A DESCRIPTION Of the New WORLD. OR, America Islands and Continent: and by what
people those Regions are now inhabited. And what places are there desolate and
without Inhabitants.

And the Bays, Rivers, Capes, Forts, Cities and their Latitudes, the Seas on
their Coasts: the Trade, Winds, the North-west Passage, and the Commerce of the
English Nation, as they were all in the Year 1649. Faithfully described for
information of such of his Country as desire Intelligence of these perticulars.

By George Gardyner of Peckham, in the County of Surrey Esquire.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Leybourn, and are to be sold by Thomas Pirrepoint,
at the Sun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

To the right honorable Sir Henry Vane, junior.
SIR,
SInce God has made You eminent in doing great services to your Country, and
appointed you of that Council which the Parliament has lately established, to
contrive the Weal of our Nation, upon their excellent instructions. This
discourse having relation to diverse of them, I crave leave to direct it to You.
And if it be too low for your Thoughts, you have goodness enough to afford me
a favorable construction. Sir, The greatest Princes in the East, receive no
Request without a Present. I have no other to you, but to desire you would
favorably receive this, and reckon me among the number of

Your Devoted Servants, George Gardyner,

Errata.
PAge 5. line 6. for Scotia read Socatra p. 26. l. 2. power. r. rover ibid. l.
6. for Cameron r. come on p. 32. l. 4. r. Continent for Co^. tinems p. 39. l.
3. put in ^is washed at floods p. 35. l. 13. r. bold for cold p. 61. l. 13. r.
Tortuga for Tortaga p. 62. l. 9. r. its for it is p. 87. l. 5. r. clear for
clean p. 101. l. 14. r. far-forfurze p. 116. l. 9. r. wels for willow trees. p.
118. l. 5. r. Nicaragua for Nicurayna p. 123, l. 2. ^. Verauga for Carauga p.
133. l. 8. r. C^co for Coco, and so where ever you come p. 143. l. ^^. r.
Limets for Climats ibid. l. ult. read Painters for Planters p. 145. l. 14. r.
principal for principals p. 146. l. 2. r. Darian for Darion p. 148. l. 3. r.
Phillip for ^hilip.

To the English Nation.
IN this unquiet age, I conceive, there is nothing so pertinent to a man's
felicity, next to the enjoying of happy places, as to know where they are. And
to think our neighboring Regions of Europe receive a greater share of
prosperity than we in England, is (without doubt) a great mistake. Neither does
any part of the old World make such promises to all sorts of men as does the
New World, commonly called America. For he that shall desire to advance himself
by his labor, will find many places where he may do it with much quietness.
He that shall desire to enjoy much land, and live in a Civil Government under
others, may find places enough for him to pitch upon. He that shall desire to
command a Country himself, and get into possession of it, without difficulty,
will find many Islands fit for his turn, that are fruitful and desolate,
wanting Inhabitants, which at small charge may be transported thither. He that
shall desire to be possessed of great rich mines of gold and silver, and precious
stones, and large Dominions, and withal has but fortitude, courage, and a
reasonable English Gentleman's Estate, may by an ordinary Providence over him,
attain to these great matters. And that man that shall have store of
Commodities lie by him, which he cannot vent, although they are necessary for
man's accommodation, will find here places, that he may exchange them at, to his
great advantage.

But if the Decipherers of this Orb had been as cautious in setting down
truths, as they have been prolixious in impertinencies, our Nation would
certainly ere this have made greater advantages upon those Regions.

For, my part, as I am an English man, so I desire that name and people may
grow great and famous and extend their authority and name beyond either Roman,
Grecian, Assyrian or Persian Nations. And if from this discourse they may draw
any thing that may prove for their Honor or Profit, I have my aim. And I shall
assure them, I have related nothing but what my own knowledge or good
intelligence persuades me is certainly true, which my future actions with Gods
leave shall declare. I have been plain in discourse of the Foreign Commerce of
our Nation. All which I intended in a larger Volumn, but the Flemmings and
Irish taking me in my coming from those remote parts of America, took from me
that greater relation, which I intended instead of this Epitomie from thence,
which I present with a resolution to submit to that common censure all
Book-makers must undergo, but with confidence I have in this subscribed my self

READER, Thy humble Servant, GEORGE GARDYNER

The Contents of the Book.
CHAP. 1.
OF the Commerce of the English Nation Page 1 The general description of
America, or the New World chap. 2 p. 31 Of Gold, Silver, Quicksilver,
Emraulds, and Pearl chap. 3 p. 39 Of the Island of New found Land chap. 4 p. 45
Martins Vineyard chap. 5 p. 47 Long Island chap. 6 p. 48 The Bermudas, or
Summers Islands chap. 7 p. 50 Of the Islands of Lucaos, or Bahama chap. 8 p. 52
Of Hispaniola chap. 9 p. 57 Of the Island of Cuba chap. 10 p. 62 Jamico Island
chap. 11 p. 66 The Island of Saint John De Portrico chap. 12 p. 67 Sancta Crux,
the Virgins, Virgin Gorda, Blances, Anagada, Sombrito chap. 13. p. 69 Angula
chap. 14 p. 71 Saint Martins chap. 15 ibid. Eustas chap. 16 p. 72 Saint
Bartholomew chap. 17 ibid. Saint Christophers chap. 18 p. 73 Nivis, or the
Snowes Barbada and Redouda chap. 19 p. 74 Monserat chap. 20 p. 75 Antego,
Margelante, Dominica, Matinina, Santalusa, Gardelupa, Dodos sanctos Deseada
chap. 21 ibid. The Burbudos chap. 22 p. 77 Trinidado chap. 23 p. 79 Margreata,
Tortuga, Gardener, Caracute, Cubava and Tamasca chap. 24 p. 80 Of the
North-west Passage, and the Lands called Nova Britania, or Nova Framuncia chap.
25 p. 83 New England chap. 26 p. 90 New Hollaud chap. 27 p. 93 The Swedes
Plantation chap. 28 p. 94 Virginia chap. 29 p. 95 Maryland chap. 30 p. 102* Old
Virginia chap. 31 p. 104 Florida chap. 32 p. 105 Of New Spain chap. 33 p. 107
The Council of New Galisia chap. 34 p. 109 Gutamalia Kingdom chap. 35 p. 110
Of Panuco chap. 36 p. 111 The Province of Talascalia, or Angels chap. 37 p. 113
Youcatan Province chap. 38 p. 116 The Province of Honduras chap. 39 p. 118 Of
the Province of Nicaragua chap. 40 p. 120 The Province of Castorica chap. 41 p.
123 The Province of Varagua chap. 42 p. 124 Of the Province of Ciblioa chap. 43
p. 126 New Biskay chap. 44 p. 127 Chiamerla chap. 45 p. 128 Culiacan chap. 46
p. 129 Sacetas chap. 47 p. 130 Xalisco chap. 48 p. 131 Guadalaiara chap. 49
ibid. Mechocan chap. 50 p. 133 Of the Province of Mexico chap. 51 p. 135
Guaxcaca chap. 52 p. 137 Soconusco chap. 53 p. 139 Gutamalia chap. 54. p. 140
Chiapa chap. 54 p. 143 Verapas chap. 55 p. 144 Of Panama chap. 56 p. 145
Carthegna Province chap. 57 p 149 The Kingdom of Granado chap. 58 p. 151 The
Province of Sancta Martha chap. 59 p. 154 Venesiula chap. 60 p. 156 Guana chap.
61 p. 158 The Land of Brazil chap. 62 p. 160 Of the Provinces of the River
Plate chap. 63 p. 164 Of the Coast between the River of Plate and the Straight
of Magellan chap. 64 p. 167 The Straight of Magellan chap. 65 p. 168 Chillia
chap. 66 p. 171 The Council of Charcas chap. 67 p. 173 The Kingdom of Peru
chap. 68 p. 176 Quito Kingdom chap. 69 p. 182 Popyan chap. 70 p. 185
A DESCRIPTION of the New World.
CHAP. I. Of the Commerce of the English Nation.
THe Navigation and Commerce of the English Nation, is so proportioned, that
upon the division of the world, it may properly be said, that it is traded by
four several parts. The greatest of which is America, the next in account is
Asia, the third Africa* and the least Europe, in which is out native Country,
it being a Westwardly part of this Division. From whence there arises to me
these Questions.

The first, whether the trade be equally divided according to the quality of
the places traded with.

The second, whether the loss to some of these places be not greater then the
gains.

The third, whether the trade of the Commonwealth may not be increased.

The fourth, how it has been hindered, and what is the let in the grants of it.

The fifth, whether there may not be a course taken to quicken the trade and
encourage Adventurers.

To answer the first.
We find that in Asia, there are six most patent Emperors, which a^^ the
Emperor of Tartaria, of Japan, of China, of Turkey, of Persia, and of the
M^gals or Mogores.

The Tartar, has few or no Ports, the Persian not many, all the ^est have
store of Ports, and rich Cities, on them, fit for Commerce and prade. And it
has been affirmed by the Natives of those part^, that were well acquainted
with the East Indies, that in India major, which is from Mallabar to
Ches^^coram, there are 13 Kingdoms, 1^700 Islands, desolate and un-inhabited.
And in India minor, which is from Siambi, to Murfili, there are eight Kingdoms
beside many Islands. And the Commodities of these parts are of the best sort,
and probably by the great quantities that have been yearly carried thither from
Europe, there is more silver then in all the other parts of the world.

And although there is this greatness yet we send yearly, but a few ships
which belong to the East India, and Turkish Company.

The trade of America is much greater, although it be but with our own Nation,
which are seated in New England, Virginia, Barbados, Christophers, Antego,
Santey, Crus, Meaguis, M^^ferat, and Barmoudas, what else of that Orb is in
the hands of Spaniards Portugals, and Dutch in any considerable place, cannot
be traded with by the English, Africa almost an Island joining to Asia by that
narrow Isthmus, part of Arabia Deserta near cut asunder by the Red and
Mediterranean Seas, has for its coasts on the Mediterranean Sea* Egypt,
Barbary, and a part of Mauritania, on the North sea the Kingdom of Morocco,
Fesse, Tombuto, the large Regions of Giney, Conge, and Empire of Monomotapa,
and from the Cape of Bona Speranza, unto the Island of Scotia, the Kingdom of
Armeto, Mosambique, Quilioa, Melinde, Magadoxo, Badivis, Ethiopia, and part of
Egypt, and from thence along the Red Sea, Seila, Adel, and the Empire of
Prester John.

And all these Countries have many Rivers and Ports, and great store of people
living on them. And we trade only to Alexandria, in Egypt, Morocco, Fesse and
Giney, and there but little neither, all the other places being left, as
terraincognita.

The trade of Europe, does justly challenge a greater Commerce then any of the
other parts have, although it be the least. On this consideration, the Ports
are near adjacent, the people more ingenious in procuring Merchandise, and and
their Commodities more in use with us, and ours more wanting with them, as our
broad Cloth, etc.

And from these considerations, I conclude, that unless in Europe, there is no
equality in the trade of our Nation with the other parts of the World.

The second Question.
Whether the loss be not greater then the gains ^o some of these places.

As the end of all trade and men's carnal thoughts are commonly for silver and
gold, so that Country that has most of it is accounted the richest. And
indeed it is almost all things, for he that has enough of that, cannot lack
any worldly thing that can be had.

Upon which, I conceive, that the principal aim of all foreign trade should
be to bring much of it in, and carry little of it out of our Country, and that
Commerce that does not is managed to the disadvantage of our Nation, and ought
to be rejected.

And upon examination it will be found, that the greatest trade which we drive
in Asia, which is to the East Indies, either by the way of Bagdet, Caro, and
the red Seas, or Cape of Bona Speranza, is with ready money.

I can with confidence say, it may be managed so to the advantage of our
Nation, that we may have their Commodity for ours, and their Ports better
traded. And whereas it has been the practice of our people to carry much money
thither, we may now fetch it home again.

And the trade of America is prejudicial, very dishonest, and highly
dishonorable to our Nation. It is prejudicial, in that it carries away daily
such men as might serve their Country, either in fighting to defend it at home,
or else abroad.

It Is dishonorable, in that we are upbraided by all other Nations that know
that trade for selling our own Countrymen for the Commodities of those places.
And, I affirm, that I have been told by the Dutch and others, that we English
were worse than the Turks, for that they sold strangers only, and we sold our
own Countrymen. And it is well known, that people in authority, and some that
profess much to Christianity of those parts, will hang a man for selling or
taking away an Indian that worshipeth the Devil, when at the same time they
allow others, and will themselves buy of their own Nation, which have most
barbarously been stolen out of their Country.

And it is dishonest, if murder be so, for when they have by Spirits or lying
tales, forced them aboard the ships, in their transportation only, there is
yearly many starved to death, those that remain are sold to those that will give
most for them; some for fourteen years, others for ten, and less, but the
least four: and it were better for them to serve fourteen years with the Turks,
then four in the Plantations with most of the Masters in those places,
especially in Virginia, for besides, their being back-beaten and belly-beaten,
it is three to one if they live out their servitude, by reason of the
unwholsomenesse of the Countries.

In which disasters that happen to our Nation, I cannot but condole their
misfortunes, as if we of all Europe were of the seed of Cham, when the Spaniard
at the same time managed their business so well, that scarcely will one of
them serve in the Indies, except it be the Viceroy, or some great Personage,
and I know that Nation in nothing exceeds us, but in their keeping together as
one people.

The third Question.
Is whether the trade of England may not be increased.

It is not hard to imagine, when we see the greatness of Asia, and Africa, and
the little Commerce that we have with them, that it may well be increased. And
although the trade of Europe be much greater the rest, yet does it want much of
that exactness which we may have in it. For where ^^ we gain in some parts,
and lose in others, it is possible to assure the Land, to gain in all and lose
in none.

The fourth Question.
Is, how it has been hindered, and what is the let in the growth of it?

The people generally suppose it is the danger of the seas, and the little
security in the parts abroad, for the Merchants Goods and ships. In answer, I
affirm, the trade of the Hollanders never flourished so as in time of War, and
their enemies were more strong at Sea then ours, upon which we may conclude, it
is not that that is the true cause.

Wherefore, I find these other causes to be the obstruction in the trade. The
first is, the Companies of our Nation, which fort of people I account a benefit
of a loss, according as they are established and managed, in which the
Companies of England have been defective, which appears in the general
damages which themselves and Adventurers have had with them, and few public
memorials they have erected at home or abroad that has appeared a public
good, but diverse acts have seemed the contrary.

And on particulars we find, there are five Companies that are well in years
amongst us, the other which was of later establishment, which really was the
best (the Giney Company) is dissolved.

And to omit the general damage that all the Inland Companies do to our Nation,
which is from my purpose now to treat of, the five Companies of exportation
are: first, the Cloth Company that trade into Holland, Hamborough, the Baltic
Seas, and elsewhere, with all the white Clothes exported the Kingdom.

The second is the East India Company, the third the Turkey, the fourth the
Muscovia, the fifth the Company of Greenland, alias Grinland. Of which, I
conceive, the Cloth Company to be the greatest Monopoly, for this cause.
Besides the engrossing of the commodity of white Cloth to themselves, which is
a great bar to the privilege of the Nation. The carrying of them out of the
Laud, is a pernicious thing to five sorts of men, Merchants, Seamen,
Clothdressers, Sheare-men and Diers, which last people receive the greatest
damage, although they were accounted anciently the Staple-manufacture of our
Nation. The prejudice to the Cloth-dressers and Diers, appears in the carrying
away from them forty Clothes white more then are worked at home, by which it
appears, that where there is one employed now in that course, there might be
forty, if it were managed at home.

And all that ever I heard that the Company could say for themselves is* that
the trade of making white Cloth would be spoiled, for the Dutch and Poles if
they could not have it white would forbear buying of it. But I am sure the
Merchants buy it beyond the se^s for their profit* and not to* se^ their
Countrymen at work, or else they differ much from them of the Company. And if
they want it to* trade with* they will have it as well dressed by us* as their
ow^ Nation; but if they be obstinate and will not buy it, we shall gain and
not lose, for our Seamen and Merchants that make short Voyages with small
profit will the^ vent it to those parts which now have it at the second hand
from them, that buy it white from us* and so the Merchants will make two
profits in stead of one; and the Seamen longer Voyages.

The East India Company come home to this question in that it has lost many
advantageous places there, and impoverished many that adventured with them,
giving them after fifteen or sixteen years forbearance of their money instead
of 70li* yearly, which the Dutch give most years to their Adventurers* 70li*
for their principall^* And the Dutch, lately to renew their Lease, which not
long since was near expired, being but for 21 years at the first, compounded
with the States General to have it renewed for so much longer for the sum of
eight hundred thousand pound paid to them* and five hundred thousand to the
West India* Company, which the States owed the said West India Company.

And whereas the Dutch Company has whole Countries, diverse Islands* Cities,
Castles, Forts, etc. and all taken in by the sword, to the contrary, our men
has lost money, lost time, which was considerable in those actions, and diverse
Countries which they never got but were delivered by the Natives, such was
Pulway, Pullerroon, Lantor, Rosingen, Wayer, Timor, Tiadore, Ternat, and the
Castle of Amboyna, where the Dutch committed the greatest murder that of late
years has been heard of upon our Nation, by racking, torturing by fire, and
water, throwing in dungeons, and their easing themselves on them until their
bodies became blistered, then drawing them forth, and beheading some, sawing
a-sunder others, at other times their cruelty has been after the same manner*
and this accompanied with revilling of our Nation; which things are in
particular related by them that escaped from those miseries, recording before
the Tribunal of the late King, their sufferings, and his dishonor which he
heard with as much parience, as the loss of the English at the Isle of Ree. I
know not the hearts of other men, but my mind is, that all men that
acknowledge a Government, and subscribe to maintain it, ought to be protected
as well abroad as at home. There is difference between the blood of Peace and
War, as David says, and this was not as the rest, of Rochell, and the Isle of
Ree, but by the snare that Joab smote Amasa. And upon discourse, it will be
found, that act is justified by that people to this day.

The cause of the Duchess flourishing, our Companies say, was there stock
exceeding the English* But it will appear, upon examination, that the English
Company had sixteen hundred thousand pounds* under writ for, when the Dutch
had but eight.

The Turkey Company is little before it in goodness, although men have not so
eminently suffered, yet some have been inslaved by the Turks of Barbary. But
the great prejudice (as the case now stands) without alteration in all the
Companies, is the engrossing the trade of his dominions to themselves, which
might serve themselves, and diverse others. For the Ports of the Grand Seignour
are many; the chief being Constantinople, there are on the coasts of the seas
in his Territories, the Provinces of Arcadia, Accea, Poliponesus, Epirus, part
of Dalmatis, the Island of the Archipelagus and Cyprus, in the Mediterranean
Sea on the coast of the Begler-Begship of Cairo, the Provinces of Troas, the
fair situated Town of Symrna, then Aleppo, the Ports of Jewry, and Egypt, the
trade of the great City of Grand Cairo, where there might be more Commerce
only, then we have now in all the Turkish Empire.

The Muscovia Company is alike prejudicial, in monopolizing the trade of that
large Empire, which trade is not valuable in relation to the Ports, for that of
Saint Michael the Archangel is the principal, and almost only Port in his
Dominions, but when you are within the land, there are most large Territories
to trade with, as the Commerce of the black. Seas, which may conveniently be
entered by the river Volga, and so traded, which the Grand Seignour prohibits by
way of Constantinople, and the peace which the Muscovite has for the most part
with the Tartar, and many Tartars still resident in Musco, by whom, were it a
general Trade, diverse men likely would for their profit get Commerce with that
Nation, which would make way for a farther trade, even to the Cathaians, and
China's.

The Greenland Company has as great a share in oppression as the rest,
although it is not so eminent in fame, and in this it exceeds, that whereas
the other Companies are a hindrance to such Merchants as might trade (were it
not for their Patent) into those Countries of their divisions, this I say, is
not only a Bar to those that would trade to Greenland, but has so much
power, as to hinder other Merchants from importing into the Land the
Commodities they have from Greenland. So that those that buy that useful
Commodity, must give their rates for it. And although it be in others a fault
to bring it from nearer places to hinder the trade to Greenland, yet it is
reported, they are not bound by this Law, being forced for want of sufficient
from Greenland to supply the English at second hand.

Now, as it is clear by this I have said, that these Companies are a great
hinderance to the Commerce of our Nation. There is also another, which the
Merchants complain of, and that is the Dutch Nation, that daily so insinuate
into the trade of all places where ever they are admitted, to the putting by of
the English. And were it not that we sell our Conntreymen for the Commodity of
the English Plantations, I am fully persuaded, within a few years, we should be
forced to have what comes from thence at a second hand from the Dutch: which in
reason seems strange, considering they export nothing but what they import, and
we export much which we need not import, and how those that have it at a second
hand, should sell a thing cheaper then him that has it at the first, seems
irrational, yet they will do it, which is done by our irregularity in trade,
and the Merchants that are the great Complaynants, are the chief causers of
their own hinderance.

But upon Examination, it will be found, that the principal Commerce of the
whole World is in hands of the English, and the United Provinces. And what we
lose they get. And as it is their great care, by all means, to increase their
own Commerce, though with the ruin of ours, so, I conceive, it is honest and
honorable, to endeavor our own good, although by their hurt.

The fifth Question
Is, Whether there may not be a course taken to quicken the trade and Commerce
of the English Nation?

As I apprehend the Companies to be a great cause of hinderance in our trade,
with the ill managing of the general trade of our Nation, so I think these
things I have offered, do in part demonstrate it. Wherefore, I conceive, that
if they were taken away, with some irregularity in trade, our Nation would not
be found wanting, either in inclination to trade, or abilities for trade to
advance our Commerce to what height we please.

And because there may arise an Objection against the overthrow of Companies,
in regard we see the Hollanders have a very flourishing trade in the World,
although it be managed by more Companies then we have.

I shall to that and the second hinderance which is the trade of the
Netherlands, affirm, the first constitution of Companies were, or ought to
have been established to keep up a trade subject to alteration, without
fortification, and strength of shipping, for to those places that give us an
equal engagement by oath of Princes, Ambassadors and Agents constantly Ledger
to see right, and performance of Articles, there is no need of Companies, or
else, why are they not in Europe? And where there is this full assurance it is
contrary to all sense, that there should be a monopoly of the trade, and where
it is not assured this way, or by Forts, we lie at the mercy of those Princes
we trade with, that permit us but for their profit, and no longer, I conceive,
it is madness without assurance of fortification, to assure Merchants goods
and ships to have any Commerce with such men or Countries. And it was for this
reason, that the Companies of England, were first erected. For it was proposed
that private men making a voyage, and according to the loss or gain of that
continue or forsake the trade, and although it were profitable; yet want of
ability or will would hinder them from gaining that assurance for the future;
which a joint stock well managed would do. And although the Hollanders come far
short of that perfection in trade which they might have, yet are they in this
very circumspect. For the Companies of Holland, do not only fortify in most
places, where they come; but gain whole Regions and Provinces, which is still
managed to the advantage and honor of their Commonwealth* But our Companies
have so much swerved from this intention of their first constituting, that
whereas the Dutch keep the East India Provinces in awe, we are miserable slaves
to them. For if a Prince of India, loses on the seas by Piracy of English or
any other people of Europe, what they have in their Country of the English
Merchants will surely, make good their loss. Or in case an English power, or
French, etc* saying, he were English, should come into the Red Seas, and take
ships bound for any Turkish Port, or Cameron land, and desire trade, and be
surprised, and getting free, revenge themselves on the goods and persons of the
Arabs or Turks, the English Merchants in Turkey under the Command of the Grand
Seignour, would surely pay for it in their persons and goods.

The Greenland Company was first established to bring in the whole Commerce of
the Whalefishing into England, and with much honesty might they have barred
others from coming thither, in regard, the English were the first Discoverers
of it, but instead of going before others, we come behind them, and far-short
of the Dutch, which appoint us their leavings, instead of taking ours.

The Dutch which is a second hinderance to us in our Commerce, overtop us very
strangely, if we seriously consider the people, and their Country, which is
comprehended within the title of the United Provinces. In which lies only
Zealand, Holland, Frisland, Utrick, and these Provinces they have entirely, the
biggest of them no greater then Kent. They have a little part of East Flanders,
Brabant, and a good part of Gelderland, which places does not afford them
common necessaries, for they have most of their flesh from Emden, Holsten and
Westphalia, their Corn from the Countries on the Baltic seas, for their
housing and shipping, their Timber and Iron from Norway, Germany, and Lukeland,
their Hemp, Pitch, and Tar, as we from Muscovia, or the Baltic Seas. And for
commodities of exportation to maintain the great trade, they have at Sea, their
land is as barren and deficient, so that their trade consists merely in what
they get from one Nation, and sell to another. And upon a true examination it
will be found, what they have gotten from us in the East Indies, and in or about
our Country, is the foundation of all their staple manufacture.

And to come to some perticulars, we find that the Spices of the East Indies,
the Herrings they have on our Coasts, and our white Cloth which they dress and
die, is the very ground of all their Commerce, all which comes to them for
little, or at least, no visible payment. For we get nothing for our Herrings
nor for the Spices, they have from those places, which formerly were ours, and
though they speak of their paying for them to some of our Nation, yet it is not
visible to us. And the white Cloth, they have at the third part they make of
it. And although with these, and the other Commodities of our Country, as
Stockings, course Cloth, Stuffs, etc. they make the most of their trades, yet
for those they buy from us, they have without any just exception. Although it
were necessary, we did make the best use of our native Commodities, which we
miss as much of, as if we had never known the way of adventuring from our own
Country.

And now I have said this, it is likely, that there are many will affirm, that
they knew as much before, as I relate, but the remedy is not amply proposed.
But I to excuse my self, say, that I have been often in discourse of this
subject, and have not heard as much as I here show to you.

And the great Physicians say, it is harder to find out the disease, then to
prescribe a remedy. And since I have done that, I conceive, I ought to be
silent, yet with an intent to show my self as forward in prescribing a remedy,
as I have been in informing of this subtle disease: And in order to that, if it
shall be required by those, who sit at the helm of our Affairs, I shall
undoubtedly bring to their knowledge a man that will show himself most expert in
serving his Country this way. And when the trade of our Nation shall be
regulated to such exactness, as may procure a general profit and honor to
our Nation; it will peradventure appear as small and ordinary a matter as the
Navigation of America, which is now a thing of little difficulty, but was
formerly accounted an impossibility to the disparagement of former ages, and
amazement of the present.

CHAP. 2. The general description of America, or the new World.
THis great part of the globe was unknown unto the Europeans until the year of
our Redemption 1492. At which time it was discovered by Christopher Columbus, a
Genowes, in the behalf of Ferdinand King of Castle, and Leon in Spain, that to
this day, enjoys the greatest and richest part of it. And especially those
golden and fruitful Regions, that are between the Tropicks, which is commonly
called the West Indies. And what there is unpossest of him and the Natives, and
in the hands of English, Dutch or French is not considerable to the rest.

This title of America, comprehends as well Islands, as Continents, the Islands
for the most part lies in the Seas on this side the Continent. The other of
the West side are few and small, the Seas that compass this Continent on the
East side, are commonly called the North Seas; On the West side the South Seas,
which lies between it and Asia, and on the North end it hides it self under
the Pole; and to the South of the straight of Magellan, the North and South
Seas meet together, and divide it from the South Pole.

The Continent of America in seven degrees of North Latitude, is very narrow
from sea to sea, that is to say, from Porto Bello to Panama eight leagues, a
rough and rocky passage, from whence both North and South, the Land grows
exceeding broad to the North beyond knowledge, and to the South, one thousand
leagues, as it is guest.

It contains diverse Regions and Provinces, in which are comprehended some
good and wholesome places, other bad and unwholesome, and as there is
indifferents, so there is extremes.

And as the best places are within the Tropicks, so the more north or south you
go, the more barren and cold you find the Climates, even to unsufferable
extremities.

The passage and course of sailing to the most parts of America, is by the wind
that blows a gentle gale, constantly between the Tropicks east, or east
South-east, not much wavering unless by a Tornado or Hericano.

The Natives of America, at this day are of three sorts; The first, that live
the most civilly, are them that live within the government of the Spaniards,
after the same manner that they do, in apparel, building, trades and Religion.
The second sort, are those that live under the contribution of the English,
Portugals, Dutch, French, etc. And these keep still their ancient Customs,
Religions, and Manners: and these I say are divided under several Governors,
or Kings, and live in Towns, some of which are paled round, containing houses
covered with Mats, their frames of Arbor works, the best are made more
substantial of great Poles and mats, covered with the bark of trees, their
food is what the Woods, Seas and Rivers affords naturally, and their bread of
that grain we call Virginia wheat, and of this their wives plant about their
Towns, whom they accustom also to do their other household work, the men
spending their time in hunting and fishing, being attended by the boys, whom
they breed up to this kind of life with themselves. And this way of living runs
throughout all America, North and South, for this sort of people.

The third kind of Indians which are on the land, they call in the Spanish
Dominions (where there is the most of them) Chickameckians, and in the Islands
Canables. In which sort of people, the Craibey Islands do so abound, that they
prove bad neighbors to the English and French, that are there seated, as those
in the land are to the Spaniards. And these Indians live upon what they get
from the strangers that are near them, and the other more civil Indians: and
some of them are so inhumane, that they will eat man's flesh. Their common food
is what they get by hunting and fishing. And such of them that have Islands,
and Provinces to themselves, live in such kind o^ habitation (as I have said,
the second sort of Indians do.) The Religion of all of them, that are no^ made
Spanish Christians, is to worship stones, beasts, or fowls, an^ serpents, but
generally the Devill^ whom they much fear, and therefore worship.

Their Priests are conjurers an^ witches and in those arts can do very strange
things.

The statures of the Natives differ as with us in Europe, but their complexions
generally are tawn^ and swarthy, as also their skins Although in diverse places,
I suppose, they would be otherwise, did they not anoint their flesh with oiles
and grease, and bask themselves in the Sun and wind, against which they have
little or no defense, going almost all naked, excepting amongst those Civil
Indians with the Spaniards.

Their natural weapons, are generally Batoo^s, Bows and Arrows. Their Bows
are made of some bending wood, their Arrows of Canes and Reeds, headed with
fishes bones, and flints, with which they are excellent marksmen. The heads of
diverse they poison to do the more mischief. There are natural to these parts
which are wild in the Woods, diverse kinds of Beasts and Fowls, many of which
are not elsewhere in the world to be found, as also many fruits not known
amongst us.

Amongst the Plantations, there is not any thing wanting that is to be had in
Europe; and much more, which is natural to those parts, but the substance of
flesh, fish, and fruits is not so substantial as that of Europe, and not any
thing comparable with that in England: which is the cause that they are much
easier of digestion, and causes a more constant appetite then we have with us.

The treasures that are yearly drawn from the bowels of the Spanish Regions,
are infinitely great. And in the subjection of any other Prince or people of
Europe, there is neither Mine of Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, Emraulds, or Beads
of Pearl, all which are in great plenty in the Spanish Dominions. And in regard
I shall in my relations, speak of many Countries, that are plentiful of these
riches, I shall here describe how they are obtained.

CHAP. 3. Of Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, Emraulds, and Pearl.
THe gold is engendered in the Mountains, from whence by rains and floods into
the Plains, and rivers, where for the most part they find it. That of the
plains, is in veins of hard earth that contains part pure grains of gold
like pompeon-seeds, which is the best, but the most that is got in the Indies,
is in the Rivers, where it is found mixed with the sand in powder, even as the
sand it self. They separate it from the earth, and sand, by washing in a bowl
of the fashion of a Barbers basin. Where they find it in hard veins, they
break them with the Hammers, and make them fit to wash: first, putting the
earth or sand into the basin, and receiving water into one side of it, turn it
out at the other, until they have washed out the earth from the gold, which as
the heavier substance remains behind at the bottom of the bowl.

The silver Mine is found in the earth in veins or branches, much like the
Tin or Cole in England, and is worked almost in the same manner under the
ground.

The way of separating the silver from the dross, is first to take the oar,
and break it in Hammer-mils, and grind it to powder, then sift it through a
Copper searse, and put it into a furnace, under which they make a fire by
degrees, mixing with every fifty quarts of powder five of salt, and stirring
it, together with quicksilver, which they squeeze through a piece of holland
upon the said powder and salt, and when they find the quicksilver,
sufficiently incorporate with the silver, then they put it altogether in a
Cauldron, in which there is water, and a wheel, that going round, turns out
the earth and dross with the water, the quicksilver, and silver, as the more
heavy substance remains behind, which they take from the Cauldron, and wash it
after the manner of gold, till they find it clean from all dross, and filth,
and then putting it into a cloth, they strain forcibly from it some
quicksilver, the remainder being as a leaf of silver.

And to separate the silver from the quicksilver, they put it into a violent
fire, and cover it with an earthen pot of the fashion of a sugar loa^, which is
also covered with coals, and kept very hot, and from a hole in the said pot, to
which is fashioned a pipe, like the pipe of a Limbeck, they receive the
quicksilver, which evacuates by the same pipe, leaving the silver of the same
form it was put in, but wanting much of the bigness and weight.

The Quicksilver and Vermillion, is found together in Rocks, or very hard
earth. That part that is found to contein the quicksilver, they break to
pieces, and putting it into earthen fire-pots well luted, they set it on a
violent fire (made in the Indies of straw, which they find to be excellent for
that work) whatof it evacuateth out of the pot, goes up, till meeting nothing
to receive it, it falls down cold, in the same manner we have it. The
remainner in the pot, being sufficiently separated from the dross and earth,
the fire is taken away, and when it is thoroughly cold, they open the pot, and
pour out the Quicksilver. into leather baggs, which keeps it best,
conveighing it where they please in them. Those that open these pots, and
stirs the silver and it together, in refining the silver, swallow a pellet
of gold, that lying in the stomach, draws the Quicksilver, which in time
gets into their bodies, from whence it goes out with the said pellet in
excrement. And if the pot be not thoroughly cold, when it is open; it is two to
one, if they lose not their teeth or hair, dis-figure their noses and faces,
and many times utterly spoil themselves. Wherefore, they are very cautious in
this action.

The Emraulds are in great abundance in diverse parts of the Spanish Countries,
they get them in veins of stone, that is almost like crystal, some as big as
a hazel nut, and of several colors, as whitish, green and white, and the most
perfect absolute green.

The Pearls are found in greatest plenty in the North seas, and they are
roundest and most orient, although there are great store at the Island of
Pearls in the South Seas, which is some 25 miles from Panama. In the North
seas, where I say are the best; the principal fishing for them is at the River
of Haca, which runs between the Province of Sancta, Martha and Carthagena,
and also at the Islands of Margreata, and Cumana. They are found in
Oyster-shels of the color of heaven, fastened to gravel or Rocks, six, nine,
and twelve fathom under water, and brought from thence by Negro slaves, which
are so expert in diving, that some of them will continue half an hour under
water.

CHAP. 4. Of the Island of New found Land.
IN order to a particular description of this new World, I shall first speak of
the Islands, of which the most Septentrionall, is Newfound land, which
stretches north and south, from 46 degrees and a half, to 50 and a half of
latitude. The Natives of this place are few, and savage, neither is there any
thing in this Country to invite a Plantation, it is so Rockie, and barren. But
for the commodity of fish, which are taken on the Coast in great plenty, there
are some men that do endure the heat of Summer, and cold in Winter, both which
come in extremes, some are French, but the most English, in whose hand lies
the supreme power, the plenty of fish (which sort is well known in England, by the
name of Newfound land fish) inviteth many ships thither, whose lading is
procured sometimes by themselves, but for the most part by the dwellers in the
place. This Island lies at the mouth of the River Canida, distant from the
Continent at the North end near half a league, and the South west point is
about a league from Cape Briton, and by the one of these ways, you pass to the
River Canida.

CHAP. 5. Martins Vineyard.
THe next Island that is seated is Martins Vineyard. It is a small Island on
the coast of New England, and the Governor is appointed by the Council of
Boston, the chief government, in New England; It is 20 miles long, and 10
broad: And upon it are forty English families, with diverse peaceable Indians,
that live by hunting and fishing.

The soil is rocky, but affords some English grain, and Virginia Corn. They
have no Commerce, but with the Indians of the Mayn, for skins of Bever, etc.
And some little Corn they send to Boston. There is great plenty of Fish on the
Coast, which they procure the Indians to catch them at an easy rate.

CHAP. 6. Long Island
SOuth west of Martins Vineyard, lies Long Island. It is in length sixty
English miles, and fifteen in breadth. The North east end is seated by some
English, which have been thrust from New England for their Judgment. The most
of them holding the Christian tenent of confession before Baptism. At the
South West end, there are some few Dutch and English. This Island is a
fruitful soil for English grain and Milet, and of a good air. The Seas about
it are well stored with Fish, and the woods, with Deer and Turkeys, and it has
many quiet Indians, that live by hunting and fishing.

The Dutch Plantation lays claim to this Island, so does the South Government
of New England, but at present, the Inhabitants live without duty to either.

There are diverse other Islands on this Coast, but not any seated, or
considerable to a Plantation. The principal on the Coast of New England, are
in the Naraganset, and Masy^^sis Bays, and near the Swedes Plantation. Some
few in Delaware Bay. And Smiths Island at the North Cape of Virginia; and from
the Cape Charles, which is the South Cape of the Chesapea^k Bay in Virginia,
till you come to Cape Hatrask, are no Islands.

This Cape is a point of an Island in 36 degrees, and from thence till you come
to the point of St. Helena, which is in 32 degrees, all the coast along are
broken Islands uninhabited, the best is within Cape Hatrask in the same height.
It is called Roanock, and is of 18 miles compass to the Southward of the
mouth of the River Occam in old Virginia. It is bad coming to it by reason of
the shelves of Cape Hatrask, which lies far out at Sea, by which Cape, he that
will go to the said Island must pass.

CHAP. 7. The Bermudas, or Summers Islands.
THis Island lies distant from the Main 200 leagues, in 33 degrees, and 20
minutes. It is 20 miles long, and something more then two miles in breadth. And
temperate in relation to heat and cold, but violent in the blustering winds,
which often haunteth their coasts, but a most wholesome place to live in, and
well replenished with our Nation, that live there without want, for there is
store of Milet or Virginia Corn, and Potatoes, diverse sorts of fruits, as
Muskmelons, Water-melons, Figs, Plants, Papans, Limons, Oranges and Limes:
Plenty of flesh, as Turkeys, Hens, Pork and Beef, and on the Coast much Fish.
The Commodity they yearly export, is some Tobacco of the worst sort, Beef, and
Pork.

The Spanish wracks that often happens on their Coast, furnishes them with
pieces of eight. And the best sort have their Negro Slaves to work for them.

This Island is almost surrounded with rocks and shelves, but on the South Side
is an open road, and toward the East end a good harbor, hard to hit, without
an Islande* for Pilot. When you first mark^ the Island, it appears as a Rock in
the Sea, going almost right up a^ a great way from the water, and i^ has a
delightful aspect, but 'ti^ little better then a Rock, there being but two
foot of mould on the greatest part of it, under which, there is a kind of hard
substance, much like pumistone.

CHAP. 8. Of the Islands of Lucaos, or Bahama.
THese Islands are South-west from the Barmuda's, and to the North of
Portorico, Hispaniola and Cuba, the most eminent is Lucayoneque in 27 degrees.
It has almost to the West the Island of Bahama. From whence the channel of
Bahama between Florida, and the Sholdes de los Mimbres takes name. The current
of this channel, seateth so hard to the North, that although Winds be
prosperous, the Ships cannot enter it, and if it be cross, they will go with
the current.

Next to Bahama, is a small Isle surrounded with the shelves of Bimny.

There is like wise the Island of Abacoa, of 12 Leagues long, another called
Yuma, of 20 Leagues, and eight in breadth, in 24 degrees and a half.

Yuemeata is in 23 degrees and a half, 15 Leagues in length, and North, from
Hispaniola, lies Samana, 7 Leagues each way.

And between Yuemeata and Guanema lies Yabaque of 10 Leagues in 22 degrees and
a half.

The Miara Parvos are three small Islands that by triangle, and are compassed
with shelves.

South from Yuemeata, is Magaguana, of 20 leagues in length, and the half in
breadth in 23 degrees, Quaqua of 10 leagues in 20 degrees and a half. North
from Quaqua are the Cacos, of five leagues, in 21 degrees. The Island of Mackre
stands in 20 degrees, and is compassed with shelues. And in 20 degrees lies
the shelves of Abreo, of 15 leagues long, but East from Mackre.

On these Islands are no Inhabitants, those that did live there were a harmless
simple people, and therefore the easier taken and carried away by the Spaniards
that have made them so desolate, many of them seem of a good mould, and the
Latitude promises much fertility. The arie is certainly good and wholesome, and
not so extreme hot, as other parts of that height.

There is scarcely any beast on them save a Cony, that has a tail like a Rat,
but Pigeons and Brids in great numbers; most of them of greenish color.

There is the Gum Benjamin of the best and worst sort, Guacom, and Sasaprila,
and Sasafras, and on some of them red wood and Ambergris. The English
Seamen are little acquainted with these Islands although they sail round them
yearly. And since I petitioned for them, which was six years ago, and my
absence hindered my prosecution: Captain Sail and others have obtained a Patent,
making thither on the coast of an Island, which he called Illutheria; his ship
was wrackt, but the people of the ship all saved, but recovered the shore with
few necessaries, I saw him after his escape from thence in a small boat of 3
Tuns recovering Virginia, where he procured a Pinnace of near 25 Tuns, with
which he carried relief to those he left in the Island. But I understand by a
Master of a Bark, that went from New England, that on a division was among
them, they were leaving the Island. In my discourse with the said Sail, I
understod that none of his company knew the place they intended, or were ever
there, when they undertook the voyage. The coasts of most of them are
dangerous, and bad to make, and that ship that shall be near, or amongst them
must keep the lead always going, but with a wary Pilot, and care in giving the
Islands a fair birth, they are easily recovered.

The Spaniards know this place well, and have a yearly trade thither for the
aforesaid Commodities, and amongst the Islands are wracks of diverse of their
ships.

CHAP. 9. Of Hispaniola.
SOuth of the Lucayos lies the Islands of Barlevento, which are not only the
best of America, but almost beyond compare, were they as well furnished with
people, as they are with necessaries to maintain them. They be in the hand of
the Spaniard, almost without people. For Hispaniola, that is the chief, and in
18, 19, 20 degrees, and 150 leagues East and West, has but one City, no Town
nor Village, but what is inhabited by Negro's, that are servants to the
Spaniards. Here is a perpetual Summer, the Winter being but the rain that
falls.

This Land is exceeding pleasant, and has diverse Valleys, one being so great,
as to reach from the one side of the Island to other, that has many golden
rivers issuing into it, which Valleys are always stocked with multitudes of
wild kine, goats, hogs, shag-hair'd sheep and horses, amongst which, as their
deadly enemy, are many wild dogs, that are bred of such as have been lost a
hunting, and run away from the Spaniards: the woods have abundance of Oranges,
Limons, Limes, Cotton-wool and Plantens, and many green Birds.

The commodities the Spaniards yearly export from thence is Ginger, Sugar,
Cotton-wool, Cassia, Fistula, Sasaprila, and Lignum vitae; with Tallow, and a
hundred thousand hides, which are yearly gotten of those wild cattle, which
are the largest of the world.

There are diverse Rivers that afford gold, and some Mines which are not now
worked, great plenty of Copper and other mineral.

The City where the Spaniards dwell, is called Santo Domingo, it stands on the
South side of the Island near the East end, on the West Side, the River Osama
in 19 degrees and a half, fairly built with stone, and walled about with a
Castle on the said River, between the Town and the Sea. Here are resident the
Supreme Council of the Islands, the Officers of the goods and royal treasure,
a Minthouse, and the Cathedral, that has for sufferance the Bishopric, of
Cuba Portrico, Fenescula, and the Abbotship of Jamecca. Here are also
Monasteries of Franciscans, Dominicans, and Mercenaries; and two Nunneries, a
Grammar School, and an Hospital.

The people in this City, live in great pleasure, enjoying, beside the foresaid
plenty of flesh, many excellent fruits all the year long, as Bonanoes,
Pine-apples, Custard-apples, Plantens, Papans, Musk-melons, Water-melons, and
many other fruits and herbs, store of Turkeys, and Poultrey. And their bread
they make of the ^oot Yuca, called Cascaby, but they have plenty of Milet and
Potatoes.

On the Coasts, are first the point of Nisao, ten leagues to the West of Santo
Domingo, and eighteen leagues, further is the Port Ocoa, which is a Bay, where
the fleets of Nova Hispani^ take refreshing, when they do not anchor in the
nooke of Sepesepin, which is near unto it, or in another called the Fair Haven,
two leagues before you come to Ocoa. And 20 leagues beyond Ocoa is the Port of
Asua. And 30 leagues more Westwardly there is a large point right against the
Island of Bola, which lies five leagues from the Coast.

The most Westerly point, is called Cape Tibron. It has an Island three
leagues from it West called Caprio, and sailing along the Coast you will see an
Island called Camito, and further in the nooke of Yaguana there is an Island
called Guanabo, of eight leagues long.

Of the North side of the Island the most Westwardly Cape and Port is Saint
Nicol, as from whence North-east and by East, lies the Island of Tortaga, near
the Coast of Hispaniola, it is of five leagues length, and governed by a
Frenchman. And further along the Coast is Montey Cristey, the West Cape of the
Port of Nativedad, to the East of which there is a great Bay called Port Real.
This Island is so full of Harbors, as he that will coast it, cannot well miss
of one where he pleases, most of which afford refreshing of fresh meat and
good water. In many parts of this Island, especially on the North side are
English men always lying to kill Cattle, for their hides only, they live in
Tents, ten, and twenty in a company, and have Shallops to attend them, to
conveigh them away when they please, most commonly to Turtagues which is their
head Quarter, for it is near lying.

CHAP. 10. Of the Island of Cuba.
THis Island lies West from Hispaniola, and is 200 leagues long East and West,
the broadest part not 45. What Hispaniola affords is here in good plenty, but
the Land neither so pleasant nor wholesome. The gold of this Island is not so
good in his allay, as that of Hispaniola, but Copper is here in greater
quantity. It has two remarkable things, the one is a Valley of 20 leagues,
that within the earth has stones as round as a bullet, and from hence the
Spaniards may furnish themselves with shot of all sizes. The other is a
fountain of a kind of pitch which runs continually. All the Natives here, as
well as at Hispaniolia, are destroyed by the Spaniards, but in both places they
have store of Negro servants: their delicatest fare in this Island is
Patridges, which are in great abundance. Over all the Island, the Spaniards
breed them up tame, and esteem them the sweetest eatable flesh in the World.

It has two fair Towns, the best, which is of greatest resort, is the Town of
Havana, that lies on the North-coast in 22 degrees: It has near 900
households, there is resident in it the Governor of Cuba, a Cathedral with
Monasteries of Dominicans, Franciscans, and one of Nuns. In this Haven all the
Spanish ships of the Indies, meet together, and return to Spain: the Town is
rich but unfortified to the land, but the harbor is strongly secured by two
Castles, that lie a little within the mouth of it.

This harbor is counted an exceeding good one for security of Ships, but on
the South-east part of the Island, there is the harbor or port of Saint James,
which for greatness and goodness, is esteened one of the best in the World.

It lies 40 leagues from Cape Tibron, in Hispaniola, in 20 degrees. It has
the City of Saint James standing on the side of it, two miles from the Sea.
This City is of 300 houses, but of small Commerce. It has a Monastery of
Franciscan Friars, and nothing else remarkable. To the West of it 25 leagues,
lies the port of Spirito sancto, and further West lies the Queens gardens,
which is a shelf of Sholds and Islands, and 20 leagues further the port of
Trinity, in 21 degrees and 30 leagues still westwardly the Cape of the Cross,
and 10 further the gulf of Xaqua, between which and Cape Anthony, which is the
Westerliest point of Cuba, there are many small Islands and Sholds along the
coast. The North coast is a cold coast, and has many good harbors, besides
that of the Havana, the next in account to it is Saint Jaquis, which is 8
leagues east from the said Haven, and not far distant from the Island, called
the Kings Gardens From this City of Saint Jaques, the Bishop has his title.

CHAP. 11. Jamico Island.
THis, Island lies twenty leagues from Cuba full South in 17 degrees and a
half of latitude East and West it is fifty leagues, North and South, in the
broadest place 20. It has the fruits and Cattle of Hispaniola, but no Mines of
gold or copper. It is very plentiful of Milet and Swine, but more subject to
Turnados and Hericanos then any of the other Islands. Here the inhabitants live
in a plentiful manner; and have on the North side of the Island, the City of
Sivil, fairly built, it has a Governor and an Abbot, a Monastery of
Franciscan Friars, who have their cloister Nuns.

The Westwardliest Cape of the Island is called Morauta, and from thence along
the North coast 10 leagues distant lies the port of Jauca. And ten leagues
forward the port of Melila, and ten leagues further stands the port of Sivil,
from whence the Coast windeth to Cabo Dilfalcon. West from Jameco are the
Islands of Curymanos. And of the South Coast five leagues lies the Hermingo's
which are dangerous shelves.

CHAP 12. The Island of Saint John De Portrico.
THis Island lies from the Hispaniola 15 leagues. It is 45 leagues East and
West, and North and South 23. It abounds in all Hispaniola has, and it is
the first place the Spaniards have in the Indies. And the City of Portrico,
which stands on the North east part of the Island, is strongly fortified, and
naturally well situated for defense in 18 degrees of Latitude: it has a
Governor, a Bishop, and his Cathedral, and Officers of the Kings treasures,
with two Monasteries of Friars. And 30 leagues to the West of this Town
stands the Village of Asricebo. And 33 leagues South-west from Portrico,
stands the Town of Saint Jerman, it is on the Westend of the Island. The North
Coast is foul and shelvie, but East from Portrico is the River of Luysa and
Canoba. And the furthest west on the South Coast is Caprio, and West from it at
Sea 5 leagues lies the Island of Mona, a small Island, and as far north to
other little Islands. And the Natives here and at Jameca, have been totally
destroyed by the Spaniards, so that at this day there is not one to be found.

CHAP. 13. Sancta Crux, the Virgins, Virgin Gorda, Blances, Anagada, Sombrito.
EAst from Portrico, lie the Caribeys, which by the Spaniards are called the
Wether Islands: the natives are men-eaters, and a very warlike courageous
people. The most Westerly is Sancta Crux, it ^yeth in 16 degrees and a half,
and ^ sixteen leagues in length: it is in the hand of the English, but few live
there. The plague that has been so hot in these Islands, begun at this, as men
report, although the other has been since as sickly, I suppose it is the
cause, it is no better seated, for undoubtedly this is the best Island, and the
largest the English possess in the Indies, and nearest adjoining to the
Spaniard, which might be made (if it were well managed) a great advantage: it
is capable of the same fruits, roots and seeds Hispaniola has, and
Sugarcanes, and lies near adjoining to the Virgins, which are a little Island
compassed with shelves near eight or ten more the greatest of ten leagues, with
Virgin, Gorda, and the Blancos, or white Islands. And West from Virgin Gorda,
lies Anagada, which is seven leagues long in 18 degrees and a half, and
compassed with shelves. And near to it lies Sombrito, another small I Will. These
are all inhabited with Canibles, except Sancta Crux, whether sometimes they
come a roving also.

CHAP. 14. Angula.
ANgula is the next which has ten leagues of length, and is in 18 degrees. It
has some few English on it with excellent Salt Pits, and a good Road for Ships.

CHAP. 15. Saint Martins.
SAint Martins lies in 17 degrees, and a half, of fifteen leagues long, now
possessed by the Dutch, being lately forsaken by the Spaniards, that had a Castle
in it, garrisoned by soldiers. It is compassed with small Ilets, and has good
plenty of Salt.

CHAP. 16. Eustas.
IT is commonly called Stasies, and seated by Flushingers of Zealand, as the
principal Owners: it has 10 leagues in length, and makes good West India
Tobacco.

CHAP. 17. Saint Bartholomew.
THis Island is full of Caniballs, and has 10 leagues of length.

CHAP. 18. Saint Christophers.
SAint Christophers is of ten leagues in length, and seated by English and
French, each having a Governor of their own Nation. There is a kind of
equality in their strengths, for what the English want of the French number,
they make good by their English spirits, which do not degenerate with the
Climate. This Island is so populous, that ground can hardly be obtained.

The French and English are intermixed so together, that with much difficulty
could either hinder a secret design though there is constant gaurds upon each
others Borders.

They make some Sugar in this Island, some Indico, and Cottonwooll, but most
Tobacco.

CHAP 19. Nivis, or the Snowes Barbada and Redouda.
THe English that seat it call it Neavis. It is of five leagues in length,
lying within a league of St. Christophers. Here is the best Sugar of the
Caribey Islands, some Indico, bnt little Cotton or Tobacco.

It is an aguish Country and unwholesome, but by the good Government that has
been amongst them, the people live the happiest of all the Caribey Islands.

And in 17 degrees lies the Barbada and Redouda, each of five leagues, and in
the hands of the Canibals.

CHAP. 20. Monserat.
MOnserat is seated by Irish, of five leagues near the Redouda. The
Inhabitants plant most Tobacco and some Indico.

CHAP. 21. Antego, Margelante, Dominica, Matinina Santalusa, Gardelupa, Dodos
sanctos, Deseada.
ANtego lies between 14 and 15 degrees. It has a good air, and is planted by
the English with Tobacco, Indico, Cottonwool, and Sugar. It lies ueer unto
Gardelupia, and Dodos Sanctos on which there lives some French with the
Canibals, which are in great numbers on these two Islands. The Deseada is six
leagues to the Gardelupia in 14 degrees and a half, seated by the Canibals
Margalante, is five leagues from Dominique, and seated by the Canibals, with
French amongst them. Dominica lies in 13 degrees, and is 12 leagues in length.
It has good Roads, and watting places, but in danger of the Canibals, that are
the Lords of this Island, with whom the French live in peaceable manner. And
near Dominica, is Matinina and Sancta Lusia, which is 14 degres 20 minutes, and
both possessed by Canibals.

CHAP. 22. The Burbudos.
THis Island is commonly called the Barbados, but the ancient name is the
Burbudos to the Seacors of the Indies or Carera de las Indies. It is a Lee
Island as those of Barlevento, and the Caribes are to weather of the Starbord
bow. It lies in 13 degrees 30 minutes, and thoroughly inhabited with English,
and Negroes their servants. This Island flourishes so much, that it has more
people and Commerce then all the Islands of the Indies: Their principal
Commodity is Sugar of the worst sort, Indico and some Cotton-wool and little
Tobacco. Here are pieces of eight in greatest plenty of any English Plantation
in America. in so much that of late they buy and sell most small matters for
ready money: it is strong in men, but no fortification yet perfected, and not
easily brought under by a common way of war. There are store of Oxen and Kine
in this Plantation, as also Swine which they keep up in pends, and horses, but
by reason of the great number of inhabitants and occasion for Beasts of draught
and burden, cattle is a good commodity, so is all kind of provision, and it
yeildeth the best return. It has diverse fruits and poultrey: and as there is a
greater trade here then in the rest of the Islands, yet in regard the sellers
are, well matched by the buyers, I conceive it the worst Plantation to go to
either to live or make a Voyage and return. For what is here, is as well in
the rest of the Islands, and much more convenience to plant, for here they have
too many people, and in them there is too few, and in most of them ground
enough.

CHAP. 23. Trinidado.
ANd more southwardly are the rest of these Lee Islands, of which the greatest
is the Trinidado, in eight degrees of North Latitude: it has fifty leagues
East and West, and almost 30 in breadth: the air is here very pestiferous,
which makes that this is the unwholsomest Island in the whole Indies, but many
Indians that being bred to it, live there without much sickness: it has a
Colony of Spaniards seated in a Town called Saint Joseph, where is resident a
Governor, and about 200 Spaniards with the help of the Indians make much of
that tobacco, which is sold in Spain, for Spanish tobacco, to the English, and
others.

The most Oriental part of it is the point De la Jaleria, from whence du North
lies the small Island of Tobago, compassed with Ilets: in the South Side is the
round point Andrada, and on the West Side the gulf of Paria, which lies
between it and the firm land: to the North are Saint Vincents and Granado, two
little Islands.

CHAP. 24. Margreata, Tortuga, Gardener, Caracute, Cubava, and Tamasca.
TWenty leagues West from Trinidado lies Margreata: it is 16 leagues East and
West, and the half in breadth: it has but little water, yet plentiful of
pasture, and many Cattle, with two Spanish towns, which stands near the Sea:
it has a Fortress to defend it, and a good harbor, which is before the Town:
in this Fortress, resides the Governor, and treasure for the King of Spains
customs, of Pearl, which is worth at the least fifty thousand pounds yearly.

And two leagues from this town within the land is the other, whose inhabitants
are most Planters, but that on the Sea is possessed by Merchants, and diverse for
pearls, which are in good plenty on this coast. And the I Will Cabagua, a league
off at sea from whence every Saturday at night, the Pearl fishers return to
Margareta.

To the East of Cubagua, are Losfralos, which is four little Islands close
aboard the shore. And to the East are the Witnesces, and West lies Tortuga,
and farther West lies the I Will of Gardener: it is ten leagues long, and by it
Curaco: in which the Dutch have a Fort and some soldiers: near unto which is
another Island called Curacute of 14 leagues in length. And north from Curacute
is the Island of Aruba: in which two last mentioned, there are some peaceable
Indians, that speak Spanish.

From the Trinidado along the Coast, there are few Islands, save those that are
at the mouth of the River Amisons and Oroinoque, which are low and flat, and on
the violent risings of the Rivers commonly overflown, which makes the
inhabitants provide them lodgings in the trees, which are there very great:
these Indians have their Canoes to attend them, by which they pass not only to
their neighbors, but fish, and go to the land at pleasure. Furthermore on the
Land of Brazil, there are some small Islands, the most remarkable is the
Tamerica: it is inhabited by the Portugals, it has a fair town on the
Southside; and a harbor, with store of Red wood.

CHAP. 25. Of the North-west passage, and the Lands called Nova Britania, or
Nova Framuncia.
THat which is most remarkable in this north part of America, is the straight
of the north west passage, which is generally talked of, and indeed is nothing
but a narrow difficult passage to Buttons Bay, the entrance being properly
called Hudsons Straight, in regard of his first finding it: the mouth of this
straight lies in 62 degrees, and because of the impossibility of this
Mathematical story, I shall say, there is certainly no such Straight, as this
which they call Anian, or the north-west passage: it has been so thoroughly
searched into by our Nation that can give no incourageme^t to a farther trial,
save that story men tell of a Manuscript in Portugal, showed to one of our
Merchants of the passage that way, of a Portugal ship of the Phi^^ipinus
droven from thence by foul weather, through this straight to Portugal, but to
men that know the distance between that straight, and those Islands, it would
seem the most ridiculous story in the World, beside the falsity of the
Informers: the Greeks relation being a far better story, for he says in regard
he was taken by Squire Candis in the South Sea, and lost all he had, to procure
some relief in his old age, he would advise the English a speedier way to the
East Indies then they now took. And this intelligence he gives after he is
retired to his Native Country, to repose from his troublesome way of
adventuring to Sea. From whence we may easily guess, for the bad turn our
Nation did him, he would not wish us a good one, but the scope of his
intelligence being but to have a bill of exchange to receive money, as he
pretended to come into England. But how likely it was, that he would leave
those rich parts of America, which he lived in with the Spaniards to retire to
his own Nation, and from thence to undertake a Voyage for us to the worst place
in the World, a rational man cannot apprehend. But were there such a passage,
it would much more concern the Portugals, and the Spaniards, then it does the
English, for their trade is to the north part of the East Indies, and ours to
the south: theirs to the Moluccos, Philipinaes, Japan, and China, whereas we
seldom pass beyond Bantam in Java, but were there a passage that way, yet it
were not to be chosen before the other, for could a man sail in a strait line:
first, from England to the straight, and then from the straight to the East
Indies, it would prove a farther way than the other by the Cape of Bonaspei.
But those that know any thing of those seas, know that the sea course to any
part of north America is as low as 23, 24, 25, or 30 the highest. For the wind
which blows in the south sea east and west, as well as in the north, that is
to say, for the most part west without the Tropicks, and almost constantly East
within them.

Wherefore you must go out of your way as well from the north part of America,
to the East Indies, as from England to this supposed Straight: and there is as
much difference in relation to pleasantness in voyages, as between summer and
winter. For when you are clean of the Bay of Biscai in all the voyage, by the
Cape you find no cold weather till you return to the same place again, but to
the contrary, is so cold and icy about the Straight in the middle of Summer,
that there is no making way without much difficulty and trouble.

And in the south sea, where the Sun keeps the same course as in the north in
June, Sir Francis Drake in compassing the world found so much cold in thirty
eight degrees north latitude, that he was forced into a southerly course.

And this makes a strong probability that there is no sea to the north of
America, but that the land of this New world reaches by the north parts; even
to the northwardly Provinces of the Empire of Japan, or Tartaria. For I find
that the winds that blow West and north-west in England being sea winds are not
so cold, as those that come east and north-east, which are land-winds. Which I
apprehend the only cause of difference in the temperature of the air with us,
and the north parts of America. For New England that lies in 41 and 42 is much
colder in the winter then the most northwardly parts of England, which are in
56. And those parts of America, that are in that height are cold, almost the
whole year through, as the undertakers in the north passage plainly prove, and
this is caused certainly by the land-wind, which that height for the most part
blows west, and northwardly, which is so much more colder, in regard it
comes from those vast Regions that are far thicker and untilled and
uninhabited with wood swamps, and such moist crudities, as are not in Europe.

On the land of the north-side Hudsons Straight, there has been seen some of
the wild Natives, but how they live is a kind of miracle. And from the south of
this Strait, till you come to New England is but one Plantation, which is at
the Fort of Kebeck, on the north-west side the River Canada, 100 leagues from
the Island Antecostey, that lies at the mouth of the said River. The French
drive a great trade with the Natives for Beverskins in exchange of hatchets,
knives, penny looking-glasses, bells, beads, and such toys.

There are good store of the Natives in these parts all along the Coast, and
are willing to exchange such Commodities as they have, for such truck as the
French bring them, although it is to be done with much care to prevent their
treachery.

CHAP. 26. New England.
THe Plantations of the North Government of New England, begins about 44
degrees, and the coast is indifferently seated with English, almost as
southwardly as 41. This Country at first was laid out in several proportions
to diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen of England, each having within his circuit a
several power. But at this day, it has but three divisions only, that is to
say: the north and his bounds, the middle and the south; the north Government
is the worst, and has fewest people: the middle Government is that of Boston,
which is the best, and has most inhabitants. The south is the Government of
New Plymouth, in which is the best ground: the north Government has scarce a
Town worthy the name of a Village; but the middle has many Towns and Villages.
The principal is Boston fairly built, the great street is near half a mile
long, full of wel-furnished shops of Merchandise of all sorts. Here is ^esident
a Council, and the Governor, which is yearly chosen from amongst them: this
town has a good Port, called the Bay of Boston, with many ships, which ^s
secured with a Castle, guarded with Soldiers and Ordnance. Near Boston lies
Charles Town, and five miles into the Country ^s the town of Cambridge, that
has University with many Students.

The south Government is that of New Plymouth, that has the name from the
town, which is a indifferent Market town.

The land of all this Region generally barren and rocky, but the care of the
inhabitants supplyet^ the natural defects of the Country, from the proceed of
the Commodities it affords, which is Pi^staves, Clabbord, Fish, Englis^
grain, and fruits, with the buildin^ of Ships, which they often sell ^ other
parts, and iron works; wi^ these they drive a trade to mo^ parts of Europe,
especially to Spai^ the Canary and Caribey Island^ it is a wholesome air, and
the English people are well-colour'd, an^ have many children which thri^ well
in that Country. They punish sin as severely as the Jews d^ in old time, but
not with so good warrant. And they have broug^ the Indians into great awe, but
n^ to any Gospel knowledge.

CHAP. 27. New Holland.
TO the southwest of New England, lies the Dutch Planta^ion. It has good
ground, and good air, but few of that Nation ^nhabiting there, which makes
that there is few Plantations in the and, and but one Village, whose
^nhabitants are part English, and ^art Dutch. Here is resident the ^he
Governor appointed by the ^est India Company. This Vil^age lies on Hudsons
River in 40 and a half, three miles within the ^outh of the River, and almost
^yning to a Fort that has Guns, ^ut they are unmounted. There is ^^e Fort of
Orange, 30 miles up the ^^d River, and there is a Mill to saw boards for the
Colony: the^ have here indifferent plenty o^ English and Indian Corn, but the
best profit is the trade with the natives for Bever, and other skins^ Those
that trade here pay 16 i^ the hundred Custom to the West^ India Company of
Holland. These Dutch are mischievous neighbours^ for with their Indian trade
they^ supply the natives with Guns and Ammunition, which in time may prove
their own confusion, and does already prejudice their neighbors.

CHAP. 28. The Swedes Plantation.
THe Swedes are seated between^ the Dutch and Virginia, in a Village by a fort
which lies eight miles within Delaware River. On the north side the said
River, they are few in number, and their principal business is their commerce
with the Indians, for they have little or no Cattle. They furnish the Indians
with Guns and weapons as the Dutch do, and once in a year have commonly a
supply and relief from Swethland, by a ship that fetches their Skins and other
Truck.

CHAP. 29. Virginia.
Virginia is to the southward of the Swedes, and the north Cape of the great
Bay that leads to Virginia, and Maryland lies distant from the Swedes Fort
near 130 English miles: this Bay is 240 miles up navigable for the biggest
ships, it lies almost north and south, and it receives diverse Rivers, which
issues into it from the west and east; those on the westside are both the
biggest and most: those on the east side are not many nor great. This coast is
also a flat coast as is New Holland, and the Swedes. The English are seated on
the east side the Bay, from the said point called Cape Charles, and by the
Creeks and Bay-side 30 miles up the Bay. Without the said Cape are certain
Islands called Smith's Islands, which are broken low grounds, unfit for
habitation. On the west side the Bay, within Cape Henry 8 miles lies the
water, called Lin-Haven, which issues there into the Bay: it has diverse
Branches, on which there are Plantations even to the head of most of them. And
between the said Haven, and James River, which is distant 12 miles is two small
Creeks that are indifferently seated, but on the side of the great Bay, there
is no Plantation between the Cape and James River, which is distant from ^^ 20
miles: this River flows more then 120 miles, and almost so far Navigable for
good ships. It ^^ Shelvie and dangerous without ^ good Pilot: it receives
diverse Rivers and Creeks on the East Side: the most eminent is the Elizabeth
River, which issues into the great River within eight miles of the ^ndy point,
that is the first point of the South Side the great River, and over against
Point Comfort ^^and, by which you must keep ^ose aboard, by ^reason the River ^
there only to be entered, four ^iles higher then Elizabeth River, ^ Nawcimond
River, which two are ^e principal; and on the West Side ^e most eminent, and
best is Chick^money, whose mouth is 10 miles beyond James Town: this man River,
as also the Rivers and Cree^ that run into it, are seated by t^ waterside,
only by reason of t^ convenience of carriage.

And between point Comfort and York, there is a small River, called the Pecoson
River, which is se^ted, and then a little further Y^ River, which is a fair
River, a^ navigable 20 miles for ships. T^ River is seated near fifty miles ^
but on the East Side better than ^ the West. And the other Riv^^ which run into
the Bay betw^ this and Maryland, are Payankat^ and to Pahanoc, and the great
Ri^ of Patowmek are unseated with a^ but the Natives. Here is go^ plenty of
Millet, but not mu^ English grain. For which this R^gion is not so natural as
New England or New Holland, for the cr^ within a year or two will dege^rate.
Their only commodity Tobacco, which I think to be more ^aturall to the
Country then any other thing. The best sort is the ^weet sented, which is not
inferior ^^ the Spanish: Cattle are of the ^me price here as in England and
^ew England, and by reason there ^e no Markets, and little money ^ buy them,
fresh meat is very ^arcely eaten. The Virginia pro^rb is, That hogs and women
thrive ^ell amongst them. But the later (I ^ink) are indifferently subject to
^^ fa^e of those men that go there which is much sickness or death. ^or the
air is exceeding unwhol^me, insomuch as one of three ^^rcely lives the first
year at this ^e; though formerly they re^rt, the mortality has stretched ^ the
taking away of eleven of ^elve. The reason of this is not ^e latitude, for that
is 37 degrees, ^d a half. In which lies many ^cellent wholesome Countries, but
I conceive it to be the chang^blenesse of the weather, which ^ mighty extreme
in heat and co^ and as various as the wind bo^ Winter and Summer. The ne^ cause
is the Swamps, standing-^ters and Marshes, and mighty sto^ of Rivers, and low
lying of t^ land. There is two other pernicio^ companions that haunt the Engl^
inhabitants, the one is the disea^ called the Country Duties, whi^ they
originally caught of the In^ans, and the cure is the same the use in England
for the French Po^ it being almost alike. The other ^ the Rattle-snake, so
called, for t^ rattle in her tail, whose bitin^ are present death. And this v^
mine in the Summer is so stirri^ that they are in the fields, woo^ and commonly
in their houses, ^ their great anoyance, yet this mo^tality does rather harden
the pe^ples hearts, then bring them ^ God, for I think they are the far^est
from conscience and moral ^onesty, of any such number together in the world.
And for want ^f administration of Justice, there ^e many have left the place,
and ^e gone to Maryland, which lies ^ the Bay. The Virginia bread ^ commonly
of Millet, called ^oane. And if the servants have ^ough of that, their
complaint ^il procure no remedy. The Rivers ^d Creeks afford much fish in
^ummer, and furze in the woods, ^ood store of Deer and Turkeys ^ Winter, and
fowl by the water^de in diverse places, and yet is pro^sion so scarce that they
are all ^e year furnished with fish and ^ase, and biscuit from New Eng^nd. The
great resort of shipping ^ in winter, for then is the Tobac^ struck into cask,
and fit for ^le.

This Country is for the most part plain, with few hills, and we^ it not so
woody, probably not alt^gether so unwholesome.

It is without any Mineral, sa^ Iron, Stone, which is in great plenty. In
diverse parts of the Country, the natives are under contr^bution of the
Governor, and pa^ him great tributes of skins, and ^ them with good
privileges ov^ the English, which in time man prove a third Massacre.

CHAP. 30. Maryland.
THis Province is divided from Virginia by the great Riv^ Patomuk. It lying on
the Nort^side the said River, and West-si^ of the great Virginia Bay. It ^ more
wholesome then the parts ^ Vrginia now seated, and better ^r English grain. The
English in^bitants are few, and those of ^fferent Religions; for some a^ongst
them are Papists, but most ^otestants. There has always ^en toleration in
Religion, and is ^ this present.

The natives of this place have ^ver been treacherous to the Eng^, but does
them good service in ^eir grounds, cattle, and hogs. ^any of their children
being bred ^ amongst them: they live here in ^^ater plenty than at Virginia, as
^ving more range of the woods, ^d fewer neighbors with Indian ^oodsmen to kill
them meat.

Those that are come from Virginia, are seated on the River Bolus, ^ next to
the River Patomuk up ^ Bay, and by such as are draw^g thither from New England,
and ^ily go from Virginia, it is likely ^ be a flourishing Country.

CHAP. 31. Old Virginia.
SOuth from this Uirginia, lies ^ Province, known by the na^ of Old Uirginia,
it is remarka^ for Cape Hatrask, that lies near 36 degrees. From which Ca^ far
out at sea is flat shelvy groun^ The Cape is a point of a brok^ Island, and
has between it a^ the main Roanock Island to t^ South of the River Ockam, whi^
there issues into the Sea. T^ River is deep within and broa^ but so shallow at
the mouth, that Pinnace can hardly enter it at hi^ water, otherwise it were
conve^ent for a Plantation. For it is fa^ beyond Uirginia in all respects, any
Land we possess in the Man The Indians of this River pay contribution to the
Governor of Uirginia. And along this coast till you come to Florida, is no
Plantation, nor inhabitants but the natives.

CHAP. 32. Florida.
THis Province begins in 34 degrees, and has on the Eastcoast before you come
to the Cape of Florida, two Forts, in which are Spanish Garrisons. The first
and most northerly is the Fort of Saint Mark, within the point of Saint Helena,
in 32 degrees and a half distant from the Havena Incuba 100 leagues. The other
is called Saint Augustine, which is the principal, because the Haven is good,
and near the Channel of Bahama, in 29 degrees 40 minutes.

The point of Canes in 28 which has to the South the river Ages, and at the
Cape of Florida, are many little Islands called the Martors, and these Islands
reach from the said Cape within a league, and a half of Cuba. The head of the
Martors to the East has an Island of 14 leagues but very narrow. The out-most
eastern point lies in 24 degrees and a half, and from the Cape of Florida to
the Government of Pancuco along the Coast of the Sea, is 300 leagues, which Seas
are called the Gulf of New Spain. In all this Coast there is no Town nor
Plantation, and few Indians, by reason the Spaniards have taken them away to
other parts. There has not been worked Mines either of gold or silver in this
Florida. Neither have the Spaniard any Commodity from them save Indians. This
Gulf of New Spain, or Mexico has two entrances; the one is between Youcatan
and Cuba, where the stream comes fiercely in, the other is between Cuba, and
the Cape of Florida, where it runs more violently out.

CHAP 33. Of New Spain.
BEsides this Province of Florida, the King of Spain in this northern America,
has three great Kingdoms. The first and principal is the Kingdom of New
Spain, the second is the Kingdom of Galisia, the third the Kingdom of
Gutemalia, and the Province of Varagua, that adjoyneth to the Straight of
Dearian, and is properly of the Council of Panama. The Kingdom of Spain has
in it a Viceroy and Council, entitled the Viceroy of Mexico. And within his
Government the Province and Bishopric of Mexico, that of Tlascala, Guaxaca,
Mechoan, Chiapa, Yucatan, and Panuco. The Indirns of this Kingdom are of two
sorts; the Chickamecans, which are a sort of rogues, that live much after the
manner of Toreges, or ancient Irish, by robbing and spoiling passengers on the
way: Towns and Villages. And the other live even as decently as the Spaniard,
and are of all trades and vocations, as they are, of sharp wits, and of great
agility of body, as appears by their extraordinary feats of activity on the
Rope, and tumblings. This Kingdom is a high Country, for the most part of it,
and for riches, pleasantness, and wholsomnesse, accounted one of the best in
the world, as lacking nothing naturally that is to be had, excepting wine and
oil, which they might also have, but that it is forbidden, to plant Vineyards,
or Olive yards by the King of Spain, and it has diverse things not elsewhere to
be had both of Trees, Herbs and Drugs.

CHAP 34. The Council of New Galisia.
THis Kingdom of New Galisia, has no Viceroy, but is governed by a Council,
whose bounds is parted from New Spain at the Port of Nativity on the South Sea,
to the North, Northwest, and North-east. It has no bounds, but may enlarge
their territories, as they see occasion on the Indians. It has already these
Provinces. The first Guadalaiaca, Xalisco, Sacaticas, Chiamerla, Culiacan, New
Biscai, and Sivaloa. And this Kingdom is not much inferior to New Spain, and
it has the same sorts of Indians.

CHAP. 35. Gutamalia Kingdom.
THis Kingdom of Gutamalia is governed as the other by a Council, without a
Viceroy, and is the southwardliest Region of this North America, and has
within its bounds the Provinces of Gutamalia, from whence the Kingdom takes
name. Soconusco, Chiapa, Suchitepeque, Verapas, Honduaras, and Cacos. Saint
Savior, and Saint Michael, Nievaraqua, Chuluteca, Taquesgalpa, and Costarica,
or the rich Coast. The Indians in these Provinces are more warlike than the
rest, and have more unwillingly submitted to the Spanish yoke, and therefore
they have had almost continual wars, the most of the Indians living till very
lately after the manner of the Chickamecians; though many of them are docible
as the Indians of Mexico. This is a rich wholesome Kingdom, not inferior to
Galisia, but rather exceeds it. But when I come to each particular Province, I
shall name them as they adjoyn on the Coast of the Sea.

CHAP. 36. Of Panuco.
THis Province is near adjoining to Florida, and parted from it by the River of
Palms, which lies in 28 degrees of North Latitude.

That part of it that lies next to Mexico, is the best, and has the greatest
plenty of victuals, with some gold: the other side, which is next Florida, is
poor and barren.

This Province has three Spanish Towns: Panuco, in something more then 23
degrees. It is distant from Mexico 65 leagues, near a River, whose entrance is
a haven: it is governed by a chief Justice, provided by the Viceroy of New
Spain. The Village of Saint James, of the Valea, 20 leagnes to the West of
Panuco. The Village of Saint Lucas, 8 leagues from Panuco, to the Northeast,
near to the Sea.

There is no River nor Haven in this Coast but Panuco, and Palms which are not
very good, and not many Indians.

CHAP. 37. ^he Province of Talascalia, or Angels.
THe next to Panuco, on the ^ coast of the North Sea lies ^s Province of
Talascalia or Lo^els; with in its government are ^r Spanish Cities. The best is
^sangels, seated by a River that ^neth into the South Sea. It ^deth off the
side of a long Plain ^^ from Mexico 22 leagues, and ^taineth near 3000
households, in ^^ streets, governed by a chief ^tice, and in it are resident the
^hedrall, with Monasteries of ^minick, Augustine, Franciscan, ^mersed, and
Carmelite Friars, ^h one of Nuns, and a College of more than five hundred
Indi^ Children to be instructed in t^ Spanish Religion and Languag^ And north
of the Angels is the C^ty of Talascalia, in more than ^ degrees of height with
two tho^ sand five hundred houses* in whi^ is a fair Cloister of Francisc^
Friars.

In the Province of Losangles, t^ City of Guaxaca, is the third, which are
three Monasteries Friars, and two of Nuns all ve^ rich. This town is pleasant
and o^ wholesome air, and not far from the River of Alurado,

The City of Vera Crux is ^ English mile from the Sea, ^i^ leagues from the
Port of Sai^ John Delua* of four hundred Spanish households, besides Indians. ^
it resides the Kings treasurer for t^ Customs.

This Province has abundan^ of Flax, wheat, sugar and ging^ diversity of
herbs, and fruits, abundance of cattle, hogs and horses, many silver mines,
200 chief Indian towns, and at least 40 Monasteries of Friars.

The Harbors and Ports are on the North Sea, the best of which is Saint John
De Lua, which is made by a small Island, whose bank is kept up by a wall, in
which are Iron and Brass rings, whereby Cables they more fast their ships.
This Island has on it a Castle, which commands the Harbor, that is entered
by two Channels; the one to the North is the slat, the other is called the
Galisian Channel. Here the ships bound for Nova Hispania, and Mexico unlade,
and to the North of this Port on the coast of this Province is the river
Sempoalia, and upward the river of Casons, and near the government of Panuco,
Fuspea, and Tamagua, and to the South of the said Saint John Delva, is first
the river of Almerica, and further South, the river of Alvarado.

CHAP. 38. Youcatan Province.
THe North part of this Province adjoyneth to the South of Talascalia. It is a
pen-insula, and in compass 150 leagues. The temperature is hot and moist, it
has no river, but is full of good willows. It is a woody Country, nor will it
bear English grain, neither has it gold or other mineral.

But it has many inhabitants, that are of the civillest sort of Indians, in
New Spain, and great plenty of Millet, Swine, all sorts of cattle, horses, and
much poultrey, much Cotton, Bombast, and Ashurs. The Inhabitants are healthy,
and live to great age.

There are four Spanish towns, the City of Meridia, is in the midst of the
Province in 20 degrees. In it are resident the Governor, the Officers of the
Revenue, and royal Treasure, and Cathedral Suffragan to Mexico, with one
Monastery of Franciscan Friars. The village of Valiodalid is 31 leagues from
Meridia to the South; and near the coast of the Honduras is Salimanca, a fair
town. And on the north coast the village of Saint Franciscus of Campeach, in 20
degrees, fifty leagues from Meridia. It is a reasonable good Haven, but of
little depth, on the coast of this Province are many Rocks, Flats and Isles,
that there is scarcely any sailing within four leagues of the shore, on which
there is the greatest Floods and Ebs of any part of New Spain.

CHAP. 39. The Province of Honduras.
THis Province of the Honduras adjoyneth unto the South part of Yucatan, his
coast stretches along the north Sea as far as Nicurayna, which is near 150
leagues.

It is a hilly Country, plentiful of all sorts of Cattle, and store of Wheat,
and Mines of Gold and Silver: it has six Spanish towns and many peaceable
Indians.

The City of Valiodalid, stands in 16 degrees, 40 leagues from the north Sea.
Here is resident the Governor, a Cathedral and a Monastery of Lamersed. The
City of Adios, is 30 leagues from Valiodalid, to the West the village of Saint
Petro, is 11 leagues from the Port of Cavalos, where the Officers ^oyall are
resident, because the Port of Cavalos is sickly, to which ^he Ships come. This
Port of Cavalos, is in 15 degrees on the North Sea, there are few in it besides
Blackamores, and some factors, by ^eason of the unwholsomnesse of ^he place.

The City of Truxcillio, is 64 leagues from the Cavalos, to the North-east a
league from the north Sea. The village of Saint George is populous of Indians,
and rich in gold. The Septentrionall point of this coast is the Cape of Eburus,
in 16 degrees east, off which 20 leagues lies the River of Pitch, and a little
further Riobaxco, and beyond it the River of Balahama, and in 14 degrees and a
half lies the River Salt, and after that the Cape of the three points, and
from North the Island of Utilia, and to the North-east Hellen and Lyvanai* and
in 14 degrees the Cape o^ Thanks be to God.

And north from thence the three Islands called, Take away Sleep.

CHAP. 40. Of the Province of Nicaragua.
NIcaragua lies next to the South Side of Honduras: it is a plentiful
Country of Coco, Cotton-wool, Millet, Cattle, and much gold. It has five
Spanish towns, and abundance of peaceable Indians, which are most expert in the
Spanish tongue.

The first and principal town is Saint James, 12 leagues from the South sea,
at the head of the lake, Nicaragua, where the Governor is resident, the royal
Officers and Cathedral, with five Monasteries of Lamersed, and many peaceable
Indians.

The City of Granado, stands on the Borders of this great lake, near which is
a famous Volcan, that burns perpetually; casting forth fire and smoke. A Friar
imagined there was much gold in it, because it never consumed the land about
it, wherefore he caused a Caldron to be fastened to a huge chain, and let it
into the furnace. But the violence of the fire soon consumed it, and with all
the Friars hopes. This great lake of Nicaragua, is full of Islands, and by a
kind of River has an issue into the north Sea, which river or passage it
navigable for great vessels. And the head of this lake is within five leagues
of the South Sea, and good ground to be cut, by which it were easy (if the
Spaniard so pleased) to have passage from the South Seas to the north Sea. At
the head of the said lake, the village of Nalio, stands in 11 degrees and a
half on the South coast, and is the best Port on that coast.

On the north Seas (for this province reaches from the North to the South
seas) is first the river of Gare, that divides Nicvaragua, from Honduras,
south of it the River Wipre, next the Port of Saint John, which is the voiding
River, that comes from the great lake, that has a great Island lying in the
mouth of it. In the south sea it has the Nalio, the Port of Saint James, and
the Port of Paria, and Nicoya, and on the coast the Island of Chora, Saint
Mary, and Saint Mark.

CHAP. 41. The Province of Castorica.
THis Province lies between Nickuragua, and Caragua, between which it has 90
leagues in length. It is a good land and very fruitful in Millet, Wheat, Flax,
and Sugar, plenty of Mines both of gold and silver, and it has two Spanish
Towns: the first and best is Curtago, the other Mendoco. It has two Ports, one
on the south sea, the other on the North.

CHAP. 42. The Province of Varagua.
THis Province lies between Costarica, and Panama, adjoining on the south part
to the Strait of Dariana. The northerliest is in 11 degrees, it has East and
West 50 leagues, and in breadth 25, and is washed as Costarica, with the north
and south seas. It is a Mountainous Country full of bushes, without pasture or
cattle, wheat or barley, but it has some Miller, but full of rich mines of
Gold. The Indians are few, and they be in continual wars with the Spaniards.
It has the City of Conception 40 leagues from Nombre Dd'ios, where the
Governor and Officers are resident. The village of Trinity, six leagues to the
East of the Conception, near the River of Bethelem, And three leagues from the
North sea, the City of Santey Fei, stands 12 leagues from the Conception, to
the south. In it are Melting-houses, and Deputy Officers. The City of Charles
near the coast of the south sea, 50 leagues from Santey Fei.

At the end of this Varagua begins the southern America. And therefore I
shall return back to the other parts of this north America, which is not yet
discovered.

CHAP. 43. Of the Province of Ciblioa.
THis Province of Ciblioa is the most northerly Province that the Spaniards
possess in America. It has but one Spanish Town, but many well built Cities
of Indians. The Spanish town is called Saint John of Ciblioa. It has a strong
Garrison of Spaniards and Mexican Indians.

The fairest Indian Town is Quibra, that has also a Spanish Garrison. This
Town is in 40 degrees, and distant from Cibiloa 200 leagues, from whence it
lies due north.

This Region is apt for English grain, and produces all sorts of our herbs
and fruits.

Here are store of all sorts of our Cattle, and the Ox of the Country, which
has a bunch of flesh on his back of the bigness of a man's head, and his hair
is shaggy and long, his horns smaller than our Kines horns, but his body much
bigger: this is an Inland Province, and lies from the sea many leagues.

CHAP. 44. New Biskay.
THis Province lies on the south-west of Cibola: it has store of provision
and cattle, and diverse mines of silver. It has two fair Spanish Towns, that is
to say, Sancta Barbola, and the Baro of Saint John, with diverse peaceable
Indians. It is an Inland Province, but of much Commerce, by reason of the
silver-mines.

CHAP. 45. Chiamerla.
THis Province lies in more then two and twenty degrees of height. It is ten
leagues broad, and something more in length: it lies along the south sea, but
has no Ports of name. It has a town of Spaniards, called Saint Sebastian. It
has many rich silver Mines, and sufficient of Cattle, and all sorts of Grain
and Fruits.

CHAP. 46. Culiacan.
THis Province is the most northerly Province the Spaniards possess on the
coast of the south sea. It is west of Chiametla: there are much cattle, seeds
and fruits of England; it has two Spanish towns: one is called the Virgins, by
which there are some silver mines; the other the village of Saint Michael; this
is a small Province, and has no eminent port on the sea.

CHAP. 47. Sacetas.
SAcetas lies south-east from Biscai. It is very wholesome in some parts of it,
and as sickly and unwholesome in other parts, which causes that in some places
there is much want, and in other places as much plenty. But to amend all
defects, there are in most places rich silver mines. It has three Spanish
towns, the best is Erena, the second Nombre d'Dios* and the worst Durangi: the
Chickmeacan Indians do much annoy these parts, but there are great numbers of
Civil Indians that live in peaceable manner.

CHAP. 48. Xalisco.
THis Province has the City ^ of Compostella, near the south in 21 degrees,
nineteen minutes: ^re is the village of the Purifica^^ south-west from
Gud^leria, 30 ^gues: this land is hot and sickly, ^hath mines of gold and
silver, ^d store of provisions, and ex^ent horses, that are well bred ^any
service.

CHAP. 49. Guadalaiara.
^Uadalaiara is the best of all the Provinces of the Kingdom of New Galisia,
and the most s^therly: it has all sorts of gra^ herbs and fruits of New Sp^
and plenty of kine, horses, ^ swine; it is a wholesome good ^ and has many
silver mines: ^ chief City and Head of the Ki^^dome is Guadalaira in 20 degr^
Here resideth the Council, ^ officers of the goods and ro^ treasure, a
Cathedral, two ^nasteri^s of Friars, and one Nuns.

And 30 leagues from Guadal^ is the village of Saint Mary, and another called
the Holy Ghost: ^ Province is much troubled ^ the Chickemecan Indians, but ^
many well governed Civil Ind^ that live orderly, and very richl^

CHAP. 50. Mechocan.
THis Province lies between the Province of Mexico, and ^e Kingdom of the New
Galisia, ^hath in breadth by the coast of ^e south sea 80 leagues, and 60
^ithin land. Here are many good ^ines, and it is a fruitful land, and ^ath
much Wheat, Millet, Coco, ^l sorts of Spanish fruits, Cottonwool, the rich drug
of Cocheneel, ^ore of cattle and fish, and the Indians are industrious, and
given to ^abour: the chief City is Mechoa^n: it stands in 18 degrees 15 minutes
and 47 leagues from Mexico.

The City of Pascurio, stands seven leagues to the east of Mecho^can: it has
the Cathedral, and two Monasteries of Augustine and Franciscan Friars. And 35
leagu^ from Pascurio north-east is the village of Saint Michael, in a roug^
Country. The next is the Village of Salya, then the Village o^ Saint Phillip.

The village of Sackatula, is 4^ leagues south west from Mechoacan^ near the
south sea in 18 degrees, 9^ leagues from Mexico.

And the village of Colina in 1^ degrees 20 minutes. On the coas^ of the south
sea near the confine^ of Galisia the Port of Natividad* is in 19 degrees, and
from this por^ they make their navigation to the Philipin'as in East India.

Besides these towns rehearsed, which are possessed by Spaniards, there are 94
head-towns for Indians, with schools of Doctrine for Indian children, and 130
ordinary towns.

CHAP. 51. Of the Province of Mexico.
THis province falls between Mechoacan and Talascalia, it has in length
north and south 130 leaugues, and in breadth 18.

The chief City and Head of ^ew Spain is seated in this pro^ince called Mexico.
It is an inland ^ity lying in 19 degrees and a half, ^ the midst of two great
lakes, ^at compass it about, the one is ^lt, the other fresh: the fresh
voy^eth into the salt, each of five leagues in breadth, and eight in ^ength,
and both are in compass ^3 leagues.

There are three Causways by which they go into the City, the shortest of half
a league long, the longest a league and half, the other a league: it has near
70 thousand houses, the most of Spaniards built with brick fair and high. And
here resideth the Viceroy of New Spain and Council, the Inquisition office and
Judges, the Officers of the Revenues, and royal treasure, a founding house and
a mint house, with the Archiepiscopall, Metropolitan, and Monasteries of
Franciscan, Dominican, and Austin Friars, the company of Jesus el Carmen
Lamersed, the Bare foot and Trinity Friars, 10 Monasteries of Nuns, one College
of Indian children, and the retired from the world, and repenting whores, a
University, and diverse Hospitals.

In this province are reckoned to be six hundred thousand tributary Indians,
one hundred and fifty Monasteries, with multitude of schools to teach Indians
Children, and many gold and silver mines, infinite plenty of all sorts of
cattle, and sheep, grain, herbs and fruits, and what else is necessary for the
delight of man in an abundant manner, with the rich Cocheneel.

The Coast of this province reaches to the south sea, on which there is an
excellent port called Aquepulco, in 17 degrees, six leagues from the river
Lopes, and eight leagues more west is the Sitalia, and four leagues further the
River Metla.

CHAP. 52. Guaxcaca.
GUaxcaca Province, comes to the Coast of the south sea, and it lies between
Mexico and Gutamalia province along the Coast of the south sea one hundred
leagues: it has 5 Spanish towns, the chief of which is Antiquera; in it are
resident the Governor of the Province, a Cathedral, many Monasteries of
Friars.

It is distant from Mexico eight leagues, from whence it lies south west. The
next to it is Sapolecai, the third Saint Jago de Nexapa, the fourth the Village
of the Holy Ghost: this province has store of gold, and silver mines, and one
of Crystal, Boreal, much Coco, Cotton-wool, Wheat, and Millet, and Cocheneel,
plenty of all sorts of cattle and swine, and not one River in the Country but
yields gold. There are 350 head-towns of Indians, and 120 Monasteries of
Friars, and many of Nuns, and schools of Indian Children to be instructed in
the Spanish language, and popery, and three hundred thousand tributary Indians.
In this province is the Valley from whence Ferdinando Cortez the first
Conqueror had his title of Marquess of the valley.

The ports on the south sea are the Haven of Guatulaco, in 15 degrees and a
half: it is great, good, and much frequented. The port of Tecoantepequa, near
the other, which is but reasonable good, but it has a great town, standing on
it, from whence they make great fishings, especially for shrimps, with which
they trade the inland Countries.

CHAP. 53. Soconusco.
THis is the westerliest province of the Kingdom of Gutamalia, joyneth to the
province of Guaxcaca, from whence it lies on the south sea east, south-east 34
leagues and far into the land. It is plentiful of Wheat, Coco, Millet, and
Cattle. It has but one Spanish town, which is called Guearettan, where the
Governor is resident. And in her Coast are the Rivers Coatan, in her west
border, east of which is Gapernacalte, and east south-east Colata.

CHAP. 54. Gutamalia.
THe province of Guattamall, is the head of the Kingdom of Gutamalia, it
joyneth to the province of Soconusco, and on the south sea, it stretches 70
leagues, the Country is of a good temperature, and plentiful of Cottonwool,
Wheat, Millet and Cattle, and other Seeds and Fruits, the Winds and Rains in
October are very furious.

It has five Spanish towns besides many Iudian towns and villages. The head
City is Saint James of Gutamalia, in which the Council is resident. It lies
in 24 degrees and a half, and of above a thousand Spanish households, and here
are the Kings Officers of the goods and royal treasure, a melting house and a
Cathedral, which is Suffragan unto Mexco, a Monastery of Dominicans,
Franciscans, Mercenarians, Augustines, Jesuits, and two of Nuns, with an
Hospital or College.

This City is furnished with all sorts of provisions, and dai^ties, and
stands exceeding pleasantly on the side of a large plain, near a burning
mountain. And 40 leagues from Saint James is the City of Saint Savior the
village of Trinity, sixty and four leagues from the port of Axavatla. It is a
chief Commissioner-ship, with the title of His Majesty in a plentiful soil.
It is a place of great traffic. And the port Atouch, for the ships of Peru and
New Spain.

And 62 leagues from Saint James is the village of Saint Michael, the Haven of
this town is called the Bay Sonseca, which is distant from the town two leagues.

This province has abundance of gold, some silver, store of balm, and liquid
amber, Copal, Suchicopal excellent liquours, and the Gum animi, with Beasts
that breed the Bezar stone. But the Volcans here are very noisome to those that
lie near them, for they often burst forth casting out fire-stones and ashes.
And here are more of those Volcans or fire-pits than in all India besides.

CHAP 54. Chiapa.
THis province is an Inland province, it is Mediterranean to Soconusco, Mexico,
Tabasco, and Verapas, and in length 40 leagues, and something less in breadth.
It has store of Wheat, Millet, and other grain and seeds, much cattle, but few
sheep. It has but one town of Spaniards, which is called the City royal, 70
leagues from Saint James of Gutermalia, to the north east, which is governed by
an ordinary Justice, and in it is resident, the Cathedral: two Monasteries of
Dominicke Friars, and one of Nuns. There are many Indian towns in her climates,
and the natives are excellent Planters, and Musicians. This City royal is in
18 degrees and a half, built round and of a mavelous situation, sixty
leagues from the north sea, and as far from the south.

CHAP. 55. Verapas.
THis also is an Inland province of Gutemalia, and is Mediterranean to Chiapa,
Youcatan, Honduras, and Gutamalia of 30 leagues over, it is a moist country,
and has plenty of Millet and Wheat, Cotton-wool, Coco, and much of that sort
of fowls, whose feathers make the rare colored Indian pictures, and this is a
great Merchandise amongst them. The Spaniards have only one small town, with a
Monastery of Friars, and one school to instruct the Indian children. The
Governor is a chief Justice: Between this province and the south America, is
the Provinces of Costarica, Honduras, Varagua, and Mearagua, which joyneth to
Gutemalia, on the coast of the South Sea. And thus have you the northern
America.

Here a Map.

CHAP. 56, Of Panama.
PAnama has a Council that has for Jurisdiction, no more than the province of
Panama, and the election of the Governor of Varagua, ^n regard they are
appointed principals of the Navigation for the dispatch of Peru, and ordering
the King of Spains treasure, which is yearly transported to Porto Belio, over
the strait of Darion, and from thence to Spain. It adjoyneth on Carthagena, and
Popian, to the south*east and south-west. The chief City is Panama, seated on
the south sea in 9 degrees north Latitude, consisting of 700 households: the
most part of the inhabitants are Merchants. Here is also resident the Council,
and Officers of the royal treasure, Monasteries of Dominican, Franciscan, and
Lamersed, and Augustine Friars; with two of Nuns, and a Cathedral. The Haven
is indifferent good, but the ships come not within a league of the town, the
biggest ships not further than Perua, three leagues of the town, at which place
they lie dry at low water.

The air at Panama is extreme unwholesome, and the place very sickly, but it is
mended and made durable, for the profit is brought in by the vast sums yearly
brought there to carry to Spain, of which the Inhabitants get part.

The Village of Nata, lies on the south sea west from Panama, 30 leagues, it
has a reasonable port.

On the North sea, there is the ^own of Nombred' Dios, it has a good port, but
the place is so unwholesome, that the trade of Mer^handize is removed from
thence ^o the City of Saint ^hilip, the ^arbour is called the port Obelo, in
which the Spanish ships, do unlade those Merchandises, that are to be
^^a^sported to Panama and so to Peru, and receives in such goods as are
returned, to be transported to Spian.

To secure the entrance into this ^arbour, are two strong Castles, between the
City and the sea, and third near the town. And on this coast are reckoned,
first the bay of ^arabaco, near the confines of Va^qua, to the east of it, the
River of Trinity, the Conception and Bethelem, an Island, and the rive^ of
Caugre, up which river from Saint Chilip, they transport the^^ Merchandise
bound for Peru, unto the house of the Croses, which is at the head of the said
River and from thence to Panama, which i^ distant from the said house five
leagues.

And 12 leagues to the west from Nombre d'Dios, is the port of Long^ got, and
in 9 degrees the port ^ Hians, the port of the Aventure i^ six, Porto Belio in
five, and again^ it the Island of the Lookings, an^ the Bastemontos. And two
leagu^ from Nombre d'Dios, the river ^ Sardinilia, and the Isle of Sardini^ and
the river of Millet, and the rive^ of Snakes, and in the gulf of Cura^ the town
of Saint Mary. On the south coast the Cape of Saint Mar^ and point of war. And
towar^ Panama, the gulf of Paris, when stands Nata, the point of Chiam^ the
river of Chepo, and the Balsa, ^ the inward part of the gulf of Saint Michael,
north from the ^s^and of pearl.

CHAP. 57, Carthegna Province.
THis Country lies on the north sea, and is parted from the province of
Panama, by the river of Darian, from whence unto the river Magdalen, is 80
leagues. The land is mountainons and hilly, full of high trees; this Region is
fruitful in some places, and in other some as barren. The seed of England will
grow but in few parts of this Country, but here are many cattle* horses and
swine.

The temperature of this Country is hot and very rainy, neither is there mines
worked either of gold or silver, but much rozen and liquors, which they have
from trees, and Sanguis Drag^nis. The City of Cartagena, stands near the sea
two leagues west from point Canta, in ten degrees of height. It has more then
six hundred households, and in it is resident the Governor, the King of Spains
officers of the royal treasure, and the Cathedral Suffragan to the Archbishop
of Granado, with Monasteries of Dominick, and Franciscan, Friars. The
situation is plain, and almost an Island, on the north side compasses it, and
to the land an arm of the sea, which reaches to the Lake of Canapote. At the
entrance of the Haven, there is an Island without Inhabitants. The village of
Saint James of Tolu, is two leagues from Cartagena southwest the village of
Saint Margito, and 30 leagues from Cartagena, to the south the village of
Sancta Crux, is 70 leagues from Cartagena by the sea and great river of
Magdalen, and twenty from Sancta Martha, six from the sea, where the
Marchandizes that are bound to the Kingdom of Granado are delivered out of the
ships, and from thence are transported up the River in Canowes.

CHAP* 58. The Kingdom of Granado.
THis Kingdom lies from the sea, adjoining on the south part of Cartagena. It
is a very rich Countey in Mines of Emraulds, gold, steel, and copper, store of
pastures, with all sorts of cattle, wheat, Millet, fruits, and herbs. The
Indians are great traders, and able men of body, ingenious in the sciences of
the Spaniards. The Merchandise comes up the the river Magdalen, on which this
land lies. Their chief City is Sancta Fee, seated on the bottom of a hill, in
four degrees to the North of the Equinoctial Line of more than six hundred
households. In which is resident in behalf of the King of Spain, a Council for
managing of the affairs of the Kingdom, the Officers of the royal treasure,
a melting house, and a Cathedral Metropolitan, two Monasteries of Friars, and
in her borders more than fifty thousand tributary Indians.

The City of Tocampa stands on the river Cati, which runs into Magdalen.
This City has also many Indians tributary, so has all the other Spanish
towns, which are first Saint Michael, then the City of Trinity, 20 leagues from
Sancta Fee north-west, the town of Palms, fifteen leagues from Sancta Fee west
north-west. And the City of Tunis north-east from Sancta Fee 22 leagues: it
stands upon a hill of an extraordinary situation. Here is a great garrison of
soldiers, and the best market in all the Realm. Here is also the City of
Meridia, the City of Victorey, the village of Saint Christopher, the City
Bales, and the City of Marequeata, all Spanish Cities, with many hundred large
towns and villages of Indians. Through this Region they pass from Cartagena by
land to Peru, commonly by post, but not otherwise, by reason that it is fifteen
hundred leagues from Cartagena to Cosco. This Region cannot be entered by land
from Cartagena, by reason of the great waters and mountains that are in the
way, wherefore they pass up the river Magdalen, with Merchandise from the
Custom House of Malamba, on the said River, from whence to the first landing
in the Kingdom of Granada is one hundred and fifty miles.

CHAP. 59. The Province of Sancta Martha.
THis Province of Martha, lies between Cartagena, and the River Hacha, on the
North sea. It is a plentiful Country of Millet, Potatocs, much gold,
Emraulds, and other rich stones, and copper, and has five Spanish towns, the
City of Sancta Martha, in ten degrees of North latitude, where is resident the
Spanish Governor, the King of Spains Officers of his treasure, and a Cathedral
Suffragan to that of Granado. The City of Tenerif stands on the river
Magdalen, which parts this Province from Cartagena. The village of Palms, is
two leagues from this river, twenty to the south of Tenerif, the City of
Losreas is 30 leagues from the river Hacha. On the coast of this Government is
the river Biaba, Piaras, Aguamur, and Sancta Martha. The Indians of this
province are commonly in war, which is a hinderance to the Spaniards quiet
enjoying the riches. It exceeds in stones of such value and quantity, as is
not elsewhere to be found in India.

CHAP. 60. Venesiula.
THe Province of Venesiula, lies on the North Sea, parted from Sancta Martha,
by the River of Hacha, on the east is the province of Suava, or New Andelosia,
as the Spaniards call it. The coast of the sea is near 130 leagues of length.
In this land are veins of gold, of more than two and twenty Carracts and a
half. It is plentiful of wheat and other seeds, for there are two harvests in
a year. It has abundance of all kind of cattle, great and small, Cotton and
Sasaprila. The City of Coro stands in 11 degrees in a good air, the Governor
for the King of Spain resideth here. It has also a melting-house, and
Cathedral with Monasteries.

The City of the Lady of Carvalteda, on the sea coast 8 leagues from Coro, with
a bad haven.

Saint James is within the land three leagues to the south of Carvelteda. The
new Valentia is sixty leagues from Coro, and seven from the Port of Brubufa
Xeres 15 leagues south from Valentia. The new Sigonia is 20 leagues to the
south of Xeres. The City of Tacuio, stands ten leagues from Segavia,
south-west Truxcillio, eight leagues from Coro south and by east. On this
coast, the principal river is the river Hacha, which parts this province from
Sancta Martha, near the mouth is a rich Town and Beads of pearl of the best in
India.

CHAP. 61. Guana.
THis Region comprehends all the land that lies between the province of
Venesula and Brazil, which begins at twodegrees of south latitude; this land
is more famous for report, than for any certain knowledge of the riches
thereof, for at this day, there is no more than one Spanish Town called Codoa,
which lies on the sea coast from Trinidado. The Spaniards are near it, and
have better opportunities to know the riches of it than any other. But the
Indians which are in great part fled from the Spanish Countries, are so much
their enemies, as not to permit them to come amongst them without wars, which
is a great hinderance to the Spaniards undertakings. But although this Country
promises much, in truth to this day there are no mines found and worked either
of gold or silver, although it is very probable by the Latitude, that it does
abound in both.

The rivers are many and great, that issue into the sea from this coast, of
which the most famous are the rivers Orinoque, or Orileania, which enters into
the sea with sixteen mouths. The best entrance is by the Branch du West from
Trinidado The river of Amasions is more southerly, and issues into the sea
under the line. The mouth or entrance of this river is more shallow then
Orinoque, neither is it so well known, although the English and Dutch have
traded up them both with the Indians for these commodities natural to the
Country, Bees wax; Cotton-wool, Cassia Fistula, Bolearmoniack, Teralemna, and
diverse other drugs, and wood fit for Dyers, and some Balsomes. The people love
our Nation above any other, and would be glad to assist us on any design. The
air in this Country is in some places extreme hot and moist, in other places
constantly hot and dry, and in other some very temperate all the year long.

CHAP. 62. The Land of Brazil.
THis Province begins where Guana ends, at two degrees of south latitude,
where there is a point called the Cape of Snakes, from whence it lies along
the Coast of the north sea to 25 degrees, and on the back side west, lies the
provinces of the river of Plate. The air is the whole year through very hot,
the winter which is our summer, distinguished only with the rain that falls
at that season.

Here are many venomous worms and great serpents, it is plentiful of pastures,
cattle and horses, little Millet and no English grain, wherefore their bread is
Casabi or Potatoes, which are in good Plenty. There are great shows of silver
and gold, but none gotten, nor mines certainly known. The chief commodity is
Sugar, Cotton-wool, Bombast, and Brazil-wood. It has near the sea coast about
20 Portugal towns, many Ingeniowes, or Sugar works: the first town of the
Country is called Tamerico, and 5 leagues to the south of that Farnambuck or
Rescif, then All Saints 100 leagues from Farnambuck in 14 degrees 40 minutes.
The town of the Sure haven in 16 degrees and a half: the Holy Ghost in 20*
There is another town on the rive^ Generio, in 23 degrees near which they cut
much Brasel-wood. There are on the coast eight or ten ports, more principal
than the rest, which are the river Saint Dominick northeast off Farnambuck, by
the Cap^ of Saint Augustine, which stands in 9 degres. The Island of Tameric^
before rehearsed, the river of Saint Francis in 10 degrees and a half. It is
very great. The bay of All Saints is 3 leagues and 13 up into the land. The
river of Trinidado, and the river of Canamon in 13 degreees and a half. The
river of Beads in 14 degrees and a half, and the river of the Virgins in 16,
and Portesceurae in 17. The river of Parague, in 20: near the town of Sanctus
Spiritus, and in 23 degrees Cold Cape beyond Saint Vincent. This province has
been in difference between the Portugeses, and West India Company of Holland,
and as the Dutch got great footing there without right, so the Portugals, since
their falling from Spain have surprised them again, and recovered them by the
same slight they got the East Indies from us, but not with such vile murders,
as they committed on the English.

They have now the town of Resif, only which not long since was near lost.

CHAP. 63. Of the Provinces of the River Plate.
THe provinces of Plate, take name from the river on which they lie, the
passage to them is up the said river, but they are almost on the back of
Brazil. They are large and far wholsomer then Brazil, plenty of Sugar, Ginger,
Wine, Wheat, Millet, all sorts of English fruits, store of Cattle, Swine, and
Horses, but no mines that are worked. They are subjected by the Spaniards, and
united to the Council of Peru, on the south sea for neernesse of lying to that
Kingdom, there is a common passage from these provinces thither by land over
the mountains, the most of the land is indifferently inhabited.

This province has three Spanish Cities, the best is the City of Ascension. It
lies in 23 degrees and a half of south latitude west from Brazil, and east
from Peru, 300 leagues up the River of Plate on the North-side. In it is
resident the Spanish Governout, the Officers royal, and a Cathedral,
Suffragan to the Archbishop of Lima, in Peru. The next is the City royal,
distant from the Ascension eighty leagues north-east. The City of Bucnos airs
stands on the River Plate, one hundred leagues from the mouth of the same.

These provinces are full of Indians, and Mistisos which are Spaniards children
begotten on Indian women. On this coast between the Brazil and the mouth of the
River Plate, is the port of Saint Vincent in 33 degrees against Becena Burgo a
small Island, and six leagues to the south the River Ubay the port and Island
Dela Canana in 35 degrees, and forward the river De la Barca. And 20 leagues
from thence the port of Roderico, and in 29 degrees the Island of Catalina And
five leagues to the south Close Haven. And fifteen leagues further another
river called Traquean. And in 32 degrees the Bay of Saint George. And in 35
degrees the Cape of Saint Mary at the entering into the River Plate. The south
Cape is called Cape Blanke, and the mouth of this River of Plate, is thirty
over and a great way up it, ten leagues in breadth with many Islands, and
diverse great Rivers issuing into it.

CHAP. 64. Of the Coast between the River of Plate and the Strait of Magelan.
FRom the mouth of this River, the strait lies southwest, and is distant
thence 400 leagues. It has on the said coast: first the point of Saint Helena
in 37 degrees, the point of Francis in 38: the River of Canobi in 45. And to
the south the Isle of Ducks. And in 47 the River of Seriani, and in 49 the Port
of Saint Julian, the River of Sancta Crux in 50. And 12 leagues before you come
to the strait of Ilefonsus. But the land possessed with no other but the Natives,
which are a Gyantly people.

CHAP. 65. The Straight of Magellan.
THis straight is famous for the trouble some passage of Drake, Candish, and
Haukins, three English men Generals, each in a several Fleet: Drake and
Candish being the first that sailed along the coast of Peru, and so to the East
Indies, and came home by the Cape of Bona Sperantia, Circum-navigating the
Globe. The last being much over-matched was taken by the Spaniards on the coast
of Peru, and convayed from thence prisoner to Spain. From whence with much
difficulty he obtained his freedom, although solemn Engagements passed from
the General his taker for his freedom.

The entrance into this strait is in 52 degrees, and the coming out into the
south sea the same height.

It is an extreme difficult passage by reason of the meeting of the north and
south seas in the channel, driving each other back* prevailing as they are
favored by the wind, which commonly blows there exceeding boysterously and
cold. There are diverse caves and bays in it, but no encouragement for a seaman
to adventure that way. The Inhabitants on this strait are few, and extreme
savage, neither is this passage any more in use: for those that will go by the
south of America to the East Indies, or into the south sea to any part of the
west coast of America, have a more convenient passage south of this strait in
an open sea. The entrance into it is called Lamear, but the sea was discovered
by Sir Francis Drake, and Sir Richard Haukins both which were driven back by
foul weather into those seas after they had passed the strait.

On the coast of the south sea, which lies between the strait and Chilli,
there are no inhabitants save the wild Natives, but it has the Bay of horses
in 52 degrees, and the Bay of Saint John in 50. The Cape of Saint Francis in
51. And 18 leagues before you come to Port Hearnan the Bay of Galago in 48
degrees 40 minutes, and north of it the Bay of Kings, and the Isle of Catilina,
then the Cape of Saint Andrew in 42 degrees where Chilla begins.

CHAP. 66. Chillia.
THis coast reaches to 28 degrees of south latitude. This Region is wholesome
above all other in the Indies, being of an excellent temperature, as neither
too hot nor too cold. It is abundantly rich in gold and silver mines, and all
sorts of cattle and grain, fruits and excellent pleasant wine. The Country men
are strong and valiant beyond compare, which the Spaniards know to their great
cost, for they could never totally subdue this Nation. The Spaniards had
formerly 12 Spanish towns in this Province, the most south was the City of
Chillon in an Island of fifty leagues long, that almost joyneth to the firm
land, which bears the name of this whole Country, this town had in it a
Monastery of Friars; and to the north of this town 41 leagues, the City of
Osornio seven leagues from the sea, with two Monasteries of Friars, and one of
Nuns. The City of Valdiva two leagues within the mouth of the River Valdiva in
40 degrees. It had three Monasteries of Friars, and one of Nuns. The City
Imperial in 39 degrees of height 3 leagues from the sea: in it was resident
the Cathedral, and two Monasteries of Friars. The City of Conception lies in
37 degrees near the sea. And there did reside the Governor of the Country.
The harbor is good, and made by an Island which lies before a nook in the
land. The Port of Quoquimbo, is a good harbor, and stands in 32 degrees. The
town of Laserana, is next to Peru. It lies pleasantly by the Valley of
Quoquimbo. In this place it rains but thrice a year: this Country is near 300
leagues by the sea, but not above twenty into the land, where lie the Andes,
which are mighty great mountains, that run through the southern America, even
from the strait of Magellan to Sancta Martha Of the Spanish towns in Chilla,
there is recovered by the Natives, and by them quite destroyed the City of
Conception, Chillon, Osornio, Valdivia, and Imperial.

CHAP. 67. The Council of Charcas.
THe bounds of this Council stretches from Chilia to Peru, it has abundance
of cattle of all kinds, great shag-haired sheep bigger then goats that carry
great burdens on their backs, store of corn of all sorts, fruits and wine,
much gold, and the greatest mines of silver in the world. There are few Spanish
towns; and but one port, in regard the Spaniards get near the Hill of Potosi,
to the City Imperial, which lies in 19 degrees of latitude far from the sea,
and delivers that which is exported, and receives the Merchandise imported
at the City of Arica.

The City of Imperial, is exceeding populous of Spaniards and Indians, and it
stands near the Hill of Potosi, which is much to be admired for the great
quantities of silver is drawn from thence, and exceeding deep caves in the
earth, from whence they fetch it, that are so intricate and far in the earth,
that those that go in take the Popish Sacraments, the danger of death is so
great. This mountain is as it were pointed at by a black cloud that perpetually
hangs over it. The land about it is most extreme barren, yet the great
quantity of silver that is there causes that all sorts of variety is there in
great plenty, although at a dear rate. And toward the Port of Arica, are the
mines of Porco, which are more ancient and very great, but harder to work.

The Indians live in the best places for cattle, corn, wine, and fruits being
tributary to the Spaniards, that in behalf of the King of Spain are Lords of
these great riches.

CHAP. 68. The Kingdom of Peru.
THis Kingdom is governed by a Council and Viceroy. It has to the North the
Council of Quipo, on the south Charcas, and to the west the south sea, and to
the east without limits. This Kingdom is well peopled with Civil orderly
Indians, that are in great subjection to the Spaniards. Peru does abound in all
sorts of fruits, seed, cattle, horses, sheep, swine, rich mines of gold,
silver, quicksilver, plentiful of wine, oil, and sugar. The Andes run through
this Province within ten leagues of the sea. In all which coasts it never
raineth, but on the said hills it raineth continually, and beyond as in other
Regions. The plains between the sea, and the said Hills, have few or no rivers,
but the industry of the Inhabitants draw in trenches, (which are artificially
made) the water either from those few rivers, or from the side of the said
Andes, which makes that the said plain is mightily populous, fruitful and
pleasant even as a garden.

The City of Lema is near the south sea in 12 degrees of south lalatitude, on
the side of a rich and pleasant valley. It consists of 4000 houses. On the
east side of it runs a fair river, by which the Citizens have Gardens with
most excellent fruits. And this is the sole place in the world that is without
thunder and lightning, which never happen here, neither is there plague or
pestilence, but the inhabitants enjoy perpetually a clear and fair sky. It is
the seat of the Viceroy and Council, and Assembly of Chief Justices, the
Officers of the King of Spains revenue, the chief seat of the Inquisition, a
University with schools of diverse Indians, languages, five Monasteries of
Friars, and one of Jesuits, ^ao which is the Port of this City is two leagues
from it. It is great and good. The village of Arneado is in the valley of
Chianeai ten leagues from Lima, near a good Haven in 9 degrees. The City of
Truxcilo, stands in seven degrees and a half near the sea, with Monasteries of
Dominican, Franciscan, and Mercenaries, and Officers royal for these bounds.
The port is two leagues of the City in a Bay not very good for ships. The City
of Saint John is seated in a most plentiful place, and the Indian inhabitants
are the fairest and most wel-favoured people in the Indies. The City Guanang is
to the south Lema. It has Monasteries of Dominican, Franciscan, and
Mercenaries, and one of Nuns, and the best houses of any City in Peru of Brick
and Stone. It stands in a temperate place, and is very healthy.

The City of Cosco, is the head City of Peru, by a title that it has from the
Kings of Spain. It lies in 13 degrees and a half south of the Equinoctial. It
is a very great City, and has four great streets that go to the four parts of
the world. It has many Monasteries and Nunneries, with a Cathedral, and
diverse schools of Indian Children.

The City of Ariquipa is in 16 degrees on the sea side. It is a rich and
flourishing place, and in a wholesome Climate: the other Cities of Spaniards
are Inland, but ^hese rehearsed are the most emi^ent. The inconveniency of this
Country is the great Earthquakes, that often happen especially about J^ma.
There are three wonderful springs of water in this Country, a water that
turns so soon as it is stopped to stone. If a man or beast drink of it, it
turns to a stone in his body, and kills him: with this they make stones of
what fashion they please, and make their houses: there is another water that
springs far within land, that being settled turns to pure white salt: the
other is two spouts of water, by each other, the one hot, the other cold.

The remarkablest ports, Islands and points on this coast are the Islands of
Lobos in 7 degrees: the one is four leagues from the coast, the other more; and
forward to the south west the I Will of Saint Rock, and further the port of Abrago
ten leagues to the north of Truxcili^ in 7 degrees and a half: the port o^
Santa in nine degrees, and five leagues more south port Farewell, and six from
it Casama, and eight leagues further the port of Gurmay, and twenty leagues to
the south the Baranca and Potquaria, where there is a great salt pit. And a
little more south the I Will of Lema, at the entry of the port of Cala, and twenty
leagues more south the point of Guareo. And in 15 degrees the point Chuca, and
forward the point of Saint Laurence, near the River Ariquipa. And then the
River of Nombre d'Dios, where Peru ends, and the Council of Charchas
begins.

CHAP. 69. Quito Kingdom.
THis Kingdom is governed by a Council, whole bounds lies between Peru and
Panama. It has two mighty Countries or Provinces within his circuit, that is
to say, first Quito, and then Popyan. Quito lies between Peru and Popyan on
the south sea, and far into the land under the Equinoctial line: and contrary
to the opinion of the Ancients, it is a most wholesome temperate Country, and
rather cold than hot in most parts of it. In those places where the snowes
continue all the year, it raineth from October to March, which they call
winter: this province is rich in Mines of Emraulds, and gold, silver and
quicksilver, plentiful of English grain and cattle, horse and swine. This
Region is happy in the temperature of the air, there being neither extreme cold
nor heat, as lying Equinoctial to these Extremes, and which is most
delightful to man's nature always, a clear sky. The Spanish towns are the City
of Saint Francis, 60 leagues from the south sea, and half a league to the north
of the Equinoctial: in it are resident the Council, the Officers of the
Spanish Kings Revenues, and a Cathedral with three Monasteries. The town of
Bamba lies southwest from Quito, on a river of that name. It is possessed by
Spaniards and Indians, which are extreme rich insheep above any town of India.
The City of Loxein stands in the way from Quito to Cosco: there are many
other Spanish Inland towns which are great and good, of which I have no certain
knowledge, but of most consequence to a Navigator, is the port towns: the best
of which is Poyta in five degrees. It is a good and great harbor. The City of
Saint James of Aquil stands not far from the sea.

It has a good port on a river that runs fair by the City fit for vessels
of great burden.

The City of Porto Vivegio stands on the sea near the borders of Peru, the
Indians of this place have red warts that sometimes grow on their Noses and
Foreheads, Cheeks and Chins, which eats as a ringworm with us, but far more
to the dis-figuring the face, and in extremity of pain.

The river and port of Tombs is in 4 degrees, and south of it the I Will of Pana,
the port of Calaio in two degrees height south latitude, by which stands the
I Will of Plata, and one degree to the south of the Equinoctial, the Bay of

This province has formerly had great Giants living there, as appears by the
great bones often found, and pieces of teeth, which have weighed fourteen
ounces.

Near the said point of Helena, there are veins of Tar, which runs out of
the earth, with which they commonly cank their ships.

CHAP. 70 Popyan.
THis province lies between Quito and Panama, the greatest part of it is
Inland, yet does it for a good way lie on the south sea. The eastern part
bordereth on the Kingdom of Granado and Cartagena.

The temperature of air is very different in this place, for here are some
places indifferent temperate and cool, other places are violent hot and sickly.
This province has some Indians peaceable, other some extraordinary savage,
insomuch that about the Village of Arma, and Canarna, they eat not only those
that they take in war, cutting off slivers eating one part, while the other
lives, but sell their Children, and the Sons their Fathers and Mothers to the
Butchers that keep shambles of man's flesh.

This Country is exceeding rich in gold mines, which makes that the Spaniards
endure the other inconveniences of the Country with great patience.

The principal Spanish City in this Government is Popyan, which lies far from
the sea, two degrees to the north of the Equinoctial. It has the Leivtenant
Governor resident in it, a Cathedral with Monasteries of Friars: the City of
Cali stands in 4 degrees 20 leagues from the sea: the Governor is resident
in it, and the Officers of the King of Spains treasure, a melting house and two
Monasteries. The Port of Bonaventure lies in 3 degrees and a half north of the
line: this is a place of good resort of Merchants, and has a good port and a
fair Custom House.

The Village of Sancta Fee, on the River of Cavaca.

The Village of Arma, borders on Granada, near which lies the Village of
Canarman.

On the sea coast is the Cape of Corientes in 5 degrees to the north of the
line. The River Solines in four degrees, and south ten leagues, the River of
Saint John in two degrees: and little more south the River of Saint Lucas, and
further south the Port of the Cross,

FINIS.
November 18. 1650.
Imprimatur

Nathanael Brent.


