THE HISTORY OF Christ's Sufferings: Composed out of the Prophets, Evangelists,
Apostles, Fathers, and other holy Writers.

WITH Aspirations, or Prayers, Suitable to each Section.

In Order to an entire Resignation of the Soul to the Will of God, according to
the Example of Christ

By DUDLEY GARENCIERS, Rector of Waverton, near Chester.

Phil. 2.5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. LONDON,
Printed for S. Lowndes, over against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand. 1697.

THE PREFACE.
O God Eternal, the Father of Mercies, who desire not the Death of a Sinner,
but rather that he should turn from his Errors and be saved; and have given me
this Opportunity of Contemplating the Passion of the Lord Jesus Christ, whom
thou have sent into the World for the Redemption of Man, through Faith in his
Blood: Grant me, I beseech thee, suitable Apprehensions to the Dignity of so
adorable a Subject: That all vain Thoughts, carnal Desires, Profaneness and
Infidelity, being secluded from my Soul, I may penetrate into the hidden
Mysteries of the Cross, on which thou have erected the Throne of thy Love;
admire and praise the Methods of thy Wisdom, at which the very Angels in Heaven
have been astonished; learn thence the Duties of Faith, Hope, Charity, and all
other Christian Graces; and in perfect Imitation of my Savior's Virtues,
trample under foot this World, and obtain Happiness and everlasting Life.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. OF the time of the Passion, and our Preparation for the Thoughts of
it. Page 1. SECT. II. Of the Mercy of Christ toward Judas, and the Ingratitude
of that Disciple. 6 SECT. III. Of the Divine Predestination in respect of the
Betrayer. 11 SECT. IV. Of the Grief of Christ for the Apostasy of his Servant,
the dreadful Condition of such as fall from him, and the happy Privileges of
persevering in the Faith. 13 SECT. V. Of the miserable Departure of Judas from
the Presence of Christ, and his selling him to the Chief Priests. 20 SECT. VI.
Of the Benignity of Christ, supporting his Disciples in the Absence of the
Betrayer, against the time of their Trial. 27 SECT. VII. Of the Legacy of
Comforts Christ left to the Faithful, and his leaving Jerusalem for a Terror
to Infidels. 37 SECT. VIII. Of the Agony of Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane.
42 SECT. IX. Of Christ's Prayer in his Agony, and his admirable Resignation of
himself to God. 52 SECT. X. Of Christ's Anxiety for the Security of his
Disciples. 56 SECT. XI. Of the Candor of Christ toward his sleeping
Disciples, and his Continuation in Prayer to God. 61 SECT. XII. Of the Glorious
Effect of Christ's Prayer, and God's Fatherly Kindness to all that call upon
him faithfully. 66 SECT. XIII. Of the Apprehension of Christ by his own
Permission, and the Horror of the Jews Hypocrisy. 70 SECT. XIV. Of the Rigor
of Christ's Enemies at his Apprehension. Page 82 SECT. XV. Of the sorrowful
Separation of Christ and his Disciples, his first Examination before Caiaphas,
and incomparable Clemency toward his Enemies. Page 86 SECT. XVI. Of the False
Witnesses that arose against Christ, and the Wickedness of the High Priest. 96
SECT. XVII. Of Peter 's Fall. Page 106 SECT. XVIII. Of Peter 's Rise. Page 109
SECT. XIX. Of the Barbarity of the Multitude toward Christ. Page 113 SECT. XX.
Of the Prosecution of Christ before Pilate, and the miserable Despair of Judas
thereupon. Page 116 SECT. XXI. Of the deplorable End of Judas. Page 126 SECT.
XXII. Of the Wonderful Providence of God in the manner of Christ's Death. Page
128 SECT. XXIII. Of the Obstinacy of the Jews to put Christ to Death, and of
the true Nature of his Kingdom. Page 133 SECT. XXIV. Of Pilate 's first
Declaration of Christ 's Innocence. Page 144 SECT. XXV. Of Christ's being
brought before Herod, and the Unhappiness of Atheistical Greatness. Page 148
SECT. XXVI. Of the Indignities done to Christ by Herod and his Officers. Page
151 SECT. XXVII. Of Pilate's second Declaration of Christ's Innocence. Page 154
SECT. XXVIII. Of Pilate 's third Declaration of Christ's Innocence, and of the
Scourging of his Body. Page 158 SECT. XXIX. Of the Injuries done to Christ by
the Roman Soldiers. Page 164 SECT. XXX. Of Pilate's fourth Declaration of
Christ's Innocence. Page 166 SECT. XXXI. Of Pilate's fifth Declaration of
Christ's Innocence. Page 170 SECT. XXXII. Of Pilate 's sixth Declaration of
Christ's Innocence, his giving Sentence against him at the Importunity of the
Jews, and the Miseries which ensued thereupon to their Nation. Page 178 SECT.
XXXIII. Of the Procession of Christ to Golgotha. Page 190 SECT. XXXIV. Of
Christ's Prediction of the Miseries of the Jews. Page 196 SECT. XXXV. Of the
Bitter Potion given to Christ at Golgotha. Page 201 SECT. XXXVI. Of the
Crucifixion of Christ. Page 206 SECT. XXXVII. Of the Exaltation of the Cross.
214 SECT. XXXVIII. Of the Situation of Christ's Cross between two Thieves, and
the Title Pilate affixed to it. Page 218 SECT. XXXIX. Of the Partition of
Christ 's Garments an^ the Irrision of the People. Page 22^ SECT. XL. Of
Christ's Intercession to the Father (...) his Crucifiers. Page 2^^ SECT. XLI.
Of the Penitent Thief, and Christ's Me^ toward him. Page 23^ SECT. XLII. Of
the Sorrowful Interview between Chr^^^ and the Virgin Mother, his Compass^^^
toward her, and Love to Sa^^^ John. Page 2^^ SECT. XLIII. Of Christ's
complaining of his being forsaken of God. Page 252 SECT. XLIV. Of Christ's
Thirst upon the Cross. 262 SECT. XLV. Of those Words of Christ, It is finished,
and the Resignation of his Spirit to the Father. Page 268 SECT. XLVI. Of the
Astonishment of the Creatures at the Death of Christ. Page 276 SECT. XLVII. Of
the Piercing the Side of Christ with a Spear. Page 281 SECT. XLVIII. Of the
Burial of Christ's Body by Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus Page 287 SECT.
XLIX. Of the Sealing and Watching the Sepulcher of Christ. Page 297 SECT. L. A
Reflection on the foregoing History, with Thanksgiving for the Death of Christ.
Page 301
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 10. read and Martyrdom. l. 25. dele and so contrary. p. 6. l. 22.
r. his Soul. p. 22. l. 17. d. Of. p. 25. l. 24. for great r. sweet. p. 30. l.
11. r. Sons of God. p. 36. l. penult. r. thy boundless. p. 40. l. 10. r. out of
my. p. 48. l, 2. r. destitute. p. 60. l. 17. r. knew it not. p. 67. l. 1. r.
overcome. p. 68. l. 25. r. draw. p. 69. l. 3. r. my Terror. p. 71. l. ult. d.
to. p. 77. l. penult. r. which cursed. p. 79. l. 1. r. that now. p. 87. l. 7.
r. Enemies. p. 103. l. 19. r. was not the first. p. 127. l. 18. d. But. p. 133.
for Sect 18. r. Sect. 23. p. 135. l. 13. r. Protomartyr. p. 141. l. 9. r. on
Euphrates. p. 182. l. 5. r. and whom they. p. 185. l. 19. r. paps of their
women. p. 192. l. 24. r. had past. p. 223. l. 20. r. of his death. l. 22. d.
That. p. 231. l. 23. r. who suffer. p. 232. l. 24. r. to thy Providence. p.
241. l. 12. r. and whom I. p. 244. l. 2. r. not before acknowledge. l. 5. r.
having first. p. 276. l. 5. r. thy Arms. p. 279. l. 20. r. from a Spectacle. p.
285. l. 5. d. which thy Enemies. The Reader is desired with his Pen to correct
the Pages, from p. 145. to p. 160.

THE HISTORY OF Christ's Sufferings.
SECT. I. Of the Time of the Passion, and our Preparation for the Thoughts of
it.
IT was the Matt. 26.2.
Time of the Celebration of the Passover among the Jews, in Exodus 12.17.
Memory of their Miraculous deliverance out of Egypt, when the Lord Jesus
having Preached the Gospel, was by the Act. 4.28.
determinate Council of God to return unto the John 20.17.
Father through the Passion of Death.

A dreadful Tragedy to those poor Disciples, who had but lately left Mark 10.28.
all to follow him, in hopes of partaking of better Fortune in the Grandeur of
an Empire and the Delights of Plenty; for the people had conceived great hopes
of a John 6.15.
Triumphing Messiah, who should free them from the Roman Tribute and Exactions,
and lift up Judaea unto the Throne of the Universe (their Fundamental error
against the Cross:) nor were these yet weaned from Temporal expectations of a
Reward in his Matt. 20.21. Act. 16.
Kingdom, for what they had quitted for his sake.

They were John 15.19.
chosen out of the World, and fit for the impression of all other Virtues and
Graces of Christianity; but are Matt. 16.22.
startled at the apprehension of Persecution of Martyrdom, and cannot
understand what they are unwilling should come to pass: So susceptible of the
poison of Ambition are the finest Spirits, that the Wisest have rejected it the
last of Vices; and so contrary and so contrary to Flesh and Blood at first are
the passages of the Spirit through Tribulation to Bliss.

There was need of the forwardness of some extraordinary Zealot to support 'em
in such a trial with a Religious Confidence, when all their Pregnant hopes were
apparently disappointed. I fear, had not Peter the bold Galilaean stepped forth
when his Master foretold his Sufferings, and broken the profound Silence and
Astonishment into which it had cast the rest of the Apostles, they had
Shipwrackt in the very Port of Faith against this Romans 9.33.
Stumbling Stone and Rock of Offense.

Hear then the expressions of an Ardent Zeal replenished with heat rather then
light: Matt. 26.33, 35.
Though all men shall be offended because of Thee, yet will I never be
offended. Though I should die with Thee, yet will I not deny Thee. Likewise
also said all the Disciples. We presume we can do any thing in the strength of
Passion, while our minds are suspended from serious reflections; but must
bewail our imbecility when that is over, and confess our selves naturally weak
and impotent, and that all our 2 Cor. 3.5.
sufficiency is of God

For, alas! there is one of them contriving his Death, and how he may most
Matt. 26.16.
opportunely betray him to his Enemies, from the very instant he protests his
Fidelity: nor shall he sooner be delivered into their hands, then the rest will
Mark 14.50.
forsake him, and Peter himself Mark 14.30.
deny him.

My dear Reader, thou see it will concern us in the constant course of our
Christian Profession, especially in the time of Persecution and Affliction, and
and as often as we commemorate the Passion of our Lord, among the rest of our
Holy Endeavors strictly to examine the Sincerity of our Hearts; and as
diligently to apply that excellent precept; Matt. 26.41.
Watch and Pray that ye enter not into Temptation. Our Minds may be Vigilant,
our Professions Zealous, our Resolutions apparently Good: But who can be secure
when one of the Twelve turns Traitor, another forswears himself, and the rest
desert.

All the moments of this Militant State are assaulted by the Grand Enemy of
Man's Salvation, Studiously wicked, and diligently pernicious to draw all into
his Snare and Condemnation. But as the time before our Savior's Passion was
more properly called the Luke 22.53.
Hour and Power of Darkness, wherein the Ruler of the Darkness of this World
was let loose against him and his Disciples; so we may conceive this
everlasting Adversary is never more industrious then to frustrate the means
which chiefly conduce to the eradicating our Corruptions, the pulling down the
Dominion of Sin, and reconciling us to our offended God: Such is our embracing
the Matt. 16.24.
Cross of Christ with entirely Crucified Affections and Lusts.

Prayer.
O my God, thou have given thy Son to dye for me, and to become my
Propitiation; but unless thou also give me to Believe on him, and to Adhere to
him by a due Application, that Treasury of thy Mercy will be revealed to me in
vain. Lord I Believe, help thou mine Unbelief, and Strengthen me, I Beseech
Thee, against the infirmities of the Flesh, and the Suggestions of the Wicked
One; that through the various Sufferings of my Savior, I may be led to the
imitation of his Divine Virtues; till Thou account me worthy to be partaker of
his Glory.

SECT. II. Of the Mercy of Christ toward Judas, and the Ingratitude of that
Disciple.
JUdas Iscariot was one of the Twelve whom Christ had elected out of the whole
World to a free and intimate fellowship of His Person; one of his peculiar
Domestics and Attendance; a partaker of those immense Blessings, which many
Matt. 13.17.
Prophets and Kings had desired in vain to see and hear: Having seen with his
Eyes the Word incarnate, and heard with his Ears the Divine Voice, and received
an opportunity to have dwelt in his presence, whom Abraham might only see by
the light of Faith: above all having been admited to the great Miracle of his
Love, the Ministration of the Mystery of Redemption, the Sacrament instituted
at his last Supper; to open his Understanding, to strengthen his Faith, and to
purify Soul.

For Jesus, in the same night he was Betrayed, Luke 22.19, etc.
took Bread; and when he had given Thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his
Disciples, saying, Take, Eat, This is my Body which is given for you, do this
in Remembrance of me. There needed no Remembrance had he not been to be sold
into the hands of his blood-thirsty Adversaries to be Slain: and therefore he
would lay before him the Egregious wickedness he was going to commit against a
Person who had always embraced him with an infinite Tenderness, and now was
ready to lay down his life for him. Likewise after Supper he took the Cup, and
when he had given Thanks, He gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this, for
this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, and for many for
the Remission of Sins; another Representation of that Innocent Blood which was
now barbarously designed to be shed, enough to have wounded a heart of Marble,
or turned a Rock into a Fountain of Tears: Since by both it may appear, the
perfidious Traitor was not more studious to deliver his Lord to the barbarous
cruelty of his implacable Enemies, then the Benign Jesus was to pursue him with
Kindness, and to contrive how he might reap the Advantages of his Sufferings,
out of an unalterable purpose to do more then die for us, by finding out a way
whereby he might live in us for ever.

But it seems the unbelieving and the Slaves of Sin, cannot have experience of
the Divine Bounty; because through the Blindness and Hardness of their Hearts,
they will not weigh so unspeakable a Gift as the Death of Christ for taking
away their Guilt. Something less Mysterious may possibly suit better with a
Carnal mind and a Corrupt understanding, and an Action of Humility from the
most High, may draw the Admiration of the most insensible.

Jesus therefore knowing that the Father had given John 13.3.
all things into his Hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God;
(and what could the Evangelists have said more proper to make us Sensible of
his wonderful Condescension? For we can never truly esteem his Humiliation,
unless at the same time we consider his Sublimity; as we cannot rightly
estimate his Charity, without considering how unworthy they were on whom he
bestowed it.) He knew himself to be Lord of all; and that he came from God by
Eternal Generation; and was shortly to sit in Glory at his Right Hand: Yet for
the love of Men, and to draw them to himself; he laid aside his Power, or
rather hid it, and took upon him the form of a Servant, with all the
Circumstances of an humble Ministration. Joh. 13.4. etc.
He rose from Supper, put off his Garment, girded himself with a Towel, poured
Water into a Basin, kneeled down, and washed his Disciples Feet.

Who would have thought the Messiah was to come among Men, to execute the
Office of a Moabite, or Slave? for thus says David, Psalm. 108.9.
Moab is my Washpot; implying, he would humble the Moabites so low, they should
serve only to bring Water to wash away Impurities. What Force has conquered
him? What Arms have brought him under? What Power has subjected him to so
dishonorable a Servitude? Are they not the Charms of his own infinite Love
which have rendered him thus enamored of his Spouse the Church, that to woo
and gain her he will become any thing? And are they not a Token he intends
shortly to cleanse and purify her in his expiatory Blood?

I am not surprised that Peter should be afraid, and contract himself, saying,
Joh. 13.6.
Lord! do thou wash my Feet? when he saw Heaven stoop to Earth, and the
Vility of Man, next to infinite, exceeded by a Mercy equal to the Immensity of
God. I rather wonder to see so many Christians burn Incense daily to that Idol
called Point of Honor, when the Son of Man came not to be Ministered unto, but
to Mark 10.45.
Minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for many. He did not disdain to wash
the Feet of his Betrayer, with those Hands which had opened the Eyes of the
Blind, cured Lepers, healed Diseases, and when lift up to Heaven restored the
Dead to Life. He might have washed the Head or Hands, a Service something more
honorable; but he bends rather to the Feet, for the Opportunity of a more
humble Posture and apter Signification of his infinite Charity.

Prayer.
Adorable Jesu! I burn with Love among thy Purifying Waters. I desire
affectionately to humble my self: But where shall I find so low a Place as
thine, when thou wast humbled before Judas, to wash his Traitorous Feet? I
therefore resign my self with thy faithful Joh. 13.9.
Disciple; and not my Feet only, but my Hands and my Head, even all that I am:
Beseeching thee to work in me what shall be pleasing to thy Will, and to Grant,
That by the Waters of Repentance and Regeneration my Soul may be renewed to
everlasting Life.

SECT. III. Of the Divine Predestination in respect of the Betrayer.
I Know not, whether Simon showed more Love to his Master, in violently Joh.
13.8.
refusing at first, and as eagerly 9.
permitting him at last to wash his Feet among the rest of the Disciples; or
Judas more Obstinacy, in continuing insensible under such an admirable
Dispensation of Goodness. For our Savior pronounces against his invincible
Infidelity, enough to strike Terror into the most confident and assured. 10.
Ye are clean, but not all. 18.
I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen. Luke 22.22.
The Son of Man goes as it was determined: but woe unto that Man by whom he is
betrayed. Joh. 13.19.
Now I tell you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye may believe
that I am He.

O God! what Lightnings, what Darts are here! what a Night without a Day! what
a Precipice without a bottom! what an Ocean without a Shore! O Height of the
Wisdom and Knowledge of the Almighty! how fearful and horrible are the
Mysteries of thy Secrets. All this was long since praedicted by the Esai. 53.
Zec. 11, 12, 13.
Prophets: All this is acted according to the Counsel and Act. 4.28.
Praedetermination of the Divine Majesty; and yet the Actor is in fault. Judas
is admitted into the Apostolate, and yet not chosen; to present Grace, but not
to final.

May it not suffice, to believe, That no Man is Reprobated without Justice; no
Man Saved without Mercy; and that what was decreed from the Beginning to be
done by Judas, was now to be fulfilled, without any new Counsel, in a certain
Order of Time, long before seen and determined. Not that Judas was compelled to
betray Christ, lest the Scriptures should be found false; for otherwise he were
not to be blamed, but rather praised, yea, his Sin would be charged upon God:
But because he was ready to do this of his own accord, the Holy Spirit
foreseeing it, foretold it to come to pass.

Prayer.
O dreadful Majesty! who do justly Condemn, and undeservedly Save Souls; I
tremble at thy Judgments, I prostrate my self before thy Mercy; if thou
enterest into Judgment with me, I cannot be justified; if thou think upon me
in Mercy, I cannot be condemned. Pierce thou my Heart with a Fear of thy
Judgments, that I may always dread them, and never feel them. If I forget thee,
awake my Memory: If I fly from thee, recall me again. If I defer my Amendment,
stay for me in Mercy; and when I return, O cast not out my Soul, but think upon
the Rigorous Justice that thou have executed upon the Son of thy Love, for the
Satisfaction of my Sins.

SECT. IV. Of the Grief of Christ, for the Apostasy of his Servant. The
dreadful Condition of such as fall from him, and the happy Privileges of
Persevering in the Faith.
WE may perceive the great Lover of Souls was extremely troubled at the
Apostasy of one of his Disciples, when he expressed so much Satisfaction in
the Preservation of the rest. ( Joh. 17.12, 13.
Holy Father, keep through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me, that
they may be one as we are. While I was with them in the World, I kept them in
thy Name. Those that thou gave me, I have kept, and none is lost, but the Son
of Perdition.) Nor would he conceal the Grief of his Spirit, foreseeing in him
a Representation of all those who should afterward reject his Admonitions and
Benefits, and trample his Love under their Feet.

For though we may have hitherto thought but of one Judas, who falling from his
Profession, sold his Lord, delivered him to his Enemies, betrayed him to be
crucified; yet such is every one, who renouncing the Faith, and following the
Motions of Satan and his own Lusts, Heb. 6.6.
Crucifies to himself the Son of God afresh, and puts him to an open Shame.

The Wonder, if not the Grief of the blessed Angels in Heaven, (who Luke 15.7.
rejoice at the Conversion of every penitent Sinner, as Heb. 1.14
ministering to those who shall be Heirs of Salvation,) is, to see so many
Christians falling from the Truth, and abasing the great Mystery of the
Religion which they profess, by a settled Tendency to Sin and Death. Who have
given up their Names, but not their Hearts, to Christ; who have begun well, and
are not established; who have partaken of the Holy Ghost, and have chased him
away again; who have eat and drunk at their Master's Table, and are the chief
that lift up their Heel against him.

A most miserable Spectacle; and not to be exceeded, unless by that of their
departure into everlasting Punishment. For as an Angel falling became the
Devil, so a revolting Christian is the worst of Men, because of the Eminency of
his former Station; and will have his Mat. 25, 41.
Portion allotted him with that Apostate Rebel.

This was that which Joh. 13.21.
troubled the Spirit of the Holy Jesus, when he testified, and said, Verily
verily I say unto you, That one of you shall betray me. This was that which
made the Disciples exceeding Mat. 26.22.
sorrowful, and to begin to say, Lord, is it I? And, O that it might have the
same effect upon us, to search our Hearts, to examine our Faith, and all our
Thoughts, Words, and Works, that we fall not among those who draw back to
Perdition.

How sad was this Feast, where both the Master and the Disciples sympathize in
an inexpressible Grief? One, that he must be betrayed to Death by his Friend;
the others, that one of them should be the accursed Betrayer: One, that he knew
the miserable Estate of that Wretch, for whom it had been Mark 14.21.
better that he had never been born; the others, that they are not yet
delivered from their Fear, which it should be of whom he spoke, and whose Being
should be worse than not to be at all.

Ah! Sinners, where are we? Alas! do we not remain under the same Suspense? One
of you shall betray me, is a fearful Saying; and the Echo of this Voice is
addressed to all, and loudly resounds the Danger of Sin and Impenitency. Is this
to live, to have a Being worse than none? And can we call that a desirable
Estate which will inevitably tend to the Abyss of Misery, through Pains,
Torments, Terrors, and Deaths?

O Life, how sweet art thou, when thou do fear and love nothing but God! O
Death, how dreadful art thou, when we have forsaken him, and devoted our selves
to the Creature! What Favors and Benedictions are there in the Life and Death
of a Virtuous Man! But what Horrors, Anathema's, and Maledictions, during the
Course and at the End of the wicked Life of a Sinner!

Blessed was that Disciple, who all this while might rest securely in the Joh.
13.23.
Bosom of his Lord. Whether Grief or Fear had inclined his Head; or whether it
were the Sweetness of his Master's Actions, which ever drew the Admiration of
the Beholders; or whether it were Love, which minds not what it does, but
silent in a sublime Tranquillity of Passions, adheres to its Beloved for an
Eternity, not admitting the least Disunion; or whether it were Excess of
Rapture and Contemplation of what he writ afterward of the Joh. 1.
Divinity of the Word; surely never any Mortal had so sweet a Repose, or near
Approach to the Beatifick Vision: Since he might lean on his Breast, to be
admitted to whose Feet, many Prophets and Kings would have accounted it the
greatest Felicity.

A Spirit separated from the Pretensions of the World, and purified from all
the Forms of the Creatures, entire to God, and which lives by the flames of
holy Love, has a mighty Privilege with the Prince of Purity, and neither doubts
to ask, nor fears to be denied; while ungovernable Zeal receives many Repulses,
and hinders not a Votary from being less Matt. 16.23.
Satan, than he that favors not the things that be of God, but those that be
of Men.

Peter, therefore, whose Rashness had often been rebuked, yet impatient, and
desirous to be rid of his Fear, Joh. 13.24. etc.
beckoned to him who was lying on Jesus Breast, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spoke. And Jesus answered, He it is to whom I shall give a
Sop when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped the Sop, he gave it to Judas
Iscariot the son of Simon, That the Joh. 13.18. Psalm. 41.9.
Scripture might be fulfilled. He that eats Bread with me has lift up his
Heel against me. And after the Sop Satan entered into him.

A Speech truly dreadful, but much more the thing it self; for a Man to arrive
at that height of Misery, through the Obstinacy and Impenitency of his Heart,
as to be cast off, reprobated, and given up to the Devil: Yet such is the
admirable Analogy and Proportion between the Judgments of God and our Sins,
when we continue to despise the means of Grace. He Libravit Iter, Psalm. 78.51.
weighs a way to his Anger, as it were in Scales, punishing our Sins with evil
Habits; our evil Habits, with hard Hearts; our hard Hearts, with Obstinacy; our
Obstinacy, with Impenitency; our Impenitency, with Damnation. Judas, who had
wilfully given up himself to Covetousness, Hypocrisy, Ingratitude, and
Contempt of all that was Holy, is now delivered to be obsirmated by Satan, and
made incurable of his Sin; that being like the Devil, he might never return.
And this is the Malediction which the Holy Ghost had long since imprecated by
the mouth of David, Psalm. 109.6.
Let Satan stand at his right hand.

Prayer.
Great Judge of all Men, Thou have made but two Ends, one in Heaven, and the
other in Hell; one with thy self, and the other with the Devils; and all our
Motions are always tending to these. We no sooner leave thee, the Center of our
Happiness, but we wander into those unfortunate Labyrinths of Misery which lead
at last to the Abyss of Torment. O, let me abide for ever in thy Presence,
fixed there by a strong Faith, an earnest Hope, and an endless Charity; that
the Suggestions of Satan may never have Opportunity to withdraw me from those
Pleasures which are at thy Right Hand; but passing the time of my Sojourning
here in Fear and Caution, assisted by thy Grace, and guided by thy Spirit, I
may safely arrive at the Consummation of thine Elect.

SECT. V. Of the miserable Departure of Judas from the Presence of Christ, and
his selling him to the Chief Priests.
AGitated by the Prince and Powers of Darkness, Joh. 13, 30.
He went out immediately, and it was Night; hoping to cover himself with the
Shades of that, to act his more horrible and black Designs. But alas, poor
Disciple! where can he find Rest, who goes out of the Presence of his Savior?
How can he choose but stumble and fall, who hides himself from the Sun of
Righteousness; who is absent from the Light of the World; who wanders out of
the way of Life; who is beyond the Voice of that Word, which only succors,
instructs, and guides? A lost Sheep, out of the Care of the Shepherd, will soon
meet with the Infernal Lion; and the Opportunity will invite him to the Assault.

The Devil was a Joh. 8.44.
Murderer from the Beginning, and never fails to promote any Evil Purpose,
takes hold on this Advantage to ruin Judas, the Jewish Nation, and (if it were
possible) the Messiah. He leads this fugitive and desolate Wretch, with the
strong Chain of imaginary Profit (his 1 Timothy 6.10.
surest Snare to draw us from the Faith) to the Chief Priests, who, out of Joh.
11.47. Mark 11.18.
Envy to Christ's Miracles, had frequently taken Counsel to put him to Death,
and waited only for an Opportunity in the Mat. 26.5.
Absence of the People.

As was the Seller, such were the Buyers, the Chief Priests and Elders of the
People, excecated by the just Judgment of God, to Mat. 23.22.
fill up the Measure of their Fathers Iniquity: Otherwise they could never have
found fault with Innocence, denied the Truth, or envied a Divine Power, all
employed only to do them good: So far does the Punishment of Sin reach to many
Exodus 20.12.
Generations of them that hate God. Which made the Evangelical Prophet,
foretelling the coming of Christ, foretell also the Blindness and Obduracy of
this People: Mat. 13.14, 15. From Isa. 6.9, 10.
Their Heart is waxen gross, their Ears are dull of hearing, and their Eyes
they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their Eyes, and hear
with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and be converted, and I
should heal them.

A mutual Inclination soon makes a Bargain. Judas says, Mat. 26.15.
What will you give me? And they, knowing his avaricious Mind, covenant with
him for Thirty Pieces of Silver. Dr Hammond in loc.
Which, according to the Greek and Latin Manuscripts, being equivalent to
Staters or Shekels, amounted to Three Pound Fifteen Shillings; which was the
common Price of a Servant in those days, a Freeman being valued at twice that
Rate. So truly did he, who was in the Phil. 2.7.
Form of God, and thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, make himself of
no Reputation, and take upon him the Form of a Servant, that he might exalt us
to the Privilege of of Sons: So sordid and vile the Heart of the Betrayer, to
undervalue his Master in the Bargain of his Blood.

How unlike was this Action to that of the Luke 7.37.
Noble Convert, Mat. 26.13.
never to be forgotten while the Gospel shall be preached; who, when Jesus was
in the House of Simon the Leper, came with an Mark 14.3.
Alabaster Box of Ointment of Spikenard, very precious, and worthy the greatest
Monarchs (for such had Cambyses sent to the King of Ethiopia;) and when she had
first shed a Flood of Tears, enough to Luke 7.38.
wash his Feet, and had wiped them with her hairs, and kissed his Feet, in an
Ecstasy of Love, Sorrow, and Admiration; she brake the Box, and poured it upon
his Mat. 26.7.
head, and Luke 7.38.
anointed his feet, to the great amazement of all the Beholders, and Mark 14.4.
indignation of some, who looked upon it as Wast.

It had not yet been used to anoint the Feet of Kings, and was afterward, when
received into the Roman Prodigality by Otho, in Honor of Nero, looked upon as a
Prodigy of unnecessary Profusion. But she thought nothing rich enough for his
Sacred Feet, whom she acknowledged above all the Potentates of the Earth, and
not to be valued, but to be loved above her Life. She now melted in the Limbeck
of holy Desire, and her Heart distilled out by her Eyes; her Hairs, which were
the Nets wherein so many Captive Souls had sighed under the Yoke of wanton
Love, are now trampled under the Feet of her Conqueror; the Kisses which
carried the Poison of a Luxurious Passion, now breath from her nothing but the
Delicacies of Chastity; her pleasing Odors, which were before vowed to
Sensuality, are now become the sweetest Exhalations, and bring an odoriferous
Perfume to Christ. Judas on the contrary thought it more worth than his Head,
and under pretense of Charity to the Poor (because he was a Ioh. 12.5, 6.
Thief, and had the Bag, and bare what was put therein) would have had it sold,
that he might have stolen from the Price.

Covetousness aims at base and low Purchases, whilst Holy Love is great and
comprehensive, and designs at nothing less than Infinity. The Love of God is a
Holy Fountain, limpid and pure, sweet and salutary, lasting and eternal: The
Love of Money is a vertiginous Pool, sucking all into it self, to destroy 'em;
it is troubled and uneven, gidy and unsafe, serving no end but its own, and
that in a restless and unequal Motion. The Love of God spends itself upon him,
to receive again Reflections of Grace and Benediction; the Love of Riches
spends all its Desires on it self, to purchase nothing but unsatisfying
Instruments of Exchange, supernumerary Provisions, and Occasions of Sin; and
ends in Dissatisfaction, Emptiness of Spirit, and a bitter Curse.

O, ye unhappy Treasures of the World, which cause the same Barrenness in the
Hearts of Men, as ye do in the Mountains in which ye grow, and consume all
Natural and Divine affection, and become the 1 Timothy 6.10.
Root of all evil, and pierce us through with many Sorrows till we are involved
in a certain Matt. 19.23, 26.
Impossibility of Salvation! Why were ye revealed from your dark Repositories?
Why were you not suffered to lie buried for ever? that wanting the occasions of
Injustice and Luxury, we might Innocently have enjoyed the necessaries of Life,
and have had our desires free to have waited on our God, the only Adequate
Object of our Immortal Souls.

But Mary has taught us the right use, to convert 'em to the benefit of the
Members of Christ, and we cannot but think it the most excellent distribution
which draws us to the nearest resemblance of our Maker, whose Nature is to Jam.
1.^. Matt. 5. (...)
Give and to do good; which 1 Pet. (...).
covers Sins; which is Psalm. (...).
everlasting Righteousness; and Ascends for a Acts (...).
Memorial before God; an Phil. (...).
odor of a great smell, and an acceptable Sacrifice; which shall Rev. (...).
follow us; and be Matt. 25.(...).
owned by the Great King in the last day; and Matt. 5.(...).
obtain Mercy in the Time of Judgment.

Ye Candidates of Eternity, whose business shall be Charity in the other World
when Faith and Hope shall cease; the Time is coming (and we know not how
suddenly) that Death shall disarray us to the very Bones, and leave us nothing
but what we have given to God, Matt. 26.11. Deuteronomy. 15.11.
and to the Poor in his Absence. Let us therefore commence here our Heavenly
Conversation, and Bless the hour wherein we have opportunity to evidence our
Love to God and Man, and to part with something for the sake of our Dear
Savior; to buy with the Superfluities of a trifling stock an 1 Pet. 1.4.
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled in Heaven, where neither Matt. 6.9.
Moth nor Rust do corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.
How comfortable will the reflections of our Charity be at the Hour of Death,
and in the Day of Judgment; when Mercy shall rejoice against Judgment, Jam.
2.13.
and Love shall constitute a part of Heaven, and help to make up the enjoyment
of that State?

Prayer.
Amiable Jesu, since we cannot pour our Grateful Odours upon thy Head, nor wash
thy Sacred Feet with our Tears; let us reach thy Divinity and Humanity with our
Faith; and let our Charity diffuse it self upon thy Mystical Body, the Church:
That we may never esteem any thing too Precious to be bestowed for thy sake,
never value any thing in competition with thy Service, who art the true Riches
of thine Elect.

SECT. VI. Of the Benignity of Christ supporting his Disciples, in the absence
of the Betrayer, against the Time of their Trial.
JUdas is gone, and the Holy Jesus not more straightened with the thoughts of
his Passion then with the Sorrows of his Disciples, begins a most Heavenly and
Salutary Discourse to enlighten their Understandings, and alleviate their Minds.

Joh. 13.31.32.
Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be
glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and will straightway
glorify him.

Now he was Glorified as to his Mystical Body by the recession of the Son of
Perdition from his Society: Now he was Glorified by the Separation of Judas,
prefiguring his future Glorification when he shall separate the Just from the
Unjust, and his Power, Truth and Justice shall appear: Now he was Glorified by
the beginning of his Passion upon which depended the whole Mystery of
Redemption: Now he was Glorified in Relation to that Glory, of which he had
said, John 12.32.
When I am lift up, I will draw all men to me.

He had before been glorified by his Miracles when the People were astonished,
and Mark 7.37.
said he had done all things well; when upon his satisfying Five Thousand with
five Loaves, they would have taken him, and made him a John 6.14.15.
King; when upon his suppressing the Winds and Waves, they began to adore him
as the Matt. 14.13.
Son of God; when upon his restoring Lazarus to Life they received him
publicly into Jerusalem with Psalms and John 12.13.
Acclamations due to the Eternal God: But the Consummation of his Glory was to
be raised from his Passion, the Phil. 2.9.
groundwork of his Exaltation, and Adorable Name.

Let then the Wicked One do what he can, Sell, Betray, and incense even the
whole World: The Glory of the Son of Man is his Cross. He is ravished by the
object of his Death, and transported by the Idea of his Sufferings; He
encourages himself to the Combat with the Prospect of Glory; He looks upon the
Cross as the Fountain of his Happiness, and Plants his Elevation upon the
lowest Abasement. He teaches us that Treachery, Calumny, and Death, how
horrible soever they seem in this World, yet to a just Man are desirable, or at
least easily to be born by him, forasmuch as there is no other way to Glory.
Let us never think then to be worthy of him, till we bear the Ensigns of his
War, as well as the Ornaments of his Peace. Every thing is a Paradise to him
that knows how to love the Cross, and every thing is a Hell to them that fly
from it, though no body flys from it but shall find it: It is the Gate of our
Mortality through which we needs must pass before we can Acts 14.22.
enter into the Kingdom of God.

Behold, when the Sovereign Love comforts, what Rivers of Balm flow from his
Tongue, and spread themselves with admirable Sweetnesses and refreshments into
the wounds of afflicted hearts. He gives as it were a foretaste of the Glory to
be revealed hereafter, and to which all present Sufferings are not worthy to be
compared, that we should ever have respect unto the recompense of Reward, and
repose our whole confidence in him that has promised. He speaks of his Death in
so desirable a manner, that he draws his Disciples into the highest
Consolation, at the same time that he humbles them in the depth of Sorrow.

John 13.33.
Little Children. The very Appellation bespeaks a Paternal Favor and
Providence, and that now by his Death and Sufferings for them they should be
called, and be the Son of God. Nor do we read in the Holy Gospel they were ever
styled before by this Name. Whereby he seems to show an extraordinary
affection, because of the Tenderness of his Love, and the infirm Infancy of
their Understanding and Faith. John 13.33.
Yet a little while I am with you. A very little while, but while Judas can go
to the Jews, and return again, and then I shall be no longer with you, unless
that for a short space I shall see you again. Not that he was to leave them,
and be no more with his Church; For as when he came from God he left not God,
so when he went to God he left not men; and himself says expressly in another
place, L^ I am with you Matt. 28.20.
always to the end of the World: But because he was now to be with them but a
little time in a Visible Mortal Body, as he had been hitherto, therefore he
says, yet a little while; and that they might more ardently enjoy him present,
and more diligently imprint in their minds what he should speak.

John 13.33.
Ye shall seek me. For ye shall meet in my absence Persecution with great Fury,
both of Jew and Gentile, insomuch, that with anxiety ye shall desire my
Presence, of which you have thought it was Matt. 17.4.
good for you to be there: Be not therefore terrified, but prepare for the
worst.

I know the desires of your Souls are with me, and you would rather be for ever
where I am. But as I said to the Jews, whither I go ye cannot come; So now I
say unto you. Nevertheless that ye may decline as much as possible the Envy of
the World which will hate you, because ye are not of it; and support one
another under all contingencies with mutual consolation; and after my Example
of Patience, Meekness, Love, Gentleness, and an universal Charity, trace the
paths of Divine Perfection John 13.34.
A New Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another: as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. The Pharisees have obscured the Law by
their Traditions, and have indulged the Lev. 19.18. Matt. 5.43.
hatred of an Enemy: But my will is, you should love your Enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who
despitefully use you, and persecute you; That ye may be the Children of your
Father which is in Heaven: For he makes the Sun to rise on the Evil and on the
Good, and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust. And that all men may John
13.35.
hereby know you to be my Disciples, who have loved you freely, voluntarily and
plenarily, without motive from abroad, and according to what is in God, and not
what is in man.

Here it was that Peter thoroughly pierced with the rays of such immense
Goodness and Clemency, his Heart melting in the Fire of Love, found himself
unable to bear a separation; and would fain know the reason why he must be left
behind, who had never hitherto been denied his Society; and whither it was the
Blessed Jesus would go from those, for whom he had expressed and to whom he had
taught so much Love. John 13.36.
Lord whither go thou? Fountain of all Blessings, what will become of me
when thou art absent by whom I live and move and have my being? If thou shall
hide thy Face all will be Barren, Desolate, and Night, Eternal Night; or
whither is it Thou will go, that we may not accompany Thee now, who upon thy
first call Luke 5.11.
Left all to follow Thee, and ever since have Luke 22.28.
continued with Thee in all thy Temptations? Have I especially been affected
with so many Benefits, and shall I ever fall to that Ingratitude to desert
thee? Have I been Elected by thee, and fed with the John 6.33.
Bread of Heaven, and the living John 7.38.
Waters of Comfort; and tasted thy Celestial Joys upon the Matt. 17.4.
Mount, and thought it was good for me to be there, and Shall I leave thee at
the appearance of danger? Lord, I am ready to go with Thee into Luke 22.33.
Prison and to Death. Yea I will lay down my John 13.37.
Life for thy sake.

Ah Peter what have thou promised? Thou have showed thy Fidelity but have not
considered how great a point of Wisdom it is to know ones self. How soon may a
Man lose that by negligence, which he has by much Labor, and a long Time, and
a Mighty Grace, scarcely obtain^d? The Proud have fallen; the Presumptuous been
Disgraced; the boldest talkers in the time of Peace have been most Dejected,
and Pusilanimous in the day of Temptation. Thou esteemest thy self strong, but
in the sight of God who knows what is in Man, will be found weak. We cannot
trust to our selves, for that understanding is often wanting, and the small
Light that is in us we lose by Negligence, and sometimes we perceive not our
inward Blindness, we are moved with Passion, and think it Zeal. Whenever we
trust to our Stock of habitual Grace, and depend on our own resolution, we are
then in a dangerous and declining State.

For what says the Truth? Luke 22.31.
Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as
Wheat. Thou art not apprehensive of the Devils power, who lies in wait for the
Souls of the Faithful, and to precipitate thee into ruin as he has done Judas.
But I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not; for he is not yet conquered
and trampled under by the Elect. For this very 1 John 3.8.
purpose was the Son of God manifested that he might destroy the Works of the
Devil. The conquest over him and the infernal Powers is to be a part of the
Col. 2.15.
Triumph of my Cross.

Thou believe thou can follow me in the way of my Passion, but thou have
not yet tasted the Power of my Death. For tho there have been some who have
died for their Country, and others have exposed themselves to be slain for
their Kindred; yet all this proceeded from a Carnal Affection: But to die for
another, in the judgment of Our Lord himself, or to die for an Enemy, this is
not of the Flesh; this is the Work of the Spirit of God. This Isa. 63.3.
Winepress I must tread alone. These strengths of Death I must first break, to
make a way for my Ransomed to pass. And therefore, though now thou stand, take
heed least thou fall. John 13.38.
Verily, Verily I say unto thee, thou shall not long be insensible of humane
weakness, for the Cock shall not crow till thou have denied me thrice.
Nevertheless when I have pulled out the sting of Death, and thou shall be
endued with Luke 24.49.
Power from on High, and have received the Holy Spirit to Strengthen thee, and
to reform thy Nature into an entire Charity, then shall thou John 13.36.
follow me without dread by the same way that I go to the Father.

Considering these Speeches, I wonder not that St. Peter, who had found such
Fruit and Sweetness in the Words of Eternal Life, such Virtue in this Treasury
of the Power of God, should think it blessedness to enjoy his Society, and to
partake with him in the worst of Miseries: I rather grieve to see so great a
mixture of Faith and Flesh, I had almost said a Predominancy of the latter in
the same Soul. The desire and purpose came from Faith: The Confidence and
Resolution came from the Flesh; To let us see the holiest of all actions are
too often mingled with Self-dependence, Pride, and Presumption; and that all
our Confidence should be in Grace, and the assistances of the Eternal Spirit.

Prayer.
When, O when! My Gracious Redeemer, will thou enable me so to address my Vows,
that I may withstand the assaults of Temptation, and persevere in what I
promise and intend. Great are the Snares and Fears to which I am Subject, being
cast into a frail Body. And with what may I support my self but by the
ravishing thoughts of thy incomparable Sweetnesses and Compassions? Pity my
Infirmities. Guide me with thy Grace. Open mine Eyes that I may see my danger.
Strengthen my Heart that I may fight Valiantly, and never be wanting in my
Fidelity to Thee. All that I am to have I owe to thy Gracious Favor, and I
hope for Salvation, not by any proportion of my own Virtues, but by the
Boundless Liberalities which only do Crown all our Works.

SECT. VII. Of the Legacy of Comforts Christ left to the Faithful, and his
leaving Jerusalem, for a Terror to Infidels.
PEter being silenced, and the rest of the Disciples bearing no less confusion
in their Hearts then in their Faces, by reason of the great conflict of
Indignation, Shame, and Sorrow, which their mistrust had raised at the
Sufferings of their Lord, the fall of Judas, and the danger of Peter; The
Benign Jesus resumes his Discourse, and opens an admirable Treasury of Comfort;
revealing the abundant sufficiency of his Kingdom, where he was going to Joh.
14.2, 3.
prepare a place for them, that they might reign with him for ever: discovering
himself to be the John 14.6.
Way, the Truth, and the Life; through whom and no other we have access unto
the Father: Showing the wonderful operations of Faith, by which all the John
14.12.
Miracles of the Church were to be wrought: Promising the Mission of another
John 14.16.
Comforter, which should abide with the Faithful for ever: Teaching the
indispensable necessity of union with him, and John 15.7.
remaining in his Love to which our obedience is the way, and which opens a
door for our Supplications in Heaven: closing all with an earnest John 17.9.
Prayer, that they might for ever be precious before God; that his Holy John
17.11.
Father would take them into his Tuition, and protect them in the discharge of
their Apostleship, and John 17 20.
all others from Peril and defection, who should believe on him through their
word. That they might live to Teach and Learn uniformly what he had taught 'em,
as he received it from the Father; and that after a Faithful Discharge of
Duties in the Preachers and Hearers of his Divine Word, they might arrive to
the John 17.24.
same place of Happiness, and his Eternal Glory be conferred upon them.

Amen. Be it so, My Jesu. Grant unto us Grace to Understand, Diligence to
Consider, Care to lay up and reduce to Practice all these intimations of thy
Goodness and Will. And since the end of all is to unite us to thy self, embrace
us we Beseech Thee, with the Arms of thy Mercy. When Thou art present all is
well; when Thou art absent every thing is difficult. When Thou speak, we
feel Consolation; when Thou art silent, we have no comfort. How hard and dry
are our Hearts without Thee; but how happy is the hour when thou call'st us to
Spiritual Joys? to be without thee is a grievous Hell; to be in thy presence is
a sweet Paradise. In thee we have protection; without thee all are Enemies. In
thee we have a Treasure and a Good above all Goods; without thee we are Poor,
and Naked, and Destitute. Vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to dwell in our Hearts,
that we may live in thee for ever.

When Jesus had thus Taught, and Prayed for his Disciples, and sung an Mark
14.26.
Hymn giving praise to the Sovereign Disposer for what was past, and what was
to come; He went out of the unhappy City Jerusalem, as the Light of the World
in the close of the Day, being himself made the end of the Light to that
miserable People; and left them in Darkness and the Shadow of Death, as the
Jer. 12.7.
Prophet had foretold, I have forsaken my House, I have left mine Herritage, I
have given the dearly Beloved of my Soul into the hand of her Enemies. For this
Egression of Christ prefigured the desolation of the Temple and the City, the
time being come that the Carnal Worship being Abolished the true Worship of God
should Commence in John 4.23.
Spirit and in Truth. And of God's thus giving them over when they had first
left him, and moved him thereto by their manifold provocations; another 1 Kings
9.7, 8, 9.
Scripture says, I will cut off Israel out of the land which I have given
them; and this House which I have hallowed for my Name, will I cast out my
sight, and Israel shall be a Proverb and a byword among all people: and at
this House which is high, every one that passes by it shall be astonished, and
shall hiss; and they shall say, why has the Lord done thus unto this Land, and
unto this House? and they shall answer, because they forsook the Lord their
God: therefore has the Lord brought upon them all this evil.

O let the people of the World hear, and let all the Nations of the Earth
tremble. Israel, the Beloved of the Lord is Rejected; Jerusalem, once the Holy
City, cast out of his sight, and his own house given up to be destroyed,
because of the Transgressions and Obstinacy of his People. And can there be any
hope but the same Sins will ever produce the same Judgments, or that Luke 13.3.
except we repent we shall all likewise perish. Joel 2.17.
Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between the porch and the
altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage
to reproach; that the heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should they say
among the people, Where is their God? And Jonah 3.8, 9.
Let Man and Beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea,
let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the Violence that is in
their hand. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and receed from his
fierce Anger that we perish not.

Prayer.
Merciful Father, all whose Severity, in respect of its Act, is accidental,
(for thou never strikest till insufferably provoked) who leadest us as dear
Children by gracious Promises, and never correctest us but with the
Chastisement of Sons, for our Amendment, and the Example of others, obliging us
to our Duty, and binding us to our Happiness, by a double tie of Love and Fear;
Change, O change the hard Fetters of Fear into the inestimable Chains of Love:
That, dreading thy Justice, we may avoid whatsoever may expose us to it, and
may dwell for ever in the Contemplation of those Good things which thou have
wrought and prepared for them that love thee.

SECT. VIII. Of the Agony of Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane.
NOW there was a Valley between Jerusalem and Mount Olivet, of the vast
Profundity of 400 Cubits, called Cedron from the Obscurity of the place, where
Foggs and Mists seemed to dwell in the bottom, to such as looked down into it
from the Temple; and a 18.1.
Brook running there of the same Name.

Which Brook sometimes swelled with impetuous Torrents, descending from the
hard and lofty tops of Mount Moria, and Mount Acra; sometimes it trickled with
a gentle Murmur in its own Source, without additional Waters, inviting the
wearied Traveller to rest; an Emblem of the Vicissitude of Humane Condition,
and the wavering Image of capricious Fortune, whereby a Man is sometimes
overborn with Force, according to that of David, Psalm. 69.1, 2.
Save me, O God, for the waters are come in, even to my Soul, I stick fast in
the deep Mire where no ground is, I am come into deep waters, so that the
Floods run over me; sometimes there is a wonderful Tranquillity and Smoothness
over the Face of all his Affairs, which burys the apprehension of the least
Storm.

At this Watercourse, being the Sink of the holy City, they used to cast in
every accursed thing; as the Powder of Maachah's 2 Chronicles. 15.16.
Idol, which Asa stamped and burnt there; the Idolatrous 2 Chronicles. 30.14.
Altars, that were in Jerusalem; and the 2 King. 236.
Grove, that was taken out of the House of the Lord; and all the 2 Chronicles. 29.16.
uncleanness that was found therein. Which is the reason of that Metaphorical
way in Scripture of understanding Affliction and Troubles by Water, and
particularly of those Words concerning our Blessed Savior, who, after passing
this, was to enter upon his Sufferings, That he should Psalm. 110.7.
drink of the Brook in the way. Nor may we hope to be exempt from it, who have
given up our Names to be his Followers, since in the Torrent of Tribulation are
found the living Waters of Comfort, which spring up in the Soul unto eternal
Life.

Here holy 2 Samuel 15.23.
David past in Grief, when he fled out of his Palace from his Son Absalom, and
all the Country wept with a loud Voice. And now this Mark 12.35.
Son of David passes over it sorrowing, in his way to Mount Olivet, (where grew
abundance of Olives) to meet the Anger of his incensed Father, due to the
rebellious Children of Men.

The Genesis 8.11.
Olive signifies Peace; and Psalm. 104.15.
Oil, Gladness; prefiguring (it may be) the Reconciliation to which his
Sufferings there were preparatory, and the Joy they should create to all
Believers: But to him it was to be the Theater of unexpressible Dolours, and to
which the Disciples followed with a sad Heart, fearing, and trembling, for the
Words he had spoken, Zech. 13.7. Matt. 26.31.
That in this night the Shepherd should be smitten, and the Sheep of the Flock
should be scattered abroad.

We read at other times they went Luke 10.1.
before into every place, whither he himself would come: But the Evangelist has
observed, now they Lide 22.39.
followed him, as unable to precede in the way of Sufferings, (for poor Nature
abhors the Cross, and clings to the Principles of Self-preservation) though
after he had sanctified it, it became more agreeable, and they embraced it with
Alacrity, as desirous of nothing more than to bear about in their Bodies the
Dying of the Lord Jesus, and to be made conformable to his Death, believing,
That in following him, they should arrive at the same Glory. And our 2 Cor. 1.7.
hope is steadfast, that as we are Partakers of the Sufferings, so shall we be
also of the Consolation.

At last they arrived at a Matt.
Village called Gethsemane, situate at the foot of the Mount of Olives, where
were many pleasant Gardens, into one of which he entered with his Disciples; as
choosing a place for his satisfactory Pains, answerable to that of the first
Scene of Humane Misery, Genesis 2.8.
where Adam fell, and ruined Mankind, and wherein he might best attend the
Offices of Devotion, Prayer, and Meditation, before his Crucifixion. Here the
second Adam would begin his Passion, in order to our Redemption from that
contagious Guilt spread over his Posterity by the first Man; here he would
become obedient unto Bonds, and mercifully take our Sentence upon himself, that
he might free us from all Bondage of Satan, and vindicate us into the Liberty
of the Sons of God.

Behold then on this Stage three mavelous Agonies, of God and Death, Joy and
Sorrow, the Soul and the Flesh; beginning in the Sweat and Blood of our dearest
Lord, but ending with the loss of his precious Life.

God and Death were two things very incompatible, since God is the first and
the most universal of all Lives, who banishes from him all Operations tending
to Death: And yet the Son of God having taken upon him our Nature, would suffer
in it all the Pains that could attend Death, to rescue us, for whom he died,
from the Pains of Death eternal.

The Joy of Beatitude was an absolute Fruition of Celestial Delights and
Comforts, without any mixture of what might interrupt it, or be displeasing:
And yet the blessed Jesus would suffer his innocent Soul to be overwhelmed with
inexpressible Griefs, and to descend by our Steps to the Anguishes of Death, to
raise us to the greatest Joys of Life.

There was also a great Duel between the affectionate Love, and the Virginal
Flesh of Christ: His Soul did naturally love a Body, which was so Heb. 10.7.
Psalm. 40.70.
obedient to the Will of his Father, and his Body followed wholly the
Inclinations of his Soul. There was so perfect an Agreement between the two
Parties, that their Separation must needs be most dolorous.

Yet Jesus would have it so, and for Witnesses of the Combat, takes with him
Mark 14.33.
Peter and James and John, commanding the rest to Mark 14.32.
sit down, and compose themselves, till he should go and pray yonder, that they
might not be moved with any thing that should befall him, but keep themselves
steady against the Fears of Danger: But these three Disciples who had seen his
Sublimity in his Mat. 17.1, 2. 2 Pet. 1.18.
Transfiguration upon the holy Mount, he would have be present at his extreme
Dejection. By that they had an undeniable Proof of his Divinity, when they were
so ravished at the Glimpse of it, that they desired to dwell there: By this they
were to know the Truth of his Humanity, and be able to give a sure Testimony to
both, as well as learn the Subject of their Imitation and Hope. Ye blessed
Spectators, how different was this Sight from that which so lately filled your
Eyes, when you Matt. 17.2.3.
saw his face shine as the Sun, and his Raiment white as the Light, and Moses
and Elias talking with him? He receives no Honor now from the Father, and that
excellent Voice is silent which proclaimed him the Matt. 17.5.
beloved Son of God, and that his Name was Joh. 12.28.
Glorified in him; Nor from his Face do there dart any cheerful Rays, nor do
his Garments appear Glorious, nor the Heavenly Courtiers wait upon him; but as
a Man dastitute of all Help, he begins to be Mark 14.33.
afraid, to be sorrowful and afflicted, showing in himself what usually happens
to those who are no more than Men, at the approach of so great a Tempest.

The Evangelists have in such Language declared his Agony, as cannot but raise
in us the highest Admiration of the Bitterness of his Passion. He began to be
Matt. 26.37.
sorrowful, says St. Matthew; to be sore Mark 14.33.
amazed, says St. Mark; to be very Ibid.
heavy, say both; and yet these Words in our Translation come far short of the
(...).
Original Expressions, which render him suddenly, upon a present and immediate
Apprehension, possessed with Fear, Horror, and Amazement, encompassed with
Grief, overwhelmed with Sorrow, pressed down with Consternation and Dejection of
Mind, tormented with Anxiety and Disquietude of Spirit.

This he first expressed when he said to his Disciples, My Soul is Matt. 26.38.
exceeding sorrowful; and lest they should not fully apprehend the Excess,
added, even unto Death; as if the Pangs of Death had already encompast him, and
the Pains of Hell had got hold upon him. He we^^ but a little farther, before
he said the same to his Father, Matt. 26 39.
falling upon his face, and praying with Heb. 5.7.
strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from Death. Nor
were his Cries and Tears sufficient Evidences of his inward Sufferings; nor
could the Sorrows of his Breast be poured forth, either at his Lips or Eyes,
but the innumerable Pores of all his Body must give a Passage to more lively
Representations of the bitter Anguish of his Soul; and his Luke 22.44.
Sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground,
according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm 22.14.
I am poured out like Water, all my bones are out of joint, My Heart also in
the midst of my Body is even like melting Wax. His Heart melting as it were
with Fear and Astonishment, and all the Parts of his Body at the same time
inflamed with Anguish, well might that Melting produce a Flowing, and the
inflamed and rarefi'd Blood force it self a Passage through the numerous Pores.

But neither will these Expressions give us a true Sense of the height and
bitterness of his Grief, unless we also consider the Occasions of it; for God
laid on him the Isai. 53.6.
Iniquities of us all; and as we were obliged to be sorry for our particular
Sins, so was he to be grieved for the Sins of us all. If then we consider the
Perfection of his Knowledge, he understood all the Sins for which he suffered,
all the Evil and the Guilt, all the Offense against the Majesty, and
Ingratitude against the Goodness of God, which was contained in the Sins of all
Men, past, present, and to come. If we look upon his absolute Conformity to the
determined Will of God; he was inflamed with most ardent Love; he was most
zealous of his Glory, and most studious to preserve that Right which was so
highly violated by those Sins. If we look upon his Relation to the Sons of Men,
he loved 'em all far more than they did themselves; he knew their Sins were of
themselves sufficient to bring Destruction upon their Bodies and Souls, and at
the same time considered them he so dearly loved, as lying under God's Wrath,
whom he so truly worshipped; and all was heightened with the great habitual
Detestation wherewith his Innocent Nature abhorred Sin. If we consider all
these Circumstances, we cannot wonder at his excessive Sorrow: For if the true
Contrition of one single Sinner, bleeding under the Sting of the Law, only for
his own Iniquities, (all which notwithstanding he knows not) cannot be
performed without great bitterness of Remorse; what Bounds can we set to that
Grief, what Measures to that Anguish, which proceeds from a full Apprehension
of all the Transgressions of so many Millions of Sinners?

Add unto all these Apprehensions the immediate hand of God, pressing upon him
all this Load, laying on his Shoulders at once a heap of all the Sorrows which
can happen to any of the Saints; that he being touched with the Heb. 2.17,
18.4.15.
Feeling of our Infirmities, might become a merciful High Priest, able and
willing to succor them that are tempted. And from hence we must conclude, That
the Savior of Man, as he took upon him the whole Nature of Man, so he suffered
in whatsoever he took; in his Body, by Infirmities and external Injuries; in
his Soul, by Fear, Astonishment, and Sorrows; in both, by unknown and
inexpressible Anguishes.

Behold, O ye Faithful, the Baptism of your Redeemer; and think not any longer
the Way strait through which you are to enter into Life. Behold how he is Luke
12.50.
straightened till it be accomplished, and never do you sink under any
Discouragement from working out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling. What
matter is it how much, or what we suffer in this Life, so at length we may
arrive at a Blessed Eternity?

Prayer.
And while we behold our Sins, which are the Cause of all thy Sufferings, O
thou afflicted Jesu! Grant that our imperfect Sorrow and Contrition may be
heightened by thy Example, and accepted in Union and Confederacy with it. It was
because the temporal Misery of a finite Creature could never satisfy for the
Infinite Guilt of Sin, contracted by offending an Infinite Majesty, that thou
vouchsafedst to make an Equivalent Ransom, by the Dignity of thy Person
suffering. In this thy Love is all our Confidence; in full Assurance of it we
approach the Throne of Grace; and we bessech thee, That we may find Help in the
Time of Need.

SECT. IX. Of Christ's Prayer in his Agony, and his admirable Resignation of
himself to God.
WHen the Holy Jesus had tasted this bitter Cup, being himself the great
Physician of Souls, he betook himself to that Universal Antidore which he had
prescribed to all the World. For having commanded his Disciples to Luke 22.40.
watch with him, and to pray, lest they fell into Temptation, (forasmuch as
vain is the Prudence of Flesh, and unprofitable all carnal Help, unless God be
present) he withdrew a little way, he Luke 22.41.
kneeled down, he fell on his Face, and Mark 14.35.36.
prayed, that if it were possible, the dreadful hour might pass from him. And
he said Abba Father, (which name he ingeminates, because it is of the greatest
Consolation to believe him a Father in all our Afflictions, and that our
Troubles proceed from his Good Will, by which he deals with us as with Sons)
All things are possible unto thee, and the World might have been otherwise
Redeemed than by my Death: Take away this Cup from me; This deadly Cup, which
being drunk, will cast me into the Sleep of Death. Nevertheless, not what I
will, but what Thou will; For this is the manner pre-determined from Eternity,
and thus it ought to be, and to this end am I come. He prays with an Intention
great as his Sorrow, and yet with a Submission so entire, and a Conformity to
the Divine Will so ready, as if it had been the most indifferent thing in the
World for him to be delivered to Death, or from it. For though his Nature did
decline Death, as that which has a natural Horror and Contradiction to the
present Interest of its Preservation; yet when he looked upon it as what his
Father had put into the Order of the Redemption of the World, it was then the
Baptism wherewith he was straightened till it were accomplished, and a thing
preferrable to all the Pleasures of Life.

As he had truly taken the Nature of Man, he had different Affections of Flesh
and Spirit, and different Prayers in respect of both. The Flesh resolutely
shunned the Cross, as what was contradictory to its Preservation: The Spirit
corrected and overcame it, being in Obedience to the Father of Spirits. He did
not deprecate Death out of Fear, (for how could the Son of God be afraid of
Death?) but he prayed according to the Affection of the Flesh, that he might
overcome the Prayer of the Flesh by the Prayer of the Spirit, as he says in
another place, John 12.27.
Father, save me from this Hour; and presently subjoyns, But for this Cause
came I to this Hour. He seems also to have prayed in this manner, lest by the
occasion of his Passion the Condemnation of the Wicked might be the greater:
For he saw, That by his Death, Judas, one of the Twelve, would become the Son
of Perdition, and his Consanguinians the Jews cast off, and the City and Temple
laid wast: On the other hand, he knew, That by his Sufferings he should
overcome the Gates of Hell, and break a Way for his Redeemed to pass: And
therefore, as unwilling they should perish by his Passion, he says, Father, if
it may be, let this Cup pass from me; but for the Salvation of the rest of
Mankind, which was to be redeemed by his Death, he Luke 22.42.
says, as it were correcting his former Prayer, Not my Will, but Thine, be
done. I know, O Father! it is the Decree of thy Will, that thus it should be,
and thus I must suffer; My Heart is ready, my Heart is ready. In the Volume of
the Psalm. 40.10. Heb. 10.7.
Book it is written of me that I should fulfill thy Will, O my God: I am
content to do it; yea, thy Law is within my Heart.

O! what a great Secret is here revealed, which teaches us to hate our Soul,
that we may preserve it; to despise it for a time, that we may Honor it for
Eternity; to punish it in this Life, to give it thereby a perpetual Rest in the
World to come; to handle it roughly, that it may be established in all Delights,
and we may love it without end? This is the way the blessed Jesus has taught us
to arrive at the chiefest Point of our Felicity.

Prayer.
Thy Will, O God, is the measure of Holiness: Thy Providence, the great
Disposer of all things, tying all Events together in order to thy Glory and the
Good of thy Servants, by a wonderful mysterious Chain of Wisdom: O, let it be
also the Meas^re of my Desires; For I know, That whatsoever thou say is true,
whatsoever thou command is just, whatsoever thou do is good. So shall I be
pleased with all the Accidents thou permittest, patient of all the Punishment
thou inflictest, a Lover of all the Good thou enjoynest, and a Hater of all the
Evil which thou forbiddest; till at last my Conformity to thy Divine Will,
shall arise up to the Degrees of Union with thee.

SECT. X. Of Christ's Anxiety for the Security of his Disciples.
THE afflicted Jesus, having in few Words expressed the innocent and harmless
Desires of humane Nature, is touched at the same time with Compassion toward
it, and in the midst of his Agony returns to visit that little Flock which was
so soon to be dispersed, and at present liable to the Assaults of Satan. But,
alas! Grief had Surcharged their heavy Hearts, and Sorrow had closed their
weeping Eyes: So far had the Tempter prevailed upon 'em to avert 'em from
Prayer, the Meditation of the Passion, and the Remembrance of their Frailty.

Finding 'em Sleeping, he first Addresses himself to Peter, who had always
expressed most Zeal for his Interest, Maak 14.37.
saying, Simon, Sleep Thou? Is this thy Constancy, Courage, and Promise; and
is it thus thou will go with me into Prison, and to Death? Great Promises
require great cares; and he that is deeply engaged, must be very Vigilant, or
very Faithless, to his Master. How is it that after such Asseverations of thy
Fidelity, I find thee at rest while I am Sweating Blood; and that this Garden
is the Bed of thy Repose, which is the Theater of my inimitable Anguish? Ah,
Simon! could thou not watch one hour? Thou have much to learn before thou
can follow me. The Nights of a Resolved Martyr, must be spent in the Studies
of Patience, not in security and ease; he must exercise a Holy Cruelty upon his
Flesh by Crucifying the Lusts and Affections thereof, before he can overcome
the inventions of his Tormentors in a holy and undaunted perseverance. Had
thou watched with me, thou might have received further Encouragement in thy
Resolution to die for me, and learnt from the extremity of my pains willingly
to embrace the present opportunity of Glorifying God by a constant Death.

Then turning to the rest, he Luke 22.46.
says, Why sleep ye? (For sloth is reprehensible in all Christians) it is not a
time to rest when danger is imminent, and the grand Adversary as a roaring
Lion, walking about to see whom he may devour. He is full of Wiles, his darts
are fiery, his insinuations subtle and undiscernable; Mark 14.38.
Watch therefore and be of good courage, least ye be overcome, and ensnared
unawares: Nor is this enough, (for none is of himself safe without the
Almighty's assistance) and therefore Pray also least ye enter into Temptation;
the Spirit truly is ready, but the Flesh is weak.

I know you have a good mind to endure the Combat; but the infirmity of the
Tabernacle hinders the willingness of the Soul. The Spirit would do what it
ought; but the Flesh retards it from its Duty, which is not affected but
toward what is convenient to it. The Flesh neither willingly Watches nor
Prays, is affrighted by adversity, sties the Cross, is offended and denies, and
does nothing that is good l But the Spirit is Confident, Prays, Watches, is
constant in Adversity, and confesses freely.

Thus as often as the Spirit is compared with the Flesh, it signifies the Holy
Spirit of God and his working in us to Will and to Do of his good Pleasure; and
the Flesh signifies humane nature with all its motions, but without the help of
the Spirit. The Spirit is therefore willing because it affects what belongs to
it, and moves us to all good things: but the Flesh is Weak because it is often
Rebellious, and not in Subserviency to the Spirit, according to Romans 7.15, 17,
18.
that of the Apostle, What I would, that do I not; but what I hate that do I.
Now then, it is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me. And I know
that in me (that is in my Flesh) there dwells no good thing. For though to will
be present with me, yet to perform that which is good I find not. Hereby it
came to pass that Judas and the Jews failed not in their diligence to do the
evil to which they were inclined, but the Apostles slept, because they were
admonished to dogood.

Prayer.
O Lord, thou teach me I am but Dust and Ashes, and if I esteem better of my
self, thou stand against me who formd'st me out of the Earth, and my own
frailty presently condemns me: But if I abase and humble my self, and esteem my
self as nothing, Thy Grace will be favorable to me, and thy Light will be near
my Heart, and all Selfesteem shall be swallowed up, and Perish everlastingly in
the d^pth of my nothingness. There thou showest my self unto me, what I am,
what I have been, and whither I am come; for I am nothing, and I know it not. O
how Meanly and how Lowly ought I to think ever of my self? how little, and how
much less then a little ought I to esteem it, if I seem to have any good? O
with what profound Humility and Reverence ought I to submit to thy Bottomless
Judgments, in compare with which I am nothing, even less then nothing? Blessed be
thy Love, Most Gracious Father, with which thou freely preventest so poor a
Creature, and relievest me in so many Necessities, and preservest me from
grievous Dangers, and deliverest me from innumerable Evils, and would make
me something by Participation of thy Infinity. O give me Grace to be frequent
and Fervent in the Happy Intercourse between Thee and my Soul, and then shall I
experience it my Safeguard against Temptation; I shall feel the Wind blowing
upon my Heart, and the Spirit fanning the Sparks of Holy Life till it be
kindled to a Flame; I shall see my self Transported, and Ascending above all
the Allurements and Terrors of the Devil, to receive the Undefiled and Immortal
Crown.

SECT. XI. Of the Candor of Christ toward his Sleeping Disciples, and his
continuation in Prayer to God.
SUch was the incomparable Sweetness of the Benign Jesus, to pass so favorable
a censure upon the Sloth of his Attendants, from which a natural Man would have
drawn Prodigies, and represented it horrible as the shades of Hell. For what
could be more Reasonable then the small Request that they should watch with him
a little while in his Dreadful Agony undergone for their Sakes, the Company of
Friends being some small Refreshment to a Person under such Sad and Fatal
Circumstances? Was it not their great Lord and Master whom now they were to
attend in his great Anxiety, ready to lay down his Life for them, and Bleeding
already under the first Skirmishes of Death, and expecting every Moment when
all the Powers of Darkness would fall upon him with their utmost Fury? But all
these considerations were drownded in a profound security: The Men were a
Sleep, and regarded not, as if nothing but Ease and Softness were to be dreamed
of. A Prodigious Negligence, the height of Unconcernedness, and the Coldest and
Indifferentest Affection in the World. Nevertheless he imputes it not to their
Supine carelessness, Ingratitude, or want of due Affection; but merely to the
Infirmity and Weakness of their Temper, himself making excuse when they could
find none, from the Frailties and Necessities of Indigent Nature.

And having thus Taught us to put a charitable Conitruction upon those Actions
which are capable of various Interpretations, he receeds a little way, and
Prays after the same manner; if Peradventure they would now join with him in
Heart, Matt. 26.42.
O my Father, if this Cup may not pass away from me except I drink it, thy Will
be done. He had before Prayed with the most Humble Submission and Affectionate
Desires to the Eternal Majesty, the God of all Comfort and Consolation, and yet
found not himself heard by any abatement of his Horrors or Relaxation of his
Fears; and now tries a second time, that we may not think it much if we are not
immediately relieved from Heaven, especially when we Pray out of the Affection
of the Flesh. Afterward returning again to his Disciples, he found them in the
same posture, but much more heavy with Sorrow, under the greatest oppression of
Drowsiness and Grief; and so far had the Tempter prevailed upon their
unwariness, that they wist not what to Mark 14.40.
answer to what he spoke.

He leaves them therefore the Third time, but with an unspeakable increase of
Grief, to see their Deplorable Condition as well as his own, since hereby was
prefigured the obscuring of their Faith, which should immediately ensue his
Apprehension, and his own dereliction, that he should be left alone to the
Barbarous Cruelty of his Blood-Thirsty Enemies, according to that of the Psalm.
38.10, 11.
Psalmist, My Heart pants, my Strength has failed me, and the sight of mine
Eyes is gone from me. My Lovers and my Neighbors did stand looking upon my
trouble, and my Kinsman stood afar of.

But as his Dolours increased, so did his Faith; so did his Fervency in
Supplication to God: And it is not without reason the holy Penmen of the Gospel
have placed the whole event of all his Petitions in the Will of his Father For
if Christ, whose Will is not divided from that of his Father, nor can Will any
other thing then what the Father Wills, did thus resign himself entirely to
that Will; much more ought we to give up our selves, whose Will is often
Reluctant to the Divine, and to whom it would many times be a detriment if God
should Grant us all that we would.

Luke 22.44.
Here therefore the Evangelist says, he Prayed more earnestly with the utmost
intention of all the powers of his Soul; whereby he has showed us that Prayer
is our Treasury, where all Blessings are kept in store, our Armory, where all
our Strength and Weapons are laid, the only great Preservative and Conservation
of our Peace, the very Vital heat of Divine Love, the Sanctuary of Troubles,
and the Cure of Grief; and that the Principal Lesson of saving Christianity, is
to desire only what God will, and to execute all the Decrees of Divine
Providence as our chiefest helps to attain Perfection.

Prayer.
O Heavenly Guide of our Devotion and Love, who have Commanded us in thy Word,
and Taught us by thy Example, to offer up Prayers in all our Necessities; Give
unto thy Servant the Spirit of Supplication, a great Desire, and a pregnant
Hope; and let the Beams of thy Holy Spirit descending from above, enlighten and
kindle it with great Fervors, holy Importunities, and an unwearied and
unsatisfied Industry; that I may seek Thee and obtain thy Blessing by the
assiduity of an ardent Zeal, and the perpetuity of Religious Offices. Sanctify
my Heart, that I may Sanctify thy Name; and let my Oblations come before thy
Presence, and the lifting up my Hands be a daily Sacrifice. Unite my Prayers to
thy Powerful Intercession, and to a Communion of those Offices the Blessed pay
at the Celestial Altar; that my Prayers being hallowed by thy precious Merits
may Ascend thither where thy Glory dwells, and whence Mercies and Benedictions
Descend upon the Church. So shall I be wrapped in Contemplation of thy Bounties,
absorpt in consideration of thy Beauties, and wholly dive into thy Heart by the
Sacred ardours of Love.

SECT. XII. Of the Glorious Effect of Christ's Prayer, and God's Fatherly
Kindness to all that call upon him Faithfully.
BLessed are all they whose daily exercise is to converse with God by Prayer,
offered with an humble Resignation to his Will, a Patient Hope, and a Strong
Faith; since the mighty Effects recorded in Scripture seem to have raised us to
a certain Omnipotency, That Matt. 21.22.
whatsoever we ask in Prayer believing we shall receive, and that all things
shall be Mark 9.23.
possible to him that so believes.

This is the Sovereign Charm which has 2 Kings 20.5.
cured Sicknesses, made the 1 Samuel 1.20.
Barren fruitful, stopped the mouths of Dan. 6.20.
Lions, quenched the violence of Dan. 3.28.
Fire, opened and shut the storehouses of Jam. 5.17, 18.
rain, arrested the Jos. 10.12.
Sun, and stayed the Chariot of the Moon, driven away 2 Cor. 12, 8.
temptation, overcome the Mark 9.29.
Devil, procured the Ministry and Service of 2 Kings 19.35. Dan. 6.22.
Angels.

Thus while the Holy Jesus was combating with the Powers of Darkness, and
striving with Death in an inexpressible Agony, at his reitterated Prayers to
God, there appeared an Luke 22.4^.
Angel to him from Heaven strengthening him; by representing to him how
necessary it was that he should die for the Glory of God, whose Justice, Power,
Wisdom and Mercy should shine forth in his Sufferings: That unless he did die
all the World should Perish, but his Precious Blood should obtain their Pardon,
open the Gates of Heaven, repair the ruin of the Angels, establish a holy
Church upon Earth productive of innumerable adopted Children to God, whom
himself should make heirs of the Celestial Paradise: That his Passion should be
soon over, his Father so far hearing and granting his Requests, that the Cup
should speedily pass from him, and that it should be followed by a Glorious
Resurrection, with Eternal Rest and Glorification of his Humanity, with the
Exaltation of his Name above all, with a Supreme Dominion over Hell and Death,
and that his Father would make him King of Kings and Prince of his Holy
Catholic Church.

Such are the Kindnesses the Almighty has in store for all that place their
whole Strength and Confidence in his Goodness; such is the admirable
Dispensation of Spiritual Comfort, wherewith he Visits and Relieves his
Servants; That tho he does not always take away the Evil because of the ends of
his Providence which are to be served, yet he comforts Internally, and gives
power to bear it: Though he does not immediately remove the pressure, and it may
be will not till the 2 Cor. 12.8.
third time, that is, after a long expectation, a patient Sufferance, and a
lasting Hope; yet in the intrim he 1 Cor. 10.13.
supports with a secret Hand, and in his own time will refresh the Soul with
Visitations of his Angels and the comforts of his Spirit. Know this also that
not only the Holy Angel, but the Matt. 18.20.
Lord of Angels himself stands by every Godly Person when he Prays, and though he
drew before his glorious Presence the Curtain of a Cloud, which renders him
invisible, yet he takes care we shall not perish, and in a just season
dissolves the Cloud, and makes it, distill healing Dew, Sweet as Manna, Pleasant
as Nard, and wholesome as the breath of Heaven.

Prayer.
Heavenly Father, by the Agony of thy Son, I cannot but perceive so great must
have been thy Terror at the remembrance of thy incensed Majesty, and before the
Tribunal of thy Justice: For if thou enter into Judgment with thy Servants, who
shall answer thee one of a Thousand? And if I bring not the Nuptial Garment, I
must hold my Peace, and be cast out. But when I consider thine infinite
Compassions and Mercies, vouchsaft to all that call upon thee faithfully, and
how thou have sent forth thy holy Angels to Minister to those who shall be
Heirs of Salvation: My Spirit revives, and I cast my self wholly into the Arms
of thy Protection, beseeching thee to give them the charge over me to direct
and keep me in all my ways, that with them and Archangels, and all the Host of
Heaven, I may Laud and Glorisie thy Holy Name for my Preservation and
Salvation, for ever.

SECT. XIII. Of the Apprehension of Christ by his own Permission, and the
Horror of Judas's Hypocrisy.
THe Afflicted Jesus supported by these Refreshments against the worst events
that were to follow, returns to his Disciples, and awaking 'em, Matt. 26.45, 46.
tells 'em, they might now sleep on and take their rest, if they thought it a
time longer to remain there where danger was so near, and the Betrayer at hand.
And scarce were they offering to depart thence, when Lo, Judas, who had sold
him, John 18.3.
came with Lanthorns and Torches because of the Obscurity of the Night, and a
great multitude with Swords and Staves from the Chief Priests and Elders of the
people to take him. A Captain now of Murderers, and the Furious Rabble, who was
so lately a Companion of Christ; a Betrayer of his Master, and but just risen
from his Table; forgetful of his Piety, Hope, and Office, and preferring a
little filthy Lucre before the inestimable Blessings of his Calling; The dismal
Figure of all Apostate wretches.

How great an Advantage had this Miserable Disciple to know where his Master
was, and where he might be found, if he had made a right use of it? For what
does the Cant. 2.7.
Bride in the Canticles desire, but tell me O thou whom my Soul loves, where
thou feedest, and and where thou lie down? But abusing his knowledge to his
own destruction, and so much more wicked then the rest of the People, as the
Serpent was by being wiser then theother Creatures, and for that a more
opportune instrument of Homicide to the Devil; the Devil makes use of him to
destroy the Celestial Man in his Body, as he had made use of the Serpent to
destroy the Terrestrial in his Soul.

But Jesus nothing surprised at what he fore-knew would come to pass, and to
give an undeniable evidence that his Death was voluntary, and not caused by the
Treachery of Man; prevents the Betrayer, and John 18.4.
offers himself to his Enemies, alone against a multitude, unarmed before their
Weapons, plain and sincere without regard to to their Malice.

He had formerly John 12.36.
hid himself when they admired his Miracles, and John 6.15.
departed from 'em privately when they would have made him a King. But now he
meets them notwithstanding their Hostility, because the hour prefixed by the
Father was come. For as we are not to tempt God by inconsiderate Rashness in
our affairs, so are we cheerfully to resign up our selves to his will and obey
him with great readiness of Mind, when he calls us to ^^ffer for a good
Conscience, and for the Confirmation of his Truth. He teaches us Submission is
the way to exaltation while he expects to ascend unto the Father from the
Cross, and lets us learn for the Hope of future Glory to despise all present
and Momentary Evils, and not consider what it is we suffer, but that it brings
us to the Father.

He might justly have reprehended 'em for their Ingratitude and Impiety against
so many Benefits he had conferred on them, or destroyed 'em with the least
breath of his Displeasure, as unworthy of Life who came to destroy the Lord of
it. But now was the time of Mercy and not of Judgment, of Patience and Long
Suffering, and not of Anger, and the greatest Evil was to be overcome of Good.
He asks in the most familiar, though convincing manner, Joh. 18.4.
Whom seek ye? and what would you have? Is it an Enemy, or a Robber, against
whom you are come with these Arms? or have ye heard of any Insurrection against
the State, or Rebellion against Caesar, that ye have made this great
Preparation? or do ye come out against an innocent Person, who sat daily with
you in the Mark 14.44.
Temple teaching, and ye laid no hold on him? If this be your Intention, you
might long since have taken him; there needed not this Charge, and Trouble, and
Pains. But consider what it is to destroy a harmless Man: The Blood of the
Guiltless Genesis 4.10.
cries from the ground to Heaven, and how much more will the Blood of the Son
of God? They answering said. John 18.5.
We seek Jesus of Nazareth. And Jesus said unto them, I am He.

Terrified at which Sound of the Divine Voice, they went Joh. 18.6.
backward, and fell to the ground: The fatal Omen that all shall be cast down
that rise up against the Lord and his Anointed, but particular Intimation of
the Fall of that People whom his Miraculous Works had rendered inexcusable. For
if he did this in the Form of the Lamb, what will he do when he comes in that
of the Lion? If he did this, being himself to be judged, what shall he do when
he comes to judge the World? If he did this when he was to dye, what will he do
when he shall Reign eternally? If such were the Dew of his Sacred Word, who
shall be able to abide the Thunder?

The least Rays of Divinity are so powerful in Nature, that its very Shadow
cannot be seen by us without a holy Horror and Concern: Which is the Reason
that even Virtue has such venerable Attractives, we cannot approach it without
Love and Reverence. Yea, the Soul of a just Man is the Isai. 57.15.
Throne of God, the Theater of his Power, the List of his Courses, the Field of
his Battles, and the Palace in which he makes his Abode; which is the Cause the
Saints have done so many Wonders in the World, the Genesis 7.9. Dan. 6.22. Luke
10.19.
wildest Beasts changing their Natures before them, and all the Genesis
7.19.8.16.9.22.10.21.
Elements, though insensible, seeming reasonable to obey them.

But the Divinity and Humanity of the Blessed Jesus did so communicate in
Effects, from his Nativity to the day of his Death, that no great Action past,
but as the Sun shining through a Cloud, they gave Illustration and Testimony to
each other. He was born a tender and crying Infant, but was adored by the Mat.
2.11.
Wise men as a King, and by the Luke 2.13.
Angels as a God. He was circumcised after the Law as a Man, but had a Luke
2.21.
Name given him which signified him to be the Savior of the World. He fled
into Egypt, like a distressed Child, under the Conduct of Helpless Parents; and
as soon as he entered into the Country the Isai. 19.1. Eusebius. de Demonst. c. 20.
S. Athanas lib. de Incarnat. Vrbi.
Idols fell down and confessed his Divinity. He was presented in the Temple as
the Son of Man, but by Simeon and Anna was Luke 2.32, 38.
owned for the Messiah, and celebrated with Divine Praises. He was baptized as
a Sinner by John in Jordan, but the Holy Ghost descending upon him, proclaimed
him the Joh. 3.17.
Beloved Son of God. He was hungry in the Wilderness, and tempted as a Mortal,
but was supported by his Divinity, and the holy Matt. 4.11.
Angels came and ministered to him as supreme Lord. A little before his Passion,
when he was to take upon him all Affronts, Miseries, and Exinanitions, of the
most despised and abject; he received Testimonies from above, and was
wonderfully transfigur'd upon the Matt. 17.2. 2 Pet. 1.18.
holy Mount. And now, being to be taken by rude hands, they are repelled by the
Majesty of his Person and the Glory of his Presence.

Seeing therefore they had no Power to take him without his Permission, he
recovers them out of their Confusion with the same Words, saying unto 'em
again, John 18.7.
Whom seek ye? And when they said, Jesus of Nazareth; he answered, I have told
you, I am he. If then you are sent to take him, I resign my self; I am that
Jesus, I am your Prisoner, let these go their way: That the John 18.9.
Saying might be fulfilled which he spoke of his Disciples, Of them which thou
gave me have I lost none; and that he might give Demonstration of his
infinite Charity, while to save others he would be slain himself, according to
that of the Isai. 63.3.
Prophet, I have trodden the Winepress alone, and of the People there was none
with me.

The Truth would conceal nothing, though he knew it would lead him to Bonds,
Irrision, Scourgings and Death. But, O God! What Hypocrisies, what
Counterfeitings and Lies are there in the Intentions and Practices of Sinners,
whose Hearts are deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can
know 'em? Judas had sold him, but is not contented, unless he also signify him
by a Sign to the Multitude, that he may be sure they may not mistake; yet not a
common token neither, but full of Hypocrisy as well as Hostility; Mat. 26.48
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is He, hold him fast. He draws near with a
seeming Endearment, and according to the Expression of Oriental Civility after
Absence, gives the treacherous Sign. He breaks the Peace by the Symbol of
Kindness: He begins his Enmity with a Kiss: He thought as yet his Malice was
undiscovered, and he might deceive his Master by a feigned Love, that he might
not endeavor to fly, or hide himself.

Dreadful Impiety! which stands in opposition to the Divine Virtue residing in
the Bosom of God. The design of God is to be known such as he is; the design of
the Hypocrite is to appear what he is not, to erect a Sepulcre externally
glorious, with Marble, Gildings, Characters and Titles; but within, Bones,
Putrefaction, and Ashes, a Retreat of Serpents, a Den of Dragons. And thus it
is he damns himself by the very means which should save him, Professions which
if true, would doubtless be accepted. But he mingles Virtue with execrable
Vices, good Actions cursed Intentions; magnifies Sin by debauching Piety, and
might much more innocently profess wickedness.

It is not more remarkable that Christ throughout the Gospel has given such
strict Caution we should beware of this Mat. 16.6.
Leaven, and denounces the severest Matt. 23.14.
Punishment against it, than that he does at this time so patiently bear with
it in the known Betrayer of his Life: For he treats him still with unparalleled
Kindness, saying, Mat. 26.40.
Friend, wherefore art thou come? I invite thee to Friendship, though I know what
thou have been about. I am ready to forgive thee, and to restore thee to thy
Station. Consider what thou art doing, and how little I have deserved it. Who
is it has brought thee, or what has forct thee? Others are instigated, but thou
come of thy self; and therefore thou have the greatest Sin. O Judas! I pity
thee however, and thy Perdition troubles me, for whom I suffer in vain. Alas!
for what art thou come? for thy own Destruction, and not for mine; the first
person in whom my Blood is deprived of its fruit and saving efficacy. My poor
Servant, wherefore art thou come? why in this manner, and what means this Kiss?
Why do thou add Hypocrisy to thy Guilt, and endeavourest to outdo all in
Malice? Thou think to deceive me, and I long since knew it; nor is it hid
from me what thou have been acting with the Jews, and what now thou intendest,
to deliver me into their hands. Let this convince thee how great a Crime it is
to deliver the Innocent to Death. At least consider whom thou betrayest, and at
what a price thou have sold my Blood: For though hitherto I have named my self
but the Son of Man, know now, thou deliverest the Son of God; thy Father by
Creation, thy Lord by Preservation, thy Savior by Redemption, thy Brother by
Incarnation, thy Master by Doctrine, thy Friend by Election, and thy Judge by
final Retribution. Behold how many Sins thou committest in one Act, and all
with a Kiss, under the sign of Love. This is the end for which thou art come,
to shed my Blood by the Office of Charity; and to put me to Death by the
Instrument of Peace.

Ah! Christian, let us no longer say with our selves, such a one has done us
harm, and no man can put up the wrong; but think with our selves, what our
great Master said to him that betrayed him with a Kiss to Death; Luke 22.48.
Judas, betray'st thou the Son of Man with a Kiss? who would not be softened
with these words? What Heart would not such a Voice bow, and incline to it?
What Tiger, what Addamant is there, that it would not move? Say not to me
hereafter, Such a one is a Deceiver, such a one is a Murderer, and the like,
and I cannot abide him, I will prosecute him to Death: I tell thee, if he be
ready to thrust his Dagger into thee, and to baptize his Right hand in thy
Throat, kiss that Right hand, and embrace that Dagger, since Christ kissed the
mouth of his Betrayer and Murderer. Thou art the Servant, I say, of him that
kissed the Traitor, (for I will not cease to repeat it again and again) of him
that spoke words to him softer than a Kiss, and sweeter than the kindest
Blandishments of Love: For, mark it, he does not say, O! thou Villain, thou
Traitor, do thou make me this Requital for all my Kindness? But he only says,
Judas, calling him by his proper Name, Can thou find in thy heart to betray
me on this fashion? Yea, I may observe that he calls him Friend, which is a
Word of great Sweetness to such an unworthy Person; and after this, he does not
say, Why do thou betray thy Master, thy Benefactor, thy Lord, the Messiah?
But, Why betrayest thou the Son of Man with a Kiss? If he was not thy Master,
yet would thou betray any Man who deals so courteously with thee, and
vouchsafes to kiss thee, even when thou betrayest him with that Kiss? O! what
an Example has the blessed Jesus given us in this Action of Humility and
Forgiveness?

Prayer.
O Light eternal and Fountain of Purity, who see all things, and art
incapable of Mixture; Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit, or where shall I
hide my self from thy Presence? If I climb up into Heaven, thou art there; if I
go down to Hell, thou art there also. If I take the Wings of the Morning, and
remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there also shall thy Hand lead
me, and thy Right Hand shall hold me. If I say, peradventure the Darkness shall
cover me, then shall my Night be turned into Day; for the Darkness is no
Darkness with thee, but the Darkness and the Light to thee are both alike and
thou art he that have covered me in my Mothers Womb. Grant me, I beseech thee,
that Innocence of Intention, that I may never go about to deceive others, or to
hide my self from thy Sight, who see in secret, but wilt reward openly, and
hate our Concealment even beyond our Sin: Prove. 28.13.
For he that covers his Sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses. and
forsakes them, shall have Mercy.

SECT. XIV. Of the Rigor of Christ's Enemies at his Apprehension.
THere are Hearts of Wax, capable of Divine Impression; (and blessed are all
they that are ready to receive it) and there are Hearts of Marble, Rocky
Hearts, reverberating Minds, which beat back all Kindnesses, and are rather
hardened than softened by 'em; it being the Purpose of the Almighty, That either
Grace shall cure Sin, or accidentally increase it. Such were the hearts of
these Ravenous Wolves, who now furiously storm against the Lamb of God, it
being their Luke 22.53.
Hour, and the Power of Darkness.

All Thoughts of Divinity, Truth, Justice, and Humanity it self, are in the
mean time suspended by the Malice of Satan instigating their Rage; who
represents him to their Fancies as the worst of Mankind, a most pernicious
Seducer and Subverter of their Religion, whose Ignominy and Punishment would be
so much more grateful to their Princes, by how much more Cruelty it was
executed upon him. With their Swords and their Staves they proclaim their
Malice; and there were some had hardly Patience to wait his Trial, (as usually
happens in popular Tumults) for how should they spare him in their first heat,
who never after left persecuting him, till he expired on the Cross?

It is in vain for the Disciples to attempt a Rescue; and Peter's Zeal is here
more unseasonable than ever. He draws his Joh. 18.10.
Sword, and strikes one of the forwardest, a Servant of the High Priest, by
name, Malchus, and cut off his Ear; but is immediately rebuked for the
Intemperance of his Passion; and the Mischief he had done Jesus Luke 22.51.
heals with a Touch. (For the Christian Religion was not so to be Planted, nor
were such to be the Arms of the Catholic Church, whom Tears and Prayers were
to become better than any illegal Expresses of Revenge.) The Lord himself will
now be wounded of Sinners, rather than the meanest Slave shall suffer; nor may
the Mat. 26.53.
Angels themselves assist him, who had ministered to him at all other Seasons of
his Mat. 2.13.4.11.
Necessity, and preserved the Faithful from the hand of their Enemies: For the
Scriptures were to be fulfilled, That thus it must be. It is the John 18.11.
Cup which the Father has given him, and he resolves to drink it.

Thus being permitted, they took Jesus, and Joh. 18.12.
bound him. These cruel Robbers lay violent hands upon the Bishop of their
Souls: This degenerate offspring rise against their Father: These Children of
Darkness seize the true Light: These hardened Sinners captivate their God; and
regardless of all the Miracles and Mercies he had wrought for 'em, who lent not
his hand of Pity to the lapsed Angels, but took on him the perishing Seed of
their Heb. 2.16.
Father, and daily supported them by the Arm of his Power, and went about doing
good: They bind him with Cords, (as Judas had premonisht 'em, That same is he,
hold him fast) hoping thereby to secure themselves from the John 11.48.
Romans, who, upon pretense of some Insurrection to have been made by him,
might have come and taken away their Place and Nation.

But as Men have different Sentiments of Christ's Sufferings, so have his
Sufferings different Effects on them; and as Judge. 16.30.
Sampson, taken by the Philistines, slew more at his Death, than he had done in
all his Life; and the Captive 1 Samuel 5.7.
Ark was the Cause of great Affliction; so Christ's Bonds became the
Destruction of the Jews, for which they were shortly after given up to the
Romans, and ever since have sought for a Deliverance in vain: Whereas to those
who look on 'em with the Eye of Faith, how they were in order to our
Deliverance from the Tyranny of Sin, Death, and the Devil, they are become
Liberty, Redemption, and Salvation.

Prayer.
O Sweetest Jesu, who did receive Judas with the Affection of a Savior, and
suffered him to kiss thy Cheek with the Serenity of God, and did cure the
wound of the Enemy with the kindness of a Parent and the tenderness of an
infinite Pity, and did permit the Soldiers to bind thee, with Patience
exemplary to all Ages of Martyrs; O kiss me with the Kisses of thy Mouth,
embrace me with the Entertainments of a Gracious Lord, and let my Soul dwell
and Feast in thee, who art the Repository of eternal Sweetnesses. Bind me with
those Bands which tied thee fast, the Chains of Love, that I may get my
Liberty. Cure my Wounds by the touch of thy hand, and let the Breath of thy
Mouth restore me to the Integrity of a holy Penitent; That so I may please
thee, and love thee, and sing Praises to thee for my Deliverance, for ever and
ever.

SECT. XV. Of the sorrowful Separation of Christ and his Disciples, his first
Examination before Caiaphas, and incomparable Clemency toward his Disciples.
THE Disciples terrified with the Insolence of the Multitude, who were now
practicing all things that might signify their Contempt and increase their
Rage toward their silent Captive, Mat. 26.56.
forsook him, and fled, but with trembling Hearts, and pierced through with a
thousand Darts of Grief. For their Condition must needs be miserable, and this
a lamentable Separation, when having left all for him, they must leave him too,
whom they loved better than their own Parents, and that in the hands of his
cruel Enemies. The time past caused 'em to remember all the Gracious Words they
had heard, all the mighty Works they had seen; the present, with the greatest
Affliction that might be represented, to their Fancies, all the Blessings they
were to lose; and that which was to come, could be nothing else to 'em but a
bottomless Pit of Terror and Affrightment. They apprehended, both for
themselves and their Master, as many Dangers as there are Thorns in the Woods;
could promise to themselves nothing but endless Miseries, Days without Comfort,
and Nights full of Horror; in the deep Sense of which they poured out their
Tears, frequently intermingling the most dolorous Sighs, having no other
Eloquence but that of their hearts.

On the other hand the compassionate Jesus was much more troubled to be parted
from those whom he had chosen from among all Men, and carried about with him,
as it were in his Bosom; for the Prophet Isaia, speaking in his Person, Isai.
49 15.
says, Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
Compassion on the Son of her Womb? Yea they may forget, yet will I not forget
thee. Especially, now he had some need of their Society, being given up to the
Necessities of humane Nature, and to suffer whatsoever might be found to
afflict it; for it is not the least point of Consolation, to have in our
Sorrows our Friends about us, by complaining to whom, we may ease our Hearts,
and they alleviate the Pressure of the Calamity, by seeming to share it among
themselves.

In those deplorable Circumstances they hurry him away toward the City with
loud Clamours, much irrision, many affronts and great have, till they came to
Mount Sion where was the house of John 18.13.
Annas father-in-law to Cajaphas, and Prince of the Sanhedrim. But he could do
nothing without the seventy Assessors, and therefore sent him to Cajaphas who
was High Priest and President of the Rites of the Temple for that year, and had
declared his John 11.49.
opinion openly in full Council concerning the Miracles and Person of Christ,
that by professing himself to be the Messiah he would doubtless attempt to make
himself a King, and by the admiration he had gotten among the People might soon
be assisted to it, if not timely prevented; the Consequence of which would be,
that the Romans to whom they were Subject, would look upon it as a defection
from their Government, and thence take occasion to come with an Army, and
destroy the Holy City and Temple of God. That therefore they were no longer to
consult at large in what way of Justice to proceed with this Man, but to
consider their interest in point of Policy, and that they might do any thing,
tho otherwise never so unlawful, to keep the Public from destruction;
concluding it was John 11.50.
expedient and much better, that one man should be sacrificed for the Sins of
the People, then that the whole Nation should perish.

Behold here the wonderful Procedure of Eternal Wisdom to bring to pass its
mighty designs, and how we truly accomplish the Divine Will while we seem never
so irregularly to thwart it, and do our own. It was the Voice of a Man, but
really an Oracle of God, as the Evangelist observes, John 11.51.
He spoke not of himself: but being High Priest that Year, he Prophesied that
Jesus should die for that Nation: and not for that Nation only, but that he
should gather together in one the Children of God, that were scattered abroad.
And what more contrary to his Intention than this effect? He was meditating
upon Injustice, and makes way for Mercy; he intended Cruelty, and opens the
door of hope. What more Wicked then to presecute Christ to Death? And what more
Beneficial then that Christ should die?

Thus the Holy Jesus was already condemned in the intention of his Judge, and
of the people, prejudiced with a dreadful Suspicion, that through him they
should fall into an irrevocable Bondage; insomuch, that forgetful of his
gracious Doctrine, glorious Miracles, and spotless Innocence, they want only a
color for his utter Destruction. And because the Instigator of all this the
Devil, though he be the very Father of lies, could object nothing against his
God-like Life; they are forced to raise all their malicious Questions about his
John 18.19.
Disciples, and his Doctrine. About his Disciples, as where they were, why he
had chosen 'em, and to what end he designed 'em? Supposing by this to have
gained an opportunity of inditing him for Sedition and Alteration of the
Government: About his Doctrine, as what it was, whence he had it, and whether
it were agreeable to Moses and the Prophets? Hoping from thence to accuse him
of Heresy, and of Seducing and perverting the People.

But our Patient Master would answer nothing as to his Disciples, at a time
when he could say so little good of 'em; for one had Betrayed him, another
wounded the High-Priest's Servant and incensed the multitude by his Rashness,
all the rest had forsaken him and fled: nor would he reveal these evils of 'em,
to teach us to conceal the infirmities of our Brethren. But as to his Doctrine,
least he should be thought to repent of it, and receed from the Gospel he came
to Propagate, he confirms it, teaching us never to deny it, (having before laid
an Matt. 10.33.
Anathema upon all that do) and declares where he taught it and before whom.
That he had never taught in Private, as they who design evil lest their
Wickedness should be discovered, but always in the light as a professor of
Truth. John 18.20.
I spoke openly to the World: I ever taught in the Synagogue and in the Temple
whither the Jews daily resort, and in secret have I said nothing. For this he
appeals to the Judgment of his Auditors, and at the same time touches the
Conscience of his Judge. John 18.21.
Why ask thou me? ask them that heard me, what I have said unto them behold
they know what I said. Why ask thou me? Why pretendest thou to Enquire, who
art resolved never to Believe, and seek not after Truth but occasion
Calumny? Why ask thou me what thou know thy self, for none of my actions
have been done in a corner? Let thy own Conscience answer for me, or ask them
that heard me. I appeal not to my Disciples, who might be thought Partial, but
to all these my Enemies standing by, who have heard me in the Temple, in the
Synagogues, in the Ships, in the Mountains, in the Fields, every where
publicly, and in great numbers. If I have transgrest in any point, let 'em
testify against me.

Happy are those Natures which will receive Instruction, and recant their error
when convinced with Reason; But very miserable are all they who are impatient
under Reproof, and grow more furious because of the Truth, which Seals the
Incorrigible Soul to Damnation. Such were the Wretches who made the Scheme of
this Tribunal, whereof an Officer that stood by stroke Jesus with the Palm of
his hand, John 18.22.
saying, answerest thou the High Priest so?

It was not long since that being sent to take him he returned a Confessor of
all his gracious words, confirming in the Presence of 'em all John 7.46.
that never man spoke like this man. But now to please his Masters, and be
commended for his officiousness, he strikes with a horrible Insolence and
Temerity, the Lord of Majesty who has the Sovereignty of the World, and to whom
the Creatures pay such an Obedience that every knee bows at his Phil. 2.10.
name, in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth. But such it seems was the
practice of this wicked Court, where none might hope for Justice or the least
pity, and every one had power over the Prisoner before Judgment, as appears
afterward in the case of St. Paul, where the Acts 23.2.
High Priest himself commanded those that stood by to strike the Apostle on the
mouth.

An injury sufficient to have raised a Tempest in any heart but that of
Exuberant Love. And if James and John would have commanded Luke 9.54.
Fire from Heaven, as Elias did, to consume the inhospitable Samaritans; How
much more worthy of it were the Abettors of this Indignity? But the Admirable
Jesus all whose Nature was Patience, to teach us there is nothing so great, as
for a Man to conquer his Passion under Affronts and Injuries, suffers it with
absolute composedness of mind, and as much Clemency and Commiseration, opening
his Mouth with the greatest Sweetness, while his Face is smitten with a servile
Hand. If I have spoken evil, bear Witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest
thou me? That I have well answered thou thy self confessest, in that thou can
object nothing against my Words, and therefore I admonish thee to be more wary
for the future, and not to act contrary to undeniable Truth. Thou strikest me
who have nothing to lay to my Charge: Thou strikest me who art not Judge over
me: Thou strikest me whom once thou did admire: Thou strikest me who have
done thee no injury at all: And yet I rail not against thee, I revenge not my
self, but freely pardon thee, and advise thee to be sorry.

Ah Christian! Such are thy Savior's Sentiments, and shall the least word of
disdain raise a storm in thy mind, and every rash action a clap of Thunder? how
long will thou say he has injured me, he has struck me, I cannot put it up, I
will have his Life? Know thou not that Revenge is only proper to weak minds,
and that Clemency resides always in a strong Spirit; that Cruelty is Tyranny,
but Meekness a true Empire; That to want power of retaining any bad Resentment,
is to be truly Invulnerable, but Malice cherished fills the Soul with Darts,
Wounds and Putrefying Ulcers; that neither God nor Man have any compassion for
those, who cannot grant a Pardon to an inconsiderate Action; but sooner or
later, there are Treasures of Graces bestowed upon those amiable Inclinations,
which are Mortal Enemies to Revenge and Cruelty.

Prayer.
O Dearest Lord, who wast smitten Extrajudicialy with the circumstances of
Despite in the Presence of a Judge, yet barest the Insolency, and Cruelty of
the Affront with an Admirable Compassion toward the rashness of the
Transgressour; Give me the like Temper, that I may look on Injury with the
mildness which arises from a sense of my own frailty; That though I be not able
to bear it with Joy, yet I may take it with Patience, and pardon it, and turn
my eye to thee who were afflicted for me, and wilt have me to be afflicted for
thee, and not to the man that persecuted and troubled me. Then shall I be
capable of that inestimable Benefit which thou have proposed on this condition,
the Forgiveness of my Debts as I forgive my Debtors, and shall be acceptable to
my Heavenly Father.

SECT. XVI. Of the False Witnesses that arose against Christ, and the
Wickedness of the High Priest.
ONE of the greatest Tragedies in the life of Man, which makes the Curious to
Question, the Wise to Wonder, the Good to Groan, and the Wicked to Rejoice; is
to see a Magistrate wilfully pervert judgment, and the Innocent oppressed under
color of Justice. Yet such was the Judge, and the case of the Holy Jesus, who
being resolved to espouse our Miseries to the utmost, would pass through the
Rigors and Formalities of the Wicked, covered with a pretext of Judgment and
Equity. Matt. 26.59.
The Chief Priests and Elders and all the Counsel sought false Witness against
him to put him to Death.

Cajaphas had examined him about his Disciples, and his Doctrine, and because
he had answered otherwise then he expected; because he had so answered that he
could lay no hold on it; he resolves now to patch together an accusation out of
the flying rumors of the People, and therefore commanded, that whatsoever they
could say, they should allege against the Prisoner. He had so much tenderness
for his own Reputation as not to sentence him without cause; but so much
Wickedness as to be contented with a pretended one, rather then he should
escape out of his hands: So there be but some Witnesses true or false, he hopes
it may excuse his Tyranny and Oppression. Nevertheless though many Matt. 26.60.
false Witnesses came, and according to the Psalmist, Psalm. 35.11.
rose up against him, and laid to his Charge things that he knew not, yet found
they Matt. 26.60.
none, that is no sufficient Testimony upon which they might ground the least
plausible accusation; for whatsoever one spoke, the next delivered it
otherwise, their Witness did not Mark 14.56.
agree together.

Such had been the Excellency, exemplary Piety, and Prudence of the Life of the
Immaculate Jesus, that if they pretended against him Questions of their Law,
they were not Capital in a Roman Court; if they affirmed he moved the people to
Sedition and Affected the Kingdom, they saw that all the World would convince
'em of the Untruth. At last after many attempts, that his Innocence might more
fully appear, came two false Witnesses near the same, and accuse him of a Trope
or Figurative Speech, which they neither understood, nor his Intention when he
spoke it. One said, This Fellow Matt. 26.61.
said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days.
The Mark 14.58.
other, I heard him say, I will destroy this Temple that is made with hands,
and within three days I will build another made without hands. But neither so
did their Witness Mark 14.59.
agree together.

He had said indeed, when the Jews desired a Sign, John 2.19.
Destroy this Temple and in three days I will raise it up, meaning the
Resurrection of his Body the third day after his Death, should be the Sign of
his Veracity to the Whole World; but the Witnesses both perverted it, and added
to it, affirming it to be threatened against the Temple at Jerusalem, and that
he had a design to subvert their Worship: Nor did the wiser Jews understand it
otherwise, which is plain from their words to Pilate after his Death, Matt.
27.63.
Sir, we remember that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, after three days
I will rise again: Only the Ignorant supposed it to be of the Temple, and the
Council willingly let it pass having no other occasion of accusation against
him.

The High Priest being frustrated by this faultring of all the Witnesses, and
silence of Christ, which prevented him the opportunity of laying hold on any
thing from himself against him, rises up in Passion, (his malice making him
uneasy) and Mark 14.60.
says, answerest thou nothing? What is it that these Witness against thee?

But there needed no reply, for what should the Innocent answer against such
lying and disagreeing Testimonies? They had born false Witness out of his true
sayings, adding and diminishing what they pleased, and yet the most Subtle and
Industrious of his Enemies could not make it out that the Temple was in any
danger from him: Jesus therefore Matt. 26.63.
held his peace. For as was the Judge, such were the Witnesses; as was the
Council, so was the Auditory; they carried the Face of a Court of Judicature,
but were a concourse of Bloody Murderers. He knew, as he was God, that
whatsoever he should answer they would pervert to an accusation against him,
and that by his answer he should rather irritate than appease them, and that
the more he satisfied 'em the greater would be their Sin; especially that it
was written of him in the Evangelical Prophet, Isai. 53.7.
He was oppressed and Afflicted, and yet he opened not his mouth. He is brought
as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth.

Cajaphas the more enraged at his silence, supposing it was done out of
contempt to his Person, and vexed that neither the Witnesses nor his own
Authority could draw an answer from him, which might bear color of Censure,
collects all his Malice and Rage together and darts it at him in one terrible
Exorcism, Mat. 26.63.
I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ
the Son of God, agreeable to the last refuge of Satan in the distracted and
furious man, Mark 5.7.
I adjure thee by God that thou torment me not.

Our Savior not moved by the Power of Exorcism (for if there were no Numb.
23.23.
Enchantment against Jacob, much less could there be against his God) but least
it might not consist with the honor which is due and ever to be paid to the
Sacred Name, or he might seem wanting to the saving Truth which he came down on
Earth to reveal to the World, or the Jews might take occasion thereby to defend
their perfidiousness, and propagate their error after his departure, saying,
That Nazarene being asked by our High Priest, and adjur'd by the Tremendous Name
whether he were the true expected Messiah, would not answer that he was,
otherwise we had believed him, and received him as such: For these Reasons he
would not here be silent, that he might leave them without Excuse, but in two
Sayings declares the Truth:

Mat. 26.64.
Thou have said, or it is true which thou have said. I need not answer, thou
thy self have said it. Or rather, he directs it to his wicked Conscience; Why
seek thou so deceitfully to draw from me that which thou know already so
well? I need not tell thee I am the Christ, since, John 11.47.
because I raised up Lazarus from the Dead, thou would put me to death. Thou
have not hitherto believed me for my Miracles, and intendest never to believe
me for my Words. Nevertheless I will yet more clearly confess, and I tell you
plainly, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting at the Right hand of
Power, Mat. 26 64.
and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. But none could thus ascend to equal Power
with God, none could again descend with the Clouds of Heaven (which the Jews
themselves expounded of the Glorious Attendance of the Angels) unless the true
Messiah and Son of God. With these words he passionately endeavors to move 'em
with the Terrors of the Lord, at the consideration of that just Judgment they
must at last undergo before his Tribunal, how Vile and Abject soever he now
appeared, since he had tried in vain to reduce 'em by his Innocence and
Benefits.

But now Hypocrisy and Ostentation as well as Obstinacy reign in Cajaphas,
Mark 14.63.64.
He rent his Clothes and said, what need we any further Witnesses? Ye have
heard the Blasphemy: What think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of
Death.

Why, What have ye heard, O ye blood-thirsty men, but that great Truth of the
coming of Christ's Kingdom, which the Patriarchs, Prophets, and all good men
longed for with earnest expectation? Where is your Anointing ye Priests and
Sons of Aaron? Where are the Prophecies ye Scribes and Teachers, which long
before mentioned these things of the Messiah? Where will be your portion, ye
Sons of Israel, who renounce an Interest in the Savior of the World, and
condemn the Son of the Great King, and think by killing him to seize upon his
Inheritance? 1 Chronicles. 22:8.
David was not suffered to build the Temple, because his hands had shed Blood:
And how shall you build up the House of the Lord, who imbrue your hands in the
blood of God? What Herod tho otherwise cruel will not dare, and what Pilate
though a Barbarian shall be afraid of, you have wilfully pronounced against the
Lord of Life: Therefore shall the Samaritans and Heathen be your Judges, yea
out of your own mouth shall ye be Judged, how much your impiety was greater
than theirs, and your Injustice crueller than that of Herod or Pilate.

It was the first time that Cajaphas had heard he called himself the Son of God
and declared himself to be come from Heaven, as appears by manifest John 5.18.
passages in the Holy Evangelists. He might much more easily have believed that
Truth, knowing how he had raised Lazarus from the Dead, then the poor blind Man
for the cure of his sight, or Nicodemus from the general report of his
Miracles, who John 3.2.9 33.
both confess, that if he had not been of God, or God had been with him he
could have done nothing: But here out of Vain Glory he rent his Clothes, (a sad
Presage prophetically foreshewing that the Priesthood should be rent from him
and that Nation,) and cries as if he had heard some strange thing, (which
personated Admiration became also the type of his own punishment, and consigned
the Nation to utter destruction,) and the whole Assembly devoted to his will,
the Priests, the Pharisees, the Scribes and Elders, ^ Mark 14.64.
all conspired in the same Guilt. Whereby it is evident whatsoever he had said,
they were all ready to confirm it, when immediately with one Voice without any
Hesitation, all condemn him to be guilty of Death. There was no body here had a
word to speak for the Innocent, none desired a time for defense of the
Prisoner; neither Reason, nor Justice, nor Humanity are regarded, but Cajaphas
will have it so, and Christ must die.

Thus was our Savior suppposed guilty of Blasphemy, who in all things sought
his Father's Glory; and proclaimed worthy of Death who did no Sin, neither was
guile found in his Mouth; and that holy Name abused and vilifi'd, which is
above every Name, and to which every knee should bow, Because we were really
Blasphemous and Wicked, and had transgrest all the commandments of our God,
from the guilt of which he came to deliver us by his Condemnation.

Prayer.
O Spotless Innocence who were judged wrongfully, but shall come to judge the
World in Righteousness; Grant Impartialtiy to all the Judges of the Earth, that
they Administer true Justice without Covetousness or Respect of Persons;
Sincerity to all Witn^sses, that they may bear Testimony to the Truth;
Integrity to all the Professors of thy Holy Precepts, that they may serve thee
in purity of Intention; and if after the example of thy own injuries, we shall
be brought before ungodly Magistrates to suffer for Righteousness and the
Gospels sake; Give us the like Patience, Who art the true Peace, and Comfort of
all that put their trust in thee.

SECT. XVII. Of Peter's Fall.
WHile these things were transacting concerning the Lord, Mark 14.54, etc.
Peter who followed him afar off into the Palace of the High Priest, and sat
with the Servants and others, and warmed himself at the fire (for it was then a
cold season) being engaged in a strange and evil company, in the midst of
danger, without time to deliberate, invent subterfuges, or fortify himself;
was surprised with the Questions of a Servant Maid, and twice denied shamefully
that he belonged to him, and at the third time began to curse and swear that he
knew not this Man of whom they spoke, who yet was known to him as his own
heart, and was dearer to him then his Eyes, and for whom he had professed a
little before, he would go into Prison and to Death. So Vain and Frail are the
greatest Spirits being left destitute to themselves, they become Barren, suffer
Ecclipses, and give examples of Terror to the World.

But the Merciful Jesus in the midst of his own Sufferings was not unmindful of
his Servants danger. Notwithstanding the dishonor of his present condition,
the sense of his Fathers Indignation, the Foresight of his approaching
Desertion, while he is wholly possessed of weakness, he is yet at leisure for an
act of Power. The Righteous Justice of his God, and the unjust cruelty of Men,
are not able to drive him from the exercise of his Mercy. He came to suffer all
these things for Man, and in the midst of his Troubles remembers Man, honoring
the Scorns and Buffets of his Judgment with the Conversion of a fallen Apostle.

He cast a Gracious Eye upon him when the Cock crew, according to the Luke
22.61.
prediction he had made of his Fall, and the piercing Animal was made the
Preacher, and his Look was the grace that made the Sermon effectual.

Who will not admire the Sage Prudence, and Miraculous Conduct of his Designs,
to bring to pass his abundant Mercy? Who will not remain astonished in
Contemplation of his wonderful Operations? and above all when he shall discern
the care he always has for the preservation of his Elect? Alas! How stupid is
the Wisdom of Men? How Imprudent their Resolutions? How feeble are the Forces
of their understanding, when they are severed from the Blessed Jesus? But there
needs but one heavenly raye of his to enlighten all the obscurities of the
Earth, but one single drop of his Dew to soften all Hardened and Rocky Hearts,
but one glance of his Eye to give a Soul and Life to all the most inanimated
bodies in Nature: Yea when a Man thinks himself utterly lost, then presently he
shows him his way in the midst of all his wanderings; and there is no climate so
dry, no soil so unfruitful, where his Omnipotent Goodness cannot cause a
Thousand Fountains and Springs to rise; to the end it may be everywhere known
and Extolled, that he is the source of all Living and Salutiferous Waters.

Methinks I see in his Face a conflict of the Affections of Pity, Mercy,
Favor, and Grace, striving together in this compassionate Action; Pity
commiserating the frailty of his Disciple; Mercy forgiving and converting him;
Favor inviting him, and Grace assisting him.

Prayer.
O Amiable Eyes of my Dear Jesus! Stay, O stay, Benign Lord, and never let thy
saving Face be turned from me. Cast upon my dull and heavy Soul one beam from
those thine Eyes, which make all storms Clear, and all disasters Happy. The
very Faithful themselves would lie still in the Depth of Sin, whereinto they
have been plunged by their inadvertency, did not thy pity raise them up. They
cannot remember their Danger or thy Word, till thou remember their Misery, and
Relieve them. O let me dwell for ever in thy Presence, for out of the sight of
thine Eyes there is no safety.

SECT. XVIII. Of Peter's Rise.
NO sooner did Peter remember the words of Jesus, and what slight esteem he had
made of that Caution which should have armed him against Temptation, but he
went out and Matt. 26.75.
wept bitterly, (...) Mark 14.72. (...) Theophylact.
covering his Head, and mingling his Tears with the Sighs and Groans of his
broken heart. Leaving it disputable whether he felt more Joy or Sorrow, in the
acts of Love or the remembrance of his Fall.

Alas! says he, How true is it that a proud Felicity has reeling Feet; That
when we trust to our own strength, we are then in most danger; That negligence
and presumption are the Forerunners of a Fall? Thou who did defy the gates
of Hell, have yielded thy self to the voice of a simple Woman. All those
Conquests thou did promise to thy self, are become the Trophies of so weak a
Hand. Return to the Combat, and since she has Triumphed over thee, do thou at
least Triumph over thy self. Alas, I am afraid to behold the place of my Fall,
and the weak snares of a foolish Woman appear to me as rigorous as Chains of
Iron. Yet what can he fear who is resolved to die, or make himself a Sacrifice
to his offended Lord? But our Soul is yet too foul for an Oblation to his
Service, let us wash it with Tears, till its impurities are cleansed. I fell
before the Fire, and I will rise by the Water, the salutary waters of
Repentance. I have Matt. 14.29.
walked upon the Sea to come to my Jesus, and I will now return to him by the
way of my Tears. I will now speak only by my Eyes, since I have lately talked
so wickedly with my Mouth. Since we have nothing left free to us but Sighs and
Groans, let us make use of the last liberty that is left; and when all is spent
return to the Mercy of Jesus, which all the Sins of the World can never
evacuate. I will from henceforth be a perpetual Example to the Church by my
Fall, and rising again from Death, for the comfort of Sinners, and a warning to
the Faithful; and the fault of one Night shall be lamented by me all the days
of my Life, in a kind of continual Martyrdom. Come and Rejoice over me, ye holy
Angels, since the greater is my Sin the more will his Mercy be magnified in my
Forgiveness and Conversion.

Let all such as Stand here these Words, and take heed lest they Fall, Let such
as are Fallen imprint them in their Hearts, that they may endeavor in like
manner to Rise. Here is not proposed an Example of Falling, but an Example of
Rising after Falling. And since none but the Tears of the Damned are
Remediless, let us hasten with this Penitent to the Pool of Contrition, and
bath our Souls in those Salutiferous Waters. Now are our Pains profitable, our
Tears acceptable, our Groans audible, our Grief pacifieth God and purges the
Heart; hereafter there shall be weeping without Comfort, and gnashing of Teeth,
and irremediable Vexation.

Prayer.
Gracious Redeemer, the Fountain of Pardon; I have sinned against thee in
denying thee by my works, and estranging my heart from thee, who art desirable
above all things. And where shall I find punishment enough to avenge me of my
self, and tears sufficient to wash away my guilt? Every slight Worldly sorrow
is apt to draw plenty of Waters in mine Eyes, but when I would weep for my
Sins, which are the greatest Calamities, either my Eyes are dry, or my Tears
too few to bewail so many provocations. O merciful Savior, break this heart,
for thou only can do it with thy compassionate Look, and melt it into Tears
of true Contrition: That since I cannot be Innocent yet I may be Penitent, and
what is wanting in my Repentance may be supplied by thy Mercy, and I may owe my
Salvation to thy boundless Liberality

SECT. XIX. Of the Barbarity of the Multitude toward Christ.
JEsus had pity upon his offending Servant; but his own Innocence found none
among his Enemies, who begin now to treat him with all the Circumstances of
Scorn, Cruelty, and Diabolical Malice. O God! What Frenzies, and what Furies
are there in a Brutish Multitude, when it is once let loose! The Lamb of God
himself is not secure from their Insults. What barbarous Passions, what blind
Will, what enchanted Desires after inhumane Cruelty toward their own Image!
They Mat. 26.67.
spit in his Face, in whose presence the Angels, ravished with wonder, do cover
their Faces with their Wings, and have no sweeter Ecstasies than the Admiration
of his Beauties. They Luke 22.64.
blindfold his Eyes, the Light of whose Countenance the Fathers have so much
desired to see. They Mat. 26.67.
strike and buffet him with the Palms of their hands, who descended from Glory
to heal them by his Stripes. They sport themselves in Railery with the Eternal
Word, who In the beginning John 1.3, 4.
made all things, and in whom was Life, and that Life the Light of Men, saying
Mat. 26.68.
Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee? And many Luke 22.65.
other things, which neither the Prophets did foretell, nor the Evangelists
have related, did they blasphemously speak against him.

Thus did our Lord Isai. 50.6.
give his Back to the Smiters, and his Cheeks to them that pulled off the hair,
and hid not his Face from Shame and Spitting. Thus did his Psalm. 118.12.
Enemies come about him like Bees, regardless whether they lost their
Fruitfulness for ever, so they might infix in him the Sting of their Malice.
Thus did he pass the sorrowful Night among the Psalm. 57.5.
Children of Men that were set on fire, whose Teeth were Spears and Arrows, and
their Tongue a sharp Sword; made the extreme Scorn, Contempt, and Sport of the
most insolent and insulting Enemy.

Go now, ungrateful and Perfidious Sinner, seek and Covet the Pleasures of this
Life, while Christ suffers these Indignities for thy sake. Behold what
miserable Comforts he has in this Passover, which to his People was a Festival
of the greatest Joy. See here what Returns of Gratitude they make for all the
inestimable Benefits they have received. This night was the Blood of the
Typical Lamb sprinkled upon their doors, and saved 'em from Destruction; and
now they tarnish with the Filth of their Infernal Mouths the Mirror of Angels,
the true Lamb, and condemn him to Destruction, who came to save them from
Damnation: And has he been less kind to thee, or have thou been more grateful
to him?

O the unaccountable Perverseness of Man! O the Ineffable Long-Suffering of
Christ. For what wonder had it been, had he again destroyed the World for so
great an Affront and Wickedness as this? But thus the Scriptures were to be
fulfilled, and thus it Luke 24.46.
behoved Christ to suffer.

Prayer.
O my Soul! what will thou say? Thy Redeemer is mocked; thy Master is spit upon;
thy Lord is smitten; thy Christ is vilified more than ever was any Man; and of
all these Indignities thy Sins are the Cause. For if thou had not sinned, nor
thy Forefathers, the innocent Jesus had never thus suffered: His manifold
Miseries are the several Indications how wicked, how Guilty, how full of Sin
thou art, and always have been. For as abject as thy Savior did appear before
his Adversaries, so vile were thou truly before God, and must for ever have
appeared before thy Tormentors in Hell, if he had not transferred these
Sufferings upon himself, and his Righteousness upon thee.

I will prostrate my self in Dust and Ashes: I will humble my Spirit with
Abstinence and Sorrow: My Tears shall be my Meat Day and Night; and I will ever
call upon God, till of his Mercy he speak Peace unto me. I will follow my Jesus
sorrowing, and embrace his Cross, and confess him dying for me, till he assist
me with his Grace, and receive me with his Mercy, and turn my temporal Sorrows
into everlasting Joys.

SECT. XX. Of the Prosecution of Christ before Pilate, and the miserable
Despair of Judas thereupon.
WHile our Savior was passing the sorrowful Night, vilified, spit upon,
buffeted, and mocked, as the very Scorn of Men, and the Outcast of the People;
Fame, which is more speedy than a thousand Posts, and has abundance of Voices
to make it self heard, had dispersed the News through the whole City; and the
People, Luke 22.66.
raised early in the Morning by various Reports, and restless Expectations,
flockt together; and the Council re-assembled, so much the more incensed, by
how much their Witnesses had failed, and Christ had answered prudently, and
suffered patiently; hoping by the semblance of a judicial Process they might
persuade Pilate, whose Authority they were to use, to accept their Examination
and Conviction, without Enquiry. And Christ is Luke 22.66.
brought again bound before 'em, that at least they might satisfy their
Cruelty in seeing him, if they could not their Malice in falsely accusing him.
For as the Force of Love has this Effect, that it suffices not to have once
seen its beloved; so Envy and Hatred desire more and more to reiterate their
Cruelty upon what they hate.

And because Christ had as yet only confessed himself the Son of God, and Judge
of the World, which would bear but little stress before Pilate, who was a
Pagan, and Idolatrous, and whose Religion maintained the frequent Descent of
the Gods they worshipped; they urge him again with the former Question, Whether
he were the Messiah or Christ, saying, Luke 22.67.
Art thou the Christ? tell us. For the promised Messiah in Scripture, being
there also called the John 1.49.
King of Israel, if he confessed himself to be the Messiah, they would by
consequence imply, he maintained himself to be the King of Israel; from whence
they would accuse him of Rebellion against Caesar.

Which Question, as it did not much differ from the former, so neither did our
Savior's Answer to it, excepting that he added ' Luke 22.67, 68.
If I tell you, you will not believe me. And if I also ask you, you you will
not answer me, nor let me go. He expected no Answer, but Irrision and
Blasphemy, whatsoever he should have spoken about his Divinity, and more
Madness and Sin in the People, whose only Satisfaction was to have him
crucified. They were not now likely to believe his Words, who had resisted his
mighty Works, to which he had John 10.25.
appealed as the best Evidences of his Commission; nor to answer any point
about his Person, who had so often been Mat. 21.27. Mark 12.37. Luke 14.3.
posed, that they Matt. 22.46.
durst not ask him any more. Therefore he only forewarns 'em again of his
future Power, which he should receive from God to judge their Iniquities: Luke
22.69.
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sit on the Right hand of the Power of
God; appealing to their Consciences, whether they did not think him the true
Messiah by the Miracles they had seen and heard; which now they would have him
say, not for their Conviction, but for a Cause of his Condemnation: For they
were so far from giving Ear to any Apology, that all was interrupted with the
clamorous noise of Luke 22.71.
What need have we of any further Witnesses, for we our selves have heard him
of his own Mouth? Upon this they Mat. 27.2.
bind him a third time, (for many were the Chains from which we were to be
loosed) and lead him with a S. Basil. in Mystagog. Eccles. Author. Com. in
Marc. apud S. Hieron.
Cord about his Neck from the Spiritual to the Civil Power.

Which Judas perceiving, who had been the Author of all this Mischief, and
having heard nothing from others laid to his Charge worthy of Death, to which
he saw he was condemned, but from his own Mouth many Revelations of Power, and
especially of Judgment, which he could not stifle; he Mat. 27.^
repented himself of being the Instrument of so damnable a Machination and
prodigious Impiety, and brought again the thirty Pieces of Silver to some of
the Chief Priests and Elders, who remained in the Temple upon account of the
Feast, Matt. 27.4.
saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the Innocent Blood, (an
undeniable Testimony against all the Blasphemy of the Jews) and cast down the
Pieces of Silver in the Temple. Which Money, in the use to which it was
presently disposed, (for they would not suffer the Price of Blood to come into
the Treasury) fulfilled a most eminent Prediction of Zech. 11.13. Matt. 27.9.
Zechariah concerning the Price of our Savior's Blood; for with this they
bought the Potter's Field, to bury Strangers in, which is Mat. 27.8.
called the Field of Blood to this day.

There is an active Principle in Man's Breast, that seldom suffers daring
Sinners to pass in quiet to their Graves, which Satan makes use of, when it is
too late to repent, to drive those to Desperation whom he caused to sin. When
the Iniquity is come to so great a proportion, as to produce Despair, and an
intolerable Condition, then he suffers the Conscience to thaw and grow tender,
that filling the Soul with a raging Sorrow, he may secure it against all
Retreat by some Act which may render the Pardon impossible. The Conscience of
the Betrayer now awakned with the Horror of the Fact, which was continually
before his Eyes, began to rouse and follow close, and the Man was unable to
bear up under the furious Revenges of his own Mind, as it happens in all
willful and deliberate Sins, especially that of Blood, which is wont more
sensibly to allarm the natural Notions of the Mind, and to excite in us the
Fears of present Judgment.

Did ever any harden himself against God, and prosper? And indeed how should
he, when he carries about with him such a powerful Executioner in his own
Bosom? In the Moment he affronts the Dictates of his Conscience, he bids Adieu
to all true Quiet, and exposes himself to the severe Resentments of a
self-torturing Mind; a Torment infinitely beyond what the most ingenious
Tyrants ever could contrive. For nothing so effectually invades our Ease, as
the Reproaches of our own Mind, from which it is impossible we should lie hid.
The Wrath of Man may be endured; but the Irruptions of Conscience are
irresistible, and often reduce a Man to such Distresses, as make him choose Death
rather than Life.

But his Masters, incurious of those Hellish Torments which Judas felt within
(because their own were not yet begun) and unable to contradict him, as to the
quality of the Purchase, which they could not really deny to be Guiltless;
dismissed him scornfully, Matt. 27.4.
saying, What is that to us? See thou to that. If his Blood be innocent, the
greater is thy Sin. We employed thee ignorantly, and have been punctual in our
Agreement, and are out of the Reach of the Law.

We see by this the miserable Estate of all those, who commit Wickedness for
the Favor of others. They are presently derided, hated, and forsaken, by those
very Persons, in whose Cause they committed it: And like to 'em are all they,
who frame their Fortune upon Vice; they build on Abysses or Foundations of
Sand; they sow Wind, and reap Tempests; their Hopes are but Clouds swelled with
Vapors, which burst, consume, and come to nothing. Never had any Man good
Fortune in Impiety, whatever Advantage he might at first propose. It is the
Spiders Web, and an Act of Violence: He shall not cover himself with his Work,
nor shall it save him from Destruction. He has lost his Conscience, and has
nothing to gain; for nothing remains for him but Unhappiness: Or rather, did
he gain the whole World, yet would he be the greatest Loser, because he has
lost his own Soul.

And now the Apostate, reduced to these Streights, terrified in his mind,
instigated by the Devil, and finding no Consolation, but amazing Reproofs, from
those very Persons he had served against his Conscience; all he could hope for,
was, to find some shelter, where he might hide his guilty Head.

But ah! miserable Man, what Darkness can cover him, who has a thousand Torches
in his own Breast to lay open the Guilt of his Crime: Who flies out of the
Presence of his God, since every place is Hell, where God is not? The most
Peopled Cities are solitary Deserts, if the God of Comfort be not there; and
the most dreadful Solitudes and least inhabited Grots become Courts and Palaces
by the Residence of his Spirit. All Reposes are Disquiet; all Peace is but War;
all Honors are Contempt, Parents are traitorous, Brothers envious, Friends
Deceivers, Beds of Down no better than Sepulchers; and Life is but a Death, or
at best but a long and dolorous Sickness, unless God be the Loadstone of our
Hearts, the Center of our Affections, and the Height of our Glory.

It is a horrible thing to see a Soul left to it self, after it has forsaken
the Inspirations of God. It becomes a desolate Vineyard without Enclosure: The
wild Boar enters it, and all unclean and ravenous Beasts do there sport and
leap without Control. God hangs Clouds over it, but lets no Dew fall upon it:
The Sun never looks upon it with a loving Eye; but all there is Barren,
Venomous, and near to Hell; Blackness of Darkness, and eternal Night;
Melancholy, racked by Despair; Guilt scourged by Shame; Rage tortured with
Envy; and Vexation stabbed by Regret and a tempestuous Repentance.

And if this be the Unhappiness of the present time, O! how great will be the
Solitude of such a Soul in her Separation? When in an Instant she shall see
nothing but all the Evils she has done, and all the Wickednesses of her Life,
spread before her Eyes, as so many Firey Serpents; for which she must answer
before the dreadful Tribunal, which even now appears before her Eyes.

Prayer.
O! just God, will there need any Chains to sink it lower than its own Weight
has done? Will there need any other Darkness to cover the Soul, which such a
Cloud of Sorrows has already benighted, and cast into the bottom of the Abyss
of Miseries? One Deep calls upon another; the Depth of Misery upon the Depth of
thy Compassion: In the midst of thy Wrath, remember Mercy. Afford us here such
Grace as may prevent Despair, (for our Sins cannot be greater than thy Mercy)
and in the Day of Judgment grant us such Mercy as may pardon our greatest Sins.

SECT. XXI. Of the Deplorable end of Judas.
POor Judas under these apprehensions of Shame, Guilt, Fear, Despair, Grief,
Rage, Anguish and Torment, the reproof of Devils and Wicked Men, departed, and
went and Matt. 27.5.
hanged himself. Which judgment was made more notorious by an unusual accident
(as the Greek Scholiast, and some Euthym. in 26. Matt. Oecumen. in c. 1. Acts.
Juvencus Hist. Evang. Beda de Locis Sanct. cap. 4.
others report out of Papias St. John's Scholar) that he fell from the Fig Tree
on which he hanged before he was quite dead, and survived his attempt some
while, being so sad a spectacle of Deformity, Pain, and a prodigious tumor,
that his plague was deplorable and highly miserable: till at last he burst in
the very substance of his Trunk as being extended beyond the possibilities and
capacities of Nature. Which reconciles the relation of St. Matthew to St.
Luke's, of whom the former says, he (...). Mat. 27, 5.
hanged or strangled himself; the latter, he (...). Act. 1.18.
fell headlong and burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

Such is the real unfruitfulness of Sin, and perplexed estate of unjust gain.
We are afterward more indigent then we were before, and know not what to do
with the cursed thing when we have it. Such is the purchase of Treason, and
reward of Covetousness, momentary in its Possession, unsatisfying in the
fruition, uncertain in the stay, sudden in its departure, horrid in the
remembrance, a certain and astonishing ruin in the end. And such is the
confusion of all those, who are terrified with the remembrance of their Sin,
but cannot apprehend the greatness of Gods Mercy, or build their repentance
upon the Divine Compassion; Whose sin is revealed to 'em but but not the
Gospel, who are sorry for their loss or what they suffer, but cannot Confess,
Believe, and heartily sue for Pardon.

Prayer.
O thou most Gracious, yet dreadful Majesty; Gracious in the dispensations of
those means which lead us to believe in thy dear Son, as in thy manifold offers
to Judas; Dreadful in the emanations of thy Justice sealing up his incorrigible
and impenitent Heart; Suffer me not, I beseech thee, ever to despair either of
thy Mercy for what is past, or of thy Grace for the future. I am cast down when
I consider the misery of the Betrayer, but I lift up my Soul to the Mercy of
the Betrayed. I tremble when I consider the fruits of Sin, but am encouraged by
those of the Sufferings of my Jesus. For whose infinite Merits, I implore thine
infinite Compassion, to deliver me now from a reprobate Mind, and in the day of
Judgment from Eternal Condemnation.

SECT. XXII. Of the Wonderful Providence of God in the manner of Christ's Death.
NOthing comes by chance in respect of God, but all things are disposed by his
wise Providence to bring his determinate Council to pass. After Judas by his
desolation had Acts 1 20. Psalm. 109.7.
fulfilled the Scripture, it was further necessary that Christ, whom he had
delivered, should suffer in a manner prefigur'd therein, tho not prescribed by
the Law of Moses. For as a Exodus ^^.46.
bone of the Typical Lamb was not to be broken so neither was any to be broken
in the true Lamb, the Great passover of the Christians. Whereby it was
intimated the Savior of the World should suffer that Death, to which the
breaking of Bones was usual (which according to custom, was that of
Crucifixion, to put an end to the Miserable life of the Sufferer) but only in
that Death should by the Providence of God be so particularly preserved, as
that not one Bone of his should be touched. The Psalmist likewise predicting of
him, they Psalm. 22.17.
pierced my hands and my feet plainly represented he should die the Death of
the Cross, to which the Hands and Feet of the Person Crucified were affixed.

In order to this Death, which was after the Roman manner, great had been the
Revolutions and Changes in the World between the Type and Prophecy, and the
time of the event. And Judea, that was once L^m. 1.1.
great among the Nations and Princess among the Provinces, had now been made
tributary by Pompey the Great about threescore years before Christ, and a part
of a Province of Syria under the care of the President of that Province,
appointed by Tiberias the Emperor. According to which Institution, a particular
Procurator was assigned to it for the disposing of the Public revenue; and
because the President who had the power of the Sword was forced to attend the
other parts of his Province, therefore Tacit. Annal. l. 15. Tertull. Apologet.
cap. 21 Cyprian adv Demet. Josephus de bell. jud. Philo de legate ad Cajum.
Justin Mart. Apolog. Eusebius Hist. l. 1. c. 10.
Pilate the Resident, Procutator of Judea was furnished with power of Life and
Death, and administered the Supreme Power as to the Jews. This gave opportunity
that Christ might be delivered to a foreign Jurisdiction, and suffer Death
after the custom of that Nation to whose power he was delivered. The obstinate
Jews had Malice enough to prosecute, but wanted power Judicially to destroy
him. It is said, they Mark 14.64.
condemned him, that is, found him guilty; yet could not pronounce sentence of
Death upon him, but Mark 15.1. Matt. 27.2.
delivered him to Pontius Pilate the Governor.

Thus wonderful are the Mysteries of God's Secrets, and great his goodness to
cause us to believe 'em. He reveals before so much as is necessary for the
foundation of our Faith, and afterward in his Wisdom through numberless
Contingencies and cross Accidents, brings his Truth to its proper event: That
being told John 13.19.
before hand, we should believe it when come to pass, and so believing have
everlasting life.

But it is the method of the Devil and wicked Men, in opposition the Divine
Verity, to conceal the true intent of all their thoughts; and which aggravates
their guilt to the depth of horror, to make use of Religion and a seeming Piety
to bring their wicked designs to pass; hopeing to steal a good Name, and the
opinion of the Multitude, by that which renders 'em infamous to all good Men,
and abominable in the sight of God.

They had hired a Betrayer who had declared him innocent; they had sought false
Witnesses who could prove nothing; they had smitten him extrajudicially in open
Court, and before Sentence; they had Bound, Vilified and Abused him, with the
greatest inhumanity their Rage could invent; they had delivered him up to the
secular Power with knowledge of his Innocence, but full purpose of destroying
him; and now would draw Pilate to accept their Accusations under the color of
an extraordinary Piety, and specious observation of a vain Tradition, That they
were not to come into the house of the Uncircumcised. They sent in the Prisoner
to the Judgment Hall, but they themselves went not in, John 8.28.
least they should be defiled, and that they might eat the Passover.

Prayer.
But Grant, O God, that we who are sensible of the horrible Profanation the
Jews made of their Religion by their insincerity; and how justly thou removedst
'em out of thy sight, when under the pretense of it they persecuted thy Son;
may never after the like Treachery and Perverseness Crucify him afresh, and
bring upon our selves the desolation of thy holy Gospel by making it a Cloak to
our Maliciousness and Vice: But that we may speak and profess truly, and
practice conscientiously whatsoever ought to be done, in imitation of thy
Purity, and of the Holy Jesus who has revealed himself unto us to be the John
14.6.
Way, and the Truth, and the Life.

SECT. XVIII. Of the Obstinacy of the Jews to put Christ to Death, and of the
true Nature of his Kingdom.
PIlate might have forced 'em out of their obstinate Humor to have entered the
Pretorium, and given their Testimony in Court. But having much more Humility,
as well as respect to Justice, condescends to come forth and take their
Allegations, Saying, John 18.29.
What Accusation bring you against this Man? a very just question to a most
Insolent answer, John 18.30.
If he were not a Malefactor we would not have delivered him up unto Thee: As
if it were necessary he should rely on their Judgments, who were the Subjects
of his Tribunal, and becoming Justice to pass Sentence of Death without proof
of Witnesses, or hearing the Prisoner.

A Faithless, Wicked, and Stubborn Generation had stopped their Ears to all that
was Divine, and now were grown Envious least the Heathens should hear those
Luke 4.22.
gracious Words which were wont to proceed out of his mouth, and at which
themselves had so often wondered; least Pilate should be Charmed, as the rest
of the John 7.45.
Officers they had sent to take him, and leave him at Liberty with the same
Answer, John 7.46.
Never man spoke like this man. Had they asked the Luke 17.14.
Lepers whom he had cleansed, or the John 5.9.
Lame whose Limbs he had restored, or the Mark 7.35.
Deaf whom he had made to hear, or the Luke 7.21.
Blind who had received their sight, or the Mark 5.15.
possessed who were in their ^ight mind, all had confessed, It was Matt. 9.33.
never so seen in Israel, and that he had done all things Mark 7.37.
Well.

But Pilate seeing their Pride, and that they intended not to make him Judge of
the cause, but Executioner of their Cruelty, and being by Nature of a (...).
rough and high temper, says, John 18.31.
Take him and Judge him according to your Law. If he be a Malefactor as you
allege, and I may not examine him, nor hear proof against him, take him, and
judge him according to your customs which admit of Condemnation without Trial.
For the Acts 25.16.
Roman Law prohibits me to deliver any man to die, before he have his accusers
face to face, and have license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid
against him. And indeed so did the Law of Moses too (that it seem not to come
behind the Roman) according to that of Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews, John 7.31
does our Law judge any Man before it hear him, and know what he does? but as
they had belied the nature of their Judicature, so do they upon this their
power of Execution, when they saw he would not be guided by an implicit Faith,
saying, John 18.31.
It is not lawful for us to put any man to Death.

Why who afterward put to Death the Protomarty Acts 7.58.
Stephen, and having stoned Acts 14.19.
Paul, drew him out of the City supposing he had been dead, and once took up
stones to stone John 10.31
Christ; if to these it was not lawful to put any man to death? But because
Crucisixion was the more Painful and Shameful, and the vid. Sect. 22.
Scriptures had signified it, and Christ Matt. 26.2. John 8.28.
foretold it, which was not in their power as stoning was, and they were
desirous to have him suffer under their Enemies, hoping to clear themselves by
his disgrace and torture, they conceal their Power, to have him Crucified, and
are permitted to bring the designs of Providence to pass.

Seeing therefore that Pilate would have nothing to do in the matter, without
the Allegation of some Crime; They begin to accuse him Luke 23.2.
for perverting the nation, forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar, and for saying
that he himself was Christ a King. As if he had broken the Divine Law by
seducing the People from the Service of God, who came to Matt. 5.17.
fulfill it, and to do the John 6.38.
Will of his Father: As if he had transgressed all humane Constitutions in
conspiring against the Emperor, who hid himself from them, when they would have
taken him by force, and made him a John 6.15.
King to head their Rebellions: as if he had trampled under the Law of Nature,
in denying to pay Tribute to his Imperial Majesty, who had taught 'em to Matt.
22.21.
render to Caesar the things that are Cesar's, as well as unto God the things
that are God's.

Nevertheless since about the time of our Savior's Incarnation, the Jews had
(according to the Prophet Daniel's Dan. 9.24, 25, 26.
Chronology) expected the revelation of the Messiah in the World, to restore
their Nation to its pristine Liberty, and thence took occasion to raise several
seditions against the Roman Government, under Acts 5.36.
Theudas, Acts 5.37.
Judas the Galilean, and a certain a Egyptian Prophet; Pilate supposed by their
accusation that he might be of that stamp, and understanding nothing as yet of
his Spiritual Kingdom, returned into the Hall, and called Jesus, and said unto
him, John 1
Art thou the King of the Jews?

To which the Prince of Sufferings most prudently answered, as neither denying
nor affirming it, (for had he confessed, he had immediately been condemned as an
offender against the Cosarean power) John 18.34.
Say thou this thing of thy self, or did others tell it thee of me? Which
words may be understood either by way of Admiration, as, how great a thing is
this that thou have spoken, tho thou art ignorant of the true meaning? And
whence have thou this, that thou call me a King? For none can say that Jesus
is the Lord but by the Power of the 1 Cor. 12.3.
Holy Ghost: Or as a Reprehension to the Conscience of Pilate, who if he
accused him out of his own suspicion, did not act the part of a Righteous
Judge; and if others had informed him, they ought to have been called to prove
it. But chiefly this was spoken to give occasion to Pilate to clear him as to
his own knowledge, and to bear testimono to his Innocence, saying, John 18.35.
Am I a Jew? Thine own nation, and the Chief Priests have delivered thee unto
me: What have thou done? It is the Jews that persecute thee, and rail on thee
as an Egregious Malefactor. I am a stranger to your superstitions, have neither
seized thee nor accused thee. What have thou done? Speak thy self. Say for what
reason thy own Prelates, and thy whole Nation are thus inveterately provoked
against thee?

Jesus would not answer to these last words since he had done 1 Pet. 2.22.
no sin, neither had guile been found in his mouth, and the people had often
Mark 7.37.
confessed he had done all things well: But as to the former question of his
being a King, he distinguishes his Kingdom from that of the World, to show that
he had never offended Caesar, which was the odious crime they would fix upon
him. John 18.36.
My Kingdom is not of this World. If my Kingdom were of this World, then would
my Servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my
Kingdom not from hence. As if he had said, I confess I am a King, but
understand then aright in what sense I am such. I never ambitioned gaudy Pomps,
nor have I designed Glorious Ills. I never attempted any thing against the
Government, nor have I diminished Tiberius's or thy Power. I govern only the
mind not the Body, and my Commands are Spiritual and not Temporal, my Kingdom
of God and not of Man. The World is too much the shadow of a Trifle in the
sight of an Enlightened Understanding to raise in a good Man any esteem or Love,
when he considers himself to be Dust, and the Son of Corruption, Born to Day
and may Die to Morrow; and 1 John 2.17.
all that is in it, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes, and the
Pride of Life, are not of the Father whose will I reveal. My Command to my
Followers is to fight against it, by despising and trampling it under their
feet. I teach Meekness and Subjection toward Men, and an entire resignation to
God; and as the way to temporal Tranquillity and the Eternal Beatitude of the
Soul, to believe what God reveals, to obey what he Commands, to trust in his
promises, and attend his decrees and the leisure of Heaven. Nor are any of
these things administered after the same manner as Worldly Kingdoms are
increased by the force of material arms, but by the Ephesians. 6.17.
sword of the the Spirit, which is the word of God; and all the Revenues here
aimed at, are not the inestimable spoil of Provinces, but Romans 14.17.
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

As a proof of all this, I my self am lowly, my Disciples Poor, my Equipage
Despicable, according to that of the Prophet, Zec. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Zion; shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy
King comes unto thee: he is just, and having Salvation, Lowly, and riding upon
an Ass, and upon a colt the foal of an Ass. Had it bin otherwise my Servants
would have fought for me, and I should have gathered Counselors instead of
Disciples, and Soldiers and Armies to have endeavored my rescue, and implored
the Angels to preserve me from violence, yea mine own Arm and my right Hand
should have gotten me the Victory over all my Enemies. But whoever saw me at
the head of an outrage, who, instead of strong holds and Castles to secure me,
never had as yet where to Mart. 8.20.
lay my head? Or when did any of mine take up arms against the Government, whom
I Mark 6.8.
sent forth without Gold, or Silver, or Brass in their purses, without Scrip
for their journey, in a single coat, without shoes or staves? And when the Jews
sent to take me, and the Officers stood affrighted and ready to surrender
themselves, I John 18.5.
offered my self, I made my self their Prisoner, and by such willing
resignation am brought here.

I have no Treasures to oppose an Empire, which has an hundred and fifty
Millions of Revenue; nor is there any wealth that I pretend to, but Poverty of
Spirit, the true Riches of the Soul. You have Five hundred Thousand Men in pay
for ten years, to maintain one Army upon the Nile, another in Euphrates,
another on the Rhine, another on the Ocean, and one in the Bowels of the
Empire: All that I have levied for the execution of my design, are but Twelve
poor Seafaring Men, without Discipline, without Arms. You have a Thousand
renowned Orators, Men of great Learning and Eminent Eloquence, who by the
Charms of their flowing Tongues can attract the People, and dispose them to
their wills: I have none but simple Ignorant Followers, that are ready to offer
the Matt. 5.39.
left cheek to him that smites them on the right, and to give their verse 40.
cloak to him that takes away their Coat, to verse 44.
love their Enemies, to bless them that curse them, to do good to those that
hate them, to pray for those who despitefully use, and persecute them. And can
you believe these probable grounds, on which may be raised the Superstructure
of an Empire; or that I aspire to Sovereignty by Sufferings, to Riches by
Poverty, to Greatness by Humility, and to Dethrone Caesar by preaching the Cross:

Pilate though convinced, and almost freed from all suspicion by the unlikeliness
of Christ's Temporal Dominion, nevertheless sticks at the name of a King. A
King he confessed himself, and of what nature soever, the Title clash'd with the
Imperial Dignity. He therefore urges him a second time, saying, John 18.37.
Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, Thou say that I am a King. To this
end was I born, and for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear
witness unto the Truth. Every one that is of the Truth hears my voice. I
repent not, nor am ashamed of my Celestial and Spiritual Kingdom, and would
have all Men know it, and even Caesar himself. For the good of Mankind depends
wholly upon it, since I govern over the Heart, to infuse Grace and Truth, and
the Word which is the Power of God to Salvation: That I may give Righteousness
for Sin, Life for Death, Joy for Sufferings, Heaven for Hell. These are the
chief feudal Rights of my Crown. This is the Scepter of my Kingdom, and this no
ways undermines Cesar's. Caesar can never be unwilling that his Subjects should
become Virtuous, nor will it be any detriment to his Arms to have his Soldiers
live Soberly and justly, and his people Conscientiously and Obediently. The
very name of Truth is Amiable, and the most Barbarous Nations have a reverence
for it.

Prayer.
O God Eternal and Heavenly Father, who would draw us from Temporal and
Earthly things, which pass away or shall be consumed with Fire, to the Love of
Celestial and Spiritual Joys to be possessed by an everlasting and undefiled
Inheritance; and teach us it is it he highest piece of Wisdom, by despising
the the World to arrive at Heaven; Grant me a true sense of the Vanity of the
Creature, which whosoever cleaves to, shall also become vain himself; and of
all Worldly pleasures which whosoever seeks will become mutable as they; That
I may only admire the excellency of thy Spiritual power raising my Affections
above the Earth, and that seeking for true Riches in thee alone, when I shall
go out of this World Naked and Poor, I may find a Treasury in the Repositories
of thy Bounty, which thou have laid up for them that serve thee.

SECT. XXIV Of Pilate 's first Declaration of Christ 's Innocence.
AS Acts 24.25.
Felix trembled when he heard the Apostle reasoning of Righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment to come; So Pilate taken with the Excellent notion of
Truth, either out of Admiration or Contempt of Jesus, says unto him, John
18.38.
What is Truth? as desirous to know what he had further to say, or rebuking him
for pretending to be more knowing then the Chief Priests, and the expositors of
the Jewish Law, who had delivered him for an Impostor and Traitor. But being
unworthy to be further instructed, who had heard enough already if he would
have believed, and because our Savior would not hinder his passion which was
now begun and to be completed, he receives no answer, and being unable to
condemn him for any thing he had already said or done, he goes out again to the
impatient Jews, and says unto 'em, John 18.38.
I find in him no fault at all.

Pilate, it seems, had more fear of God out of a Natural Notion and common
sense of Justice, then the Jewish people had out of the Law and the Prophets.
And notwithstanding they were very Rich and Powerful, and he might expect
reward or damage from 'em; while Christ on the other side was alone, poor,
forsaken of all, and from whom he could neither expect profit nor detriment; ye
the stands up for him according to the office of a just Judge who should be
free from Avarice and Partiality, and proclaims him faultless as the Matt. 27.3.
Betrayer had done.

But the Jews were a people of whom Ezekiel complains, they were Ezekiel. 3.7.
impudent and hard hearted. And when their Reason, Conscience, Witnesses, and
and all other endeavors had failed; as a furious multitude without any regard
of Shame or Compassion, they grew stronger in clamor and more fierce, Luke
23.5.
saying, he stirs up the People, teaching throughout all Jewry beginning
from Galilee, to this place. Can this man be innocent who comes from Galilce,
the Joseph. de bello jud. l. 3. c. 4.
Nursery of Fierceness and Animosity, where the Rebel Acts 5.37.
Judas began his faction so lately, who taught it to be unlawful to pay tribute
to strangers, and to Joseph. de bello Jud. l. 2. c. 12.
acknowledge Mortal Rulers after God had been their King, and whose Disciples
Luke 13.1.
Blood thou thy self (when they refused to communicate with us, and would offer
part) did mingle with their Sacrifices? Art thou not yet satisfied what
Seditious Fellows these Preaching Galileans are? Is he not sprung from that
Man's Principles? Does he not tend to the same end? And is he not more
dangerous, by how much his pernicious doctrines have spread themselves
throughout all Jewry.

O how deaf is Malice and Envy? How Eternally Insatiable a misguided Zeal? How
restless and unwearied in its designs of cruelty, from which the Judge himself
is not able to deliver? But how much more detestable in the Chief Priests, the
Scribes, and Elders of the People, who ought to be the Examples of the Virtues
they teach? Who can but tremble at the gross Stupidity to which they were given
over for their Sins, that Matt. 13.3. Isai. 6.9.
hearing they should hear and not understand, and seeing they should see and
not perceive? Of so little advantage are all other gifts without grace, they
are nothing worth; they end in Licentiousness, Pride, and Injustice; and lay us
open to the indignation of God, whose great work is to put down the Mighty from
their Seats, and to scatter the Proud in the Imagination of their Hearts.

Prayer.
O Gracious Father of Eternal Charity; never let me have that affection of the
Desperate and Damned, that it should be ill with me when it is well with
others; that I should envy the Prosperity, or traduce the Virtues, or detract
from the Merits, or rejoice at the Affliction, or spitefully upbraid the
Infelicities of my Neighbor: But following the beautiful president of Candor
shining in all the actions of the Bountiful Jesus, I may join in the Holy
Communion of Saints, in the measures of Grace and Glory for ever.

SECT. XXV. Of Christ's being brought before Herod, and the Unhappiness of
Atheistical Greatness.
NOW Pilate was glad to hear of Luke 23.6.
Galilee, for he was desirous to clear himself of this dangerous business,
where he saw he must either condemn the Innocent, or displease the whole Nation
of the Jews. And forasmuch as Herod was his Luke 23.12.
Enemy, and Matt. 14.1.
Tetrarch of Galilee where Christ was Matt. 21 11.
born in Nazareth, and opportunely at Luke 23.7.
Jerusalem, by reason of the Feast, he endeavors to turn him over to him.

And Herod at first as Luke 23.8.
Joyfully received him, for he was desirous to see him of a long season,
because he had heard many things of him, and hoped to have seen some Miracle
done by him. (it was that Herod who had Matt. 14.
beheaded John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, for testifying against his
incest) and now out of a vain Curiosity to see Christ and some of his Miracles
so much famed abroad, and not for any intention to learn the truth of his
Doctrine, he Luke 2^.^.
questioned with him in many words, to which our Savior would answer nothing.
He judged him unworthy so great a satisfaction, who had shed the blood of his
Innocent Servant, and knew his crime and yet persever'd in it, and now sought
after Vanity and not the Truth. Simplicity in Intention, and Purity in
Affection, are the two wings which lift us up from Earth. One intends God, the
other apprehends him. But instead of these, there is a Vain levity in the
hearts of some great Men, who think their Power, Riches, and Honor so many
warrants for Lightness and Infidelity; and that because they are above the
Vulgar, they may mock at what is Sacred; rendering their Religion an empty
Speculation, and their hearts destitute of saving Practice. They may seek for
Miracles, but none shall be given them, but what amazes the rest of the World,
their Execation in common Duties, as a punishment of their Insolency and Pride,
against so many opportunities as their Riches ^^forded them to minister to the
(...) of the Giver. Hereby it come^ (...) that the greatest (...) have oftimes
the (...) Grace of God; and Blood, Spirit, Extraction, and Wealth, are for the
most part but a fair Object where misfortune appears with the greatest
Deformity. The Sun is wont to make his rarest productions in the most unknown
places in the World; and the Spirit of God never works more Miracles, then in
the Souls of those Persons, whom the World knows not, or despises.

Unhappy Herod, where are the Privileges of thy Nobility, and what is the
Advantage of thy Birth, so long as thou leadest a wicked Life? In vain it is
for thee to hope for any thing from Christ, while thy heart is full of Vanity,
Adulteries, and Murders. Christ will not speak, but where the Conscience
hears, and where he finds an Inclination to Truth; nor can he work his Miracles
in those Regions, where infidelity Matt. 13.58.
binds his hands. He would answer to Pilate who had respect for Truth, and in
whom he found some inclinations to Justice; but not to thee, whose Levity,
Profaneness, and continually repeated Crimes, have rendered unworhty of the
Favors of Heaven.

Prayer
O! thou high and lofty one, that inhabitest Eternity, who dwell in the High
and Holy Place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit; Suppress
in thy Servant all proud Thoughts, vain Desires, and wanton Curiosities; and
keep my Soul in an humble frame; that I may be ready to learn, not to dispute
the Mysteries which thou, a God of Truth and Goodness, have revealed. Enlighten
my Blindness; quicken my Dullness; support my Frailties; disperse my Passions;
free me from Prejudices, which hinder my sinful Nature from ascending to thee,
and thy Holy Spirit from descending on my Soul.

SECT. XXVI. Of the Indignity done to Christ by Herod and his Officers.
BUT while the Lamb of God is silent, his malicious Prosecutors grow louder and
louder. The Luke 23.10.
Chief Priests and the Scribes stood and vehemently accused him. They could
bring no other Pretense of Crimes, than what they had done before Pilate; but
hoping to prevail with Herod by Importunity, they repeat and aggravate them
with incessant Noise. And Herod, according to his natural Levity, (the Type of
such as jest at sacred things) a ridiculous Soul, feeble and languishing in the
Relishes of God, asks nothing Seriously, but only derides and makes sport with
him, chiefly because of his Title of a King, which he thought did only properly
belong to Act. 12.1.
himself.

And An evil Prince (says Solomon) has Evil Ministers. As did Herod, so did
his Men Luke 23.11.
of War. They looked upon Christ as impotent and despicable, because he would
work no Miracle before them; and as a Fool, that he would not answer nor defend
himself against their railing Accusations: And therefore put upon him a (...).
Luke 23.11.
white Garment, to signify that he had arrogated Greatness among the People,
(for such the Jam. 2.2. (...).
Nobility of the Jews wore) that all who saw him might take notice of him, Luke
23.10.
and ask, What Fool that was, and whither they were carrying him, and what were
the Reasons of his Disgrace, and thereby draw upon him an universal Contempt.
In this opprobrious manner (as they thought) but indeed the Symbol of his
Purity and Innocence, they sent him * back again to Pilate.

We read he was once weary in his Journey, being subject to the Infirmities of
our Nature he had Heb. 2.16.
assumed, and was forced to John 4.6.
rest himself upon Jacob's Well: And how much more now must he needs be tired,
being thus harassed and afflicted, without Intermission of Travel and Shame? He
had been forced out of the Garden to Annas's House, thence to Caiaphas, and
there tormented all night; early in the morning hurried again to the Council,
from thence to Pilate, from him to Herod, there mocked and set at naught, and
now dragged back again in a ludibrious Vesture.

But had we not sinned, he had not thus suffered; or had he been Guilty, they
had been less enraged. But because he was unlike them, they hated to see him,
and fearing his escape, were more vehemently enflamed.

Nevertheless all this was designed by Providence, that Christ being tried
before so many Judges, might clearly manifest his Innocence to the World; and
that passing through all sorts of Affronts and Scorns, he might Sanctify our
Tribulations, and teach us to endure and suffer our selves to be despised in a
Religious Cause; and when it happens otherwise, to remember our dearest Lord
for a President of bearing it with admirable Simplicity and Equanimity of
Deportment.

Prayer.
O suffering Jesu! thou Doctor of Patience, with humble Sighs I implore thy
Grace, to furnish me with the same Meekness of Spirit; that I may renounce my
Will, and bear with Evil, which cannot be avoided in this miserable World. Let
not the Scoffs of Atheistical and Vain Persons move me any otherwise than to
pity and pray for them; nor any Disgrace or Persecution cast me down while I
suffer with a clear Conscience. For why should I refuse to endure with Patience
Injuries so small in respect of those which thou have willingly undergone for
me; or be loath to be conformable to thy sorrowful Image, who hope to be
assimulated to thy Glorious Likeness? The Sufferings of this Life are not
worthy to be compared with the Consolation thou sendest here, much less with
the eternal Happiness thou promisest hereafter: Only do thou draw me, and make
me able to follow thee, (for the Flesh is weak) and I will submit my head to be
crowned with Thorns, being fully persuaded thou will at last adorn me with a
Caelestial Diadem of Glory.

SECT. XXVII. Of Pilate's second Declaration of Christ's Innocence.
PIlate seeing nothing found in him worthy of Death by Herod, who was best
skilled in the Jewish Mysteries, had a clearer sense of Christ's Innocence, and
of the Malice of his Accusers, than before, and grew more desirous to free him,
being sent back. Insomuch that having called together the Chief Priests and
Rulers, he said unto them, Luke 23.14, 15, 16.
Ye have brought this Man unto me, as one that perverteth the People: and
behold, I having examined him before you, have found no fault in him, touching
the things whereof you accuse him; no nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him, and
lo, nothing worthy of Death is done unto him. I will therefore chastise him,
and release him.

A great deal of stir here has been about this Man, and ye have been instant
with me to condemn him, but have brought no Accusation that amounts to it: and
the Roman Tables have given me no Permission to put to Death an uncondemned
Person, or to condemn an innocent Man. Herod has looked upon him as more
ridiculous than dangerous; and I can find no fault in him. Nevertheless that ye
may not seem thus to have used him, and to have made all this Noise about
nothing, this I will do, I will order him to be chastised after our manner to
Malefactors, and so release him, and clear our selves of him.

This is again the second Testimony Pilate bears to the Innocence of the Holy
Jesus: And if his Innocence, without his Passion had been sufficient to have
satisfied his Father's Anger, incensed against the Sins of Mankind, the Jews
had acquiesced, as well as the Gentiles, in the Judgments of Herod and Pontius
Pilate, and Christ had been no further persecuted to Death. But God would be
pacified in the Nature which had offended; and the Jews were permitted to
increase in their Wickedness, to bring to pass the Redemption of the World.
They accuse him Mat. 27.13.
afresh, laying many things to his Charge; and are so much more vehement, by
how much he appears less Guilty, and they are afraid he may be released.

The Governor in the mean time is surpised with wonder at the unaccountable
Malice of his Prosecutors, and his admirable Patience against their Railing
Accusations, and Contempt of Death, proportionable to his Innocence ( Mat.
27.14.
for he answered to never a word of all their Blasphemies) having never before
met with any Prisoner who would not use all means to defend himself, or desire
Pardon and Deliverance.

But thus he has taught us to lay our hands upon our Mouths, when we suffer for
Righteousness sake, and to yield an absolute Submission to God's Will, which
thinks fit to humble us by Injuries and Defamation; That, believing in him as
the Trier and Judge of hearts, we may know he will in due time suppress our
Persecutors, and exalt us in this or a better Life.

Prayer.
And blessed be God the Father of all Comfort, in whom while we trust, we have
sufficient Confidence to bear up against the Malice of our worst Enemies, and
to lift up our Heads to the Recompense of Reward, which those enjoy Rev. 7.14.
who came out of great Tribulation, and have made their Robes white in the
Blood of the Lamb.

SECT. XXVIII. Of Pilate 's third Declaration of Christ's Innocence, and of the
Scourging of his Body.
NOW there was a Mat. 27.15.
Custom at the Feast of the Passover, in memory of their Deliverance out of
Egypt, for the Governor to release a Prisoner to the People, whomsoever they
desired: And when the Multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he
had ever done unto them, Pilate was in hopes to prevail by this occasion to set
him free, by making it a Favor from them to Jesus, and an Indulgence from him
to their Nation. And the more to induce 'em to it by a fair Opportunity, he
proposes the Choice only between the innocent Jesus, whom he had twice declared
such, and a most notorious Villain called Barabbas, who, Luke 23.19.
for a certain Sedition made in the City, and for Murder, was cast into Prison;
Mat. 27.17.
saying. Whom will ye that I release unto you, Barabbas, or Jesus, which is
called Christ?

But insatiable was the Malice of the Chief Priests and Elders, who Mat. 27.29.
persuaded the Multitude that they should ask Barabbas; and so great the
Execution of the whole Nation, that they all Luke 23.17.
cried out at once, Away with this Man, and release unto us Barabbas.

What was this, but to say, Destroy the Innocent, and give unto us a Traitor
and a Thief; Away with the Prince of Peace and universal Charity, and leave
unto us the Author of Sedition: Put him to Death who has raised up the Dead
before us, and give unto us a known Murderer. And indeed, as they desired, it
has been justly granted 'em. They chose a Robber, and were given up to Plunder:
They preferred a Murderer, and were devoured of the Sword: They begged the
Seditious, and were massacred by one another: (their Misery, during the Siege
under Titus, being greater from themselves within the Walls, than from their
Enemies without.) They rejected their Savior, and found none to deliver 'em,
but were broken to pieces with the Severities of God's Wrath.

Pilate seeing their Obstinacy and Injustice in the Choice, and Luke 17.20.
endeavoring all he can to release Jesus, says unto 'em again, Mat. 27.22.
What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ? If you will have me
give you Barabbas the Murderer, what will you have me do with the innocent
Jesus? With what Justice can I condemn the Guiltless, when I shall have freed
an egregious Malefactor? In desiring Barabbas to be releast, you desire, or
rather force me to release Jesus. What is it therefore that you would have me
do with him?

But these were the wicked Husbandmen, of whom our Savior had Mat. 31.38.
foretold, they should combine to destroy the Heir of the Isal. 5.7.
Vineyard of God; and of whom the Prophets said, Psalm. 140.3.
They had placed the Poison of Serpents upon their Lips. Isai. 5.7.
I expected Justice, and behold a cry Jer. 12.8.
My Heritage is unto me as a Lion in the forest, it cries out against me, and
therefore have I hated it. For thus in the height of their wicked Imprecations
they furiously persecute Christ to his Cross, crying out the more, Mat. 27.22,
23.
Let him be crucified, let him be crucified.

Why, Mat. 27.23.
says the Governor, what evil has he done? and a Exodus 13.21.
third time declares, I have found no cause of Death in him: I will therefore
chastise him, and let him go. When he saw the implacable Rage of the Jews,
neither to be restrained by force nor persuasion, he hoped a lesser Draught of
his Blood might stop the Fury and Rapidness of their Passion; and that by
exposing his Body to Scourges (the Roman Usage to Malefactors) he might avoid
the greater Evil of condemning him to Death; and that when the Jews should see
him so tormented, they would relent in Pity, and their Cruelty abate.

Thus he who clothes all, was despoiled of his Garments, and confounded before
the People, who covers our Confusion; and bound to a Pillar, who went before
them by day in a Exodus 13.21.
Pillar of a Cloud, to lead ^em the way, and by night in a Pillar of Fire to
give them light, to go by day and night that they might escape their Enemies;
and his Body, which was the most sacred Temple of the Deity, torn with vehement
Stripes from unrelenting Hands, till the Pavement was purpled with a Shower of
holy Blood; and his Person, more beautiful than the Sons of Men, wholly
deformed, and hardly to be known; according to what himself had Mark 10.34.
Luke 18.33.
foretold of his being delivered to the Gentiles to be scourged; and the Isai.
53.5.
Prophecy of Isaiah, long before his Incarnation, He was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities, the Chastisement of our
Peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. For if Christ had not
sustained for us this Denudation and Confusion, we could never have been
clothed with the Garment of his Righteousness, or been able to have appeared
unblameable before God's Justice Seat in Heaven.

Behold therefore, O! my Soul, with devout Meditation, this Portion of the
Sufferings of thy wounded Jesus, which was the Wonder and Astonishment of
Heaven and Earth. Behold with what profound Humility and Silence the great Lord
of the World condescends to undergo the Punishment of Slaves. Behold with what
a sweet Patience this innocent Lamb yields to have his Body plowed and furrowed
by merciless Infidels. Behold him naked, helpless and unpitied, whilst the
furious Executioner tears his Skin and tender Flesh with forked Scourges, to
satisfy the Cruelty of a barbarous Multitude.

Prayer.
Grant me, O my God, who have laid such Severities upon thy only and beloved
Son, that I may never think any Austerity, Mortification, or Penance, too much
to be undergone for that great Guilt which I have contracted by my Sins; and
for which it was necessary my Redeemer should thus be punished. And whatsoever
shall be wanting in my Sufferings for the Iniquities I have committed, heal
with the Stripes of this bruised Love, who came to shed his Blood a Ransom for
the World: That owing the Cure and Salvation of my Soul to such an inestimable
Remedy as that, I may for ever Praise thee for thy incomparable Mercy.

SECT. XXIX. Of the Injuries done to Christ by the Roman Soldiers.
AFter this, the Soldiers, who, because of the frequent Seditions and Tumults
of that Nation, were quartered at Jerusalem, and now especially called together
to curb the prodigious Concourse at the Feast; hoping, by an extraordinary and
cruel Officiousness, to receive a liberal Reward from the Jews, whom they saw
so inveterately set against him; take him, and use him in that inhumane manner,
we should hardly believe, were it not faithfully Recorded. They strip him, and
put on him a Mat. 27.28.
Scarlet or John 19.2.
Purple Robe, such as their Commanders used to wear, jeering him by this, as
Herod had done by the white; and when they had platted a Mat. 27.29, 30.
Crown of Thorns, in stead of a Royal Diadem, they put it on his Head; and a
Reed in his Right Hand, for a Scepter: All to signify he had made himself a
King; but that his Kingdom was as weak and vain, as those Ridiculous Emblems of
his Royalty. And they bow the Knee before him, with a contumelious Address, and
mock him with a reproachful Salutation, saying, Hail, King of the Jews. And
then they spit upon him, and strike him with Mat. 27.30.
Reeds, and their Joh. 19.3.
Hands upon his Head, pressing his Temples with a thousand Punctures; and
forcing the Blood under the Crown of Thorns to descend upon his Cheeks, and mix
with his Tears and the loathsome Spittle of the People, till he became truly
what the Prophet had described him Isai. 53.2.
Without form or comeliness, and to those that saw him, there was no Beauty,
that they should desire him.

Prayer.
Whither, O whither, Thou great Martyr of Love, shall thy Humility descend, thy
Piety proceed, thy Compassion extend? I have been proud, and thou art humbled;
I have been wicked, and thou art punished: I that am a lost Man have been the
Cause of all thy Weaknesses and Afflictions. It is thy Love and my Iniquity
which has brought thee thus low. Teach me, I beseech-thee, to apprehend the
Baseness of my Sin in proportion to the Calamities thou have suffered for me;
that I may hate the Cause of thy Sufferings, adore thy Mercy, and imitate thy
Graces. For, Lord, what is thy Servant, that thou should suffer one Stripe,
or the least Irrision, for so poor a Creature? And how great a Misery must it
be, to provoke by Sin so great a Mercy as thou have revealed? But thy Love is
infinite, and I am Dust and Ashes. Let thy Holy Spirit support and sanctify
me, and suffer thy self to become the Object of my present Dolours, that thou
may hereafter be the Fountain of my everlasting Joy.

SECT. XXX. Of Pilate's fourth Declaration of Christ's Innocence.
OUR Savior thus Isal. 53.3.
despised and rejected of Men, bearing our Griefs, and carrying our Sorrows,
Pilate thought it impossible to behold him without Pity, and once more brings
him forth to show him to the People; hoping so sad and miserable a Spectacle
would not only draw Tears from the Eyes of the Beholders, but even Showers of
Blood from their Hearts; and a fourth time publicly declares him innocent, and
that he ought no further to proceed against him, Joh. 19.4, 5.
saying, Behold I bring him forth unto you, that ye may know I find no fault in
him.

Then came Jesus forth, wearing the Crown of Thorns and the Purple Robe; and
Pilate says unto them, Behold the Man.

Let it suffice, O ye Jews, for this Man's Punishment, that he is thus
miserably and opprobriously afflicted: All which has been done to him, more out
of Necessity, than for any Offense made out against him; since after all our
dealings with him, I must confess him innocent, and that I have found no fault
in him.

Behold the Man, whether he be now like a Man, and much less a King, for which
you have so violently accused him. Behold his Robe, is it not of Mockery?
Behold his Scepter, is it not a Reed? Behold his Face, is there any thing there
which may induce the People to run after him and admire him. Behold the Man in
every part, and you will find him so much less than a Man, by how much he has
suffered all these Indignities and an irreparable Disgrace among Men; That
truly he is now the Object of our Pity, and Humanity requires us to sympathize
with his Miseries, which are but so many Instances of our own Mutability, and
silent Appeals to Mercy. Let it suffice therefore, and let us dismiss him. If
you have envied him the Title of a King, you see it has sufficiently dejected
him, and brought him to shame, to a ludibrious Vesture, a Crown of Thorns,
painful Stripes, odious Spittle, and the Contempt of the whole Nation.

But, alas! there are some implacable Spirits in the World, which seem to
partake of the Nature of Devils, and cannot be overcome either by Mildness or
Force, but grow more obstinate, when excited to Pity. When the Chief Priests
and Officers saw Jesus in this Condition, those very Motives which melted
Pilate, served only as Incentives to their farther Rage. Invidious Malice is a
poisoned Gall, the Root of Vices, the Father of Murders, and the Mother of
Death. It is the Rage of the Devil, and the very Soul and Spirit of Apostate
Nature, neither to be pacified with Kindness, nor satisfied with Cruelty.
Little Portions of Revenge do but inflame it, and serve to flesh it up to a
fiercer Violence. Vexed that they had not yet done their Work, they fall afresh
upon the poor Remainders of his Life. And they cried out, saying, John 19.6.
Crucify him, Crucify him. It is not enough to us to see the Blood of his
Face, but we must have that of his Heart too. We are not satisfied to behold
him miserable, but we must see him dying on the Cross. Thou have well done in
Scourging him, now Crucify him: Thou have shown him to us wounded, but we must
see him dead.

Prayer.
Ah! my dear Maker, thou Father of Mercies, whence come these Thoughts into the
Heart of Man, whom at first thou made after thine own Image? And why are we
given up to the Instigations of Satan, the Father of Lies and Original of
Murder; but because we have wickedly departed from thee, and done Despite to
thy Spirit of Grace? O, give us Mildness and Bowels of Compassion one toward
another, especially toward the Afflicted, considering our selves Fellow
Subjects in the same Misfortunes: That in the last day, when we must answer for
what we have done, and our own Mercy shall be the Mat. 25.35.
Measure of our Judgment, thy Mercy may rejoice over thy Justice, and we may be
received into the Joy of our Gracious Lord.

SECT. XXXI. Of Pilate's fifth Declaration of Christ's Innocence.
PIlate astonished at their Inhumanity and Obstinacy, and no longer able to
restrain his Indignation, says, John 19.6.
Take ye him, and Crucify him your selves; for I find no fault in him, and
desire to have nothing more to do in the matter. And this was the Fifth time he
proclaimed him innocent.

As if he had said, If ye will have him Crucified, Crucify him your selves, ye
blood-thirsty and insatiable Murderers: Shall I, because of your Malice,
contrary to all Laws, (by which I am bound to protect) destroy the Innocent?
Shall I be accessory to your Murder, terrified thereto by your Clamours? Am I
to be an Administrator of Hatred and Envy, and to suppress the Just by my
Authority? I will not have my Judgment Seat, nor the Roman Empire, stained with
the Blood of a guiltless Man. I have too far condescended to pleasure you
already, by scourging this poor innocent Person; and if after all he must dye,
take ye him and murder him, since your Religion permits it, and with you it is
a Capital Crime to be innocent. I have no Law for it, and will be clear of this
Injustice.

A Spectacle worthy of the Presence of The Almighty; to see a Magistrate ardent
in Zeal for the Defense of the Innocent and Just, and to bend all his
Endeavors and Force of Courage to strengthen his Arm against the Torrent of
Iniquity, to put off peculiar Interests, and to defend the Truth. It is this
which makes Government easy, and the People to rejoice under it, while wicked
Justicers make sad the World.

Surely they had blushed at this Righteousness of the Heathen, if they had had
the least sense left of Goodness or Religion; but resolved he should never
escape out of their hands, they begin to start a new Accusation. The Jews John
19.7.
answered, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, because he made
himself the Son of God. Before, they had said, it was not lawful for 'em to put
any Man to Death, but now they have a Law rather than he shall escape, and
whatever the Law be, they will make him Guilty of it; which, according to their
Accusation, we may suppose was that of Lev. 24.16.
Blasphemy, or against Deuteronomy. 18.20.
false Prophets, for seducing the People by a pretended Revelation.

Now though the numerous Controversies of the Jews did not concern the Roman
Governors; nor were they moved with the frequent Quarrels arising from the
Disputes of different Sects; nevertheless, when Pilate, who believed the
Descent of the Gods, heard that Saying, whereby they accused him for making
himself the Son of God, he was the more John 19.8.
afraid, and knew not what to determine. He had heard of his Miracles, and was
sensible of his Innocence, and wonderfully taken with his admirable Constancy
and Patience shining throughout his Sufferings; and rationally concluded, if he
were some venerable God, (which all his Actions seemed to declare) it were
unpardonable in him, to give Sentence against him; and therefore he goes again
into the Judgment Hall, and says unto Jesus, John 19.9.
Whence art thou?

But Jesus gave him no Answer in so great a Mystery, who against the perfect
knowledge of his Innocence, had ordered him to be scourged, contrary to
Justice: And this is that Silence, of which the Prophet speaks, Isai. 53.7.
He was oppressed and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he was brought as
a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth. Nor needed he any Defense in respect of himself; for a
good Conscience needs no Apology, and fears neither the Rage of Men nor
Devils. The Gladness of the Just is of God, and in God, and their Joy is of the
Truth alone. He that seeks no Witness for himself without, does show he has
wholly committed himself to God, is of great Purity and inward Confidence: And
they who can so divest themselves from all outward Affection, are blessed in
their Imitation of the Son of God.

But this was a Virtue unusual to Pilate, at whose Tribunal every Prisoner had
ever been ready to make his best Defense, and to elude the Accusations of his
Adversaries; which caused him to admire it more than all the Eloquence of the
World: And therefore he said to Jesus, Speak thou not unto me? know thou
not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? Where
behold the Error of Power and violent Fortune, being advanced into the Seat of
Authority. The wicked Magistrate is puffed up with his Commission, and makes it
the Security of his Injustice; and begins to think his Power unlimited as his
Will; and resolves to do any thing, because he may do something.

Hear therefore the Answer of the Holy Jesus, you who hold the Balance of
Justice in your hands, and with whom God has entrusted the most dreadful of all
his Attributes: For in teaching you whence you have it, he teaches you how to
administer it. It is God's Power, and must be justly executed. Jesus John 19.11.
answered, Thou could have no Power against me, except it were given thee
from above. Mistaken Man, from Dust thou art, and to Dust shall thou return. I
have said, Ye all are Gods, but ye shall Psalm. 82.6, 7.
dye like Men. Sin and Infirmity are of Man, but Righteousness and Power are of
the Almighty. Pilate, thy Sufficiency is from Heaven; and Heaven never intended
to oppress the Innocent; that must be the Product of thy great Imperfection:
And thy Sentencing me to Death, whom thou have so often declared Faultless,
will show thy Weakness and Pusilanimity. For if thou regardest the Power given
thee of God, to be executed among Men, thou should necessarily set me at
Liberty; because the Power from above is just. Thou questionest me for being
the Son of God: And neither all this Band, nor all these Jews, could be able to
take one hair of my head, unless the Will of my Father had decreed me to
suffer. Thy Power over me is neither from Caesar, nor from these, who by their
Clamor seem to strengthen thee; but from the eternal Majesty, who is over all.
It is he who has said, I will Zech. 13.7. Mat. 26.31.
smite the Shepherd: And unless he witheld my Right Hand, and led me with his
Counsel to this purpose; with mine own Arm I should get my self the Victory,
and neither suffer for, nor by the Creatures. Since therefore I am delivered to
thee, (for my Father has delivered me) it is by Divine Permission, and not of
thy Power. Nor is it indeed true Power which thou would exercise over the
Innocent; but Tyranny, Oppression, and Murder. If therefore thou art permitted
to abuse thy Power, yet have thou not whereof to boast, but much to answer for
before the Judge of all Men, Nevertheless, he that delivered me to thee has the
John 19.11.
greater Sin. Judas and the Jews have sinned more than thee: For they have
maliciously and falsely accused me, but thou have often declared me innocent.
What they have done, they have done out of Envy to God's Glory; thou only
actest out of Fear of them. They have despised the Law they have received, and
all the Prophecies which have testified of my coming; but thou art ignorant of
the Law and the Prophets. Thou art misled by their Clamor and Importunity; but
they have hardened themselves in Sin. A false Witness is of the Father of Lies,
who is the Accuser of the Brethren, and watches continually to betray and
calumniate the Servants of God. And by how much the more a Vice partakes of his
Nature, by so much the more it becomes a Vice: In which sense the Sin of this
People equals that, from whence, by singularity of Derivation, the Devil has
his Denomination of an Rev. 12.10.
Accuser. A Judge may proceed wrongfully by Misinformation, and his Ignorance
become a Plea for his Injustice: But a false Witness shall not be Prove. 19.5.
unpunished, and he that speaks Lies shall not escape.

Prayer.
O Judge Eternal! who art the very Truth, and from whose Presence there is
nothing hid; Grant me, I beseech thee, both in Judgment and Testimony, an awful
Reverence of thy impartial Justice; That if I judge, it may be according to
Right; if I bear Witness, I may do it sincerely, in the Uprightness of my
Heart: For none but theu Pure in Heart shall behold thy Face in Glory, which *
consummates the Beatitude of thine Elect.

SECT. XXXII. Of Pilate 's sixth Declaration of Christ 's Innocence, his giving
Sentence against him at the Importunity of the Jews, and the Miseries which
ensued thereupon to their Nation.
PIlate tho a Heathen had learned from the Creatures the Eternal Power and
Godhead of the Deity, and had a lively sense of Sin, and would not willingly
offend his Maker, from whose Goodness he could not but own his Greatness, and
thenceforth John 19.12.
sought to release Jesus. And therefore we may not wonder if our Savior has
taught us, that such a probity shall rise up in Judgment against the sinning
Israelites, and all profane Christians; for the clearer the means of
Knowledge, the the greater the guilt of Obstinacy; and the more unavoidable,
and just the Condemnation.

But when the Jews saw that he feared God, and that he would not pass Sentence
of Death upon him, for making himself his Son, they immediately flew back to
their former calumny, crying out, and John 19.12.
saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesar's friend: Whosoever makes
himself a King, speaks against Caesar. So that if it concern thee not, that he
has Blasphemed our God, the Infinite and Eternal Majesty of Heaven; yet surely
it will concern thee, that he is a Rebel to thy Lord. Thou can not preserve
the Imperial Dignity, under which thou presidest, if thou releasest the
affector of it; and in favoring the Enemy, thou will partak ein his crime.

What will not Jealousy of State do? What will not Tyranny, when Seconded by
evil Ministers, who blow the Coals to devour an Innocent? What a horrible
Monster is a pusillanimous Judge, overborn with Interest, Fear, or Guilt?
Pilate was unable to sustain this charge, foreseeing they would as Maliciously
represent him to the Emperor, as they had accused Christ to him; and knowing
himself guilty of many insolences and Rapines (for he had Philo. de legate. ad
Cajum.
seized on the Corban or Sacred Treasury, and spent it upon an Aqueduct in the
City; nor could all their Petitions divert his Intentions, but his Resolutions
went through theira Blood, to bring in the Water,) he thought by this act to
Mark 15.15.
content the people, if he consented at last that it should be as they required.

Nevertheless having again John 19.13.
brought forth Jesus and himself being seated in the Judgment Hall, upon a high
place or Tribunal made of fair (...). lapidarium.
stone curiously wrought, and for the eminence of it called in the Chaldean
Tongue John 19.13.
Gabbatha, he tries once more before Sentence, if by any means he might
dissuade them from their intended Murder, Saying unto the Jews, John 19.14.
behold your King.

As if he had said, behold the man you have brought unto me, and accused under
the Title of a King: And what can you farther desire against him? Behold he has
been Buffeted, Spit upon, Reviled, Ridiculed Scourged, and Crowned with Thorns,
and thus stands Dejected and Derided before you. Behold this Mock-King: What
harm can he do you? What danger do you fear from such a King, who is not able
to help himself? if he have called himself by that Title, is he not humbled for
it, almost to Death? If he desired to be, or be thought such a one, is he any
other then what the Boys would set up; and so much the worse, by how much he
has suffered? What do ye decree? Are ye satisfied with his punishment? Will ye
release him, and avoid the Evil, his Innocent Blood will bring upon you.

But Malice never wants an evil Tongue. They interrupt him, and without any
reason, cry out, John 19.15.
Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Why says Pilate, Ibid.
Shall I crucify your King? This will redound to your perpetual Disgrace, if
owning him for your King, you shall desire him to be Crucified. To which The
Chief Priests answered, Ibid.
we will have no King but Caesar. Why speak thou so much of a King, as if we
desired any other then the Emperor; our wishes are to be free from that
suspicion, nor will we have this Man, but Tiberius for our Lord.

Alas! Poor humane Nature! How great is the Misfortune, to which thou art
subjected in this Life! We never sufficiently know our own good, till we have
lost it, and it be too late. We fly from that we should seek, and we seek that
we should avoid; and never begin to bewail our losses till they are past
recovery. The Jews might have possessed an inestimable Treasure by the Presence
and Conversation of the Son of God: but choose rather to submit themselves to
an entire Slavery under the Romans, who had subdued their Nation, whom they
hated; which at last they lamented among unspeakable griefs, being cast into
the gulf of unavoidable mischiefs, by the Fury of Joseph de bello jud.
Vespasian and Titus.

While these things were acting at the Judgment Seat, Lucius Dexter Chro. 10.
Ann. Chr. 34.
Claudia Procula the Wife of Pilate (whether she were in part converted to
Christianity; or that it were by the permission of God, for the farther
confirmation of Christ's Innocence, against all the Malicious accusations of
the Jews; or whether it were from the Devil, to hinder, if it were possible,
the passion of Christ, whereby he should be subdued) having been troubled much
in her thoughts because of this Trial (for she could not repose, but Jesus was
in her sleep; she could not speak, but Jesus was on her Tongue; she could not
write but Jesus was under her Pen;) sent to her Husband a speedy Messenger,
saying, Matt. 27.19.
Have thou nothing to do with that just Man: for I have suffered many things
this day in a Dream, because of him.

But neither did this prevail, and the Matt. 27.24.
tumult rather increased, by how much more the Innocence of Christ appeared;
and Pilate was constrained to an involuntary Sentence, to do as they would have
it, though against his Conscience; insomuch that having called for Water and
Matt. 27.24.
washed his hands, to signify in their own Ceremonies he disowned the Act, and
transferred the guilt from himself, being the Minister only of the Law, upon
them as the Jury, who would find against his Judgment; he a sixth time
proclaimed the Innocence of the Holy Jesus, to the confusion of the Jews and
all future unbelievers, saying, Matt. 27.24.
I am innocent of the blood of this just person: See ye to it.

Then answered all the People, Matt. 27.25.
his blood be upon us, and upon our Children.

A most dreadful imprecation! To wish our selves accursed, that we may fulfill
our Malice upon another. And yet how many are there who being embarked with
their Enemies, care not to perish, so that in dying they may glut their Eyes
with the Death of those they hate? An Infernal Malignity, merely Diabolical,
and which Aug. l. 2. de Doctr. Christiana.
defiles the Devils themselves.

How just was it in God to involve that People and their Posterity in
irreparable ruin, according to their own impenitent Desires of Guilt? And yet
how sad is it to consider the Mercies they forfeited, and the evils they
incurred thereby? For Joseph de belio jud. Hegesippus.
Titus Caesar Son of Flavius the Emperor, about eight and thirty years after the
Death of our Lord, utterly overthrew Jerusalem to the ground, with the
slaughter of Ten Hundred Thousand by Fire and Sword, besides innumerable
Numbers that perished by Famine and Pestilence. And about Sixty four years
after that Destruction by Titus, in the time of Adrianus Aelianus the Emperor,
when the Jews rebelled under Benchocah the Pseudomessiah, there were slain
again by the Army of Julius Severus Five hundred thousand of the People,
besides what perished by Pestilence and Famine. And that there might be a final
Extirpation of the ancient City, and the Words of our Savior be fulfilled,
Matt. 24.2.
That there should not be left one stone upon another which shall not be thrown
down, he caused the ruins and Foundations thereof to be dug up, and the
Stones to be broken in pieces, and the ground to be left desolate.

Alas, for Israel the chosen of God! Alas, for Jerusalem the Holy City, and the
most Beautiful Structure in the World! Alas, for the Temple and Sanctuary of
the Lord! How are the people of God become Reprobate, and his own Inheritance
Deserted of him, and broken with such tribulation as was Matt. 24.21.
not from the beginning of the world, to that time, no nor ever shall be?

He drove Back the Waves of the Exodus 14.22.
Red Sea, and suffered 'em to walk between two Waters, as between two crystal
Walls; and why has he drowned 'em in Rivers of Blood, with so horrible a
Slaughter, that in the Siege of their City, the Living sufficed not to bury the
Dead? He Numb. 20.11.
opened the sides of the hard Rocks, to quench their thirst in the barren
Wilderness: And why has he dried up the paths of their Women, who saw their
little ones die in their arms, themselves unable to moisten their lips, unless
it were with the Tears of their Eyes? He showered down Exodus 16.13, 14.
Manna and Quails about their Camp, and by a Exodus 16.19.
daily Providence supplied their wants: And why has he afflicted 'em with such
enraged famine, that the hands of the Mothers slew their Infants, and roasted
'em on Coals to satisfy their Hunger; and the People greedily devoured the
Bodies, Dead partly by Famine, partly by Pestilence? He Deuteronomy. 32.10, 11.
led 'em through the Desert and the waste howling Wilderness, as the Eagle
stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, and bears them on her wings.
And why did he abandon 'em to Eagles and Vultures, which so often made Carrion
of the Flesh of his Children, who were cast over the walls into the ditch of
the City, till it was filled with their putrefaction? He gave them strength as
a consuming Fire, before which all the Nations were but as Straw, their Hearts
Deuteronomy. 2.25.
trembling, and being in Anguish because of them: And why did they become the
prey of the Arms of Infidels? He gave them liberty for an Inheritance, and John
8.33.
freedom from Bondage, as being the Seed of Abraham: And why obtained they not
so much as an honorable Servitude, that there being not Crosses enough to
Crucify 'em, their Enemies reserved 'em for Beasts to devour rather than they
would derive any Service from 'em, and that those who were sixteen years of
age, and under, were sold by Caesar for thirty a penny? He gave them knowledge
above all Nations, and made 'em a Deuteronomy. 4.6.
wise and understanding People, the Admiration of the World, for the Statutes
he had given them: And why are they become Blockish, Idle, and Stupid, with a
perpetual 2 Cor. ^
vail over their hearts? He ordained for 'em the Protection and Assistance of
Angels, and sent 'em Exodus 23.20.
before them to keep them in the way, and to bring them into the place which he
had prepared: And why did those holy Presidents forsake the Temple, crying
aloud, Joseph. de bello. jud.
Let us depart hence? He had destined 'em for Royalty and Deuteronomy. 9.3.
Empire over their Neighbors, and had brought'em into the possesion of a
Blessed Country, a land Deuteronomy. 26.9.
flowing with milk and Honey: And why have they not one Inch of ground now,
especially of that where Jerusalem was formerly built, unless they purchase it
with their Money, only to enjoy it one hour or two in a Year, and to bedew it
with the Water of their Eyes, after they have so often moistened it with their
blood? He established 'em with a Priesthood, an Altar, and Services, such as
distinguished 'em from the rest of the World, and showed 'em to be the peculiar
care of Heaven: and where is the Temple, that Seat of his Holiness? Where is
the Propitiatory, the Table of the Show Bread, the Rationale, the Majesty of
the High Priests, the Comeliness of the Prelates, the perpetuity of Sacrifices?
From whence comes it that it is sixteen hundred years ago since this miserable
Nation goes wandering through the Regions of the Earth, as abandoned into an
Eternal Exile, without Temple, without Priests, without Offerings, without King
or Government?

O God Eternal, how have thou thrown down thy Footstool? O God of Justice, how
have thou made desolate thy Royal Priesthood? O God of Vengeance, how have thou
suffered thine Admirable Sanctuary to be profaned? To what Sin may we
attribute this, but to the neglect of the Essence of the Word Incarnate, and to
that dreadful Imprecation of guilt on the whole Nation, His Blood be upon us
and upon our children? For after the Son of God had shut his Eyes, steeped in
Tears and Blood over the miserable Jerusalem, he never yet has opened 'em to
afford it Mercy.

Prayer.
Great Eye of God, which art ever open upon the Sins of all the Earth, who can
steal from thy piercing rages? Great Hand of God who Thund rest and Lightnest
perpetually over Rebellious Heads, who is able to resist thy Judgments? O
injured Goodness who for the satisfaction of thy Justice, rewardest the
obstinate according to their desires, and returnest the Wickedness of Sinners
upon their Heads, when they have rejected the tenders of thy Grace; since thou
have given up thine own Inheritance to be punished in this World according to
their choice; what will become of those profligate Souls, who have impiously
devoted themselves so frequently to the Devil, and importuned thee to confound,
and damn 'em? If such hideous Punishments to all Posterity have pursued Israel
for having neglected thy Son, in Bonds, Afflictions, Ignominy and Death; What
will become of those, who have dishonored the Lord Jesus in the Chariot of his
Triumph, with all the Glory, Power, Wisdom, and Sanctity of the Universe under
his Feet? Set a watch, O Lord, before my Mouth, and keep the door of thy
Servant's Lips; let nothing proceed thence, but what being in Subjection to thy
Will, and Holy and Harmless in its self, may tend to the Glory of the Kingdom
of Christ, and the Advantage of my Soul. Let me kiss the Son lest he be Angry,
and I perish in mine infidelity. Let me Embrace him in his Abasement and
Exinanition, that he may Crown me in his Exaltation.

SECT. XXXIII. Of the Procession of Christ to Golgotha.
IT was now the Mark 15.25.
third hour, and about the John 19.14.
sixth, or near Noon (For the Jews divided the day into four equal parts, which
they called hours, the first, from Six in the Morning till Nine; the third,
from about Nine to Highnoon; the sixth, from thence to Three in the Afternoon;
the ninth, from Three to about Six in the Evening; and whatsoever was done in
any part of these four spaces, was said to be done in that Hour, and so of the
Night:) when Pilate having washed away (as he thought) the guilt from himself
(tho he did not afterward go unpunished, for he was Euseh. in Eccles. Hist. l.
7. c. 8. Joseph. l. 18. c. 7.
banished to Vienna, where he lived ingloriously, till in despair he Slew
himself,) gave sentence that it should be as they required, und Luke 23.25.
released unto 'em him that for Sedition and Murder was cast into Prison, whom
they desired, but delivered Jesus to their will to be Matt. 27.26.
Crucified.

Then did the Jews, having obtained what they so much desired, and the Roman
Soldiers, who could have no Tenderness for a Person Condemned under the Notion
of a Traitor, pour the full Torrent of their Insolences upon him, Matt. 27.36,
31.
repeating all their former Affronts and Torments, Reviling, Smiting,
Buffeting, and Spitting upon him; till weary of these sad preludiums of Misery,
and to be more seriously cruel, they pulled off from him the Ludibrious Purple,
and put his Matt. 27.31.
own Raiment on him, for his greater confusion before the all people, that he
might more readily be known by 'em, his Face being so Spit upon, Swelled and
Bloody, that he was no longer to be known by that. Only they leave him the
Crown of Thorns, as they thought for the greater aggravation of his Sorrows,
but designed by Providence as an Emblem of his Sovereignty, that Christ being
once Crowned should be a King for ever, nor should evermore any Enemies prevail
against his Kingdom.

Thus was the Matt. 21.38, 39.
Heir led forth of his own Vineyard by these wicked Husbandmen to be put to
Death, the true Sin-offering whose Figure under the Law was to be burnt Lev.
9.11.
without the Camp, as a Thief, a Seducer, a Blasphemer, and a Rebel, Reviled,
Abused, and Cursed of all, according to that of the Prophet, Psalm. 109.22, 24.
I go hence, like the shadow that departs, and am driven away, as the Locust;
I was made also a reproach unto 'em, and when they looked upon me, they shaked
their Heads. He who had delivered 'em from so great Captivities, and from the
Idolatries of Exodus 16.6.
Egypt and Esra. 7.6.
Babylon, and admitted 'em into the Borders of his Sanctuary, is now forced by
'em out of his own Inheritance, and in the company of Thieves dragged to
Slaughter.

O how unlike was this leading forth to that whereby he brought their Fathers
out of Bondage, when he suffered no Man to do 'em Psalm. 105.14, 36
wrong and reproved even Kings for their sakes? He brought them forth also with
Silver and Gold, there was not one feeble person among their Tribes. There has
past but five days, since he was received into the City, more desirable then
the Passover it self; and now he must become a Sacrifice to their detestable
inconstancy. Then he came riding in Triumphant manner, as the Prophet had Zec.
9.9. John 12.15.
foretold of the true King of Sion; now scarcely stands under the weight of
miseries. Then was he accompanied, and adorned by his Disciples; now they are
all fled and absconded. Then were the ways John 12.13. Luke 19.36.
Strowed with Flowers, Palmbranches, and Garments of the People; but now are
his Feet dashed against the Stones. Then did the whole multitude, that went
before and followed, give praise unto God with a loud voice, and to him the
Acclamations due to a Mighty Prince and the Son of the Eternal King, saying,
Mark 11.9.10.
Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: Blessed be the
Kingdom of our Father David, that comes in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in
the highest: but now they cry, away with him, away with him, Crucify him, and
we will have no King but Caesar. And that his passage might be the more
dolorous, they lay upon his Shoulders a ponderous Cross, to add to his pains,
and make the people believe, he was the greatest malefactor that was to suffer
that day.

And he John 19.17.
bearing his Cross went forth.

A great sight. And if beheld with Piety, a great Mystery, in which was
fulfilled that of Isaiah, where he says, the Isai. 96.
Government shall be upon his Shoulders; for the Principality of Christ is his
Cross, whereby he has Col. 2.15.
overcome Hell and Death, and for which God has highly Phil. 2.9.10, 11.
exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name; that at the Name
of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, in Earth, and under the
Earth; and that every Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord to the
Glory of God the Father.

Nevertheless how sorrowful must it be to Christ, thus to depart out of that
City which he had always highly favored, and equaled to the Heavens for Power
and Riches, and over which he had so lately Luke 19.41.
shed a flood of Tears, in compassion of the desolation which should come upon
her? How grievous must it be to support with his bruised Flesh a cross of that
length that it could only be dragged by him (for none would touch the Deuteronomy.
21.23.
accursed tree to assist) and every shock must necessarily create to his
wounded Shoulders, and Head afflicted with Thorns, intolerable pains?

Yet this was the least part of the Cross of Christ, or rather he bore at the
same time a greater, a more grievous, a Spiritual Cross, his Psalm. 22.14.
heart being in the midst of his body like melting wax moulten in the fiery
furnace of Gods wrath: For the Lord Isai. 53.6.
laid on him the iniquities of us all, and he became a Gal. 3.13.
curse for us, (every one being accursed that Deuteronomy. 21.23.
hangs on a tree) that we might be delivered from the curse of the Law, and
be made the 2 Cor. 5.21.
Righteousness of God in him.

Prayer.
O wounded Love, and Prince of the Afflicted, thou barest our Cross with an
invincible Patience, and we Perfidiously shun thine; though thine be temporal and
light to us, and that which thou barest for us, would have crushed us to
Eternity. Thou have taught us, that he that will Matt. 10.39.
save his life shall lose it; and he that will lose it for thy sake shall find
it; grant us therefore, we beseech thee, a suitable resolution, that we may
take up our Cross, and follow thee; and suffer us not to sink under it, nor to
shrink from it. That so we may carefully undergo all the Sacred Acts and
Offices of true Repentance, which is the Cross of Sinners, in imitation of thee
our dear Master, who have suffered for us the utmost malice of Men, and left us
an Example that we should fol-low thy steps.

SECT. XXXIV. Of Christ 's Prediction of the Miseries of the Jews.
NOW all this while there Luke 23.27.
went with him a great company of people, and of Women which also bewailed and
lamented him. Not but that many good Men likewise were concerned on the sad
occasion, whose inward sighs accompanied the Women's Tears; but the Female as
the more contemptible Sex, dared more freely to express their grief before the
Magistrates, which by the Edict of Tiberius was forbidden toward suffering
Malefactors. And the saying of our Savior was fulfilled which he had spoken,
John 16.20.
Verily, verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but the World shall
rejoice. The Chief Priests and their Ministers went joyfully to see him die,
and to fill their Eyes with the Tragic Spectacle; but his Disciples followed
him mournfully afar off: And the pious Women who had believed, and abhorred his
Death, would bewail him Suffering, Dying, and Dead.

Our Gracious Lord regardless of the furious Multitude, and 2 Timothy 2.19.
knowing who are his, turns to these, saying, Luke 23.28.
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for your selves, and for your
Children. For behold the days are coming in which they shall say, Blessed are
the Barren, and the Wombs that never bare, and the Paps that never gave suck;
and so great shall be the Terror, they shall begin to say to the Mountains,
fall on us, and to the Hills, cover us, as if the dreadful Day of Judgment were
then appearing.

Not that it was indecent to bewail his Passion (for humanity commands a
Sympathy, and some pity toward the Sufferings of a real offender, much more
toward the misfortunes of an Innocent Person) But because it was not fit to
bewail him as others, who died not as others die, (for we come to Death by Sin,
but Christ came to Death by Righteousness,) therefore he says, Daughters of
Jerusalem, there is no necessity you should weep for me who have long since
been prepared to go this sad procession. I suffer not this for my own Sins:
And, what you are Ignorant of, this my end will bring Joy to the whole World.
Such Grief becomes not those who Triumph, nor is Lamentation suitable to
Victory. But if your tenderness must vent in Tears, you have reason to shed
abundance for your selves and your Posterity, to avert (if possible) those
Dreadful Judgments which hang over this City and Nation. For behold those
adverse times are coming, when Men as well as Women, Young and Old, Rich and
Poor, shall be reduced to such streights, that they shall wish they had never
been Born, nor ever had Sons or Daughters. Yea so great shall be the
afrightment, that ye shall wish your selves under the Earth rather than upon
it, in the Bowels of the Mountains, and the Caverns of the Hills, least any one
should see, or find you out. For if they do these things in a Luke 23.31.
green tree, in me and my Disciples: What shall be done in the dry? If I who
have done Heb. 4.15.
no Sin, who am the John 15.1.
living Vine, and the John 6.35.
bread of Life, pass not out of the World without this fiery trial: What shall
become of those who are void of all fruit, who are near to Heb. 6.8.
cursing, and whose end is to be burned? If Judgment begin at the House of God,
and all that will live Godly shall suffer persecution: What shall be the end of
them that obey not the Gospel?

Ah, my dear Reader, how Quick and Powerful, how Sharp and Piercing is this
word of God, even to the dividing asunder the Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow: What a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the Heart?
How shall God punish us for our own Sins, who is so wrathfully displeased with
our Redeemer, for the Sins which are none of his? If Christ his Obedient Son
were thus grievously Afflicted, how shall his Rebellious Servants hope to
escape unpunished? And what must the Reprobate undergo in the day of Judgment,
if such be the sufferings of the best beloved? Oh the infinite anger of God! Oh
the inestimable rigor of his Justice, who is thus enraged against his only
Son, his beloved Son, his Son the partaker of his Essence: And that not for his
own Sin, but because he interceded for Sinners! What will become of the
polluted Soul, which continues still to go on securely in Sin; when the
Immaculate Jesus is thus tormented? Let the Creature fear, which has Crucified
the Creator. Let the Servant tremble who has slain his Lord.

Prayer
O thou Great God of Power and Mercy, whose Lightning Flashes preceed the
Thunder, to give warning of thy Wrath, and Terror to the Universe; and who
never punishest Sinners without premonition; let thy sore judgments threatened
against others, and at last inflicted on 'em because of their Obstinacy, waken
our Souls out of their Sinful security, to a due consideration of those means
which may avoid them: that we turning from our Sins, thou may turn from thy
fierce anger, and leave a blessing, and we Perish not. For if the present
punishments of the Impenitent, are the forerunners of the Eternal Torments to
be inflicted on 'em in Hell; thy Temporal Mercies toward returning Sinners
shall be their assurances of they everlasting Favors.

SECT. XXXV. Of the Bitter Potion given to Christ at Golgotha.
WHile Jesus was thus painfully Traveling in the way (either because they
thought he went too slowly under the weight, and their fury was impatient of
any delay; or that they feared he might Faint and Die and Frustrate the cruel
end and shame they had designed; or that they would reserve his Spirits for his
greater Torture) having found a man of Cyrene, Matt. 27.32.
Simon by name, him they compelled to bear his Cross, a person by Providence
Mark 15.21.
passing the road at this juncture, and his name by interpretation signifying
Obedient as if God would thereby teach us that none can bear it profitably, but
such as are attentive, and submissive to his Will; and that he will not suffer
the faithful to be temptea 1 Cor. 10.13.
above their ability, but together with the temptation give a means to escape.
There were also two Malefactors led with him to be put to Death, for his
greater disgrace and increase of Grief, by dying in their Company, after he had
first seen them struggle in the pangs of Death before him.

At last they came to Mark 15.22.
Golgotha, which is the same with Luke 23.33.
Calvary, a mount on the West side of the City, and by signification the place
of a Scull, for being the common place of Execution, there lay the Bones of
such as before had Suffered, the Frightful remains of what the ravenous Birds
or Beasts had left of their devoured Carcasses; a place among the Jews of the
greatest impurity, for none might touch a dead body and be Number. 19.11.
clean, much less the Bones of a cursed Malefactor, and such was every one that
Deuteronomy. 21.23.
hanged upon a tree; nor was any thing thought by 'em to give a greater
Contagion of Pollution, then the 1 King. 13.2. 2 King 23.16.
burning Men's Bones upon what they intended to profane. Nevertheless our
Savior who had himself also Matt. 23.27.
represented the abominations of the Hypocrites by these Emblems of defilement,
would descend himself to the extremest impurities, that the might sanctify
and cleanse whatsoever was impure; and by humbling himself teach us the true
way to Glory. So different are the ways of Christ from those of the World,
which aims at high things by hasty ascents, and the more it is lifted up, falls
with the greater ruin: But Christ would be dignified by the lowest abasement,
and by how much more he emptied himself and became poor for our sakes, by so
much more he was exalted to Glory by the Father; and has left us an assurance
of the Truth of that remarkable sentence, Luke 14.11.
Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself shall
be exalted.

Here, being wearied and almost spent with a sleepless night past in shame and
vexation, a sorrowful morning of continual hurry from one judicature to
another, pain of cruel scourging and venomous Thorns, barbarous Insolences,
the weight of the Cross, and his tiresome ascent to the Theater of his Death,
they offer him something to Drink out of a feigned compassion, as if they would
now commiserate his Griefs. But alas, the tender Mercies of the Wicked are
Prove. 12.10.
cruel, it was Matt. 27.34.
Vinegar with Gall, or Mark 15.23.
Wine mingled with Myrrh, a nauseous Potion, which they had prepared to mock
his thirst, and to stay and Afflict his decaying Spirits. not thinking they
were at the same time giving Testimony to his Truth: For the Psalmist had long
before predicted in his Person, that they should give the Messiah Psalm. 69.21.
Gall to eat, and when he was thirsty, Vinegar to drink. But our Savior having
tasted thereof would not Matt. 27.34.
drink.

Go now Intemperate and Luxurious Sinner, who art strong in Wine and Valiant in
excesses, cloth thy self in Purple and fine Linen, and fare sumptuously every
day; while the Holy Jesus among dead Men's Bones, and the greatest Impurities,
condescends to taste the bitter Antidote of thy debauches. But remember the
answer of Abraham, in whose Bosom the once poor Lazarus then lay satisfied, to
Dives the Glutton tormented in Hell Flames, and desiring a drop of Water to
cool his Tongue, Lake 16.25.
Son, thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus
evil things: but now he is comforted and thou art tormented. Temperance is a
purgative Virtue of the Soul, and exalts the Spirit by subduing the Body; Is
the Mother of good thoughts, and leads us to God, by a due consideration of our
latter end, when we must leave all that we have enjoyed, and render an account
of the right use or abuse of 'em, And surely if the Romans 8.18.
Sufferings of this present Season are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
which shall be revealed hereafter; then the Religious forbearance of Temporal
contentments can bear no proportion with the enjoyment of God, in whose Psalm.
16.11.
presence is the fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore.

Prayer.
O Gracious Lord, who lived'st Abstemiously, and denyed'st thy self all
refreshment in the greatest necessity, and thirsted'st for me that I might
thirst after thee; Let all my Appetite be only for thee, who art the John 6.35.
bread of Life which came down from Heaven, and the Fountain of living John
4.10.
Waters, of which whosoever drinks shall be an everlasting John 7.38
Spring himself, never dry, but filled Eternally with the dew of thy Exuberant
Love.

SECT. XXXVI. Of the Crucifixion of Christ.
THE Evangelists having attended our Lord to Mount Calvary, are very short as
to the cruel Circumstances wherewith he was nailed to the Cross, and only Matt.
27.35. Mark 15.25. Luke 23.31. John 19.18.
say, they crucified him there: For our Tears are most suitable to this part of
the Passion, which none can be able fully to express; and our powerfullest
Eloquence on this Subject will be the Threnody of a broken Heart. Nevertheless,
in expressing so little of the manner of it, they have left us much to be
thought on with most passionate Reflections.

They force the Garments from his wounded Body, and every Scourge now bleeds
afresh; while the hasty avulsion of the coagulated Blood causes in his tender
Flesh intolerable Pain: Besides, the exposing his naked Body added to it the
highest Indignity of Shame in the Interpretation of his barbarous Enemies, who
thought it so great an Ignominy to those that died to expose their Bodies to
the view of the people, that where the Bodies of the dead were out of the reach
of their Adversaries, they thought it most highly opprobrious to their Ghosts,
to take but their representation and affix it to a Cross.

His Body thus denudated, but still crowned with Thorns, to add Terror to his
unspeakable Grief, they prepare the Cross before his Eyes, the Altar on which
the Lamb of God was to be sacrificed, but among the Jews the Deuteronomy. 21.23.
accursed Tree. (Not that Suspension was any of the Capital Punishments
prescribed by the Law of Moses, or that by any Tradition or Custom of the Jews
they were wont to punish Malefactors by that Death; but such as were punished
with Death among them, were, for the Enormity of their Fact, oft-times after
Death, exposed to the Ignominy of a Deuteronomy. 21.22.
Gibbet, and those being so hanged, were accursed by the Law.) Among the
Gentiles it was the worst of Deaths, the Punishment of Slaves, and of the most
desperate Persons in the World. For the Death of a crucified Man was the most
continual Languishing, and Tearing a Soul from the Body with most exquisite
Violence and Agony; in that the Hands and Feet, which of all Parts of the Body
are most nervous, and consequently most sensible, were pierced through with
Nails; which caused not a sudden Dispatch, but a lingering and tormenting Death:
Insomuch that the Romans, who most used it, have thence deduced their
Expressions of Cruciation or Pain: And their Emperors which were naturally of
any merciful Disposition, first caused such as were adjudged to Crucifixion, to
be slain, and then to be nailed to a Cross.

Now though Christ were not to die by the Sentence of the Jews, who had lost
the supreme Power in Causes capital, and so not to be condemned to any Death
which was contained in their Law; yet the Providence of God did so dispose it,
that he should suffer that Death which did contain in it that ignominious
Particularity to which the legal Curse belonged, which was Deuteronomy. 21.23.
hanging on a Tree: That he might become a Curse for us, and abolish in his
Flesh the Ephesians. 2.15.
Enmity, even the Law of Commandments, blotting out the Col. 2.14.
Handwriting of Ordinances which was against us, and which was contrary to us,
nailing it to his Cross. So truly did he make himself of no Reputation, and
took upon him the Phil. 2.7.8.
Form of a Servant, and humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even
the Death of the Cross, a servile Punishment of the greatest Acerbity, enduring
the Pain; of the greatest Ignominy, despising the Shame.

Having cast him on the Wood with great Immanity, with the same Violence they
snatch his Left hand, and nail it; forcing the Flesh together into the Tree.
But the Sinews contracting to one another help, and the Right hand not
reaching the appointed place, they proceed by cruel Acts, increasing Torment,
to strain it thither with their utmost Force, till after many Trials, with
great Difficulty, they nail it also to the transverse Beam.

Afterward in like manner they pierce his Feet, and draw and expand 'em till
all his Joints are loosed, and the Nerves, Veins, Fibers, and Bones of his
whole Body, are easily to be numbered, according to that of the Psalmist, They
Psalm. 22.77.
pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all my Bones: For the Nails being
driven in the most sensible Parts of the Body, where the Nerves and Bones meet
in that manner that they cannot be separated without exquisite Torment, they
never left their torturing Activity, till by their dolorous Impressions they
had forced his Death.

Thus were those powerful hands extended in Misery, which so lately had cured
the Luke 7.21.
Blind and Mark 7.35.
Deaf, cleans'd the Luke 17.14.
Lepers, raised them that were fallen, and loosed them that were bound of Mark
5.15.
Satan. Thus were those adorable Feet transfixt with Nails, which had gone
about doing continual Good, and to which the Mat. 14.26.
Seas had given themselves for a Pavement, and Peace preceeded whithersoever
they went. Thus was that Sacred Body hung upon the Wood, naked, and exposed to
all manner of Shame and Torment, in which all the Col. 2.3.
Treasures of Wisdom and Power were hid. Thus was that Face, more beautiful
than the Sons of Men, which comforted the Afflicted, and the Light of whose
Countenance the Fathers and Prophets had so much desired, changed into the
Paleness and Horror of Death.

What have thou done, O Beauty above all Beauties, and how have thou deserved
this, most amiable Love, that thou art thus exposed, vilified, and tormented?
What is thy Crime, and the Cause of all thy Grief? What is it that has laid
thee on the Altar of the Cross, naked, bleeding, tortured, and dying? Is it not
as the Holy Isai. 53.
Prophet long since declared, That thou should be smitten and numbered among
the Transgressors, That thou should pour out thy Soul to Death, That thou
should be cut off from the Land of the Living? and all for the
Transgressions of the People? The Lord has laid on thee the Iniquities of us
all. Thou art wounded for our Transgressions. Thou art bruised for our Sins.
The Chastisement of our Peace is upon thee; and by thy Stripes we are healed.

We complain of the Jews Malice, of Judas's Treason, of Pilate's Injustice, and
the Romans Cruelty; but we are among thy Crucifiers, and ought to look nearer
home. Our Treachery was the Judas which betrayed thee; our Covetousness sold
thee to thy Enemies; our malignant Envy accused thee; our Perjury was the false
Witness against thee; our Injustice the Pilate that condemned thee; our Pride
scourged thee; our Lusts crowned thee with Thorns, and pierced thy Sacred Hands
and Feet with Nails.

We, we then are the Cause of all thy Grief, We are the sole Authors of these
sad Calamities. We have eaten the sour Grapes, and thy Teeth are set an edge,
And shall we now give up our selves to Mirth, while thou weepest, suffer,
and thirstest? Shall we court Pleasures, and pursue them with greediness,
whilst thou art hanging and languishing on the Cross? Shall we anoint our
Heads, and spend our precious time in the vain adorning of our Bodies, whilst
thou art horrible with Spittle and Blood? Shall we commit Wickedness with both
hands, and our feet be swift to shed Blood, while thine in the mean time are
fastened to the Wood, and bleed? And shall we crown our Heads with Flowers and
Garlands, while thine is surrounded with the sharpest Thorns? Or shall we, by
repeating all this, Crucify thee afresh, and put thee to an open and continual
Shame?

Prayer.
O Gracious Lord! who came to cleanse it by thy Blood, put an end by thy
Grace to the Contagion of Sin. Heighten our Apprehension of the Guilt of our
Transgressions, by making us sensible of the Greatness of thy Sufferings. For
certainly they had deserved eternal Confusion, for whom it was necessary thou
should be exposed to shame, that they might never be confounded: And their
Impurities were great indeed, which could not be cleans'd, but by thy
immaculate Blood.

SECT. XXXVII. Of the Exaltation of the Cross.
IT cannot be thought but the Ministers of the Jewish Malice would use all the
Circumstances of Rigor and Cruelty, toward a person, whose Death they had so
earnestly desired: Insomuch that having first most barbarously hung the
Thieves, who were to suffer with him, on either side, that the Apprehension of
their Miseries might increase his Torment; they at last, with great Shouts and
much Officiousness, erect his Cross also into the Air, in order to put it into
its proper Station: Which being a hole cut deep in the Rock, capable to receive
the Foot of the Cross, when they let it sink in with a sudden impetuosity, the
violent Concussion gave infinite Torture to the torn Body of our Lord, resting
now only upon four great Wounds; so that all his Joints are loosed, his Inwards
tremble, and the Wounds of his Hands and Feet are opened, according to that of
the Prophet, I am Psalm. 22.14.
poured out like Water, all my bones are out of joint. My heart also in the
midst of my body is even like melting wax.

Here it was that burst forth the River of our Paradise, the Fountain of the
Blood of our Blessed Redeemer, from the place of Pleasure, the Body of our
Lord, dividing it self into four parts, from the several Wounds of his hands
and feet, and thence descending and watering the whole Earth, and washing away
the Sins of all true Believers; the Fountain of the Zec. 13.1.
Prophet which was to be opened to the House of David and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for Purification of their Uncleanness. And may this precious Blood
of the Lamb of God, slain intentionally for this purpose before the Rev. 13.18.
Beginning of the World, soften the hardness, moisten the dryness, and make
fertile the barrenness of our Hearts; that they may be capable of those
inestimable Benefits he has purchased for us by the Effusion of it.

In this also was fulfilled his own Predictions which he had made concerning
the manner of his Death, That as Moses Joh. 13.14. Numb. 21 9.
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, by looking on which the People that
were bitten of fiery Serpents were restored and lived; so he the Son of Man
should be up, that whosoever believes in him, though wounded with the Infernal
Serpent, should not perish, but have everlasting Life: And again, When I am
Joh. 12.32.33.
lift up, that is, crucified, it being an Elevation or Lifting up on the Cross,
I will draw all Men unto me, Gentiles as well as Jews, to believe on me.

Prayer.
Be it so, my Jesu, O draw me to thy self; and by the Eye of Faith, let me ever
behold thee, as suffering for me, that I may ever love thee. But alas, while I
now seek thee, I can represent to my Thoughts nothing but the Shadow and
Appearance of a Body all crusted over with gore Blood. I look for Limbs, but
find nothing but Wounds. I look for the Ensigns of a glorious Redeemer; I
discern only a Skin all bloody, fastened to a Cross between two Thieves, and
struggling under the Convulsions of Death.

But O, Eternal Father, that which has made thy Son thus vile and wretched in
the Eyes of the World, has made him most precious and acceptable in thy sight.
Look down, we beseech thee, from thy Sanctuary, and thy Dewlling Place in
Heaven, and behold the Sacrifice which our great High Priest and thy holy Child
Jesus offers unto thee for the Sins of his Brethren, and be favorable to the
Multitude of our Iniquities. Behold the Voice of our Brother's Blood crying
unto thee for Mercy upon us. Behold the Lamb who is without Blemish, now
bearing our Sins in his Body upon the Tree; and look not upon us as we are in
our selves, but in the face of thine Anointed, who becomes thus obedient unto
Death, to deliver us from the Guilt of Disobedience: And let not the Scars of
his Wounds ever depart from before thy Presence, that thou may ever be
mindful, in all our Transgressions, how great a Ransom he has paid for us; and
let his Blood be as the Rainbow in thy sight, ever about thy Throne in Heaven,
that thou may no more destroy every living thing. Behold, O Creator, the
Humanity of thy Son, and be ever merciful to the Debilities of our Nature.
Behold the torn Members of thy beloved, and remember our Substance, that we are
but Dust. Behold the Sufferings of the Redeemer, and forgive the Sins of the
Redeemed.

SECT. XXXVIII. Of the Situation of Christ's Cross between two Thieves, and
the Title which Pilate affixed to it.
BUT it was not enough for the cruel Jews to murder the Messiah by the
painfullest kind of Death, unless they might stain his very Passion too, by
placing him in the John 19.18.
midst of two egregious Malefactors, which, for his greater Disgrace, they had
brought to suffer with him; that by Strangers he might be thought to be a
Partaker in their Crimes, if not the worst of all, by his Station between them;
and so it might be reported in the Neighboring Regions, That three notorious
Villains were that day Crucified at Jerusalem, of which the Impostor that went
by the Name of Jesus was, as being the chief, placed in the middle; whereby the
Scripture was fulfilled, which says of him, And he was reckoned among the
Isai. 53.12.
Transgressors.

Nevertheless, there were some Reports went of the Purity of his Doctrine, the
Greatness of his Miracles, the Sweetness of his Conversation, and the Beauty of
his Person; above all, the present view of his Sufferings, and admirable
Patience and Clemency toward his Crucifiers, filled the Hearts of many with
heavy Sighs, and their Eyes with an Inundation of Tears. And Pilate, among the
rest, who best knew his Innocence, and that for Mat. 27.18.
Envy he was delivered and condemned, pricked in his Conscience, and fearing
the Consequence, lest he might be defamed or accused to Caesar for consenting
to the Death of such a wonderful Person without declaring the Cause of his
Condemnation, (according to the Custom of the Romans toward Malefactors)
ordered his Accusation thus to be written, and to be fastened to the top of the
Cross, John 19.19.
Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews; that a Rumor at least might pass, he
was not put to death as a Prophet of the Jewish Nation, or as the Son of some
immortal God, but as a Spreader of Sedition among the People, and one who
affected a Kingdom in Jewry: For so they had accused him; Luke 23.2.
we found this Fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give tribute to
Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King: And when Pilate sought to
release him, they cried out, saying John 19.12.
If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: Whosoever makes himself
a King speaks against Caesar.

This was the meaning of Pilate by the Title, whereby he Thought to signify
the Cause of his Condemnation. But as in the Prediction of Caiaphas concerning
his Death, the Spirit of God had another Intention, different from the Design
of the High Priest; so likewise in this, besides what Pilate thought, as well
as in the Mock-Purple, the counterfeit Scepter, and the bloody Diadem of
Thorns, which were mystical Representations of a real Kingdom, there was
intended him a Name and a Kingdom without end, and he was signified to be the
true Messiah, the King both of Jews and Gentiles, whose Zech. 9.10. Psalm.
72.8.11.
Dominion should extend from one Sea to the other, and to whose Scepter the
Kings of the Earth should submit their Majesty.

That this might be more manifest to the whole World, it was directed by
Providence in the Joh. 19.20.
three chief Languages; in Hebrew, because of the Jews, who gloried in the Law;
in Greek, because of the Wisemen and Philosophers of the Gentiles; in Latin,
because of the Romans, who then governed the Jews: That it might be known
throughout the whole World, that almighty God had anointed this Jesus to be a
King over all Nations; and the Dan. 7.14.
Prophecy of Daniel might be fulfilled, which says, There was given him
Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages,
should serve him: his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

The Jews therefore envied him this Title, lest every Tongue should confess
afterward that he was the Lord, to the Glory of God the Father; and desired
Pilate that it might be John 19.21.
altered, or abolished: For they were now ashamed, because it might be thought
by Strangers, this was their King, who was so ignominiously put to Death. But
neither did John 19.22.
Pilate endeavor to alter it; nor would the Divine Providence suffer it; this
Title being given him by the Will of God.

Prayer.
O King eternal, who for the Humiliation of thy Beloved, and his Obedience unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross, has highly exalted him, and given him a
Name which is above every Name: That at the Name of JESUS every Knee should
Phil. 2.9, 10, 11.
bow, of things in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth; and that every Tongue
should confess, That Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father:
Grant, we beseech thee, Conversion to Infidels, to all Jews, Turks and
Heretics, that thy way may be known upon Earth, thy Saving Health to all
Nations; and that they submitting to the Kingdom of thine Ancinted, and living
in Obedience to his Holy Gospel, may be saved with the Remnant of the true
Israelites, and all that confess him to intercede for us at the Right Hand of
thy Majesty in Heaven.

SECT. XXXIX. Of the Partition of Christ 's Garments and the Irrision of the
People.
IN the mean time the Soldiers who had nailed him to the Cross, and done the
cruel part which belonged to their Office, took his John 19.23, 24.
garments (and made four parts, to every Soldier a part) and also his coat:
Now the Coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. They said
therefore among themselves, let us not rent it, but cast lots for it whose it
shall be: that the Scripture might be fulfilled which says, Psalm. 22.18.
They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots.
These things therefore the Soldiers did.

And what could they do more? They handled him most Barbarously, to please the
cruelty of his Bloody Persecutors; They had nailed him to the Cross to make
sure of Death, which the Chief Priests had so much desired; That they had
seized the poor spoil of his dying body, more out of lust then any great
Advantage, to show and boast of it afterward to their Companions. And now they
seem to be at a loss how to torment him further.

When behold (least any kind of Ignominy should be wanting to the lamentable
acerbity of his Death) the insulting multitude, in a malicious derision, call
upon him to save himself. Mark 15.29.30, 31, 32.
And they that passed by, railed on him, wagging their heads and saying, Ah
thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy self,
and come down from the Cross. Likewise also the Chief Priests mocking, said
among themselves, with the Scribes, He saved others, himself he cannot save,
Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the Cross, that we may see and
believe. Matt. 27.43.
He trusted in God; let him deliver him now if he will have him: for he said, I
am the Son of God.

It is a Divine thing to Sympathize, and Humanity requires pity toward a real
offender, because we are all subject to the same infirmities; but much more
toward the Sufferings of an innocent Man: and cruel mockings to an Afflicted
person are as so many darts adding torture to the Soul, into whose wounds we
should rather pour the Balsom of the most tender and compassionate Speeches.
For who knows how soon (if left of God) he may stand in need of the same
commiseration?

But his inhumane Murderers were not satisfied to have loaded him with
reproaches during his Trial and after sentence, unless they prosecute him to
the very grave, and when his light is set, eclipse his Fame. The pains of his
body they thought too little, unless they might vex his departing Soul: herein
exercising a malice purely Diabolical, to pervert him from God in his last
conflict. They are no longer able to reach his Body with their Hands, and now
they would blast his Soul with their infectious Breath, heaping together in one
whatsoever before they had accused him of, or now would have the ignorant
People believe: to root out the credit of his Miracles and Doctrine, and to
imprint in the Multitude a disbelief of his Truth. As if they had said, ye see
now, (and nothing can be more plain) what a notorious Seducer and Impostor he
was, who pretended to save others and cannot save himself; and how little
reason we have to believe his commission from God, who is thus deserted, and
disowned by him: For he is the God of Glory and not of Infamy, the God of Life
and not of Death. And can he be any other then accursed of his Maker, who dies
this accursed Death, for cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree? Or will
God redeem his People by such an accursed wretch? In this therefore were
fulfilled those several Prophecies, Psalm. 35.15, 16.
In mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea the
very abjects came together against me unwares, making mows at me, and ceased
not. With the ffatterers were busic mockers who gnashed upon me with their
Teeth. And again, Psalm. 3.2.
Many one there be that say of my soul there is no help for him in his God.

But God forbid that to prove himself the Messiah, Christ should have descended
from the Cross. He might easily have done it, and the Devil would have been
glad of it, for then the great work of Our Redemption had been hindered; whereas
now the grand accuser of our Elder Brother, and all his evil Ministers have
labored in vain to suppress the Glory of out Lord. For the more they have
endeavored to diminish it, the more it is increased, and and spread abroad in
the World. They derided him before Cajaphas, Pilate, and H^rod; They bound him
as a Thief, and represented him as a Traitor; They spit upon him as a Toad, and
thirsted for his Death, and to effect it preferred a Murderer; They Buffeted,
Mocked, and Crowned him with Thorns; They loaded him with his Cross, Crucified
him between two Thieves in the most Ignominious and Public place; They envyed
him the very Title under which he Suffered; and now all together, Chief
Priests, Rulers, Scribes, Elders and People, and all that had any occasion to
pass by or curiosity to come thither, (except some few faithful) exclaimed upon
him, and slandered him, to obscure him in perpetual Oblivion.

But God has confounded all their Malice, and the more they have contemned him,
has Glorified him the more, and Acts 5.31.
exalted him with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior for to give
repentance to Israel and forgiveness of Sins, and given him a Phil. 2.9.
name above every name, to be adored by every creature.

Prayer.
O God the Father, Merciful and Gracious, whose pleasure it is we should
confess thy Holy Child Jesus to be the Prince and Savior of the World; I
Beseech thee, root out of my wavering heart all Scruple, Irreligion, and
Profaneness; and from my Tongue Dispute and Blasphemy: That whatsoever he has
taught to be believed I may embrace, whatsoever he has commanded to be done I
may practice, and in the ways of the Cross, which he has sanctified, I may
follow him. Lighten mine Eyes with the beams of that liberty which thou
grantest to thy Children of serving thee in full assurance of Faith, that I
sleep not in the Death of Sin. Call back my thoughts from their frequent
wanderings in those barren Regions where the Truth is doubted, and fix me by
thine infinite Grace and Mercy, that I may ever adore and love thee through my
Crucified Lord.

SECT. XL. Of Christ 's Intercession to the Father for his Crucifiers.
OUR Blessed Savior was now in the greatest Agonies to which the Actions or
Slanders of his Enemies could reduce him, and when they had spent all the
poison of their lips that they were now reduced to an involuntary silence; He,
that he might leave nothing undone which might magnify his Mercy above all
their provocations and to give an undeniable proof of his Ministry that he
came to reconcile the World to God, broke into this most admirable intercession
for them, Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them for they know not what they do.

O God! O Goodness! O Love! What Word, what Speech, what Voice is this? He was
not more sensible of the madness of the People, then he was compassionate of
their infirmities, nor grieved with their Malice so much as Merciful to their
Sins. Hitherto they had objected against his being the Messiah, and now he will
give them an undoubted demonstration opposing himself by Prayer to the Anger of
his God.

Heavenly Father, whose Honor I have observed, whose Commandments I have
fulfilled, and at whose Will and Pleasure I was sent into the World; and being
of thy substance took humane Nature, to be a Pacifier, Intercessor, and
High Priest, to make reconciliation for the Sins of the People; who now hang
bleeding and dying upon the Cross, in the midst of so many Reproaches,
Torments, and Griefs, offering up my self to thee in Tears and Cries for the
Sins of all whoever offend thee; Spare thy people, Good Lord, spare them, and
wash away their Sins in my propitiatory Blood.

Adam transgressed and his posterity became abominable, and the whole World
lies in wickedness: Even thine own Inheritance which thou have chosen out of
all People, and loved above the rest of the works of thy Hands, have added this
weight to the guilt of all their Sins, to deny the Holy one whom thou have
sent, and to spill my innocent Blood upon the Earth: For how great is my
Dignity which they have set at naught? How infinite is thy Majesty they have
despised in me?

Nevertheless though hitherto thou have justly dealt with Man in shutting Heaven
against his transgressions, and opening Hell, and sending Death into the World;
nor should thou ever justly spare, without satisfaction to thy Eternal
Justice, nor could all the Blood of Men make that atonement; yet now behold me
who am come to satisfy thee by the dignity of my Divinity joined to the nature
of offending Man. Man's Salvation depends on me, on me alone, who came an exile
hither from those Essential Joys I had in thy Bosom, to suffer Cold and Heat,
Hunger and Thirst, Nakedness and Weariness, Watchings and Temptations,
Afflictions, Persecutions, and this cruel Death. What Griefs, what Torments
have I not endured in this tender body of Flesh? What Sorrow, what Streights,
what Agonies have I not experienced in this frail constitution of Mortals? Was
there ever any grief like mine, wherewith thou have afflicted me in thy fierce
anger? What remains then, O Father of Mercies, who have Exodus 34.6.
proclaimed thy self Gracious, Long-Suffering, and abundant in Goodness and in
Truth, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin; but that thou should lay
aside thine Anger, Remit, Pardon, and Pour forth thn Grace.

My Blood cries not for Vengeance, as Genesis 4.10. Heb. 12.24.
Abel's did against his Murderer; nor do I appeal to thee now as a Judge, but
as to a Father, I implore thy Mercy (unless there shall be any who shall
account it unholy, and trample my Covenant under their Feet.) I have Pardoned,
who Suffered, and am Crucified: Pardon thou those, whom that thou might
Pardon, thou sentest me into the World thus to suffer.

Now all manner of Sinners which shall ever be in the World, they are my
Tormentors, they are my Crucifiers, as well as these Jews and Romans about me.
I Pray therefore for all, as I Suffer for all, and offer my self a ransom for
all: But more particularly for these my Brethren (because no Sin can equal
theirs) that thou would be pleased to be favorable to their Blindness, for
they know not what they do, The vail of Darkness is over their Hearts, and this
covering of Flesh has clouded me, that they cannot discern my Divinity; but
hereafter they will look on him whom they have pierced and mourn, and the World
shall acknowledge me their Crucified Lord. Is it not by thy permission that
Satan has thus blinded them, and hid from their understandings the Mystery of
my Incarnation? Destroy not therefore an ignorant Nation, who are to fulfill the
designs of thy Wisdom and Mercy: For did they know me they would not Crucify
me, and notknowing me they are subservient thy Providence. After the same
goodness likewise do thou ever pardon all that offend against thee ignorantly
and out of Infirmity, that they may return to thee, and Repent, and be
acceptable through the Merits of this my Sacrifice, which I here offer for
their Ransom. Let my Death overcome their Death. Let my Resurrection despoil
their Hell. And when I return Triumphantly to thee, let me also make a way for
my Ransomed to pass.

Prayer.
O Bleeding Love, my Dear Intercessor, who had the Patience thus to Pray for
thine Enemies, among so many Torments and Deaths; wherefore did thou not Pray
thy Heavenly Father that he should mitigate thy own Griefs; for thou
neglected'st the Beloved of God, and interceededest for his rebellious
Servants? Thy Hands and Feet were nailed to the Cross, thy tender Flesh torn
with Whips, thy languishing Head pierced with Thorns, and all the parts of thy
Body disjoynted and struggling under inexpressible pains: Why would thou not
pity thy Sacred Body, who had such compassion of thy Tormentors? Why
would thou not be eased from temporal pains, who wast so desirous to have
them freed from the Eternal? Art thou not bound to defend the Innocent? And why
do thou not defend thy self, who art most eminently and undoubtedly such, by
the Testimonies of thy Betrayer and Judge? But thou becomst an Advocate for the
guilty. Thou excusest a Sin which cannot be paralel'd. Without being desired
thou Prayest for the Actors, and for the love of those who kill thee art
content to die.

And why all this, Gracious Lord, but for my instruction that I a Sinner,
should have compassion toward Sinners; that I who commit so many Sins my self,
should not only forgive such as do offend me, but also excuse, and Pray for
them: that so I may become a Son of thy Eternal Father, and a true Disciple of
thy Beneficent Love.

O fill my Heart with thy Exuberant Charity, and transform me into thine own
likeness. Dissolve into meekness all pittiless Spirits, abolish with thy Grace
all Mortal Vengeances, and convert with thy Clemency those Tyrannous Souls who
know not what it is to Pardon, when once Offended. That after thy Example we
may embrace our Adversaries, quench their passions with Tears of Love, and
become acceptable to that infinite Charity wherewith thou redeemest the the
Sinning World.

SECT. XLI. Of the Penitent Thief, and Christ 's Mercy toward him.
NO sooner had the Benign Jesus interceeded for his Enemies, but the Divine
Goodness so ordered, that one of the Malefactors who suffered with him should
immediately be converted, and receive the Fruits of it, for the comfort of all
those who should afterward repent, and believe in the meritorious efficacy of
his Death: Whilst the other Thief desperate and impatient perished in his
impenitency and unbelief, bearing the Figure of all hardened Sinners, who though
they have Christ never so near, are ever repining, and murmuring under the
Cross, and mistrusting the providence of God, till they are Destroyed of the
Destroyer.

For Luke 23.39.
one of the two which were hanged by him (his savage nature growing furious
under pain, and raging against every thing that was near) railed on him,
saying, If thou be the Christ, save thy self and us. But the Luke 23.40, 41, 42.
other relenting, and possessed with a deep sense of all the guilt of his
offenses, a piercing dread of future Judgment, and especially with admiration
of the Holy Jesus, rebuked him, answering, do thou not fear God, seeing thou
art in the same condemnation? and we indeed justly; for we receive the due
reward of our deeds: but this Man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto
Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus Luke
23.43.
said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

O the wonderful and unsearchable Judgments of God, who is able to convert the
most wicked in a Moment, and would not have us rashly condemn any, or ever
despair of his saving Mercy! Behold here a Prodigy which has nothing common in
Nature, a convincing Revelation in the heart of a Sinner, whose lightning is
like a Thunderbolt, Quick and Piercing, and carries away along with it
whatsoever stood before it.

The Poor Thief confesses Christ, when all his Disciples doubted and forsook
him. And when he had only his Heart and Tongue free, yet offers both, believing
in his Heart and confessing with his Mouth, that he was the Lord of Glory.
Which Miraculous Conversion, Jesus entertained with a speedy promise of a very
great Felicity, that upon that very Day he should be with him in Paradise.

I know not in this Action, whether I should rather admire the good fortune of
the Penitent Thief, or the wonderful Power of the word Incarnate; of the Thief,
who is drawn for a Cutthroat to Prison, from Prison to Judgment, from Sentence
to the Cross, and thence goes to Paradise without needing any other gate but
only the Heart of the Bountiful Jesus: For, on the other side what can be more
admirable to our thoughts, then to see a Crucified Man do an Act which belongs
to the living God when the World shall end, to save some and reprobate others,
and to judge from the Cross, as if he sat upon a Throne.

As if he had said, My only Companion and Patient Partaker in my unspeakable
Griefs, thou ask of me with a great Faith but a small thing in appearance,
that I should remember thee, when I come into my Kingdom. But I am not ignorant
what becomes me to give, or thee to recieve for such a faithful
acknowledgement. Nor will I reward so great a Virtue shining through all the
Clouds of thy Affliction, but with the Chief and greatest Good.

I am now forgotten, as a dead Man out of Mind, and mine acquaintance are hid
out of my sight: My Friends are become my Enemies, and my Disciples fled. Peter
afraid of a Woman's voice has denied me, and forsworn himself; and Judas for a
little unprofitable lucre has sold, and betrayed me; the rest as Sheep without
a Shepherd are scattered, and almost destitute of all Hope and Faith. But thou
who art a Robber and fierce by Nature, without any advantage of Religious
Education, art come hither to me out of the covert of the Woods, and the hollow
Caverns of the Mountains, and meetest me in Love and the participation of my
Cross, more Faithful then my Friends, more Constant then my Disciples, and
Believe, and Hopest, and Adorest my Abasement, and Contemplatest me,
Triumphing over the Powers of Death and Hell in a Servile Ignominious
Crucifixion; Confoundest the Ungrateful, Reprehendest the Blasphemous, Bear
Testimony to my Innocence, and Fightest for me, all thou can with thy Tongue.
Thou see me here as a Malefactor, and yet acknowledgest me to be thy Holy
Redeemer. Thou see no other title or sign of my Kingdom, but only my Body
covered over with Blood and oppressed with Dolours, and yet thou call upon me
as reigning in Heaven. Thou see me in Misery as an Abject Person, and
confessest the infinite Glory of my Heavenly Dominion. Flesh and Blood has not
revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven, nor have I found so
great Faith, no not in Israel it self.

Genesis 22.15.
Abraham believed on me speaking to him from Heaven; and Exodus 3.2.
Moses, speaking to him out of the midst of Fire; and Isai. 6.1.
Isaiah, as I spoke to him sitting on my Throne: But thou Believe on me
hanging upon this Cursed Tree, Weak, Fainting, and Breathing my last, as if I
were working Miracles, or riding in Triumph. John 3.2.
Nicodemus and John 1.49.
Nathaniel have also believed, being admonisht by the Scriptures; and the John
15.22.
Canaanitish Woman, led by my Miracles; and my Matt. 19.28.
Disciples, upon promise of Thrones: But none of these things have been
demonstrated to thee, nor have thou searched the Scripture, nor seen signs, nor
heard promises, and yet thou believe and concludest my Glory out of my
infirmity, and my Innocence from my Condemnation.

Thou shall not long expect thy Reward. For though the Ax be laid to thy Root,
and thou were ready to be cast into the Fire; Yet art thou in time, the door of
Mercy is still open, yea the Fountain of Grace flows more plentifully then
ever. And it shall be more Profitable and Honorable for thee, thus to have
hung by my side Crucified and Believing, then to have sat before Caesar on
Golden Arras, or Triumphed before the People on an Ivory Throne. And thou shall
reap more pleasure, for having been partaker of these my Torments, then thou
could have done out of the spoils of Provinces, or by having been Monarch of
the Universe. For what would it have profited thee to have gained the whole
World, and to have lost thy poor Soul; or to have heaped up all the Treasures
of the Earth, if they must have been followed with Everlasting Sorrows.

Verily I say unto thee, and be thou secure of it, even this day will I exalt
thee before all Israel; and thou shall be where I am, because thou have confessed
and followed thy Savior. Thy petition was but small, as thou imaginest (for
what is easier than to remember) but truly the greatest, and such as ought to
be the Prayer, and constant desire of every Faithful expectant. For whom I
forget they are cut of from my Hand, are cast out of the light of my
countenance, and reserved for Judgment under chains of Darkness; But whom I
remember, to them I am merciful; whom I remember to be Merciful to, in my
Kingdom, they are Eternally Blessed in the Presence of my Father.

Verily therefore I say unto thee, that in remembering I will remember thee, and
with the Righreous thou shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance. Mine Eyes
shall always be upon thee, and thou shall abide under the shadow of the
Almighty. I will defend thee under my Wings, and thou shall be safe under my
Feathers. Thou shall be with me, to be with whom, the Saints have desired to be
dissolved; and it shall be there, whence neither the Genesis 3.24.
flaming Sword nor Cherubims shall drive thee from an absolute enjoyment: For
it shall be in the Celestial and Heavenly Paradise, the place of the blessed
Angels and Saints, where God with his Divine Majesty fills 'em with the light
of Righteousness, and quickens their Spirits with Everlasting Joy.

Yea thou shall be the Example and Mirror of my Mercy, wherein every Penitent
may see his own condition, and know that my Bounty is greater then his Sin (if
he will truly turn to me, that I may receive him) and that while there is Life,
still there is hope of acceptance upon a sincere and hearty repentance, and a
steadfast Faith. And that to the end of the World, whosoever shall hear thy Sins
were pardoned may never despair, but trust in Mercy, and turn to me, and seek
Salvation and find it, and desire it and receive it.

Prayer.
O Sweetest Savior, when I consider this Penitent, I must needs confess that
even Thieves and Barbarians would have served thee better then I, had they
received so many Favors and Graces as it has pleased thee to bestow upon me.
Nevertheless, since by the same instance of thy Mercy, thou raisest me to a
lively hope of acceptance by true Repentance, and a strong Faith; increase in
me I Beseech thee, the Seeds of both, making way for my Salvation by thy
assisting Grace: till my Soul being purified (as another Miracle of thy
Goodness) thou Vouchsafe to receive me to those Blessed Enjoyments which thou
have purchased with thy precious Blood.

SECT. XLII. Of the Sorrowful Interview between Christ and the Virgin Mother,
his Compassion toward her, and his Love to Saint John.
NOW while Jesus was receiving the Penitent Thief, there John. 19.25.
stood by his Cross the Holy Virgin Mother, Sad, and Silent, with a modest
Grief, deep as the Waters of the Abyss, but smooth and full of Love and
Patience; and by her side his Mothers Sister, Mary the Wife of Cleophas, and
Mary Magdalen, and the Disciple whom Jesus loved.

When Jesus therefore saw his Mother, and the Disciple by whom he loved; then
it was we may imagine burst forth those Heb. 5.7.
Tears which Saint Paul mentions to have been shed upon the Cross, accompanying
that Tender and Heartbreaking sight, when he began first to behold her with his
dying Eyes. He would not acknowledge her of whose Sorrows he was most sensible,
least he might seem to have respected Persons or Affections: But having before
Prayed for his Malicious Crucifiers, and then Comforted the Penitent Thief (as
a token that all these bitter Sufferings were to intercede for, and save
Sinners) He now turns to his Mother in that manner, the apprehension whereof
must needs affect the most insensible Heart.

The presence of Friends is indeed a refreshment to the miserable, while there
is any comfort to be expected from them; and two are better than one, because
they have advantage from their Society; for if they fall, one will lift up his
fellow: But here there was no such convenience in the meeting, which was most
deplorable to the Mother standing by, who could lend no assistance to her
tortured Son, and to the Crucified Son, who by his incessant pains could only
augment the grief of his Mother.

We read when he was a Child and missing but three days, She sought him
sorrowing among her kinsfolks and acquaintance: Luke 2.48.
her Love, Admiration, and Meditation perpetually attending this mavellous
Birth. But now she may no longer find him among his Friends, for they had all
forsaken him and fled, and left him environed with whole Troops of Enemies
except those few which accompanied her there, incited to it by her magnanimous
constancy to be present at the Crucifixion of her dear Son.

For she had said in her heart (where she ever Luke 2.19.
treasured whatsoever was Prophesied concerning his Person) I will wait, and
expect the Death of my Beloved. I will follow him out of Jerusalem, though with
the saddest thoughts; and I will behold with weeping Eyes, whither they bring
him, how they strip him, how they bore his Hands and Feet, how they nail him to
the wood, and how they lift him upon the Cross; and when all this is done, and
they shall recede from him, and stand afar off, and look upon him as accursed,
then will I draw near and stand by the Cross of my Jesus; then will I embrace
the wood with my Arms and wash it with my Tears, and kiss it with my Lips; and
tho I may not die with him, yet will I fix my Eyes upon him, to engrave his
wounds deep in my Heart. I will not now desert him dying, who past by all other
creatures and Children of Men, to come to me the lowest of his Servants, and
receive from me an humble being; But I will see how he goes out of this World,
who alone know how he came into it; and in the miserablest kind of Fellowship
will suffer invisibly in my Heart, whatsoever he suffers visibly in his Body.
And thus was fulfilled that Luke 2.35.
Prophecy of old Simeon which he spoke at her Purification, That a Sword also
should pierce her very Soul.

Here then we may imagine the saddest conflict between the Soul of the Blessed
Virgin, and the Eyes of the Beloved Jesus, which at the same time they were
hastening unto Death, were called back to look upon his Mother burning in an
unutterable Flame of Love. O how deep must the rays of that Vision penetrate,
not only her Heart but her very Soul, wherewith the Lord vouchsaft to behold
her, dying? And how oppressed with Sighs, and overwhelmed with Grief, and drowned
in Tears, did she lift up her Eyes to behold his disfigured, torn Body with the
Blood distilling from the four great Wounds; to behold him dying, and looking
upon her, when she was ready to die her self? There could nothing be
represented to him in this view but the Martyrdom of the Soul of his dear
Mother: Nor could she do any thing but by most passionate reflections imprint
in her heart all the Torments which he suffered.

At last after this most passionate and doleful interview, wherein the rays of
their afflicted Spirits transfixt and wounded each others Soul, even to the
agonies of Death; he (to teach us the tender respect and faithful care due to
our temporal Parents) having nothing now left free but his Tongue, directs it
to her, to support and comfort her with the most proper Appellation, and
Provision, which the time and circumstances of his passion would permit,
saying, John 19.26.
Woman behold thy Son.

For tho he had usually called her by this John 2.4.
Name, to show he was truly born of her, and thereby had fulfilled the Genesis
22.18. Heb. 2.16.
promise to Abraham, taking on him his Seed, and being made of a Gal. 4.4.
Woman; yet more especially in this juncture he seems to do it in compassion to
her Person overwhelmed with Grief and surrounded with Enemies: Lest by any
kinder sort of expression he might add to her excessive sorrows, or by his
owning her for his Mother, by calling her so, the Barbarous multitude might be
enraged against her. but this general term secured her from that danger, whilst
at the same time it raised her attention to what he spoke for her consolation
with respect to his beloved Disciple who stood near.

As if he had said, I know, O Woman, the inexpressible anxiety of thy tortured
mind, the tender Love, Compassion, and Sorrow thou must needs have for an only
beloved Son, dying the most ignominious and painful Death. I know also thou
stand here wishing by thy presence to revive me, to die with me, or to die
for me; and all these things I kindly accept. But alas, they do not more ease
me then they wound me, unless I might be restored whole to thy breast which is
so sorrowfully afflicted for me; without that all remedies are vain, all
comfort is to no purpose.

Nevertheless seeing in the bitterness of thy Soul, pierced through with so
many sorrows, thou expressest to me the tenderness of the most compassionate
Mother, thou art not to be left without consolation, and the last kindnesses my
circumstances will permit.

Thou see in what Torments I hang here, with what difficulties I am
straightened, in what agonies I decay, at what a price and loss I redeem Sinners,
with what Love and Charity I embrace Mankind. It remains only now I should
likewise support thee, who have done to me the best offices of an earthy
Parent, and from whose Love none of these Ignominies have separated me. Fear
not therefore to be deserted after my Death, or to want a representative of my
Filial care: There is John thy Kinsman and otherwise most dear to us, he shall
become thy Son in my stead, to observe and honor thee all the days of thy
life. To whom I will now speak in thy presence, and deliver him in my place thy
Servant and Guardian. Then turning to that Disciple, he said, John 19.27.
Behold thy Mother.

John, thou have hitherto abundantly answered thy calling, by Faith, Love, and
Constancy to the End: And I will now reward thee in a more excellent manner
then ever thy desires could wish or hope. Thou have Mark 1.20.
left thy Calling, thy Parents, thy self, ventured with me into the John 18.15.
Judgment Hall, followed me to this Golgotha, this place of Death, and here
attendest me while all the rest of my Disciples being ashamed and afraid have
forsaken me and fled, and I will now recompense thy Faith in me with the
greatest pledge and assurance of my Love. Thou have seen my Glory in my John
17.1, 2.
Transfiguration; Thou saw me yesterday sweating in the M^rk 14.33.
Garden; Thou see me now bleeding on the Cross. I have hitherto carried thee
John 13.23.
leaning on my Breast, nor have I witheld any Mystery from thee, and now having
but one thing dear to me in the World (besides the Souls for which I die) I
recommend and commit it to thy charge. Behold, the Mother of Christ becomes thy
Mother. Thou see me now near Death; Thou see mine acquaintance are hid out
of my sight; Thou see there are many Adversaries on every side: I assign,
commend, and make her thine. And do thou, as a Son, Obey and Minister to her,
Defend and Honor her all thy days, being assured as thou acknowledgest her for
thy Mother, I shall acknowledge thee in Glory for my Brother.

At the sense of this, the Holy Virgin Mother disolving in Tears, and into the
Love of God, answered in thought, wanting Language sufficient to express the
Transport of her tender Affection; and the obedient Disciple with a profound
and joyful Humility took her from that time into his (...), John 19.27.
care, and Administered to her as a Son.

Prayer.
O Love Incarnate, the most sensible of all Loves, who having been begotten by
Eternal Generation, know the Love of an Eternal Father; and born in time,
has experienced the kindness of an earthy Parent to a beloved Son; and have
taught us by thy Example, Obedience to both, in the worst of Afflictions, and
Death it self: Implant in our Hearts an entire resignation to the Will of our
Heavenly Father, and a true Honor for our Earthy Parents; that so we may be
partakers of that happy Condition which is Exodus 20.12.
promised to the one in this life, and of those everlasting Joys which thy
Coheirs through thy intercession, hope for in the other.

SECT. XLIII. Of Christ's complaining of his being forsaken of God.
THere is a secret pleasure in doing Acts of Grace, though we our selves are in
the greatest straits; for being a Ray of Divine Goodness communicated to us for
the Glory of God, it carries along with it a pleasing satisfaction, a reward
surpassing all carnal enjoyments. By which there may seem to have been hitherto
some allay of Joy scattered among the sorrows of this Crucified Love, while he
was doing things agreeable to his nature, pitiful toward his Enemies, gracious
to the Thief, careful of his Mother, bountiful to his Disciple. But now
whatsoever might support him begins to fail, and the wrath of God due to the
sins of all mankind pours down upon him in a full storm: insomuch that nature
her self becomes confounded at the sufferings of her Heb. 1.1.
Creator, and draws over her Face an unusual veil of weeping Clouds and thick
Darkness, to express her Grief, conceal the Tragedy, and hide her self from the
wrath of the Almighty. For it was now full Moon (at which time the Sun cannot
suffer Eclipse) the Passover being always Exodus 12.18. Lev. 23.5. Numb. 28.16.
then celebrated; and yet there was Matt. 27.45. Origin contra Cells. l. 2.
Tertul. Apolog. Aug. Ep. 80 ad Hesychium. Suidas in vita Dionysii.
Darkness over the whole land from the sixth hour until the ninth, that is from
Vid. Sect. 33.
twelve to three in the Afternoon. Which as it declared the Divinity of our
Savior to whom the Creatures paid such an acknowledgment, so did it
demonstrate his Purity and Innocence at whose Sufferings the Elements were thus
troubled, and was also a sign to that Rebellious People who had so often John
2.8.
desired one from Heaven, and a sad presage that the light of Truth was shortly
to be Luke 19.42.
hidden from their Eyes, and that both they and all that deny him should be
cast into Matt. 8.12.
outer Darkness.

All this while the Divine Nature rested that the Human Nature might suffer;
but it upheld the Humane, that that it might overcome. Till at last Jesus
wholly oppressed with the load of his Fathers wrath, and quite wearied with the
pains due to our sins, cried out or (...), Matt. 27.46.
roared in the most lamentable manner, My God, My God, Why have thou forsaken
me?

Which violent Ejaculations gave an evident proof of the truth of his Humanity,
and of the greatness of his Sufferings, for the confutation of all future
Heretics who should either deny him to have been Man, or to have truly
suffered in the Flesh: The voice of so Dismal and Terrible a cry being a sure
sign of an inexpressible Grief, and that it proceeded purely from Humane
Affections.

Nevertheless he complains not in the least of his ignominious punishment,
cruel pains, or any other desertion whatsoever, though there were so few of his
friends with him, and his very Enemies stood from him at adistance, not only as
accursed but an infectious Object: But he complains only of his being forsaken
of God. That Is the height of all Sorrows. That Is the Abyss of the state of
Misery: For where God is not, all is Hell.

What, could God forsake his Son? or did not Christ see the Heb. 12.2.
Joy that was set before him, and to which he should arrive through that cloud
of Affliction. Yes he did? But not to comfort him All things were now tending
to complete his Passion, to add extremity to his Pains, and infinity to his
Miseries. For it had been determined by the council of the Godhead, that his
Glory should increase his Shame; his Knowledge, his Grief; his Majesty, his
Misery; his Happiness, his Punishment. O what a Romans 8.32.
delivery, (as speaks the Apostle) what a desertion, and giving up was this!
Where Strength was the Tormentor, Knowledge a Vexation, Joy and Glory a
Persecution. Are all the Sufferings that ever were in the World comparable to
those of the Crucified Jesus? Or did ever any Martyr before cry out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me?

As if he had said, O my Eternal Father, the Father of Mercies, and the God of
all Consolation, I turn to thee but neither seek nor obtain any Relief, or
mitigation of my Torments. For I voluntarily submitted my self to this burden,
and whatsoever thou shall add to it I will patiently bear. Nevertheless, though
thou succourest not my complaints, yet will I not cease to declare my Grief;
least I should endeavor by my silence to frustrate my Enemies of their Joy, or
seem not to suffer for 'em, what I do. Who, though they see my body torn on this
Gibbet, may yet imagine my mind to be untoucht, and that I suffer but as others
have done. I therefore testify, and with this my speech declare the inward
anguishes of my Soul to all these who here afflict me, and thus I imprint it in
the hearts of all those who shall hereafter believe on me, (for thy desertion
is the height of all my Miseries, a desertion properly due to their Persons) My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Others invoke thee but once as their God, because though they want thy Glory,
yet by their Sins they deny thee: But I call upon thee, as my God, and my God,
both as partaker of thy Nature, and as a fulfiller of thy Divine Will. And yet
thou castest me away from thee, and make me to suffer, the Just for the
Wicked, at the hand of the unjust. Thou deliverest me up to Sinners to be slain
by 'em, for their Sins. Thou severely chastisest thy own Son, that thou may
spare thy Rebellious Servants. Behold I am Psalm. 88.3, etc.
counted as one of them that go down into the pit, and even as a Man that has
no strength. Free among the dead, like unto them that are wounded, and lie in
the grave, who are out of Remembrance, and cut away from thine hand. Thou have
laid me in the lowest Pit, in a place of Darkness, and in the Deep. Thine
Indignation lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy Storms. I
stick fast in the mire, where no ground is. I am come into deep Psalm. 69.2.
waters, so that the floods run over me.

I am destitute of thy Help, debarred of all Comfort, suspended from
Refreshment; nor does the Blessedness of my Glory relieve me, or make my Cross
less dolorous. Without me are aggravating Circumstances of misery; in my Flesh
is Pain; in my Soul is Anguish, intolerable Anguish, even unto Death. My Flesh
is most afflicted, because most sensible. My Soul is most straightened, because
most understanding. My Flesh grieves, and my Soul Grieves, and what does not
grieve, being cast out of the Comfort of thy Sight? Tribulation and Anguish
Tyrannize over me, and every moment, by every thing, my Sorrows are enlarged.

I grieve for the Abuse of thy holy Name. I grieve for the Trouble of her that
bare me. I grieve for the Pusilanimity of my Disciples. I grieve for the
Scandal of all that believe on me. I grieve for the Error of these that
crucify me. I grieve for all the Sorrows the Saints have suffered, or ever
shall endure for my sake. I grieve for the ungrateful, who shall crucify me
Heb. 6.6.
afresh, and put me hereafter to the like open Shame: But especially for all
those, who once believing on me, shall afterward, apostatize from the Truth
(there remaining no more Heb. 10.26, 27.
Sacrifice for their Sins but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and
fiery Indignation which shall devour them.) That after so many Sweats and
mortal Agonies my precious Blood should be spilt in vain; and that of so many
Millions, who might now be brought through the Red Sea of my Blood, out of the
Bondage of Sin, there is none to give Glory to God, but this Stranger, and he a
Thief, who enters with me into the promised eternal Rest.

Why have thou delivered me? Why have thou forsaken me? Why have thou subjected
me to this Sorrow, this Death? Why am I destitute of Divine Consolation,
abandoned to Humanity, and delivered as a Prey to all the outrageous Sadnesses
of Mind? Are all my Sufferings but for one, or have thou not laid on me the
Isai. 53.6.
Iniquities of all? O! how great and intolerable is the Guilt of Sin, for which
thou would have my Blood to expiate; for which thou have exposed, delivered,
and forsaken thine only begotten and beloved Son? O! my God, who can be able to
comprehend the force of thine Anger, but he that feels it; or even feeling it,
among so many Perplexities, to recount the Effects of thy just Indignation?

O thy admirable and ineffable Love, which in this method of Wisdom and Mercy
thou have declared toward the unworthy Sons of Men! Thou want not the Good
of all the Creatures, being completely happy in thy self; nor is thy Glory
increased by their Haleluja's, or diminished by their Blasphemies, yet thou
exposest me thy Son, thy only Son, the only Son of thy Love, the Darling of thy
Bosom, and the Delight of Angels, for sinful Man, for Dust and Ashes, for a
thing of naught; and make me in his stead, a Psalm. 22.6.
worm and no man, the very outcast and offscouring of the people.

But so it has pleased thee, Eternal Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, and I
thank thee. And if there be any thing more, lay it upon me; I gratefully accept
it; I am ready to suffer it. My God, my God, our Will is the same: Mine is,
That thine may be done; thine is. That I should save Man.

Great is the Power of the Pains I suffer: But much more violent are the
Ardours of my Love. That though thou should yet further desert me, and
wicked Men become never so ungrateful; yet will I not be separated from the
Love of thee, or from the Love of those whom thou have given me. No, thou have
forsaken me, lest thou should forsake me. Thou have humbled me, that thou
may exalt me. Thou have cast me away, to receive me more honorably.

Hear therefore thy chastised Son, who languishes under thy Wrath for the Guilt
of others, and cries for Mercy upon their Souls. Hear, O hear, who have sent me
to this end that thou might accept my Sufferings for them. My God, my God, I
know thou have forsaken me, for a sure Token thou will never forsake them, for
whose Pardon, and Salvation, Behold, I dye

Prayer.
Propitious Wonder! forsaken of God, that I should never be forsaken; and dying
upon the Cross, with unconceivable Pains, commensurate to thy Love and the
Misery of Mankind, that I should live with thee eternally. By what Names shall
I adore thee? By what Title shall I magnify thee? All are too short, too
scanty, to express thee. Love, only Love, nothing but Love will reach thee, my
Jesu, thou art all Love. No Sufferings, no Love has ever been like thine for
me: No Grief, no Love (but thy own) should ever exceed mine for thee. O purest,
tenderest, dearest Love; refine, soften, sweeten and love me into all Love like
thy self. Let me live, O my Savior, by the Love of thy Cross; let me glory in
it; let me study it above all things. In the Love of thy Cross let me take up
my Cross daily, and crucify my sinful Lusts and Affections, which persecuted,
tormented, and crucified thee.

SECT. XLIV. Of Christ's Thirst upon the Cross.
BY this time the external Injuries of Wind and Heat, the internal Violence of
incessant Pains, the continual Distillation of his precious Blood, together
with the intensive Longings of his Soul after the Salvation of the Nature in
which he suffered, above all, his Sorrow for the present Desertion, had reduced
the holy Jesus to a Feverish Drought, and the last Struglings of an exhausted
Life; by declaring of which he might move their Humanity, as well as signify
his infinite Affection toward it. And therefore, knowing that all things were
now accomplished, that the Psalm. 69.22.
Scripture might be fulfilled, he says. I John 19.28.
thirst.

And surely since they had heard, That whosoever should give a Matt. 10.42.
Mark 9.41.
Cup of cold Water to drink, in his Name, to the meanest of his Servants,
should in no wise lose his Reward; and seen so lately how bountifully he had
remunerated the poor Thief for a Verbal Acknowledgment; we might justly expect
so small a Kindness would easily be granted in his last Extremity, which was
impossible to restore his flying Spirits; but graciously accepted, might be
rewarded with everlasting Comforts in his Heavenly Kingdom.

Let us see then what Commiseration this so beloved People have for this
excessive Lover of their Salvation, that, for the Love of it, would be deserted
of God, and purchase it at the Effusion of his inestimable Blood. Let us see,
whether first their Hands will administer Water to cool and moisten his parched
Tongue, (according to the Psalm. 22.15.
Prophet) now cleaving to his Gums, or their Eyes yield Tears to refresh his
Soul.

He thirsts for their Redemption through intolerable Anguish, but calls 'em not
to partake in his Sufferings for it: Nor does he propose an Oblation for their
Iniquities, to be procured with Pains or Cost, at the Expense of dissolved
Pearl or Diamonds; but gives an Opportunity, by showing his Necessity, for
that so remunerable Refreshment of a little Water.

He had passed the sorrowful Night without Sleep, in Travels, Reproaches, and
bloody Sweats: In the Morning, he had been hurried a second time to the
Council; thence to Pilate; from him to Herod; from Herod again to Pilate, and
there scourged; and immediately thence to Golgotha with a ponderous Cross: He
had now been above three hours nailed to it, his Blood and Vital Humor
continually distilling; till his natural Powers were quite drained, his
Strength Psalm. 22.15.
dried up like a Potsherd, and his Heart in the midst of his Body like melting
Wax.

And is there none of those who have applauded his John 7.46.
Doctrine, admired his Matt. 9.33.
Miracles, administered to him of their Luke 8.3.
Substance, confessed and owned him to be a Matt. 21.11.
Prophet in Israel, and the Matt. 14.33.
Son of the eternal God; that will relieve him with the common Element which
Providence has prepared for every Creature, and not denied to the Matt. 5.45.
Unjust?

The Water is not here to be fetched this Son of David with the same Peril it
was brought his 1 Chronicles. 11.18.
Father through the Camp of the Philistines from the Gates of Beth-lehem: Nor
is there any great Gulf between him and them, as in the Luke 16.26.
Parable between Dives and Lazarus; but it is every where ready at hand, and
such as we are commanded not to deny an Romans 12.20.
Enemy.

Besides, is not the Cause of this Necessity the Travel and Pains he has
endured for them, lest any thing should be wanting to their Salvation? Is it
not his immense Desire of their Welfare which has reduced him to this sad
Extremity? Is it not the last they can give, or he will ask, being now ready to
depart out of the World? Is it not that which he will infinitely remunerate in
the general day of Retribution, when he shall say to them that gave it, Matt.
25.35
Come ye blessed, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of
the world: For I was thirsty, and ye gave me Drink.

But instead of it, they prepared a Vessel of John 19.29
Vinegar, such as might mock his intolerable Thirst, and by retaining his
Spirits, only prolong his Torments; wherewith they filled a Sponge, and put it
upon Hysop, and put it to his Mouth. They had before afflicted him in all other
Parts, his Head with Thorns, his Face with Buffets, his Back with Scourges, his
Hands and Feet with Nails, his Body with shame; and in all other Senses, his
Feeling with Pain, his Hearing with phemies, his Sight with Abominations, his
Smelling with the Ordure of their Infernal Mouths: And now, as if they intended
the last Sense he should suffer in, should be the same in which Genesis 3.6.
Eve first offended, and Providence would make use of them to fulfill the Psalm.
69.21.
Scripture, they gave him Vinegar to drink.

This was all the Kindness the Son of God received at their hands for whom he
died. This was all the Refreshment the Beloved of the Father was allowed while
he thirsted for the Redemption of Sinners: And he who feeds the Earth with the
Dew of Heaven, and fills all things living with Plentifulness, wanted himself,
that we might enjoy Rivers of Pleasures in the celestial and eternal Paradise.
Thus he suffered for our Ebriety and Intemperance, in all Senses, for all our
Sins; and dried up himself, who says in the Gospel, John 7.37.
If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drink.

Prayer.
O, my dear Jesu, Life of my Life, and unexhausted Fountain of Mercy, which can
never be drawn dry; to what sort of Sufferings has not thy Love Subjected thee
for my sake, that thou might purify my Soul, and present me unblamable to
thy Heavenly Father? To what sort of Gratitude should this induce me, who know
thy Blood to have been drained for me, but a thankful Remembrance of thy Death,
and, after thy Example, an universal Charity to all that stand in need of it?
Yea, I will receive the Cup of Salvation, and I will call upon the Name of the
Lord. I will magnify his Mercy, in showing forth his Death, and with confident
Expectation of his coming again to Crown me with the Purchase of his precious
Blood. And though I am unworthy, through my manifold Sins, to offer unto him
any Sacrifice at all, yet will I present my Soul and Body to be a reasonable,
holy, and lively Oblation; not doubting but in Mercy he will accept my Service,
and with the same Affection wherewith he thirsted for me.

SECT. XLV. Of those Words of Christ, It is finished, and the Resignation of
his Spirit to the Father.
WHen Jesus therefore had received the Vinegar, (all Prophecies being then
fulfilled as far as belonged to the Life of the Messiah) he said, John 19.30.
It is finished, or now is completed whatsoever was predicted in the
Scriptures of my Person, to the end that Men might believe that I am he who was
ordained by the eternal Wisdom and Mercy to be the Savior of the World, and so
believing, escape Hell and Death, and be adopted into the Inheritance of the
Son.

A dreadful Speech to the Powers of Darkness, and to the Enemy of our Salvation
and God's Glory, the Devil; all whose Desires tend to Damnation, and whose Prey
are the Souls of Men: As if he had said, Satan, Thou have hitherto tried all
thy Wits to destroy me and my Gospel, and frustrate the Happiness of all that
should embrace it. Thou have sowed thy Tares and the Seeds of Ingratitude in
the Hearts of this People, to whom I was Matt. 15.24.
first sent as the chosen of God; exalted their Fury, blinded their Judges,
animated their false Witnesses, extorted my Death.

By thy Instinct, one of my Disciples betrayed me, another denied me, the rest
have forsaken me, and all my Friends stand afar off, or dare not own me in this
ignominious place. By thy Stratagems the Jews have rejected me, my Followers
despised, and these Infidel Soldiers, to consummate thy Malice, nailed me to
this Tree. But now the Quiver of thy Rage is empty, and all thy Mischiefs shall
return upon thee: Nor shall thou only have nothing in me, but shall lose many
Millions of Souls by me. Thy Force shall be abated; Thy Kingdom wasted; thy
Wickedness restrained; thy Acts ridiculed. For behold by me is finished what
the Father has appointed; by me is finished what the Law required; by me is
finished what the Prophets have foretold, as necessary and circumstantial to
the Work of Redemption. The Types are completed: The Shadows are abolished:
The Malice and Violence of the Enemy endured: And the Sacrifice offered which
God has required. Sin has an end: Righteousness begins: The Law is fulfilled,
and the Gospel Succeeds: God is reconciled, and Man redeemed.

Thus did he terrify the Infernal Powers with the same Word which supports the
Faithful with the highest Consolation that Heaven can give, or Earth is capable
to receive. For if all be finished, there is no room for Fear. A Shield is
given us against all Evils. The Lust of Sin, the Sting of Death, the Power of
the Grave, and the Fiery Darts of the Devil, all are vanquished, and we are
more than Conquerors through him that has loved us; and not we alone, but his
precious Blood is sprinkled backwards to our first Parents, and forwards to the
last Man that shall be upon Earth, though not fully in Possession, yet in hope;
and there is now no Romans 8.1.
Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.

After this, there remained only the Recommendation of himself, and of all
those, whose Reconciliation he had wrought, to the Divine Majesty, to be
accepted, protected, governed and preserved, till they might be glorified in
his Heavenly Kingdom: Which made him seal up his dying Lips with a loud Cry,
uttering these Words, Luke 23.46.
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

My God, my God, my eternal Father, behold me on this Pile, Sacrificed to thy
Justice, according to thy Will, pre-determin'd of me, and my Desire from the
first Moment of my Conception; thy Pleasure having ever been engraven in my
Heart with a Chizzel of Fire and an eternal Character, so that I have wished it,
I ever would it, and I will protest it with my last Breath, while my Soul shall
be upon my Lips, To have but one only Desire in the World, to accomplish what
thou have pre-ordained to be done by my Obedience for the Salvation of Men. And
now, O Father, I have endured with Patience all the Storms of thy just
Indignation, I come to thee, who art the desirable Haven of all that obey thee,
and seek for Rest. I have manifested thy Name. I have glorified thee on Earth.
I have finished the Work thou gave me to do. I now return, offering up my
self upon this Altar of the Cross, a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice,
Oblation, and Satisfaction, for the Sins of the whole World. Psalm. 4.9.
I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest in thee: for thou shall make me
dwell in Safety. Psalm. 16.11. Act. 2.27.
Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy Holy One to see
Corruption. But thou will gird me about with gladness; and for my obedience
unto death, wilt highly Phil. 2.9.
exalt me to be a Prince, and a Savior, and give me a Name above every Name.

Together with my Spirit, I recommend into thy Hands my dear Purchase, the
Souls of Men, saved from Destruction by the Effusion of my Blood: For they are
mine by Right of Redemption, and I have adopted them into the Heavenly Family:
They are mine by Right of Conquest, as Trophies gained from Death and Hell; The
erring Sheep Luke 15 6.9.
I have traveled seeking, and now come home bearing on my Shoulders; the
Pieces I had lost, and now have found; come, and let us rejoice over them
together.

Let them be ever precious in thy Sight, as Members entitled to the Privileges
of the Head, the same Romans 8.11.
Spirit remaining in me and them. Neither let any Torment molest them; but wipe
away all Tears from their Eyes: Preserve, cherish, and receive them into thine
Embraces, as thou receivest (...) doing it (though at the Miracle of his
recovery) had been actually cast out.

It had been safer to have owned him living, and more honorable to have
professed his Truth while he went about Acts 19.38.
doing good, and John 7.46.
spoke as never Man spoke, and the People accounted him a Luke 7.16.
great Prophet, and said, he had Mark 7.37.
done all things well: But to hope for any thing from him when condemned as a
Malefactor, forsaken of his Disciples, and Crucified, and Dead, this is the
great Labor and Work of Faith.

Yet these having obtained the Body of Jesus, that Adorable Gift and Heavenly
Treasure, were not ashamed to take it from the Cross with great diligence and
many Tears; nor did they care what others would say of so contemptible and vile
a ministry, though they expected a Thousand censures for so doing: To whom the
Holy Virgin Mother resorted, supported by Mary Magdalen and the other Mary who
had accompanied her at the Cross during the fiery Trial, that she also might
embrace the body of her Son in the most Passionate and Tender manner that could
be expressed by a Person that was Holy and Sad, and a Mother weeping for her Dear
Son.

But admirable were the Supports and Comforts of her Faith which she had built
upon those Prophesies which concerned his Resurrection and Glory, and which she
had always laid up in store against this great day of expense, or else she had
died at so sad a Spectacle. And now that she saw her Holy Offspring had Suffered
all that our great Necessities or the malice of the Enemy could require, (after
she had bathed his cold Body with her warm Tears, and made clean the surface of
the Wounds with her gentle affrighted Hand) she delivered a winding sheet to
Joseph of Arimathea, and gave him in charge to Enwrap the Body, and Embalm it,
and compose it to the Grave, having first Metaphr. Angust. 15.
exhorted him to a public Profession of what he was John 19.38.
privately till now; and he obeying the council of such an excellent Person,
assisted by Nicodemus wound it in fine linen and a composition of Myrrh and
Alloes, and laid it in his Mat. 27.60.
own new Sepulcher which he had hewn out in the rock, John 19 42.
wherein was never man yet laid, thus making him a Grave with the Rich, and at
the same time with the Wicked, the rock in which, it was being part of the
Mount Calvary the common place assigned for the Burial as well as the Execution
of Malefactors. And having thus by rare Acts of Providence fulfilled literally
what had been predicted of his Sepulcher, they rolled a great Matt. 27.60.
stone to the door of it, and departed. And the Luke 23.55, 56.
Women also which came with him from Galilee beheld the place and how his Body
was laid, and they returned, and prepared spices designing to have embalmed him
more diligently afterward, and rested the Sabbath Day according to the
Commandment.

O Happy Persons who had the Grace and Privilege to be serviceable in so Pious
an Act to their Lord, who is now Honored in all the Churches of the Faithful,
not only as a Man, but as God and Man; who lies no longer in the confines of
the Grave but sits at the right Hand of God in Heaven, and whose very Sepulcher
is so Honorable to this Day, that not only Christians but many Thousand
Heathens go in Pilgrimages to Jerusalem to see it!

Behold O ye great ones, and let the Passion of Christ have the same operation
in your Hearts. Consider whether in like manner you ought not to abhor
whatsoever may seem to please you in dishonor to it. I fear Belief would never
be so unfruitful, were it not preceded by the Death of Virtue: And I am sure,
but for Atheism or Profaneness, nothing would be more welcome to your thoughts
than the remembrance of this Crucified Savior. Joseph and Nicodemus have
interred him in the Grave: It remains you should receive him into your Souls,
by doing those offices of Piety and Charity which may declare you his true
Disciples. You have those Abilities which rightly bestowed become as sweet
Odours to the Body of Christ, and these you should extend to his Mystical Body,
to show what you would have done to his Natural, had you been with Joseph and
Nicodemus on Calvarie. It only appertains to carnal Spirits, who want Faith in
the House of Faith to prefer Riches above Religion, and their Worldly affairs
to the Service of God; and it is the part of Sensual Souls, Black and
Distrustful, Pusillanimous and Faint, to startle at the Vocation of a Suffering
Jesus.

Learn then O ye Nobles hereafter to value your selves not by those frail
perishable Blessings which environ you, and are common to the Wicked; the skin
which covers you, and daily withers; those false Ornaments which disguise you,
and are borrowed from other Creatures; those supposed beauties which are never
nearer ruin then when they most Sparkle with Luster: But open your Bosoms to
those fair hopes wherewith the Faith of Christ replenishes the Heart, and you
will find what a Nothing of Time's Eternity all other things in the World
possess.

And let all those, who have hitherto Persecuted and Crucified him afresh by
their manifold Transgressions, resolve for the future to attend his Service,
and conspire in Loyalty what they can to uncrucifie him. Let them ascend the
Mount Calvary and salute his Holy Steps: We Kiss his steps when we Love his
ways, and humble our selves, and follow his Paths. Let them on their Knees
approach him on the Cross, and reverently cover his naked Body: We cover him
when our Charity clothes his Servants, and hides the infirmities of his little
ones. Let them with diligence unfasten the Nails, and gently draw them out of
his Hands and Feet: We draw them out when we freely obey his Will, and loosen
our Affections from cleaving to the World. And when they have thus rescued
their adorable Lord, let them Nail themselves in his stead to the Cross: And
this we do when we put off the old Man, and Crucify the Flesh with its
Affections and Lusts.

Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, whose Sacred Body was laid in a Sepulcher after thou had
Suffered Death for the life of my Soul; make me so frequently to renew in my
mind the memory of thy precious Death and Burial, as may put me upon a serious
preparation for my own. And since thou did not design to stay any longer on
Earth then till thou had made a way for thy ransomed to pass; let not my
heart be set on any condition, how comfortable soever it may appear to my
senses, which may make my Soul desire to be absent from thee. But cause me to
grow daily less and less affected toward the uncertain pleasures of Life, and
more and more in love with thy Eternal Joys. Grant me, My Redeemer, a true
Penitent Heart for all my former neglects of Thee. Deliver me from the
punishment my Sins deserve, and from the Sins that deserve those Punishments.
That when I close mine Eyes in Death, I may rest in thee; and being absent from
the Body, may be refresht in the Repositories of thy Mercy. So shall my Time be
governed with thy Grace, and my Eternity Crowned with thy Glory.

SECT. XLIX. Of the Sealing and Watching the Sepulcher of Christ.
NOW the Chief Priests and Pharisees upon mature Consideration, revolving all
the accidents of the past day, and comparing the circumstances of his Words and
Actions with the Predictions of the Prophets concerning the Messiah, and the
wonderful ways by which they were completed, and especially remembering those
Mystical words (which before they pretended they could not understand, and Vid.
Sect. 16.r.s.
wrested to a seditious intent against their worship) of his building again in
three days the Temple they should destroy; and that he had given such his
restoration from the Dead, as a Luke 14.29, 30.
sign at their request, to convince the World of his Truth; they came to Pilate
early on the next day that followed the day of the Preparation being the great
Sabbath of the Pascal week wherein all other People were at their devotion and
Prayers (so restless and industrious were the Powers of Darkness to have buried
the Gospel in the Grave of Christ) and said, Mat 27.63, 64, 65, 66.
Sir we remember that that deceiver said while he was yet alive, after three
days I will rise again. Command therefore that the Sepulcher be made sure until
the third day, lest his Disciples come by night and steal him away, and say
unto the People, he is risen from the dead: So the last error shall be worse
then the first. Pilate said unto them, ye have a watch go your way, make it as
sure as you can. So they went and made the Sepulcher sure, sealing the stone,
and setting a watch.

Thus did that obdurate and impenitent People harden themselves by those
wonders which should have wrought their Faith and Conversion, and justly feared
the last error would be worse then the first, hereby Prophesying ignorantly
against themselves: For their Sin became unpardonable, because seeing they
would not see.

But, blessed be God, all their obstinacy has been subservient to the Magistery
of his Providence which orders all things prudently by the means of others.
They thought to have accomplished their malice against Christ, and at the same
time fulfilled the determinations of his Will. They thought by sealing the
mouth of the Grave, and setting a strict Guard over the Corpse, to have buried
his Memory in perpetual silence, and all the while were giving Testimony to his
Resurrection, and setting a sure seal to the Truth of his Divinity: For
securing and watching the Sepulcher with such diligence they have placed the
Resurrection (the Foundation of our Faith) beyond doubt to future Ages, and
much firmer then if they had never watched.

This is that which gives Glory to the Empire of Christ, and whereby we
perceive its Divine Power and the miraculous extent of its Conquests, whose
establishments have been so contrary to all humane ways. When we consider how
he was exalted by the lowest abasements, glorified by his ignominies, enriched
by his Poverty, lives by his Death, and is Eternized by his Sufferings. And
that our Religion, ever opposed by the Wicked, is nevertheless Victorious and
Triumphant over impiety, enricht by its Losses, Glorious by its Persecutions,
established by its Totterings, and honored by its Wounds. This is that which
transports humane understanding into an admiration of the greatest of our
Christian Profession.

Prayer
O Crucified Jesu, the Fountain of Love; Let the wonders of thy Mysterious
Incarnation and Death, set all the Powers of my Soul on work, that I may desire
and pant after thee; that I may Admire, Adore, and Imitate thee; that I may
take sweet and Heavenly delight in the Communion of thy Cross; that I may with
Praise and Thanksgiving, receive thee into my Soul, attend, and watch thee,
till thou arise with thy Graces there. There will I Love, only Love, always
love to entertain thee.

SECT. L. A Reflection on the foregoing History, with Thanksgiving for the
Death of Christ.
AND now, my Soul, thou have seen this Great Mystery, God Incarnate dying on
the Cross, to make satisfaction to the infinite Justice by the dignity of his
Person, Suffering in the Nature which had offended, whereby thou art raised to
a lively hope of obtaining Heaven, which otherwise thou had lost, and been
for ever miserable in Hell: with what words, with what Affections, with what
Actions will thou glorify the Author of so inestimable a gift as this?

O depth of Love! Abyss unsearchable of the infinite Mercies of God! That God
should delight to make his own Son a Sacrifice, who would not suffer Abraham to
offer his! That God should design it from the foundation of the World,
foreseeing we should stand in need of it, and without it perish Everlastingly!
That God should reveal it when we no ways deserved it, nor could on any account
hope for it; and command us to seek the Benefits of it, and enable us to obtain
them by his preventing and assisting Grace! O God Eternal, who have redeemed my
Soul by the precious Blood of thy dear Son; I am less then the least of all thy
Mercies, and of all that Truth which thou have revealed to thy Servant. I
praise thee, I bless thee, I worship thee, I extol thee, I give thee thanks for
thine infinite Compassion, O Lord God, Heavenly King, God the Father Almighty.

O Lord the only begotten Son Jesu Christ, Lamb of God, Son of the Father that
take away the Sins of the World, have Mercy upon me, receiv^ my Prayer, and
unite me to thy self in the flames of Love: For thou only art the Savior, thou
only O Christ with the Holy Ghost art most high in the Glory of God the Father.

Glory, and Honor, and continual Thanks be given to Thee, Lord God Almighty,
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the World by the
Death and Passion of Christ, whereby thou might exalt us to Eternal Life.
Amen.

FINIS.

