The Complete Constable.

Directing All CONSTABLES, HEADBOROUGHS, TITHINGMEN, CHURCHWARDENS, OVERSEERS
of the POOR, SURVEYORS of the Highways, and SCAVENGERS, IN THE Duty of their
several Offices, according to the Power allowed them by the Laws and Statutes:
Continued to this present Time, 1692. Also Directions for the LONDON CONSTABLES.

To which is added, A Treatise of Warrants and Commitments, proper for the
Knowledge of All Constables, etc.

LONDON; Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins, Esquires; And are
to be sold by Abel Roper at the Mitre, and Tho. Beaver at the Hand and Star
near Temple Bar, 1692.

(...) in the mean time; This Treatise was therefore upon Request prepared to
supply the Defects of the Former, and to be a New Guide for Constables, etc.
but finding it would take up more time than was first supposed, and not willing
to send it out by Twilight or Naked, We had the Patience to Complete the Work,
and to add so much of all the late Statutes as concern Your several Offices,
with many other useful Rules and Observations, and offer them to your View at
Clear Day; not doubting, but you will think our Labor well continued, our
Rules and Observations very profitable, and our Title most deserving to be,

Your, etc.
A Complete GUIDE for CONSTABLES, etc.
The Newest GUIDE FOR Constables, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition of the Title CONSTABLE; of the several names and
kinds of Constables; of their fitness, Oath and Authority.
BEfore I set down the Duty and Office The derivation of the Constables Title.
of Constables, it may be expected that I should show something of the
derivation and antiquity thereof; and though there be some difference about it,
yet it is agreed by most, that the word CONSTABLE is compounded of two Saxon
words Cuning and Cyng (signifying a Prince Lamb. fo. 5. 4 Part of Cooks Inst.
fo. 123.
or King) and Stable, or rather Staple, (signifying a Stay or Prop) and so
Coningstable (by contraction Constable) is as much as to say, The Prop or Stay
of the King. This word is diversely used in the Common Law: As the Constable or
Marshal of England, Stamf. pl. Coron. fo. 65. which Office is discontinued, and
why it is so. See Dyer fo. 258. number. 39. The Constable of the Tower, Stamf. pl.
Coron fo. 152. 1 H. 4. ca. 13. Stow's Annals p. 812. The Constable of the
Exchequer, 51 H. 3. Stat. 5. Constable of Dover Castle, Camb. Brit. p. 239.
West. 1. ca. 7. Anno 3 Ed. 1. Constable of the Forest, Manwood part. prim. ca.
13. Stat. 32 H. 8. ca. 38.

But the Constables for whose use this Guide is intended, are either Constables
of Hundreds, otherwise High-Constables, or Constables of Towns, Buroughs,
Parishes, Tithings, etc. called Petty-Constables, Headburroughs, Tithingmen,
etc.

When Constables, etc. where first appointed.
THese High-Constables (as some say) Lamb. 5. cap. 9. Rast. 379. Smith de Rep.
Angl. l. 2. c. 25. Dalton's Just. of P. c. 16. fo. 46.
were first Ordained by the Statute of Winchester, for the oversight of Armor,
Watches, Highways, Hue and Cry, and the like; and afterward Petty-Constables
for their aid and assistance were appointed.

But others think, that by the ancient Common Law they were Conservators of the
Peace within their several Hundreds and Limits. 12 H. 7. fo. 18. Crom. 6, and
222.

That the Hundreds were derived out of See Dalton, as before.
Counties first, under the Government of Sheriffs; but growing too great for
their care were divided into Hundreds, and that in every Hundred was ordained a
Conservator of the Peace, who was called the High-Constable. See Lamb. Duty of
Constable. p. 9.
That these Hundreds also enlarging, Buroughs and Towns, or Tithings, (that is
to say, a Tenth part) were appointed, and within them also was ordained a
Conservator of the Peace, or Petty-Constable. Others reckon, That first the
Tenths or Tithings were ordered, and after of them were made up Hundreds, and
of these Counties or Shires; so that there is no part of the Kingdom that lies
not within some County, of which Counties or Shires, one with another, there
are reckoned in England XXXVII, besides XII in Wale,.

But to reckon either way it appears, and High-Constables.
so at this day continues, That High-Constables are properly for the whole
Hundred, Rape or Wapentake; and their Power extends over the whole, which do
mostly comprehend many Parishes, Tithings, and Villages.

That Petty-Constables are for particular Petty-Constables.
Towns and Parishes within the Hundred, and consequently for the aid, ease and
assistance of the High-Constables; but their Authorities are only in such
particular Towns or Parishes: And,

That Borshoulders, Tithingmen, Headburroughs, etc. are for particular
Buroughs, Hamlets, Villages and Tithings, to which their Authority is limited.

And Note, it was the Opinion of the Nota.
Learned Sir Francis Bacon, That though the High-Constables Authority has a more
ample Circuit, he did not perceive that the Petty-Constable is subordinate to
him, from any Commandment that proceeds from his own Authority: But it was
used, That the Warrants and Precepts of the Justices be delivered to the
High-Constables, who being few in number, might better attend the Justices; and
then the High-Constables by virtue of such Warrants (not their own Authority)
make their Precepts over to the Petty-Constables. Bac. C. T. p. 22, and 30. And
this also seems to be only in some Cases, as where they are summoned to attend
the Justices to make their Presentiments, and the like.

This seems to be the general Method, Nota.
though in some large Parishes and particular Places, there are and may be
several Officers called by the several names of Constable, Headburrough, and
the like: And though these Inferior Officers be called by several names, yet
their Offices in their several Precincts and Places are in effect one and the
same the Name being only changed.

However the Office of a Constable seems Some Distinction between these
Officers.
to be distinct, and of greater Authority than theirs; and some have held, That
Headburroughs, Thirdburroughs, Borshoulders, Tithingmen, etc. being appointed
in a Town or Parish where is also a Constable, that they cannot principally
meddle, because (in comparison of them) the Constables are Head-Officers, and
the others but as Assistants to the present Constable; though in the Constables
absence they are chiefly to attend the service: And that there are many things
which the Constable may do, wherein such Headburroughs, Borshoulders, etc.
cannot meddle.

See Dalton's Justice of Peace, ca. 1. fo. 34. Lamb. page 4. 6, 9. 51, 52, 53,
54, 55, etc. See 1 Jac. ca. 7.

And yet in Towns and places where there are no Constables, but only
Headburroughs, Borshoulders, Tithingmen, etc. there their Power and Authority
is declared to be equal to the Power of a Constable, and in all Where their
Authority is all one and the same.
such cases and things their Office and Authority are in a manner all one. And
he that is sworn the Tithingman, etc. of any place, is in effect (with respect
as aforesaid) the Constable of the place: And that when any Staute does appoint
the Constable, or other Inferior Officers to punish Offenders, in such case the
Borshoulder, Headburrough, Tithingman etc. may do it, they being supposed to be
Inferior Officers to the Constables.

By the Statute 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. it is Nota.
Ordained, That upon the death or removal of any Constable out of the Parish,
any two Justices may elect and swear a new one, to continue till the next Leet
or Quarter Sessions; and then the Steward or Justices to approve of him, or
appoint another: And if any such Officer continue in his Office above a Year,
the Justices of the Peace may discharge him and put in others till the Lord of
the Manor hold a Court.

In some Cases then the High Constable Nota
may and must do more than the Petty-Constable, etc. And in some Cases they
have equal authority, and in other Cases they are distinct; I shall therefore
endeavor to show, what all Constables either High, or Low, Bursholders,
Headburroughs, Tything-men, etc. may and must do; what is their common or
equal, and what their special or particular Duty and Authority. But Note, That
where it is generally spoken of Constables, there it is also meant as to
Headboroughs and Tything men, etc. and where there is any difference I shall
distinguish it.

But First, I will speak of the fitness and manner of their Choice, and of the
Oath each of them must severally take, for the Nota
due Execution of his Office. And observe that part of their Office and Duty
consists in the attendance of Court Leets, Justices Constables when and where
to attend.
of the Peace and Coroners, for the executing of their Warrants within their
several Precincts; and also to attend upon, aid, and assist, and execute the
Warrants of Judges of Assize, at their Assizes and Gaol Delivery; and the
Justices of the Peace at their general and special Sessions, and other
Meetings, to make Presentment upon Oath of things within their Knowledge, and
according to Articles exhibited to them for that purpose; of which more in its
place

Of the Choice and Fitness of Constables, and of the Oath to be taken by them.
THey ought to be men fit for the Execution Honesty Ability and understanding
required.
of their Office, and therefore to be chosen out of the honestest ablest and
most understanding men, not Feeble with old Age, nor otherwise Weak, Sick, Poor
or Impotent, That so the Office may be performed truly and diligently, without
Malice, Affection, or Partiality.

This Office ought not to be put upon the Poverty and Ignorance to be avoided.
Poorer sort, for they are usually most Ignorant and Fearful, and less able to
attend this Office; their Necessity requiring them to mind their own Trade and
Employment: And it is to be understood, That Constables Bac. p. 25.
have no allowance, but are bound to perform their Office gratis.

Such who in respect of some other Offices, Some Professors exemptd and to be
excuseed.
Callings, or Professions; as Clergymen, Sheriffs, Lawyers, Attorneys,
Physicians, and such like, are presumed to be otherways so much employed, as
not to be at leisure to attend upon this Office, so much as is required, and
therefore not to be Chosen.

Also Women, whether Maids or Widows, Women Idiots and Infants.
ought not to be chosen; neither Madmen, or Idiots, nor Infants under 21 Years
of age, nor old Men above Seventy.

Therefore it is not a good Custom generally, that this Office should go, by
tenure of Houses, for so it may fall upon a 1 Cro. fo. 283.
Woman, (which is not sufferable) but it may be a good Custom, That every man
sufficiently qualified, shall serve or find one to do it.

These Officers are to be chosen in respect In what respect they are chosen.
of their Habitation or Residency, and not in respect of their Lands; for a Man
may have Lands out of the Hundred, Parish or Tything, etc. But he ought to
serve only in the place where he lives.

The High-Constables are usually chosen High-Constables when and where chose
and Sworn. Dalton. ca. 16. fo. 46. Lamb. Just. 190.
and Sworn at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace for that County, But they may
be either Chosen or Sworn out of the Sessions, and if they be chosen out, it
must be by the greater number of Justices of that Division where they Dwell,
and in the like manner also they may be Removed.

And Note, that two Justices of the Peace, the one being of the Quorum, may
appoint the High-Constables for Wales, by the Stat. 34. H. 8. ca. 26.

The Petty-Constables are most commonly Petty Constables when and where,
Chosen and Sworn in the Court Leet, and sometimes by the Justices of Peace at
their Quarter Sessions Dalton Just. fo. 47, 48, 336. So that High-Constables
are by appointment of the Justices, and Petty-Constables elected by the People,
unless in some Cases as is after set down.

If Constables lawfully Qualified and Chosen, shall refuse to be Sworn, the
Justices of Peace may bind him over to the Assizes or Sessions, and he may be
there Indicted, Fined, and if he be chosen in a Leet and refuse, he may be
fined in that Leet for his Contempt, Dalton 47. 1 Cro. 409.

As one lawfully qualified and chosen Refusing to serve.
may not refuse, so if one that is not rightly qualified and enabled, may
refuse, (if he be chosen,) and shall be discharged by Law, and another may be
appointed in his place. Dalton J. P. fo. 322.

And it is said to be a Forfeiture of the Removal of unfit Persons.
Leet, where the Leet chooses unable or unfit Constables, and their choice is
void, and upon Complaint made to two Justices of the Peace, they may remove
such unfit 8 Co. 42. Steels Rep. fo. (...).
and unable Person and choose and Swear some other. 1 Bull. 174. Dalt. ca. 16.
fo. 47.

But in other Cases its said the Justices are not to meddle either in Sessions
or out of Sessions. But leave it to the Custom of the Court Leet. Styles Rep.
362.

Note also by the better opinion it is Constables Deputy.
held, That the Constable of a Hundred or Parish, may not make a Deputy for the
exempting of* his whole Office; but he may depute one, to do many things under
him, and in his Name, that relate to his Office, yet so that the Constable
shall be responsible and answer for what is amiss, etc. 3 Bulst. 77. 78.

Yet sometimes one chosen, has named a fit Person for his Deputy, who upon his
acceptance has been Sworn, and in this case its said the Deputy shall answer
for himself 1 Cro. 409. Crawley's Case.

By an Act 24 Maii, primo Willielmi and Protestant Dissenters being chosen
Constables, etc. may make a Deputy.
Mariae, That if any Protestant Dissenter from the Church of England, shall
then after be chosen High-Constable, Petty-Constable, Churchwarden, Overseer of
the Poor, or to any other Parochial or Ward Office; and shall scruple to take
the Office upon him in regard of the Oaths, or any other Matter to be done in
respect of such Office, such person may execute the said Office by a sufficient
Deputy by him to be provided, who shall comply with the Laws on this behalf.
Provided such Deputy be approved and allowed of in such manner, as the
Principal should have by Law been allowed and approved.

After the Constable, Headburrough, or Tithingman is chosen, he must take an
Oath for the due execution of his Office. The Form whereof is as follows.

The Form of the Constables Oath:

YOu shall well and truly serve our Sovereign The Oath at length.
Lord and Lady the King and Queen When the Constable is Sworn in a Leet, then
are added these words [ And the Lord of the Mannor]
in the Office of a Constable, and shall see the King and Queens peace to be
well and truly kept to the utmost of your power. You shall Arrest all such
persons as in your presence shall ride or go armed offensively, or shall commit
or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach of the Peace. You shall do your best
endeavor (upon complaint to you made) to apprehend all Felons, Barretors, or
Riotors, or persons riotously assembled, and persons making Affrays; and if any
such Offenders shall make resistance with force, you shall levy Hue and Cry,
and pursue them until they be taken. You shall do your best endeavor that the
Watch in your Town be duly kept, and that Hue and Cry be duly pursued according
to the Statutes; and that the Statute made for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds,
and Night-Walkers, and such other idle and wandering Persons coming within your
Liberties be duly put in execution. You shall have a watchful Eye to such
persons as shall maintain or keep any Common House or place, where any unlawful
Games or Plays are or shall be used; as also to such persons as shall frequent
or use such places, or shall exercise or use any unlawful Games or Plays there,
or elsewhere, contrary to the Statute. At your Assizes, Sessions, or Leet, you
shall present all and every the Offenses committed or done contrary to the
Statutes made and provided for the restraint of inordinate haunting and tippling
in Taverns, Inns, and Alehouses; and for repressing of Drunkenness and profane
Swearing. You shall true presentment make of all Blood shedding, Affrays,
Outcries, Rescues, and other Offenses committed or done against the public
Peace within your Limits. You shall well and truly execute all Precepts and
Warrants to you directed from the Justices of Peace, and others in Authority in
this County. And you shall well and truly, according to your knowledge, power
and ability, do and execute all other things belonging to the Office of a
Constable, so long as you shall continue in the said Office.

So help you God.

Note, that it has been part of this Oath, to see the maintaining of Archery;
but this seems to be out of use.

The Oath is many times contracted in Form, and administered briefly, thus:

YOu shall swear, That you shall well and The Oath in short.
truly execute the Office of Constable [or of a Tithing man, etc.] for the Town
[or for the Parish or Tithing, etc.] of A. for the next Year [or for half a
Year, as the time is to be] and until another be sworn in your room, or you
shall be legally discharged thereof.

So help you God* etc.

CHAP. II. Of the several Duties incumbent on all Constables after they are
Sworn, according to the particular Branches of their Oath.
BY the Form of the Constables Oath The Heads of the Oath.
it appears, that he is sworn to some things in general, and to others in
particular.

1. In general, to serve the King and Queen [and if in a Leet, the Lord of the
Mannor] in the Office of a Constable: This extends to his whole Office. 2. In
particular, to see the King and Queens Peace to be kept and preserved. 3. To
arrest such persons as shall in their presence ride or go offensively Armed, or
commit any Riot or Affray, etc. 4 Upon Complaint, to apprehend all Felons,
Barretors, Rioters, etc. and upon resistance to levy Hue and Cry, and pursue
them. 5. To see the Watch be duly kept in the Town. 6. To see that the Statute
for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, Idle persons, and Night-Walkers be duly
put in execution. 7. To have a watchful Eye upon persons keeping unlawful
Gaming houses, and such as frequent the same, and use any unlawful Games and
Plays there, or elsewhere. 8. At the Assizes, Sessions, or Leet, to present the
Offenses of Tippling, Drunkenness, and profane Swearing; against which the
Statutes have provided, 9. To present all Bloodshedding, Affrays, Outcries,
Rescues, etc. 10. To execute truly all Precepts and Warrants to them directed
from the Justices and others in Authority.
The rest is in general, to do and execute all other things belonging to the
Office of a Constable, to the best of his power, knowledge, and ability; and
this again extends to his whole Office.

I will first treat of these things which Particulars of the Oath first treated
of.
are particularized in his Oath, and next endeavor to show all such other
things as belong to his Office.

Note, that the Statute of 25 Car. 2. ca. 2. which appoints Officers and others
to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, etc. does not extend to
High-Constables, Petty-Constables, Headburroghs, or Tithingmen; nor to
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, or the like inferior Civil Officers.

This Office of Constable, etc. seems to be Composition of the Office in 2
parts.
made up of two parts; the one derived from the ancient Common Law of the
Nation, the other from diverse Statutes and Acts of Parliement: His Authority
also is several, in some things acting of himself, without any command from
others, and this is said to be ex Officio; and in other things not to Ex
Officio. Warrant.
act without a Commandment, Warrant, or Precept from another person.

It is in his power, by the virtue of his Office, to preserve their Majesty's
Peace:

1. In foreseeing and preventing that nothing be done that directly will, or
probably may, be an occasion of the breach thereof. 2. In quieting such as are
actually breaking the same. 3. In punishing such as have already broke the
Peace.
First, For the preventing the reach of Preventing and preserving the Peace, ex
Officio.
the Peace, he ex Officio, without a Warrant from a Justice, by Night or by Day
may Arrest suspected persons, Strangers, and others, that walk in the Night and
sleep in the Day. He may stop all such persons as go or ride unlawfully Armed,
and take their Arms from them and commit them to Prison; and if he be informed
of such as haunt Bawdy-Houses, or other suspicious Places, or of any lewd Man
and Woman that are together, and about to be incontinent and lewd, he may take
assistance with him and Arrest them. 13* Ed. 1. 4. Cromp. 6. 12 H. 7. 18. Fitz.
Just. 200.

If any be about to make an Assault or His Authority about an Affray.
Affray, the Constable may in the King's Name command them, to forbear and
depart on pain of Imprisonment. Dalt. fo. 33. And this he ought to do, or he
may be Fined for his neglect, if it be presented by the Inquest at the Sessions
of the Peace. Cromp. 146. Though some say, If he be sent for to keep the Peace,
and will not come, he shall not be Fined: But Quaere.

If they will not surcease, but still threaten To put the Affrayers in Stocks,
etc.
to beat, hurt, or kill one another, and fly into fury and passion, he may
commit the Offenders to the Stocks, or in other safe Custody, until such time
as he can carry them before some Justice of the Peace, to find Sureties for
their Beaviour. Dalt. ca. 1. fo. 4, 5. 118, 340. 3 H. 4. 9, 10. But if there be
nothing but Words, it seems the Constable may not lay hands on them. Dalton 34,
158.

Secondly, If they draw Weapons or give He may require Assistance.
Blows, the Constable may command others to assist him; and if the Affrayers
make resistance against him, he may justify the beating or wounding of them,
and setting them in the Stocks; and it shall be murder in the Affrayers, if
they kill the Constable, or any that assist him: And if any person be
dangerously hurt in the Affray, the Constable Note, that in such case any other
person may arrest the Offender.
may arrest the Offender, and carry him to a Justice of Peace, who is either to
Bail him, or Commit him to Prison, until it be known whether the Party hurt
will live or die. 4 Co. 4. 9 Co. 66. Lamb. 135. Dalt. 33.

If an Affray or Assault be made upon Affray upon the Constable.
the Constable, he may defend himself, and put the parties in the Stocks, till
he can carry them to a Justice of Peace, or to the Gaol; and he may call others
to assist him to do this, who may justify the doing of it. Dalton 35. Kitch.
69.

If a Constable, or any of his Assistants Hurting the Constable or his
Assistants.
shall be hurt in an Affray, they may have good remedy; but if the Affrayers be
hurt in resistance they shall have no remedy against them. Lamb. 141, 142. 21
H. 7. 21.

Thirdly, After an Affray or breach of Warrant, where requisite.
the Peace be over, it is said, That the Constable, without a Warrant, cannot
arrest the Affrayers, except some person be dangerously hurt, as he may before
or during the Affray. 38 H. 8. 6. But quaere. Quaere. Pursuit of Affrayer.


For its said, That if the Affrayers, when they see the Constable come to
arrest them, shall fly into a House (by which it seems the Affray is over,) the
Officer may in fresh pursuit of them, ex Officio, break open the Doors and
apprehend them; and if they fly into any Franchise within the County, he may
follow and take them: nay, though they fly into another County, yet he may
pursue them, and cause them to be taken there; but then in this last case, out
of the County, he can meddle no further, but only as Assistant to the Constable
there, to carry them before some Justice to cause them to find Sureties, and so
much every private man may do. Dalton 28, 29, 33, 34. Lamb. 135, 143, 144.
Cromp. 146.

And it is also said, That if an Affray Affray in a House, and the Doors shut.
be in a House, and the Doors are shut, and though none of the Parties have taken
any hurt; yet the Constable may ex Officio break into the House, to see the
Peace kept. See Dalton ca. 8. fo. 33, 34. and Lamb. 135.

It has been held, That the Constable might Ex Officio, take Sureties for the
Peace, Trin. 35. Eliz. Skarrets Case: But it was then the opinion of others
that he ought to carry the Offender before a Justice, and this is the usual and
safest way. And it is held, that though a Constable may do what he can to keep
the Peace; yet he cannot at the request of any man, take surety of the Peace.
Cromp. 6. 12 H. 7. fo. 18. a. 3 H. 4. 9, 10. Kitchen fo. 69. a. Dalton fo. 4. 5.

Secondly, For the arresting such Arresting persons offensively armed.
Persons as Ride or go Offensively Armed, you must observe, That if any Person
shall Ride or go Armed offensively, before their Majesty's Justices, or any
other their Officers or Ministers, in the time of executing their Office, or in
Fairs or Markets or elsewhere, by Day or by Night, in affray of their Majesty's
Subjects, and breach of the Peace; or wear or carry any Daggers, Guns, or
Pistols Charged; The Constable upon sight thereof, may seize and take away
their Armor and Weapons, and have them apprized as forfeited to their
Majesty's; and may also carry the Persons wearing them before a Justice to give
Surety to keep the Peace. 2 Ed. 3. ca. 3. 7 R. 2. 13. 20. R. 2. c. 1. Dalton
Just. ca. 9. fo. 35. and 159.

But their Majesty's Servants in their presence, Who may be armed and when.
Sheriffs and their Officers, and other their Majesty's Ministers, and such as
assist them to execute their Office; and all Persons pursuing Hue and Cry, in
case of Felony and other Offenses against the Peace, have lawful Authority to
bear Armor or Weapons, Dalt. ca. 9. fo. 36. 5 Co. fo. 72. 3 Co. Just. fo. 162.

The Constables have further Authority to search for Arms; but this is by
Warrant; of which more hereafter.

As to Riots, Routs, etc. Nota, That Sheriffs, Suppressing of Riots, etc.
Constables and all other their Majesty's Officers, shall suppress Rioters and
imprison them, and all other Offenders against the Peace, 17 R. 2. chapter 8.

All their Majesty's Liege people upon Assistants.
warning, shall be assistant to the Justices, Commissioners, Sheriff and
Undersheriff, upon pain of Imprisonment, and to make Fine and Ransom to their
Majesty's, Stat. 2 H. 5. 8. Dalton J. P. ca. 46. fo. 114.

It is to be Noted, That when three or What may be called a Riot, Rout, or
unlawful assembly.
more Persons do assemble themselves together, to and with the intent to beat
or mayhem a Man, to pull down a House, Wall, Pales, Hedge, or Ditch,
wrongfully, to claim or take Common, or a way in a Ground; to destroy any Park,
Warren, Dove-house, Pond, Pool, Barn, Mill, or Stack of Corn, or to do any
other unlawful act, with force and Violence, and against the Peace, and in
manifest terror of the people; and if they only meet to such a purpose or
intent, although they shall after depart on their own accord without acting any
thing: Yet this is an unlawful assembly: And if after such meeting as
aforesaid, they move forward toward the execution of their intent, though they
put it not in execution, yet it is a Rout; and if they do put their intent in
execution, and do any such thing indeed, Then it is called a Riot.

And if three 4 or more do enter into Lands with force, upon the Possession of
another, though their Entry be lawful, yet its a Riot, because it is prohibited
by the Stat. to enter into Lands and Tenements with force, or a multitude of
People. 5 R. 2. 7. 15 R. 2. 2, etc. Cromp, 68. Dalt. fo. 57. 8. Lambert 179,
181. 3 of d pt. and Instit. fo. 176.

And if any Constable, or any private Person of the same County, do refuse to
attend and assist the Justices of Peace upon Request, to remove a Force, or to
convey the Parties to the Gaol, he may be Imprisoned for his Neglect, and make
Fine to their Majesty's. 15 R. 2. ca. 2. Dalt. ca. 22. fo. 57.

If therefore 3 or more meet with an evil How they depend one on another.
intent to act, it is an unlawful Assembly; if they continue and move forward,
it is a Rout; and if thereupon they commit any mischief, it is a Riot.

Yet its said there may be a Rout, where Exception.
there was no unlawful assembly or evil intent, as in the case of a Man's going
or Riding to the Sessions, Market, Fair, or other assembly of company with his
Servants in Harness, though he has no intent to Fight or commit any Riot, Yet
this is a Rout, by the manner of his coming, for the Stat. faith, That no man
shall bring any Force in affray of the Peace, Nor shall go armed in Fairs,
Markets, or elsewhere, upon pain of Imprisonment and forfeiture of his Arms.
Stat. 2. Ed. 3. 3.

And all these 3 both Riot Rout and Unlawful Punishment thereof.
Assembly, are punishable and fineable to their Majesty's.

And these things are to be observed as Observations concerning Riots, etc.
to all, That the unlawful Assembly and Rout, must be of 3 Persons or more, as
must also a Riot, which is the most dangerous of all 3, and consequently most
to be punished. Stat. 13. H. 4. 7. Dyer 210.

That an Assembly of 3 persons or more, 3 Persons.
which is not to the terror of the People, nor to do some act with Force and
Violence against the Peace, is not unlawful nor prohibited by any of the
Statutes. May-Games and Sports.


So its said, that the Assemblies, that be used upon May Day, to fetch in
May-boughs or Flowers, so assemblies at Church-ales, Whitson or Midsummer-ales,
so assemblies at the fetching home, setting up, or Danceing about a Maypole, so
the assemblies at the Bating of a Bull or Bear, or at the moving or making of
Dole or Revel-Mead, so the assemblies of Minstrels and their Fellows at certain
places and times allowed by old and ancient Customs, are not unlawful, See
Poulton de pac. Regis and Regne Tit. Riot, etc. Sports may become Riots.


But notwithstanding such Companies may fall into Riot by quarreling and taking
of parts, and such Siders and partakers to the Quarrels shall be adjudged
Rioters but not the Residue. 22 H. 6. 37.

Thirdly, The Constables are sworn Apprehending of Felons.
upon Complaint, to use their best endeavor to apprehend all Felons,
Barretors, etc. and upon resistance to levy Hue and Cry, and pursue them, etc.

The Law accounts any Offense Felony, Felons, what.
that is in degree next unto Petit Treason, and compriseth diverse particulars
under it: As Murder, Theft, Sodomy, Rape, Wilful burning of Houses, and the
like; also Robbery, which is a Felonious taking away of any man's Goods from his
person, or presence, against his will, putting him in fear, and of purpose to
steal the same Goods: And this is sometimes called Violent Theft, which is
Felony for Two pence. West. Sect. 60. tit. Indictments, Crompt. p. 32. 4 Co.
124. b.

Therefore such as commit such Felonies be called Felons.

Baretors are Deceivers, and common Barretor, what.
Wranglers, that set men at odds, and are themselves never quiet. Lamb. Eir. p.
342. says, a Barretor is a vile Knave or Unthrift.

If Felons and Murderers be in a Town Notice of Felons given to the Constable.
or Village, and the Constable, Headburrough* etc. have Notice of them, it is
their Duty ex Officio, to gather Men together and apprehend them. And if any
Felon be taken, it is the Constables Office to see him conveyed to Gaol. And if
any man will lay Murder or Felony to another charge, he may declare* it to
the Constable; and the Constable ought upon such Declaration, or Complaint, to
carry him before a Justice; and if by common Voice or Fame any man be suspected
with cause, the Constable of duty ought to arrest him, and bring him before a
Justice to be examined. Fitz. Just. P. 201. 1 R. 3. 3. Lamb. 17.

If any House be suspected for receiving Constables search.
or harboring of any Felon, the Constable, upon Complaint or common Fame, may
search both for the Felon and Goods stolen. And so its said any other man, as
well as an Officer, may arrest and keep in hold such a man, as he does know to
have committed any Felony. Dalton 289.

If any fly upon a Felony, the Constable Constable to raise Hue and Cry.
ought to raise Hue and Cry to take him, and in the mean time to seize his
Goods, and to Inventory them in the presence of honest Neighbors, for his
Goods and Chattels are forfeited, if he be guilty; and in some cases his Lands
too, Fitz. J. P. 201.

Hue and Cry signifies, the pursuit of Hue and Cry, what.
one having committed Felony by the Highway; and if the party robbed, or any in
the company of one murdered or robbed, come to the Constable of the next Town,
and will him to raise Hue and Cry, or to make pursuit after the Offender,
describing the Party, and showing (as near as he can) which way he is gone; the
Constable ought forthwith to call upon the Parish for Aid, in seeking the
Felon: And if he be not found there, then to give the next Constable warning,
and he Warning for fresh Suit.
the next, until the Offender be apprehended, or at the least until he be thus
pursued to the Seaside. Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. ca. 5. Smith de Repub. lib. 2.
cap. 20. Stat. 13 Ed. 1. cap. 3. 28 Ed. 3. cap. 11. 27 Eliz. ca. 13. Crompt.
160. b.

The Constables and Officers of every Search.
Town, to which Hue and Cry shall come, ought to search in all suspected Houses
and Places within their limits: And as well the Officers, as all other persons
which shall pursue the Hue and Cry, may attach and stay all such persons, as in
Suspected persons.
their search and pursuit they shall find to be suspicious, and thereupon shall
carry them before some Justice of Peace of the County where they are taken, to
be examined where they were at the time of the Felony committed; and if any
default be in the Officers, they may be fined by the Justices for their
neglect. Dalt. cap. 28. fo. 75.

No Hue and Cry shall be deemed legal, Nota.
unless the pursuit be both by Horse and Foot. 27 Eliz. 13.

And the Hundred where fresh Suit shall Hundred Fined, for not making Fresh
suit.
cease, in case of Robbery, shall answer half the Damages to the Hundred
wherein the Felony shall be committed, to be recovered in any Court at
Westminster in the Name of the Clerk of the Peace of the County wherein the
Felony was committed; and here the death or change of the Clerk of the Peace
shall not abate the Suit.

When in this case Damages are recovered Tax, how to be levied.
against any one, or some few Inhabitants of the Hundred, and the rest refuse
to contribute thereunto, two Justices of the Peace (one being of the Quorum)
dwelling within or near the same Hundred, shall for the levying thereof set a
Tax upon every Parish within that Hundred, according to which the Constables
and Headburroughs of every Town, shall tax the particular Inhabitants, and levy
the Money upon them by distress and sale of Goods, and deliver the Money levied
to the said Justices, or one of them, and restoring the Overplus to the party
distrain'd. 17 Eliz. 13.

And note, That no Hundred shall be One of the Felons taken.
chargeable when any one of the Malefactors shall be apprehended; or when the
Action is not prosecuted within one year after the Robbery committed. 17 Eliz.
13.

Concerning Escapes, etc.
THe voluntary letting of a Felon to Concerning Escapes suffered by Constables.
Escape, before he be arrested for the Felony, is no Felony in the Party that
suffers him to Escape: But if the Constable suffers one to Escape, when he
knows he has committed a Felony; in such case he may be Indicted and Fined for
suffering the Escape.

And its said, That if the Felon be under Voluntary Escape made Felony.
arrest of the Constable, or any other, for Felony or Suspicion thereof, and
the Constable or other person, who so has him a Prisoner, voluntarily lets or
suffers the Felon to go at liberty where he will; this is Felony in the Jailer,
Constable or other person that so lets him Escape; but it is no Felony in
the Prisoner, because he broke not the Prison.

But if such a Prisoner shall Escape Negligent Escape.
by the negligence of his Keeper, and against his Will and knowledge, then it
is Felony in the Prisoner, because a breach of Prison; and the Jailer,
Constable, etc. may be Fined by the Judges or Justices for such Escape. Stamf.
32, 44. Dalton, fo. 272. Bro. Escape 31. Dyer 99.

If a Constable, or other Officer, voluntarily Felon destroys himself.
suffer a Thief to kill, hang, or drown himself; this is said to be an Escape
and Felony in the Constable: But if this be done unawares to the Constable, and
without his consent, then is such an Escape but negligent, and fineable. And
note, that such a Thief so Constable fined.
killing or drowning himself, is said to be Felo de se, in reference to the
destroying himself, Dalton fo. 272.

If a man be arrested only on suspicion Where the Constable may discharge the
Prisoner.
of Felony, and it appear afterward there was no such Felony committed, then
may the Constable or Officer discharge the Prisoner; and it is no Escape where
there was no Felony. But on the contrary, if one be arrested upon Suspicion,
and there is really a Felony committed; and though after the Arrest the Officer
is satisfied, that the Party arrested is not guilty: Yet he cannot discharge
him, but he must be set at Liberty by due course of Law; for otherwise it will
be a voluntary Escape and Felony, or at least fineable. Dalton, fo. 275. Cromp.
40.

If a Private person (as he may) in many Arrests made by Private persons.
cases arresta another; as in case of a dangerous Affray, Suspicion, or knowing
one to have committed Felony, or one that is apparently about to commit a
Felony, or one that has dangerously Wounded another, or Night-Walkers that are
dangerously suspicious, etc. He ought to carry and deliver the Prisoner to a
Constable, Headburrough, Constable charged.
or Tithingman, etc. and they are bound to secure the Party arrested. Dalton
fo. 338. 20 Ed. 4. 6.

And note, That where a Constable or Prisoner Pinioned and Fettered.
Officer shall imprison any Felon in the Stocks, he may lock the Stocks, and
may also (if he see need) put Irons on the Prisoner: And when he is about to
convey him to the Justice or Gaol, he may Pinion him, or otherwise to secure
him, that he cannot Escape. Dalton fo. 342.

And when the Constable carries any How the Constable may deliver up the
Prisoner.
such Felon, or suspected Felon, to the Gaol, the Jailer is obliged to receive
him: But if he refuses, then the Officer may either keep the Prisoner in his
own House, or carry him back to the Town where he was taken; and the Town in
the last case, its said, shall be charged with the keeping of him until the
next Jail-deliver, where (upon Complaint against the Jailer) they will punish
him for his Refusal. Dalt. 340, 341. 10 H. 4. and 4 Ed. 3. ca. 10. Poulton,
Prison. 6.

But it may be the best and safest way to carry him to a Justice, if
conveniently it may be done.

In case where a Justice of Peace, Constable, Felon taken in another County.
or other Officer, comes to a Felon to arrest him, and he perceiving it flies
into another County before he can be taken, and he is there taken; in such case
the Felon must be carried before some Justice of the Peace of that County where
he is taken, and must be committed to the Gaol of that County, although the
Felony was committed in another County. Dalton fo. 340. Bro. Impris. 25.

Fourthly, To see the Watch be duly kept in the Town, etc.

The Constables etc. of every Town, are Watch; in what time of the year.
to cause Night-Watch to be kept from Ascension-day till Michaelmass, from
Sunset until Sunrising; viz. in a City with Six men at every Gate; in a
Borough with Twelve men; and in every Town with Six or Four men, according to
the number of the Inhabitants there. If any Stranger pass by them, he shall be
arrested until the Morning, when (if they have no suspicion of him) they shall
let him go quit; but if otherwise, they shall deliver him to be safely kept,
etc. And here if any will not obey the Arrest, they shall levy Hue and Cry upon
him; and for such Arrest of a Stranger, none shall be punished. Stat.
Winchester, cap. 4. 13 Edw. 1.

1. These Watchmen should be of able Body, and sufficiently Armed. Watchmen,
how to be qualified.


2. No man is compellable to Watch, except he be an Inhabitant within the same
Town, etc.

3. That such as are Inhabitants within Their Order.
the Town, are not compellable to Watch at the Will of the Constable, but only
when their Turn comes; unless it is the use and custom of the Place, to do
otherwise.

4. If such as ought to Watch, refuse upon command of the Constable, the
Constable Refusal to Watch.
may complain of him to a Justice of Peace, who may bind him over to his Good
Behavior, and to answer at the Quarter Sessions; or the Constable may present
him at the Assize or Sessions of the Peace: And some have held, that he may set
the Party in the Stocks for his Contempt. But this seems rather to be, when the
Party (or some for him) appears, and yet will not be orderly, as the Constable
sees fit. Dalton fo. 141.

These Watchmen are to apprehend all Watchmens Duty.
Rogues and Vagabonds, Night walkers, Eves-droppers, Scouts, and the like, and
such as go Armed.

And though it be said, That if a Their Examining of Passengers.
Stranger pass by them, he shall be arrested until the Morning: The use and
custom is for Watchmen to examine them; and if they find cause of suspicion in
them, then they may keep them till the Morning: If not, suffer him to pass; and
whether they be Horsemen, or Footmen, or Drivers of Cattle, or the like; or that
shall carry any Burden on Horseback; the Watch may stay them till the Morning,
to justify themselves, unless they can render a good account, both of
themselves, their Company and Carriage; and if any Post come by them, it is good
to know what number they have, lest Offenders shelter themselves, and slip away
under their Convoy. Dalton, fo. 140, 292.

And Note, That the Constables, etc. are Nota, and Quaere.
to be aiding and assisting to these Watchmen on all occasion: But yet methinks
there is no reason that the Constables should (as some do) think, that their
Word is an unalterable Law, and that if a Person be taken in the Night on their
Watch, and they once give order for the carrying him to the Counter, etc. that
they cannot upon his Submission, or proof of being a Civil person, call him
back or discharge him. For in the Case of an Affray, after the Affray is over,
the Constable may set the Affrayer at Liberty again, on his own head: Therefore
more reasonably he may in this Case, though in the case of Felony or Suspicion
thereof he cannot do it, as is aforesaid.

Fifthly, That the Statutes made for Punishing Rogues, Vagabonds, Nightwalkers,
and such other idle persons be duly put in Execution.

This is a large Branch of the Constables Office, and herein two things are to
be known.

1. What a Rogue is, and who is to be accounted a Vagabond, etc. 2. What is to
be done unto them.
Note therefore, That all persons (being Who are accounted Rogues.
above the age of 7 years) Man or Woman, single or married, That wander from
their usual place of abode, every where Begging, or if they do not Beg, if they
Wander and Loiter abroad, without a lawful Pastport, and give no good account
of their Travel, are accounted Rogues

But Rogues Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars.
these following are of a higher degree, and are to be accounted as Rogues,
Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars.

1. Viz. All Scholars and Seafaringmen that Beg.

2. It Is Felony without Clergy for Gypsies to remain above a Month in England
or Wales.
Wandering Persons using unlawful Games, subtle Crafts, or Plays, or pretending
themselves to have skill in telling Fortunes, by the marks or figures in the
Hands or Face, or by casting of Figures, all counterfeit Egyptians (or Gypsies)
not being Felons.

3. All Juglers (or slight of hand Artists, pretending to do Wonders, by virtue
of Hocus Pocus, the powder of Pimper le Pimp, or the like) Tinkers, Pedlers,
petty Chapmen, Glass-men, especially if they be not well known or have a
sufficient Testimonial.

4. All Proctors, Patent-Gatherers, (except Proctors in this Sense are
Gatherers.
for Fire) Collectors for Gaols, Prisoners, or Hospitals, wandering abroad,
Fencers, Bearwards, common Players of Enterludes, and Fiddlers, or Minstrels
wandering abroad.

5. Persons delivered out of Gaols, who beg their Fees, or otherwise do Travel
Begging; such as go to and from the Baths, and do not pursue their License;
Soldiers and Mariners, that Beg and counterfeit Certificates from their
Commanders.

6. All Laborers which wander abroad out of their respective Parishes, and
refuse to Work for Wages reasonably taxed, having no Livelihood otherwise to
maintain themselves, and such as go with general Passports not directed from
Parish to Parish.

And note also, That all Servants departing out of their Service, that is to
say, out of one City, Town or Parish, to serve in another, having no such
Testimonial as the Statute requires, or producing a false one, are to be
punished as Vagabonds.

And so are such persons as are sick of the Plague, or infected therewith, and
wilfully go abroad in Company, against the command of Officers.

For all these things see, Stat. 29. Eliz. ca. 4. and ca. 17. 1 Jac. ca. 7. 21
Jac. ca. 28. Dalt. ca. 24. Poult. Vag. 2. and 7. Resoluc. Judic. 13, 15.

Next observe, That Constables, etc. are The Constables, etc. are to apprehend
all Rogues, Vagabonds, etc.
to use their best endeavors to apprehend all such Vagabonds, Rogues, or
sturdy Beggars, which shall be found and taken Wandering or Begging within their
respective Precincts under the forfeiture of 10 s. for every neglect.

The same forfeiture is by such private persons as shall not apprehend Rogues,
etc. being at their Doors. And if any person bring a Rogue or Beggar to one of
these Officers, he is obliged to receive him and punish him according to Law,
or he forfeits 20 s. to be levied by Warrant from 2 Justices. Stat. 39. Eliz.
ca. 4. 1 Jac. ca. 7.

The Punishment is after this manner.
THe Constable, Headburrough, or Tythingman Rogues, Vagabonds, etc. how to be
punished.
assisted by the Minister and one other of the Parish, is to see (or do it
himself,) That such Rogues and Vagabonds, etc. be stripped Naked from the middle
upwards, and openly whipped till their Body be bloody, and then forthwith to be
sent away from Constable to Constable the next straight way to the place of
their Birth; and if that cannot be known, then to the place where they last
Dwelt, by the space of one whole Year before the time of such their Punishment;
and if that cannot be known, then to the Town through which they last passed
unpunished; and if it cannot be there discovered, where they were Born, or last
Dwelt as aforesaid, then are they by that Constable, or rather from Constable
to Constable to be conveyed to the House of Correction, or common Gaol of the
County, to be employed in Work, or put in some Service, and to be therein
continued by the space of one Year: But if they be not of able Body to Work,
then that last Town is to keep them till they can be placed in some Almshouse
within the same County. 39. Eliz. ca. 4. 2. Bull. 258. Resolve. Judic. Sect. 714.

Note, none are to be sent to the place of their Birth or last Habitation, but
wandering Rogues: For those that Beg in their own Parishes or High ways, without
the appointment of the Overseers, are to be sent to the House of Correction.

Observe further, That after such Vagabond Rogues and Vagabonds, etc. must have
a Testimonial.
is whipped as aforesaid, he is to have a Testimonial under the Hand and Seal of
the Constable or Tything-man, ( etc.) and the Minister, testifying the day and
place of his Punishment; as also the place to which he is to be conveyed, and
the time limited for his passage thither: And if by his own default he exceed
that time, then he is again to be whipped, and so from time to time till he
arrive at the place limited: The substance of the Testimonial is to be
Registered by the Minister, in a Book which he is to keep for that purpose, on
pain of five shillings for every Default. Dalt. fo. 129.

The Form of the Testimonial it self, may be in this manner, viz.

LAwrence Lazy, a Sturdy Vagrant Beggar, The Form of the Testimonial.
aged about Forty Years, of middle Stature, brown-haird, and round Visaged, was
this six and twentieth day of October, in the Third Year of the Reign of our
Gracious Sovereigns Lord and Lady William and Mary of England, etc. King and
Queen, openly whipped in the Parish of S. Giles in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex, according to Law, for a wandering Rogue, and is assigned to pass
forthwith from Parish to Parish by the Officers thereof, the next straight way
to Hardwork, in the County of O --, where he confesses he was Born, [or Dwelt
last by one whole Year, if the place of his Birth cannot be discoverd, etc.]
and he is limited to be at Hard-work as aforesaid, within Twelve days now next
ensuing, at his peril. Given under the Hands and Seals of A. B. Minister of the
Parish of S. Giles afordsaid, and C. D. Constable of the said Parish.

And note, That such person as shall in Forfeitures of such as shall disturb or
hinder the punishment of Rogues, etc.
any wise disturb or hinder the execution of this Law, concerning the
punishment of Rogues, etc. shall forfeit 5 l. to be levied by Distress; and
bound to the good Behavior, by two Justices, one to be of the Quorum. Stat.
39. Eliz. ca. 4. after Confession or Proof of two Witnesses, Dalt. fo. 149.

And it is said to have been resolved by Forfeiture of the Constable for not
receiving and conveying Rogues, etc. from Parish to Parish.
the Judges at Westminster, soon after the making of this Stat. That where a
Rogue is to be conveyed from Constable to Constable, the next straight way to
the place of his Birth, in such case, if the Constable of any Parish will not
receive such Rogue, to convey him to the next Constable, etc. he forfeits 5 l.
and may be bound as aforesaid to his good behavior. And the penalty is said to
be the same if he do receive him or her, and yet does not convey him or her to
the next Constable, upon their passage. Resol. of Judges. Sect. 13, 14. Dalt.
fo. 128. How and to what places Rogues and Vagabonds ought to be sent and
settled. Husband and Wife.


And it is also said to have been then resolved, That if a Rogue say he was
born at such a place, and it cannot be made appear to the contrary, he must be
sent thither.

So, if the Husband or Wife have a House, and one of them or both Rogue about,
they ought to be sent to the Town where the House is; and so of an Inmate.
Children under 7 years of age.


Also the Wife and all Children under 7 years of age, being Vagrant, must be
sent to the Husband, and if he be Dead, then to be sent with the Wife where she
was born, or dwelt last. Children above 7 years of age. Children under 7 years
once settled, may not be removed.


And Vagrant Children above 7 years old, must be sent to the place of their
birth.

And Note, that when such Vagrant Parents with their Children under 7 years of
age, be placed at the place of birth of their Parents, or their last Dwelling,
if afterward the Parents or either of them Dye, or run away, yet the Children
once settled, must remain there still, and may not be sent to their place of
birth, though after they grow to be 7 years old.

The Wife being a Vagrant, ought to Wife.
be sent to the Husband, though he be but a Servant in another Town.

The Rogue whose place of birth, or Husband Wife and Children together.
Dwelling cannot be known, having a Wife, or Children under 7 years of age,
They must all go together with the Husband, to the place where they were last
suffered to pass through without punishment; and there the Children must be
relieved with the Work of their Parents, though their Parents be committed to
the House of Correction.

But its said, Constables are not to post Constables not to post away too
hastily such as are sick or great with Child. Incorrigible Rogues.
away such Vagrants, (taken by them or sent to them,) that are desperately
sick; nor Women ready to be delivered; nor to deliver them to the next
Constable after Sunset. See for these, Dalton Cha. 47. Resol. Jud. Sect. 4.
and 5.

Note, That some Rogues are looked upon as incorrigible Rogues, as such as shall
appear to be dangerous to the inferior sort of people, threatening or offering
any Violence to them, or that will not be reformed from their Roguish Life, as
having been once whipped and sent home, and do afterward wander again: Or when
they say they were born or Dwelt last in such a place, where in truth it is
otherwise. Such as these are accounted incorrigible Rogues; and all Constables
meeting such Persons within their Liberties, ought to carry them before some
Justice of Peace, there to be ordered by him according to the Statute.

Punishment of Incorrigible Rogues, is to be Burnt on the left Shoulder, and
for the next time it is Felony without Clergy. 1 Jac. 7. Threatening to run from
their Families.


Again, all such Persons as shall run from their Families, and leave a charge
to the Parish, are to be punished as Incorrigible Rogues; and if any threaten
so to do, unless he give good Sureties for the discharge of the Parish, he may
be sent to the House of Correction. See Dalt. ca. 47. Resol. Jud. Sect. 4. and
5.

If the Constable neglect his Duty, he Forfeitures for not apprehending Rogues,
etc.
forfeits 10 s, as before; and such as disturb or hinder the Execution of the
Law, forfeit 5 l. as before.

So every Person that shall not apprehend such Rogues, as he shall see or know
resort to his House to Beg, etc. and shall not carry them to the next
Constable, shall forfeit 10 s. as before. 39. Eliz. ca. 4. 7 Jac. 4.

Yet any Justice of the Peace may reward Reward for apprehending Rogues, etc.
any Persons, who shall apprehend and bring before him any Rogue, Vagabond, or
sturdy Beggar, by granting to such Persons under his Hand and Seal to the
Constable or Tything-man of the Place, through which the Rogue did pass
unapprehended, ordering him to give such Person 2 s. for every Rogue so taken,
on pain of being proceeded against according to the Statutes of 39. Eliz. and
1. Jac. 7. And out of the Money forfeited by the Constable upon the Statute 1
Jac. the Justice may allow the said 2 s. Stat. 13. and 14. Car. 2. ca. 12.
which Statute being expired was, 1 Jac. 2. revived for 7 years.

And so, they that apprehend Vagabonds, Rogues atprehended on the Confines of a
County.
etc. at the Confines of a County, which passed through any Parish in another
County unapprehended, may go to a Justice of Peace of that County, where such
Rogue, etc. was not apprehended, who upon Certificate from some Justice of
Peace of that County, where such Rogue, etc. was apprehended, may grant such
Warrants to the Constable to reward them as aforesaid; and in case of the
Constables refusal to pay, the Justice of the County through which the Vagabond
passed unapprehended, may cause the Constable there, to pay to such Person or
Persons as apprehended him or them, 10 s. or so much thereof for their Expenses
and loss of Time as he thinks fit, which he forfeited by, 39 Eliz. See Stat.
13, 14, Car. 2. ca. 12. revived for 7 years.

Also Constables, Headburroughs, and How Constables are to be repaid their
Charges in conveying of Rogues, etc.
Tything-men, out of Purse for conveying Vagabonds, etc. to Houses of
Correction, or Workhouses, They (the Constables, etc.) the Churchwardens, and
Overseers of the Poor, and other Inhabitants in the Parish, may Tax all
chargeable by the Stat. 43 Eliz. Chap. 2. which Rate being affirmed under Hand
and Seal by two Justices of the Peace, they may levy it by Distress and sale of
Goods, 13, and 14 Car. 2. ca. 2. See Wing. Abridg. of Stat. Tit. poor People.

Note, This Statute 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. (Except what concerned the
Corporations of Workhouses, within the Weekly Bills of Mortality) was but to
continue till the next Session: But 19 May 1 Jac. 2. it was revived for 7
years, and to the end of the next Session*

Note, That if the Constable or Tithingmen Constables, etc. fined, for not
searching for Rogues according to Warrant; and for not giving an Account, how
many have been Convicted.
neglect to make privy Search for Rogues, upon Warrant from the Justices of
Peace, and to appear before the Justices, at their Meeting appointed for that
purpose, to give an Account (upon Oath) in writing under the Ministers hand,
testifying what Rogues, etc. they have taken in that Search, or since the last
Meeting; and how many have been punished, or otherwise sent to the House of
Correction: Or if they neglect safely to convey such to the House of
Correction, as by the said Justices Warrant are to be committed thither, they
are to incur what Fine the Justices please to set upon them, so that it exceed
not 40* s. 7 Jac. 1. cap. 4.

We have spoke before concerning Wandering Laborers, refusing to work for
reasonable Wages, having no other livelihood.

Yet you may observe, That the Constable, Constables may set on work Laborers,
etc. in Hay or Corn harvest.
etc. has power ex Officie to set on work all Artificers, or Mechanic
Tradesmen, fit to labor by day, upon Request to him made by any person that
wants help in Hay, or Corn Harvest. And if they refuse, he may set them in the
Stocks two Days and one Night; and if the Constable neglect his duty herein, he
shall forfeit 40 s. Stat. 5 Eliz cap. 4.

We spoke before of Servants leaving Servant departing from one Service in one
Town, to another Service in another Town, etc. without a Testimonial
their Services without Testimonial, etc. It Is true, these Testimonials now are
seldom regarded; yet the Law gives a great Penalty in this case. For the Master
that retains a Servant without a Testimonial, forfeits 5 l. And every Servant
which shows not a Testimonial to the Chief Officer in a Corporation, or to
the Constable, Minister, or Churchwardens, where he is to dwell, may be
Imprisoned till he can get one; which, if not procured within 21 days; or if he
produce a false, he is to be whipped and used as a Vagabond. Stat^ 5 Eliz. Chap.
4.

These Testimonials, if in a Town Corporate, Who must make the Testimonials.
are to be under the Hands and Seals of the Town, and two Householders there;
and in the Country, under the Seals of the Constable or Constables, and two
Householders there: Which Testimonial shall be made and delivered to the Party,
and also Registered by the Minister of the place where the Servant dwelt; for
which the Minister is to have Two pence.

Note, No Penalty for not delivering a Testimonial to the Servant.

The Form of the Testimonial is this:

MEmorandum, That A. B. Servant to The form of the Testimonial.
C. D. of J. in the County of E. Husbandman [Taylor, or the like] in the said
County, is Licensed to depart from his said Master, [ or Mistress, or Dame, as
the case happens] and is at his liberty to serve elsewhere, according to the
Statutes in that case made and provided. In witness whereof We have hereunto
set our Hands and Seals the 26th Day of October, in the Third Year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary, Anno Dom. 1691.

A. B. Constable of I. C. D. Householder there. E. F. Householder there.
One would wonder how so strict a Law should be so soon disused; but it may be,
for that it found a great Inconvenience for a Servant to get such a
Testimonial; however, the Law is still in force.

As to this Branch of the Oath that Night-Walkers.
concerns Night-Walkers, and such other Idle persons, I have spoke of that
before in the Duty of the Constable and his Watch. Yet it is said, That any
Private man may arrest Night-Walkers; however, then he must deliver them to a
Constable, and they may be bound to their good Behavior by a Justice.

See 2 E. 3. 6. Dalt. fo. 16. Poult. 18. Lamb. 122.

For the rest of the Idle persons, I think Orchard-Robbers, Hedge-Breakers,
Wood-Stealers, etc.
we may reckon up such as cut down Wood or Corn, or rob Orchards, and the like.
And therefore observe, That all such as shall be convicted before a Justice of
Peace, for cutting and taking away of Corn growing, Robbing of Orchards,
Breaking Hedges, etc. and their Procurers and Receivers knowing the same; if
they cannot make such Satisfaction as the Justice shall think fit, the Justice
may then commit them to the Constable to be Whipped, either for the first or
second Offense; and if the Constable refuse or neglect to see them Whipped, the
Justice may commit him to Gaol till he will do it, or procure it to be done.
Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 7.

And by the Statute 15 Car. 2. cap. 2. Constables, Constables may apprehend
suspected persons.
Headburroughs, or other Inhabitants in County, City, or Town Corporate, etc.
may apprehend whom they suspect having or conveying any Wood, Underwood, Poles,
or young Trees, Bark or Bast of Trees; or any Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales,
Rails, Hedge-wood, Broom or Furze; and by Warrant from a Justice of Peace, the
May search suspected Houses.
Officers may search the Houses, and other places belonging to those they
suspect; and where they find any, may carry persons suspected for cutting and
taking the same, before a Justice of Peace of the County, City, or Town
Corporate; where, if they give not such account how they came by them as does
satisfy the said Justice, or in convenient time to be set by the Justice,
produce not the Party of whom they bought the same, or some Witness to depose
upon Oath, such Sale shall be deemed as Convicted within the meaning of 43
Eliz. cap. 7. and be liable to the Punishment Punishment
therein contained: And also for the first Offense, shall make such Recompense,
and within such time as the said Justice shall appoint; and pay to the
Overseers for the Poor of the Parish where the Offense was committed such Sum,
not exceeding 10 s. as such Justice shall think meet; and in default thereof,
to be committed to the House of Correction for any time, not exceeding a Month;
or else to be Whipped by the Constable, etc. and for the second Offense, to be
sent to the House of Correction for a Month, and be kept to hard Labor; and if
convicted of the third Offense, they shall be deemed Incorrigible Incorrigible
Rogues. Penalty upon the Buyer of stolen Wood.
Rogues. 15 Car. 2. cap. 2.

And if any person buy Wood, etc. of any other justly suspected to have stolen
the same, and this be so found upon Examination before a Justice, the Justice
may order the Buyer to pay the treble Value thereof to the Party from whom it
was taken; and in default of present Payment, make a Warrant to the Constable
to distrain for it; and for lack of Distress, to commit the Party to the Gaol,
at the Parties own charge, there to remain one Month without Bail or Mainprize.
15 Car. 2. cap. 2.

But non shall be questioned upon this How and when to be prosecuted.
Law, that has been punished for the same Offense by any former Law; nor after
six Weeks after the Offense committed, shall any Question thereof be made. 15
Car. 2. cap. 2.

Sixthly, To have a watchful Eye to such as shall keep Common and Unlawful
Gaming-Houses; and to such Persons as shall frequent the same.

Every Mayor, Sheriff, Bailiff, Constable, Search for Gaming-Houses, etc. 48 s.
and other Head Officer within every City, Borough or Town, shall make due
search, once every Month at least, in pain to forfeit 48 s. for every default,
in all such Houses and places where unlawful Games Imprisonment till Security.
shall be used, and may arrest and imprison as well the Keepers of the House,
as the Resorters thereunto, until they shall severally give good Security at
the discretion of the Justices or such Officers, not to keep such Games any
more. 33 H. 8. ca. 9.

And for distinguishing what are unlawful Unlawful Games and Gamesters.
Games, and who are unlawful Gamesters, It is Enacted by the said Statute, 33
H. 8. cap. 9. That no Artificer, or his Journyman, no Husbandman, Apprentice,
Labourer, Servant at Husbandry, Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or Servingman,
shall play at Tables, Tennis, Dice, Cards, Bowls, Clash, Coyting, Loggating, or
any other unlawful Game, out of Christmas, or then out of their Masters house
or presence, in pain of 6 s. 8 d.

But this Act shall not restrain a Servant, by his Masters License, to Play at
Cards, Dice, or Tables with the Master himself, or other Gentlemen resorting to
his Masters House. And if his Master have Freehold of 100 l. per Annum, he may
also License his Servants to play at Bowls or Tennis. 33 H. 8. ca. 9.

And Note, That all Licenses to keep Licenses void.
Houses or Places of Unlawful Games, shall be void by Stat. 2 and 3 Phil. and
Ma. cap. 9.

Seventhly, At your Assizes, You shall present all Offenses contrary to the
Statutes, for the restraint of inordinate haunting and Tippling in Inns, etc.
for the repressing of Drunkenness and profane Swearing.

No Innkeeper, Victualler, or Alehousekeeper, No Alehousekeeper to suffer
Tippling.
shall suffer any Town-Dwellers to sit Tippling in his House, in pain of 10 s.
nor sell less than a full Ale Quart of the best Ale or Beer, or two Quarts of
the small for 1 d. in pain of 20 s. And here the View of one Justice, or proof
by one Witness upon Oath, or the Parties own Confession before one Justice, is
sufficient Conviction. 1 Jac. 9. And the Oath of Conviction, 1 Jac. 9. 21 Jac.
7. 1 Car. 4. Distress.
the Party confessing shall convince any other.

The Penalties aforesaid are given to the Poor of the Parish where the Offense
is committed; and are to be levied on Warrant (by the Constable and
Churchwarden) by Distress, which after six Days may be sold to satisfy the
Penalty: And in default of Distress, the party Delinquent must suffer
Imprisonment till he pay the Penalty. Imprisonment.
And here every Officer that neglects to levy the said Penalty; or certify
(within 20 Days) the default of Distress, shall forfeit likewise to the Poor 40
s. to be Officer forfeits 40 s.
levied (upon Warrants) from one Justice, by distress and sale as aforesaid;
and upon default of Distress shall incur Commitment, as aforesaid.

The Officers, or other Parties receiving Officers accountable.
these Penalties, shall be accountable to the succeeding Officers, and other
Parishioners.

One convicted of Drunkenness in Court, One convicted of Drunkenness.
or before a Judge or Justice in their several limits; or by the View of one
Justice, or proof by one Witness, upon Oath before one Justice, shall forfeit
five Shillings to the Poor, to be levied and employed as the Penalties of 1
Jac. 9. And in case he Penalty.
be not able to pay it, shall remain in the Stocks six Hours: And for the
second Offense Stocks.
of Drunkenness may be bound to good Behavior. 4 Jac. 5. 21 Jac. 7.

Here the Officer that neglects to levy Officer forfeits 10 s.
the said Penalty upon Warrant, shall forfeit 10 s. to be levied and employed,
as aforesaid. 4 Jac. 5.

A Town-Dweller, which is convict to One convict of Tippling.
sit Tippling in any Inn, Victualinghouse, or Alehouse, by the View of one
Justice, or the proof of two Witnesses; shall forfeit Ten Groats, to be levied
and employed as Forfeiture.
aforesaid; and being not found able to pay it, shall remain in the Stocks four
Stocks.
Hours. 4 Jac. 5.

These Offenses, as also those mentioned Where these Offenses shall be enquired.
in 1 Jac. 9. shall be enquired of, heard, and determined at the Assizes,
Quarter Sessions, in Corporate Towns and in Leets. 4 Jac. 5.

And all Constables, Churchwardens, Officers sworn to prevent them.
Headburroughs, Tithingmen, Aleconners and Sidemen, shall be charged on their
Oaths to prevent the said Offenses. 4 Jac. 5. 21 Jac. 7,

None shall be twice punished for one But one Punishment for one Offense.
Offense. 4 Jac. 5.

Vintners within these Acts.
Vintners, which do also keep Inns or Victualinghouses, shall be taken to be
within these Acts, 1 Jac. 9. 4 Jac. 5. and 1 Car. 4.

The Offenders 4 Jac. 5. to be prosecuted within six Months.

By Stat. 3 Car. 3. none shall keep an Alehouse without License.
Alehouse without License, in pain to forfeit 20 s. to the Poor, which the
Constable and Churchwarden (upon Warrant before the Justice) shall levy by
Distress, Distress.
and (after three Days default of payment) may sell the Distress, to satisfy
the Penalty, rendering the Overplus: And in case the Delinquent has not
wherewithal; the said Justice shall commit him to the Constable, Alehousekeeper
Whipped. Officer punished.
to be openly Whipped.

And here the Officer that neglects to execute the Warrant, or to punish the
Offender, shall suffer Imprisonment without Bail, or pay 40 s. to be employed
as aforesaid.

See Dalton's Just. fo. 31, 32. Alridg. of Stat. Tit. Alehouses, etc.

And by 21 Jac. 7 and 10. the Alehousekeeper shall be disabled for three years,
who offends against 1 Jac. 9. and 4 Jac. 5.

And Note, That if a Common Innkeeper Alehousekeeper refusing to lodge
Travelers.
or Alehousekeeper will not lodge a Traveller, who profers ready Money
beforehand for his Victuals: In such case the Constable may cause such
Innkeeper, or Alehousekeeper, to be Indicted at the next Sessions or Assizes,
where the Justices may Indicted and Fined. Damages recovered by the Traveller.
fine and imprison him.

Or in such case, the Traveller grieved may bring an Action, and recover
Damages against the Innkeeper, etc. Dalton fo. 28. 9 Co. 27. b. 10 H. 7. 8.

Next, For the repressing of Profane Swearing.

If any shall Swear or Curse within the Profane Cursing and Swearing.
hearing of a Justice of Peace of the County, Mayor, Justice, Bailiff, or
Head-Officer of any City or Town Corporate where the Offense is; or shall be
convicted thereof by his own Confession, or the Evidences of two Witnesses upon
Oath, before such Mayor, Justice, or Head-Officer, he Forfeitures.
he shall forfeit 12 d. for every time, and the Justice of Peace, or
Head-Officer, may thereupon issue out their Warrant to the Constables, and
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of that Parish where the said Offense
shall be committed, to levy the sum and sums of Money by distress and sale of
the Offenders Goods, rendering the Overplus (if any be) to the Owner.

And where no Distress is to be had, the Offender set in the Stocks. Offender
Whipped.
Offender (if above 12 years of Age) shall by Warrant, as aforesaid, be set in
the Stocks Three hours; but if he be under 12 years, and shall not forthwith
pay the sum of 12 d. per Oath, then he shall be Whipped by the Constable, or by
the Parent or Master in the Constables presence. 21 Jac. cap. 20. 3 Car. cap.
4. 17 Car. cap. 4. Dalton 138.

I spoke before of the Constables Authority upon Notice of a Woman's being in
Adultery; and of a Man and Woman of evil Fame, going to a Suspected house.

I will next set down the Constables Office concerning such as Profane the
Lord's Day: And observe, That in the opening the 5th, 6th, and 7th Branch^^ of
this Oath, is set down the Duty of the Constables, as the Matters mentioned in
the Abstract of Penal Laws, lately commanded by the QUEEN to be put in
Execution.

The Constable, Headburrough, etc. o^ Penalties upon such as use unlawful
Sports and Pastimes on the Lord's Day.
Churchwardens, by Warrant from a Justice of Peace (or other Chief Officer of
any City, Borough, or Town Corporate) under their Hand and Seal, against such
as use Unlawful Games on the Lord's Day, as Bearbaitings, Bulbaitings,
Enterludes, Common Plays, or other Unlawful Pastimes within, or out of their
own Parish, may levy the Penalty of 3 s. 4 d. by distress 3 s. 4 d.
and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering the Overplus to the Owners; and in
default of Distress, the Constable is to set the Offender in the Stocks by the
space of Stocks.
Three hours. 1 Car. 1. cap. 1.

The View of one Justice in the Country, Conviction by View or one Witness,
etc. To be prosecuted within a Month. General Issue.
or Chief Officer in a Corporation, or Parties own confession, or the Oath of
one Witness, shall be a sufficient Conviction. But the Party offending against
this Act, must be questioned within a Month after the Offense committed: And if
the Officer be questioned, he shall plead the general Issue, and yet give the
special Matter in Evidence. 1 Car. 1. cap. 1. Dalt. fo. 63. Abridg. of Stat. p.
275.

Every person keeping or being present 5 s. forfeited.
on the Lord's Day at any Wrestlings, Shootings, Bowlings, Ringing of Bells for
Pleasure, Mask, Wake, Church-Ale, Dancing, Game, Sport, or Pastime whatsoever,
he forfeits 5 s. if he or she be above 14 years of Age; but if he be under, he
forfeits only 12 d. by him under whose Tuition he or she is.

And no Carrier with his Horse, Waggoner 20s. by a Carrier, etc.
with his Wagon, Carman with his Cart, Wainman with his Wain, or Drover with
his Cattle, shall Travel on the Lord's Day, in pain to forfeit 20 s. for every
such Offense, 3 Car. 1. cap. 1.

Note, There must be but one 20 s. forfeit for one Journey, though they pass
through several Parishes, and the Parish where the Distress is first taken
shall have it. See Dalt. fo. 134.

Neither shall any Butcher by himself, or Butcher 6s. 8d.
any for him, kill or sell any Victual upon the same day, in pain of 6 s. 8 d.
3 Car. 1. cap. 1.

Here the Conviction of the Offender, Conviction by View or two Witnesses, etc.
and the levying and employment of the Forfeitures, are the same with those of
the former Statute, save only that here two Witnesses are necessary.

This Action shall be prosecuted within six Months; and here also the Officer
may plead the General Issue. Stat. 3 Car. 1. General Issue.
cap. 1.

And note, That a Churchwarden may levy 12 d. upon such Persons as repair not
every Sunday to some Church or Chapel, by 1 Eliz. cap. 2.

But by 3 Jac. 4. he must levy it by Warrant.

By the Act of Indulgence, he may go to Meeting or Conventicle.

See more of this hereafter, in the Duty of Churchwardens.

All Laws in force, concerning the Observation Penalties on such as shall Work
or Sell on the Lord's Day.
of the Lord's Day, shall be put in Execution. None shall do any worldly Labor
or Business on that day, (Works of Charity and Necessity only excepted) and all
of the Age of 14 years or upwards, offending in the Premises, shall forfeit 5
s. And no person shall publicly Cry, or 5 s.
expose to Sale any Wares whatsoever on that Day, on pain to forfeit them, 29
Car. 2. cap. 7.

Quaere, If selling Drink (called for) be an Exposing of Wares etc.

No Drover, Horse-Courser, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, or their Servants, shall
Drover Higler, etc. 20 s.
Travel on that Day, on pain to forfeit 20 s.

No person shall use or Travel on the Boatman and Passenger, 5 s.
Lord's Day with any Boat, Wherry, etc. Except on extraordinary Occasion, to be
allowed by a Justice of Peace or Head-Officer of the place, etc. on pain to
forfeit 5 s. 29 Car. 2. cap. 7.

The Justice of Peace, or Chief Officer of Seizure of Goods exposed to Sale.
the City, Borough, etc. before whom the Offender is convicted by View,
Confession, or Oath of one Witness, shall give Warrant to the Constables or
Churchwardens, to seize the Goods cried or put to Sale, and to sell them, and
to levy the other Penalties by distress and sale of Goods; and in case of
Inability, etc. to set the Offenders in the Stocks for two Hours. Offender to
be set in the Stocks.
The Penalties aforesaid, to be employed to the use of the Poor of the Parish
where the Offenses are committed; saving that any Justice or Head-Officer may
out of them reward Informers, so as such Reward Informers rewarded.
exceed not a third part of the Penalties, 29 Car. 2. 7.

This Act shall not prohibit Dressing of Toleration for Cooks.
Meat in Families, or Inns, Cooks Shops, etc. nor crying of Milk before 9 of
the Clock in the morning, or after 4 in the afternoon, 29 Car. 2. cap. 7.

No Persons on the Lord's Day shall Serving of Process and Arrests.
serve any Process, Warrant, etc. (Except in cases of Treason, Felony, and
Breach of the Peace,) but such Services shall be void; and the Persons serving
the same shall answer Damages, as if they had done the same without Warrant, 29
Car. 2. cap. 7.

Disturbing Preachers.
ANy person Disturbing a Lawful Minister Disturbing of Ministers in their
Preaching, etc.
in Preaching, Praying, or Administering the Sacrament, may be presently
apprehended by the Constable or Churchwardens, and carried before a Justice,
who may, if he think fit, commit him to safe Custody; and within six Days after
with another Justice, if they find the Offense proved by two Witnesses, commit
Commitment.
him to the Gaol for three Months, and from thence till the next Sessions;
where the Offender giving Security for his good Good Behavior. Submission.
Behavior, he may be discharged, otherwise to be continued in Prison till he
make submission.

And note, That if any person rescues such Rescuing the Offender 5 l.
an Offender, he shall suffer Imprisonment, and also forfeit 5 l. And also the
Inhabitants of the place, if they suffer him to escape, forfeit 5 l. if they be
presented at the County Sessions, Stat. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 3.

Some think this Statute is repealed by 1 Eliz. cap. 2.

See Dalt. fo. 103, 104.

But it is taken notice of in the Abstract of the Laws, which its said Her
Majesty lately commanded to be put in Execution.

See more hereafter, of Disturbing a Protestant Dissenting Minister.

Popish Recusants.
POpish Recusants, above 16 years of Popish Recusants.
Age, shall within 40 days after their Conviction repair to their usual
Dwelling, and not remove above Five miles from Not to remove five Miles from
their dwelling, etc.
thence, in pain to forfeit all their Goods, and Lands, and Annuities during
life. And if they have no certain abode, then they are to repair to the place
where they were Born, or where their Father To give in their Names to the
Constables, etc.
or Mother dwells; and within twenty days after their Arrival there, to give
their Names in writing to the Minister, Constables, and Headburroughs; which
Minister is to enter them in a Book to be kept for that purpose; and he,
together with the said Constables and Headburroughs, are to certify the same
to the next Quarter Sessions, where the Justices of Peace, shall cause them to
be Enrolled.

See Wing. Abr. Stat. tit. Crown, 35 Eliz. cap. 2.

The Constables and Churchwardens of Constables to present Popish Recusants at
the Sessions.
every Parish, or one of them (or if there be none such, then the High
Constables of the Hundred there) are once every Year to present at the General
Sessions of the Peace, the Monthly absence from Church of every Popish
Recusant, and the Names of their Children, being above the Age of Nine years,
abiding with their said Parents, and of their Servants, together with the Age
of their Children, as near as they can know them, on pain to On Penalty of 20 s.
forfeit respectively for every such default 20 s. Which Presentment, the Clerk
of the Peace or Town Clerk shall Record without Fee, on pain of 40 s. 3 Jac. 1.
ca. 4. Abr. Stat. tit. Crown.

If the Minister, Petty Constables, or Recusant refusing to take the Oath.
Churchwardens of any Parish, or any two of them shall complain to a Justice of
the Peace, of any person suspected of Recusancy, such Justice may tender the
Oath of Allegiance to the Person suspected; and if he refuse to take it, may
commit him to Gaol till the next Assize or Sessions: Where, if he again refuse,
he incurs a Praemunire; but if the Person suspected be a married Woman, she
shall only be continued in Prison without Bail till she take the said Oath,
Wing. Abr. tit. Crown, 7 Jac. cap. 6. Dalt. fo. 10.

Note, That by a late Act 1 W. and M. the old Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
are taken away, and new Oaths appointed.

Conventiclers.
EVery Constable, Headburrough, Tithingman, Constables must levy Fines, etc.
upon frequenters of Conventicles.
Churchwarden, and Overseers of the Poor, are authorized and required to levy
the Fines assessed by the Justice of Peace upon those who shall be present at
unlawfu^l Conventicles, upon their Goods and Chattels (having first received a
Warrant under the Hands and Seals of one or more Justices or Chief Magistrate)
and forthwith to deliver the Money so levied to the same Justice of Peace, or
Chief Magistrate, 22 Car. 2. cap. 1.

If any Constable, Headburrough, Tithingman, Constables must inform of
Conventicles on Penalty of 5 l.
Churchwarden, or Overseers of the Poor, shall know or credibly be informed of
any Conventicle within his Precinct; and shall not thereof inform some Justice
of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, and endeavor to Convict the Parties, but
neglects his Duty, he forfeits 5 l. to be levied on his Goods, 22 Car. 2. cap.
1.

And the said Officers, being Constable, May break open the Doors, to search
for Conventiclers.
Headburrough, or Tithingman, may (upon a Warrant from one or more Justice or
Justices, or Chief Magistrate) with what aid, force and assistance they think
fit, (after refusal or denial to enter) break open into any House, or other
place, where they shall be informed any Conventicle is held, as well within
Liberties as without, and take into their Custody the persons there unlawfully
assembled, to be proceeded against according to this Act.

But no Peers House is to be searched; Peers House
unless in presence of a Lord Lieutenant, or two Justices of the Peace, whereof
one to be of the Quorum.

And Note, That the Penalties for a Married Wives Penalty levied on Husbands
Goods. General Issue.
Woman, (living with her Husband) shall be levied on the Goods of the Husband.

And any Person Sued for acting by this Law, may plead the General Issue, and
give the Special Matter in Evidence, and shall recover treble Costs, 22 Car. 2.
cap. 1.

But Observe further, That now Their Exceptions by Act of Indulgence to
Dissenters.
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, dissenting from the Church of England, and
qualified according to the late Statute of Indulgence, are exempted from
Penalties.

See Stat. 1 W. and Ma. 24. Maii, 1689.

Provided no Popish Recusant have any Not to extend to Popish Recusants.
benefit.

Provided also no Congregation be allowed until the place of Meeting be
certified to the Bishop, or Archdeacon, or Justice of the Peace, etc.

And provided, That if any Assembly of Dissenters not to keep their Meeting
House Doors locked or barred, etc.
Persons, dissenting from the Church of England, shall be had in any place for
Religious Worship, with the Doors locked, barred, or bolted, during the time of
such Meeting together: All and every Person that shall come to, and be at such
Meeting, shall not receive any benefit from this Law, notwithstanding his
taking the Oaths, and making and subscribing such Declarations, etc. as are in
the said Act contained, 1 W. and M. 24 Maii, 1689.

You shall true Presentment make of all Bloodshedding, Affrays, Outcries,
Rescues, or other Offenses committed or done against Their Majesty's Peace,
within your Limits.

This Branch explains it self; and it is When and where Constables must make
their Presentiments.
the Duty of High Constables, and Petit Constables to attend upon, aid and
assist, and execute the Warrants of the Judges of Assize, at their Assizes and
Jail-deliver, and the Justices of Peace at their General and Special Sessions,
and other Meetings, and there (upon Oath, and in Writing, if it be required) to
make Presentment to them of things within their knowledge against the Peace,
and of such other things as are usually contained in Articles exhibited to them
for that purpose: As concerning Felons, Hue and Cry, Watch, Punishment of
Rogues, Laborers, Servants, Apprentices, Idle and Suspected persons, the
Assize of Bread and Beer, Weights and Measures, Bridges in Decay, Alehouses,
Licensed and Unlicensed, Gaming-Houses, harboring Rogues, Tippling and
Drunkenness, unlawful and Unsealed Measures, Defect of Highways, etc. and if
they be Charged, they must give Account to all the Particulars of their Office;
and for any neglect or fault therein, Justices may punish them by Indictment or
otherwise, as in other like cases of neglect or contempt of them.

Note, Most of these Things, especially those which are common Nusances; as
corrupting the Air, Water, or Victuals, by Filth or Carcasses, etc. stopping of
the way and passage, Deceit in Weights, Measures, etc. Counterfeiting of Wares,
and the like, the Constables, etc. are to present at Leets, and give
Information of the Offenders, to the intent they may be punished as the Law
requires.

See Bacon's Cases, p. 28.

Ninthly, You shall well and duly execute all Precepts and Warrants to you
directed, from the Justices of Peace and others, who have Authority in this
County.

First observe, That its said a Justice of How the Constables ought to execute
the Justices Warrants.
Peace, may direct his Warrant to the Sheriff, Bailiff, Constable,
Headburrough, Tithingman, or any other Officer, or any other indifferent Person
by Name, though he be no Officer.

See Dalt. fo. 332. 14 H. 8. 16.

But some Acts of Parliament limit the Officers, to whom he shall direct his
Warrant, etc.

Secondly, Note, That generally where a When a Justice makes his Warrant beyond
his Power, etc.
Justice of Peace has Jurisdiction and Authority in the matter, though he make
his Warrant something beyond his power, yet is not the Constable, etc. to
dispute it, but must Execute it, and he shall be Excused; as for Example, If
the Justice make a Warrant to arrest a Man for the Peace or good Behavior,
etc. and there is no cause for it, yet the Officer shall not be punished for
Executing the Warrant. But it is otherwise, where a Justice of Peace makes his
Warrant for something to be done out of the Jurisdiction of the Justice, or
wherein he is no Judge; and here the Officer may be punished if he Execute it,
and therefore may very well disobey it. And it behooves an Officer at his Peril,
to take notice of the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Justice. Dalt. fo. 334.
Lamb. 67, 94. Cromp. 74. 14 H. 8. 16. 10 Co. fo. 76.

Neither ought an Officer to obey a Notorious mistakes in a Warrant.
Warrant that has apparent and notorious mistakes in it, as if it command him
to levy of a Man 5 l. because he was Tippling in an Alehouse, or had Sworn an
Oath, or the like, where the Penalty amounts not to a tenth part, or if it
requires the Constable to do something not within his Precincts: But otherwise
where it is regular; The Officer to whom such Warrant is directed, ought with
all speed and secrecy to Execute it. Dalton fo. 332.

And Note, a sworn Officer, as a Constable, Constable not obliged to show his
Warrant.
etc. needs not to show his Warrant to any man, when he comes to serve it upon
him, although he require it; yet he ought to acquaint the Person with the
Contents thereof; and such as is no sworn Officer ought to show his Warrant on
Demand, otherwise the Party may choose whether he will obey it. Dalt. fo. 332.
Bro. Faux Impr. 23. 6. Co. 54. 9 Co: 68.

But it is said, That if the Officer say to Officer gives sufficient notice by
these words I arrest you, etc.
Party I arrest you in the Kings Name, etc. That is a sufficient notice what he
is, and in such case, though the Party knows he is no sworn Officer, he ought
at his Peril to obey him; and if the other has no lawful Warrant, the Party
grieved may bring an Action of false Imprisonment against him. Dult. fo. 333. 9
Co. fo. 69.

If a Constable, or other Officer arrest a Constable makes an arrest first, and
then procures a Warrant.
man, before he has his Warrant, though afterward he procure one to arrest the
party for the same cause, yet is it a wrongful arrest, and the Officer is
subject to an action of false Imprisonment. Dalt. 333. Lamb. 93. Dyer 244.

If a Constable, etc. after he has arrested Constable takes the Offenders word
for his appearance.
the party, by virtue of his Warrant, lets him at Liberty upon his promise,
that he will come again at another day, and go with him to the Justice, and if
the party comes not at the day appointed, The Constable in this case cannot
take him again upon the same Warrant, because he went at Liberty by his
consent; but if he had escaped of his own wrong without the consent of the
Officer, in such case its said, the Officer may make fresh Suit and take Fresh
Suit.
him again, and though he run out of sight, or fly into another Town or County,
he may bring him back before the Justice that granted the Warrant on which he
first arrested him. Dalton fo. 333, 340. Cromp. 148, 172, 173, 214. Vid. antea,
concerning Escapes.

Its said, That if there be two or three 3 Persons of one Name, and the wrong
man is arrested. Quaere of this. Constable takes the Offender, whose name was
mistaken in the Warrant.
Persons known by the Name of A. B. of C. Gent. and a Warrant is granted
against one of them, wherein the wrong Person is arrested, in such case false
Imprisonment will not lie. Dalt. 333. 11 H. 4. fo. 90. 5 E. 4. fo. 51.

But where a Warrant is granted, against A. B. Son of E. B. and the Officer
takes A. B. Son of J. B. who in truth is the right Person that offended, and
was complained of; yet the arrest is wrongful, and the Officer liable to an
action of false Imprisonment. Dalton 333. 10 E. 4. 1. Bro. 38.

It has been held, That a Justice of Peace Warrant against a Felon.
cannot make a Warrant to arrest a Felon, unless he be first Indicted of
Felony, or that the Justice himself has a suspicion of the Felon. But yet if
the Constable or other Officer do execute the Warrant he may justify it, though
there was Error in the Justice. 14 H. 8. 16. Bro. Peace. 6 and Faux Imp. 8.
Dalt. fo. 331.

Note, it is said before, That a Constable, Nota.
Ex Officio may upon suspicion or information arrest a Felon.

Yet its said, that common Fame and One arrested for Felony, and none done.
Voice is not sufficient cause to arrest a man for Felony, unless a Felony be
done indeed. But where a Hue and Cry either by the Common Law or Statute is
Levied upon a Person, the arrest of him is lawful, though the Hue and Cry be
feigned. And Hue and Cry feigned.
if it be feigned, he that Levies the same may be arrested, fined, and
Imprisoned. 29 E. 3. 9. 38 E. 3. 6. 3d part Co. Inst. fo. 118. 21 H. 7. 28.

Note, That a Constable or other Officer, Where the Constable may break open
the House.
upon a Justices Warrant for Treason, Felony, and the like, or in any other
case, where the King is a Party, may by virtue of the Warrant break open any
House to arrest the Offender, having first signified the cause of his coming,
and required them to open the Doors. 5 Co. fo. 9. Cromp. 171. Dalt. fo. 204,
205, 333.

Note also, That if any Person shall abuse Punishment of such as abuse the
Justices Warrant.
the Justice of Peace his Warrant, either by throwing it into the Dirt,
treading it under Feet, burning it, or the like: Such person for such his
Contempt, may be bound to his good Behavior; and may also be Indicted and
fined for the same, for it is the Kings Process. Cromp. 149. Dalt. fo. 334.

Note also, upon a General Warrant, Before what Justice the Offender must be
carried.
The Constable may choose his Justice, but where the Warrant runs only to bring
the Party before the Justice granting it, Then the Constable must carry him
before that Justice and not elsewhere.

Lastly, Observe, That a Person committed Offenders committed to Gaol must bear
their own Charges.
to Gaol, ought to bear his own charges, to be levied of his Goods and
Chattels, by a Justices Warrant for that purpose; but if he have not Goods,
then the Parish where he was apprehended is to bear the charge of conveying
him, by an indifferent Assesment, by the Constable and Churchwardens and two
or more of the Inhabitants, allowed of by a Justice of Peace. And the Jailer is
bound to receive the Prisoner freely, without taking any thing of the Officer
that brings him. See Stat. 3. Jac. 1. Chap. 10.

Tenthly, You shall well and truly according to your Knowledge Power and
Ability, do and execute all other Things belonging to the Office of a
Constable, so long as you shall continue in the said Office.

This is the last Branch of the Constable's Oath, and extends to all other
things belonging to his Office. Therefore I shall next endeavor to set them
down in order for your Instruction.

CHAP. III. The Constables Office about Seizing Arms, etc.
THe Lieutenants of the Militia, or Constables to seize the Ayms of such as the
Lieutenants of the Militia judge dangerous.
two or more of their Deputies, may by Warrant employ Persons (of which a
Commission-Officer, and a Constable or his Deputy, or the Tythingman, or in
their absence, some other Officer of the Parish shall be two,) to search for,
and seize Arms, in the Custody of such as the said Lieutenants or any two of
their Deputies judge Dangerous, and to secure them, and give account thereof to
the said Lieutenants, etc. 13 and 14 Car. 2. ca. 3.

No Search to be made between Sun setting When the Search must be made.
and Sunrising, other than in Cities and their Suburbs, Towns Corporate,
Market Towns, and Houses within the Bills of Mortality, if the Warrant so
directs. Ibid.

No Dwelling House of a Peer shall be Searching of the House of a Peer.
searched, but by Warrant from the King, under the Sign Manual, or in the
presence of the Lieutenant, or one Deputy Lieutenant. Ibid.

In case of Resistance, it shall be lawful In case of Resistance.
to enter with Force, and the Arms seized may be restored, if the Lieutenants,
their Deputies, or any two of them think fit. 13 and 14 Car. 2. ca. 3.

High Constables, Petty-Constables, and other Officers, shall be assisting in
the Execution of the Premises.

The Constables also, by Warrant for Constable to levy Fines, etc.
that purpose, under the Hand and Seal of the Lieutenants and their Deputies,
or three of them, are to Levy to such Sums as shall be charged upon such as
neglect to provide Horsemen and Footmen, Arms, etc. according to the Act 14
Car. 2. ca. 3. 15 Car. 2. ca. 4.

And where sufficient Distress cannot be Lack of distress and commitment.
had, Then the Lords Lieutenants or their Deputies, by like Warrant to the
Constable may commit such Offender to Prison, until he shall make satisfaction,
according to his Forfeiture, Payment, or Penalty. 15 Car. 2. Ca. 4.

The Constables or their Deputies, Headburroughs, Constables to seize Popish
Recusants Arms
and Tything men, from time to time are to assist such as shall be empowered by
Warrant, under the Hands and Seals of two Justices of Peace or more, to search
for all Arms, Weapons, Gunpowder, or Ammunition, which shall be in the House,
Custody, or Possession of any Popish Recusant, and to search the same for the
use of their Majesty's. Stat. 11. Maii, primo W. and M.

All Popish Recusants and other Persons, Disturbers to be committed.
concealing Popish Recusants Arms, or disturbing such as are authorized to
search and seize the same, shall by like Warrant as aforesaid, be committed to
the common Gaol for three Months without Bail, and shall forfeit the said Arms,
and lose treble the value of them to their Majesty's, and their Successors.

Also the Constables, etc. are to be aiding To seize the Horses of Popish
Recusants, above 5 l. value.
as aforesaid, to search for the Horses of Popish Recusants, above the Value of
5 l. a piece, and to seize the same for their Majesty's use; and to carry to
Gaol such as shall conceal any such Horses, to be committed by like Warrant for
3 Months without Bail, and to forfeit treble the value of such Horse or Horses.
1 W. and M. 11. Maii, 1689.

The Constable also is to obey the Justice Amoving Papists 10 Miles from London
and Westminster.
his Warrant, for bringing before him, and amoving Papists and reputed Papists,
from the Cities of London and Westminster, and 10 Miles distant from the same.
14 April, 1 W. and M. 1689.

CHAP. IV. Account.
Bailiffs, Constables and Sheriffs, and other Officers, are to Execute the
Orders and Precepts of the Commissioners, appointed to Examine and State the
public Accounts of the Kingdom, by an Act, 2 W. and M.

CHAP. V. The Constables Office about Seizing of Cattle, etc.
COnstables, Tything-men, Headburroughs, Constables to Seize Irish Cattle.
Church Wardens, or Overseers of the Poor, or any other Person, may take and
Seize all great Cattle, Sheep, or Swine, or any Beef, Pork, or Bacon, brought
from Ireland: And that to prevent fraudulent Seizures and Compositions, the
Seizors shall within six days after Conviction and Forfeiture, cause the said
Cattle, Sheep and Swine, to be killed, and the Hides and Tallow shall be to the
Seizor, and the Remainder to be Distributed by the Churchwardens and Overseers
amongst the Poor of the Parish, where any such great Cattle, Sheep, or Swine,
shall be Imported or found. Stat. 18 Car. 2. Cap. 2. 20 Car. 2. ca. 7. 32 Car.
2. Cap. 2.

The Seizor, Churchwarden, or Overseer, Penalty upon Seizor for neglecting his
Duty.
failing in his Duty, shall forfeit 40 s. for every one of the great Cattle,
and 10 s. for every Sheep, or Swine, which should have been so killed and
distributed. One Moiety to the Poor of the said Parish, the other to the
Informer, to be levied by Distress, and Sale of the Offenders Goods, Commitment
for want of Distress.
by Warrant from any one Justice of Peace, and for want thereof the Offender to
be committed to Gaol for thee Months without Bail. 32 Car. 2. Cap. 2.

Mutton and Lamb Imported, shall be Mutton and Lamb to be Seized.
subject to the like Seizures, and the Importers and Sellers to the like
Penalties, as they are for Importing of Beef, Pork, or Bacon, and so it is for
all Butter* and Cheese, which shall be Imported from Ireland. 32 Car. 2. ca. 2.

And Note, That if any great Cattle, A 2d Seizure may be made.
Sheep or Swine, which have been Seized, shall be found alive in any other
Parish or Place, they are subject to a 2d Seizure, and to be killed for the
benefit of the Seizor, and the poor of the Parish or place, in the same manner,
as is ordered upon the first Seizure.

And if there be any English, Scotch, Intermixed Cattle all forfeited.
or other Cattle intermixed with Irish Cattle, They shall all be deemed and
forfeited as Irish. 32 Car. 2. ca. 2.

CHAP. VI. The Constables Office about providing Carriages, etc. for the King.
THe Constables formerly, by many Statutes, had much to do in taking up.
Provisions and Carriages for the King and his Court: But by the Statute 12 Car.
2. Cap. 24. as concerning Provisions, Pre-emption and Purveyance taken away.
It is Enacted, That no Pre-emption (that is, a Privilege of Buying before
others) shall be allowed the King, or any of the Royal Family, in or out of any
Market; but the Subjects may dispose of their Goods as they please. Nor shall
any Person, by color of Purveyance, take any thing of any Subject without the
Owners assent; nor shall require any to find Horses, Oxen, or other Cattle; or
Carriages for any King or Queen, etc. without consent, as aforesaid.

And if any shall make Purveyance, or Purveyor committed to Gaol.
impress any Carriage otherwise, one Justice and the Constable, at the request
of the Party grieved, may commit him to Gaol, and Indict him next Assizes or
Sessions, and the Party grieved may by Action recover treble Damages and treble
Costs against the Offender. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

This Act confirmed by 13 Car. 2. cap. 7. Provision made for the Kings
Carriages in his Royal progress.
But it being found to be too prejudicial to the King, if the Subjects might
not be forced at reasonable Rates to furnish the King with Carriages: Therefore
by a Statute 13 Car. 2. cap. 8. It was provided, That the Clerk, or Chief
Officer of the Kings Carriages, three Days before His Majesty's arrival, should
give Notice to the two next Justices to the place, to provide such a number of
Carts and Carriages, which the Constables upon their Warrant are to Press and
provide, each Cart furnished with four able Horses, or four Oxen and two
Horses, to be paid six Pence a 6d. a mile.
mile, for every mile they go laden, to be paid in hand at Lading, and not to
go above one days Journey; which if any shall refuse without reasonable cause,
he forfeits 40 s. to be levied by the Constable on a Forfeiture.
Warrant.

And if the Justice or Constable take any Bribe, to spare any fit person from
such Carriages, or Press more Carriages than directed, he forfeits 10 l.

Note, this last Act is expired, and primo Jac. I was revived, but was to
continue but till the first Session of next Parliament, and therefore is now
expired.

Provision for Carriages by Land and Water for their Majesty's use.
And by the Stature 14 Car. 2. cap. 20. two or more Justices by Warrant from
Commissioners of the Navy or Master of the Ordnance, are to cause Constables to
provide Carriages for 12. miles round from the place of Lading, who are to have
12 d. a mile for every Load of Timber, and 8 d. a mile for every Tun of other 8
d a mile.
Commodities; and such as refuse (being warned) to send their Teams, forfeit 20
s. But they must be paid in hand, and are to Travel no further, nor work any
longer than the Justices shall order.

Note, this last Act was expired, but revived again for 7 years, by an Act 1
Jac. 2. and now again almost expiring.

CHAP. VII. The Constables Office about Cloth, etc.
CONSTABLES, on request to them The Constables to assist the Wardens for
regulating Worsteds, etc. Also the Wardens for Kidderminster Stuffs.
made, are to be aiding and assisting to the Wardens and Assistants, to
regulate the Trade of Worsteds and other Stuffs, called Norwich Stuffs, made
within the City of Norwich and County of Norfolk, 14 Car. 2. cap. 5.

Likewise upon request, they are to be aiding and assisting to the President,
Wardens, and Assistants, for regulating the making of Kidderminster Stuffs,
within the Borough and Parish of Kidderminster, by the Act 22 and 23 Car. 2.
cap. 8.

Note, The High Constable has a further Power about Clothiers and Spinsters, of
which more hereafter, when we speak of the High-Constable alone.

CHAP. VIII. The Constables Office about Their Majesty's Customs, etc.
ALl Constables, Headburroughs, and Constables to assist those that manage
their Majesty's Customs.
other the Kings Officers of the Admiralty, Captains and Commanders of Ships,
Forts, Castles, and Blockhouses, etc. and other the Kings Subjects, are to be
aiding and assisting to all and every person and persons, which are or shall be
appointed to manage his Majesty's Customs, and if molested therefore, may plead
the General Issue, 14 Car. 2. cap. 11.

By the Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 19. Sheriffs Constables to search for uncustomed
Goods.
Justices and Constables, are upon request to be aiding to any person having a
Warrant from the Lord Treasurer, or any of the Barons of the Exchequer, or
Chief Magistrate of a Port for the Search of accustomed Goods, who (with such
Assistance) may enter into any House in the Day time, where such Goods are
suspected to be concealed And in case of Resistance, may break open House may
be broke open.
the House, and seize and secure such Goods.

But no House shall be entered by virtue False Information and Damages recovered.
of this Act, but within a Month after the Offense supposed to be committed:
And if the Information whereupon any House shall be searched prove false, the
Party injured shall recover full Damages and Costs against the Informer, in an
Action of Trespass, 12 Car. 2. cap 19.

This Act confirmed by 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

Such as are authorized by Writ of Assistance Writ of Assistance.
out of the Exchequer, are to take a Constable, Headburrough, or other Officer,
inhabiting near the place; and in the Day time, to enter into any House, Shop,
Warehouse, etc. And in case of Resistance, to break open Doors, Chests, etc.
and there to seize and bring away any prohibited Seizure of Goods.
and uncustomed Goods and Merchandises, and to secure the same in Their
Majesty's Store house in the next Port, 14 Car. 2. cap. 11.

And the like provision is made by a Statute 1 W. and M. for prohibiting Trade
and Commerce with France.

Taxes and Aid-Mony.
BY an Act 2 W. and M. for granting an Aid to Their Majesty's of the Sum of
1651702 l. 18 s. viz. 137641 l. 18 s. 2 d. by the Month, for 12 Months, from 25
December. 1690.

Constables are to assist the Collectors to Constables to distrain and break
open Houses, etc.
Distrain, and in the Day time to Break open the Houses, and (upon Warrant from
two or more of the Commissioners) the Chests, Trunks, etc. where the Goods are
of such as refuse to pay their Assessments.

That where the Lands or Houses are How to distrain when the Houses, etc. are
unoccupied.
unoccupied, and no Distress to be found, and thereby the Parish, etc. charged;
the Collectors, Constable, or Tithingman of the Parish, Place, or
Constablewick, at any time after may enter and distrain upon the Lands or
Houses; and the Distress, being the proper Goods of the Owner of the Land, etc.
if not redeemed within four days, by payment of the Tax and charge of Distress
to sell, rendering the Overplus; and to distribute the Distress, proportionably
to the Parties who contributed to the Tax of the said unoccupied Lands.

If Wood-lands be Assess'd, and no Distress How to levy the Tax upon Woodlands.
to be had, the Collector, Constable, etc. may by Warrant from two or more of
the Commissioners of the Hundred, or Division, at seasonable times in the Year,
cut and sell so much Wood as will pay the Assessment behind, and the charge
incident thereunto, rendering the Overplus; and the Party to whom it is sold,
may sell, cut down, and dispose of the same to his own use.

If the Assessment be upon Tithes, Tolls, How upon Tithes, Tolls and Annual
profits.
or Annual Profits, not distrainable, and not paid within 15 Days after demand;
the Collector, Constable, etc. by like Warrant from the Commissioners, may
seize and sell so much of the Tithes, Tolls, or other Profits so charged,
sufficient for the Tax and Charges occasioned, rendering the Overplus, etc. 2 W.
and M.

CHAP. IX.
The Constables Office about Distress for Rent, etc.
WHere any Goods or Chattels shall Distress for Rent reserved upon Demise,
Lease, or Contract. Notice of the Distress
be distrained for any Rent reserved, and due upon any Demise, Lease, or
Contract whatsoever; and the Tenant or Owner of the Goods so distrained, shall
not within 5 days (after such Distress taken, and Notice thereof and of the
Cause, left at the Dwelling House, or most notorious Place on the Premises,
charged with the Rent distrained for) Replevy the same according to Law: Then
in such ease the Landlord or Person distraining, may with the Sheriff, or
Undersheriff of the County, or with the Constable of the Hundred, Parish, or
Place, where such Distress shall be taken (who are required to be aiding and
assisting, therein) cause the Goods and Chattels, to to be Appraised by two
sworn Appraisers Goods to be Appraised, and sold.
(whom the Sheriff, Undersheriff, or Constable are empowered to Swear) and
afterward sell the same for the best price, toward the Rent and Charges of
Distress, Appraisment, and Sale, leaving the Overplus in the Sheriff or
Constables hand, for the Owners use, Stat. 11 Maii 1690. primo Willielmi and
Mariae.

And the like may be done as to Sheaves Corn and Hay distrained for Rent.
or Cocks of Corn, loose or in the Straw; or Hay in any Barn or Granary, or on
any Hovel, Stack, or Rick (which before this Act were not distrainable.)

But note, That these last mentioned Corn and Hay not to be removed till
default of Replevin, etc.
Goods, etc. are not to be removed from the place where found and seized; but
to be kept there, as impounded, until the same shall be replevied within the
time aforesaid, or sold in default of such Replevin, 11 Maii, 1 W. and M.

CHAP. X*
The Constables Office about Excise.
EXcise Men ( alias Gagers) when Constables to assist Gagers and Excise-Men.
they intend to enter by Night into the Houses of Brewers, Victuallers,
Distillers, etc. to Gage their Coppers, Fats, or Vessels, or take an account of
their Beer, Ale, Wort, Perry, Cider, Strong Water, Metheglin, Mead, Coffee,
Chocolet, Sherbet, or Tea, brewed, made or distilled there, are to take a
Constable along with them, 12 Car. 2. cap. 23, 24.

Note, the Excise of Coffee is now paid in the Berry, etc.

See primo W. and M. 25 Julii, 1689. concerning Distillers of Strongwaters, etc.

Also Constables, etc. upon Warrant to To levy Penalties upon the Offenders
against the Acts of Excise.
them directed from the Justices of Peace, are to levy the Penalties upon the
Goods of the Offenders against the Acts for Excise, by distress and sale
thereof, rendering the Overplus; and for want of Distress, to carry the Party to
Gaol, till satisfaction be made, 12 Car. 2. cap. 23, 24.

The Constables are also, from time to To summons Brewers, etc. before the
Commissioners.
time, upon Warrant to them directed, to summon all Alehousekeepers, etc. to
appear before the Commissioners of Excise, at the Days and Places in such
Warrants appointed.

CHAP. XI.
About Fish.
Constables and Churchwardens, by Constables are to levy the Penalties upon
such as destroy the Spawn of Fish.
Warrant from a Justice of Peace, are to levy the Penalties upon such as
destroy the Spawn and Breed of Fish along the Sea-shoar, or in any Haven or
Creek, or within five Miles of the Mouth of any Haven or Creek, by fishing with
Nets of a less Mesh than three inches and an half betwixt knot and knot,
(except for the taking Smoulds in Norfolk only) or with a Canvas-Net or other
Engine. The Penalty is 10 s. to be levied by distress and sale of the Offenders
Goods.

Note, that in Corporations, the Penalty may be levied by the Head Officers, 3
Jac. cap. 12. To search for Nets and Engines, used to destroy Fish.


Also Constables, upon Warrants from the Justices of Peace in the Counties of
Worcester, Salop, and Gloucester, are to search for unlawful Nets or Engines
(used to take Fish in the River of Severn) in all suspected Houses, and to
seize the unlawful Instruments, and bring them to the Quarter Sessions, to be
destroyed, Stat. 30 Car. 2. cap. 9.

CHAP. XII.
About French Goods, etc. prohibited.
NOne shall sell, or offer to sale, export, Constables, etc. to search for
French Goods imported.
or import Foreign Bonelace, Cut-work, Embroidery, Fringe, Band-strings,
Buttons, or Needlework of Thread or Silk, on pain to forfeit for selling, or
offering to sale, as aforesaid, 50 l. and the Goods themselves; and for
importing, 100 l. and the Goods imported, the one moiety to the King, the other
to him that will sue in Court of Record.

And the Constables, upon Warrant to them directed from the Justices of Peace,
are to search for such Manufactures in Shops, being open Warehouses, and
Dwelling-houses, and to seize them, Stat. 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. 13.

By an Act primo Williel. and Mar. for French Goods to be destroyed.
prohibiting Trade with France, Wines, Vinegar, Brandies, and other liquid
Commodities, single or mixed, shall be staved, spilt and destroyed; and Linnens,
Silks, Paper and other Commodities, mixed or unmixt, shall be publicly burnt
and destroyed: And such Persons as presume, to take up or save any of the said
Commodities so to be destroyed, Forfeitures.
shall forfeit 40 s. over and above the Value of the Goods.

And the Persons importing, shall forfeit the full value thereof; and the
Persons keeping or selling any such prohibited Goods, shall for the first
Offense forfeit the full value thereof; for the second, double Forfeitures.
the value, and be disabled to execute any public Employment whatsoever. And
any person may seize such Goods, in whose custody soever, to the intent they
may be destroyed.

And every Informer or Prosecutor, that shall by collusion or fraud, desist or
delay his prosecution for any Offense against this Act, shall upon Conviction
forfeit 500 l.

And all Sheriffs, Mayors, etc. Constables Constables to be aiding.
and other Officers, are enjoined to be aiding in the due execution of this
Act, in reference to the Commodities aforesaid.

If any person, not being a known Merchant, Vintner, or Shopkeeper, shall sell
or expose to sale any such prohibited Goods, after Conviction in Their
Majesty's Court of Record, shall suffer 12 Months Imprisonment without Bail,
above the Penalties Imprisonment. Ship. Forfeited 500l.
aforesaid.

The Ship or Vessel in which they are imported, shall be forfeited, and all the
Furniture etc.

And the Master, or other Person, having Care of the Ship or Vessel in the
Voyage, or out of which any such Prohibited Goods shall be unship'd, either at
Sea or in Harbors, etc. into any Hoy or Boat, shall forfeit 500 l. And the
Justices may by Warrant apprehend him, and upon the Fact proved by two
Witnesses on Oath, may commit him to the next Gaol for Imprisonment.
12 Months, without Bail or Mainprize.

And the Seamen, Mariners or any other person assisting at the unshipping or
conveying of any the said Commodities, either by Land or Water, shall upon such
Proof, be subject to like Imprisonment, or Seamen, etc. Whipped.
be publicly Whipped at the discretion of the Justice of Peace, before whom he
shall be convicted.

And the Carts and other Carriages, and the Cattle moving the same, shall be
forfeited, one half to the Poor, and the other to the Seizor.

The Constables, etc. are (upon Warrant) Constables to levy the Forfeitures on
such as sell Wine by Retail in unlawful Measures.
to levy by distress and sale of Goods, the Forfeitures of such as sell Wine by
Retail in Glass-Bottles, or other Measures not made of Pewter, and lawfully
sealed; Viz. 50s. for every Offense; the conviction to be by Confession or Oath
of two Witnesses, before one or more Justices of the County, City, or Place
where, etc. and the Offender to be prosecuted within 30 Days, Stat. 2 W. and M.
for the better execution of the former Act.

And such as beat or abuse Informers, Officers, etc. in the due execution of
this Act, may be the next Justice be committed to Prison till the
Quarter Sessions, and there be fined, not exceeding 5 l. and to remain till he
be discharged by Order of the Justices, or two of them.

CHAP. XIII.
About Highways, Hay-Carts and Hogs, Streets and Bridges.
THE Constables and Churchwardens Constables, etc. to choose Surveyors.
of every Parish, shall yearly upon Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter Week, call
together some of their Neighbors, and then make choice of Two within the
Parish, to be Surveyors of the Highways the Year following; who shall
forthwith take that Office upon them, in pain to forfeit 20 s. apiece. The said
Constables and Churchwardens shall then Stat. 5 Eliz. cap. 13. 22 Car. 2. cap.
12.
also nominate six Days betwixt that time and Midsummer, to be set apart for
the amendment of the Highways, and shall give public Notice thereof in the
Church, the next Sunday after Easter, Stat. 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. cap. 8.

By Stat. 22 Car. 2. cap. 12. they are to be chosen some day in Christmas
Week, by the Constables, etc.

The Stewards in Leets have Power to Fines upon such as make default.
enquire after the breach of this Act, and to set Fines upon such as make
default, at their discretion; and shall within six Weeks after Michaelmass,
deliver indented Estreats thereof under their Hands and Seals, viz. one to the
Bailiff or High-Constable of the Liberty, and the other to the Constables and
Churchwardens of the Parish where the default was made, 2 and 3 P. and M. cap.
8.

And in default of Presentment thereof in Leets, the Justices of Peace in
Sessions shall enquire thereof, and set such Fines as they, or two of them (one
to be of the Quorum) shall think fit, whereof the Clerk of the Peace shall
deliver indented Estreats under his Hand and Seal, within six Weeks of
Michaelmass, in manner, as aforesaid. And these Estreats of the Stewards of
Leets, or Clerk of the Peace, shall be a sufficient Warrant for the Bailiff or
Chief Constable, to levy the said Fines by way of Distress; and if no Distress
can be found, or the Party do not pay the Fine within twenty Days after lawful
demand thereof, he or they shall forfeit double so much. All which Fines and
Forfeitures shall be employed toward the amendment of the Highways, 2 and 3 P.
and M. cap. 8.

The Bailiff, or High-Constable, shall yearly (betwixt the first of March and
last of April, render unto the Constables and Churchwardens, unto whom the
other part of the Estreats was delivered, a true account of the Money received
by him, in pain of 40 s. And the said Constables and Churchwardens have Power
to call the said Bailiff or High Constable before two or more Justices of Peace
(one to be of the Quorum) to pass his Account, who have Power to commit him,
until he shall have satisfied all the Arrearages by him received, save eight
Pence in the Pound for his own Fee, and twelve Pence in the Pound for the Fee
of the Steward or Clerk of the Peace; and in this case the succeeding
Constables and Churchwardens have the same Power that their Predecessors had, 2
and 3 P. and M. 8.

The Fines assessed in Sessions upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. 13. shall be
Estreated by the Clerk of the Peace, levied accounted and employed, as by the
Statute 2 and 3 P. and M. 8. is provided.

Upon a Warrant from two Justices of Constables to levy Forfeitures in default
of the Surveyors.
the Peace, the Surveyors are to levy by distress and sale of Goods, the
Forfeitures upon the Statute of 18 Eliz. 10. in not scowring Ditches, etc. and
if the Surveyors neglect to do it within one year after the Offense committed,
the Constable and Churchwardens shall do it, according to the provisions of the
said recited Statutes. Stat. 18 Eliz. 10.

And by a Statute 22 Car. 2. cap. 12. all Constable fined for neglecting his
Office.
Constables and Surveyors of the Highways, neglecting to put the Acts (touching
repairing or enlarging Highways) in execution; or wilfully suffering any
Wagons or Carts to pass in any other manner than by this Act is allowed, upon
conviction thereof by one Oath before one Justice, or the Justices own view,
shall pay such Fine (not to exceed 40 s.) as such Justice shall impose.

And by this Statute, no Carriage with Forfeitures of such as Draw with above
five Horses in length.
any burden (other than such as are employed about Husbandry, and in carrying
Hay, Straw, Corn unthresh'd, Coal, Chalk, Timber for Shipping, Materials for
Building, Stones or Ammunition, or Attillery for the King's service) shall go
in any Highway with above five Horses in length; and if any Draw with more
Horses or Oxen, they shall all draw in Pairs, except one Horse.

And every Owner of any Wagon, Cart, etc. Horse or Beasts, shall forfeit for
every Offense 40 s. whereof one Third part to the Surveyors, to amend the
Highways; one Third part to the Overseers for the Poor; and one Third part to
him who To be levied by the Constable. Penalties upon such as neglect to
labor, toward Repairing the Highways.
shall discover the Offender, to be levied by Warrant to the High-Constable, or
other Officer.

The Surveyor upon neglect of any to come and labor, shall complain thereof to
the next Justices; who upon Oath of one Witness, shall levy for every days
labor neglected, without a reasonable cause, 1 s. 6 d. for every Man and Horse
3 s. and for every Cart with two Men, 10 s. for each days neglect.

And if any bring Actions against such as act by this Law, they must be laid in
the proper County, and Defendants may plead the General Issue, and recover
treble Costs, Stat. 22 Car. 2. cap. 12.

Note, That by an Act 20th. December. The Act for cleansing the Streets, etc.
2 Wi. and Ma. for Paving, and Cleansing the Streets in London and Westminster,
the Out-Parishes in Middlesex, the Borough of Southwark, and other places
within the weekly Bills of Mortality, in the County of Surry,

It is Enacted, That every person of the Inhabitants to sweep the streets
before their Doors.
Parishes in Middlesex, Westminster, Southwark, and weekly Bills of Mortality,
are twice in every Week, viz. Wednesday and Saturday to sweep the Streets
before their respective Houses, Walls, and other public places, that the Dirt
may be ready for the Scavenger, upon penalty of 3 s. 4 d. for every Neglect.

They are not to throw any Dust, Dirt, Penalties on such as throw Dirt in the
streets.
or Filth, in the Streets or Alleys, etc. upon penalty of 5 s. nor to cast any
filth or Noysom thing into any public Sink, Vault, Watercourse, or common
Sewer, or Highway, or into any private Vault, or Sink, of any other Person,
but are to keep it till the Scavenger come, and then deliver it them, upon
penalty of 20 s. for every Offense.

The Keepers of their Majesty's Houses, Keepers of their Majesty's Houses, etc.
Hooping and washing of Barrels, etc. in the streets.
Stables, etc. And Keepers of Courts of Justice, and other public places, are
liable to these Forfeitures.

They forfeit 20 s. who Hoop, Wash, or Cleanse any Pipes, Barrels, or other
Vessels, in any Streets, Lanes, or open Passages, and they forfeit the like who
set out any Dung, Soil, Rubbish, or empty Coaches to make or mend, or rough
Timber, or Stones to be sawn or wrought in the streets.

Scavenger every day, except Sunday, Penalties on the Scavengers. Forfeitures.
shall bring Carts, etc. and give notice by Noise, and stay a convenient time
till Dust, etc. be brought out to them, on penalty of 40 s. for every neglect.

All open streets shall be repaired by Open streets how to be repaired.
Forfeitures.
House-holders, and where the Houses be empty, by the Owners, upon penalty to
forfeit 20 s. for each Perch, and 20 s. for every week after, till sufficiently
paved.

One Justice of Peace or more, where New streets how to be paved. Forfeitures.
any new street is made, may view it, and (if judged fit to be paved,) to
certify under hand to the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, who are to order
therein as they shall think fit; and the Owners of every New-Built-house, or
Inhabitants, are required to obey such Orders, and the Offender forfeits 40 s.
for each Perch, and the like for every week, till the same be paved.

This not to invalid any Custom or usage to the contrary.

The Parishes of S. Ann, and S. James, Parishes of S. Ann etc. Rates and other
things Custom of the City.
in the Liberty of Westminster, shall choose Seavengers as by former Acts, and
the Rates and all other things shall be according to the Custom and Usage of
the said City, where not otherwise in the said Acts provided.

All the other Places and Parishes, upon Scavengers how to be Chosen.
Monday or Tuesday in Easter week, by the Constable, Churchwardens, Overseers,
Surveyors of the Highways, and such other Inhabitants as are usually present at
the Election of Parish Officers, or the greater number of them, shall make
choice of two or more able Tradesmen to be Scavengers for the Year next
ensuing, and until others be Chosen, etc. who being Penalties upon Scavengers
refusing to act.
approved and confirmed under hand of two Justices, shall within 7 days take
the Office upon them, upon pain to forfeit 10 l. In which case others to be
Chosen in manner aforesaid, within 7 days after such refusal, who shall be
liable to the like forfeitures.

The said Penalties to be levied by Distress Constables to levy these Penalties
by Distress.
and Sale, by Warrant from one Justice of the Place, directed to the Constables
or other Officers of the same Parish, or any two or more of them, rendering the
overplus; reasonable Charges to be deducted for making the Distress.

The said Penalties to be paid to the Penalties how to be disposed of.
Surveyers of the Highways, and disposed of by them toward mending and
repairing the Highways, and Streets of the same Parish, Ward, or Division.

In default of Distress, within 6 days after Imprisonment for lack of Distress.
demand, and not paid, or after notice in writing left at the House, to be
committed to common Gaol, by any Justice to remain until payment.

Within 20 days after the Election and Constables, etc. to make a Tax for the
Scavenger, to be paid by the Inhabitants
Confirmation of the Scavenger, The Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers,
Surveyers, or the greater number of them, shall make a Tax to a pound Rate upon
the Inhabitants, which allowed by two Justices, and being equal and reasonable,
shall be Quarterly paid upon demand to the Scavenger.

In case of refusal, shall by Warrant of Distress. Imprisonment.
two Justices be levied by Distress, etc. and for wont of Distress, by
Imprisonment till payment.

Moneys Collected, shall be accounted Scavenger to account.
for by the Scavenger to two of the next Justices, within 28 days after a new
Scavenger Elected.

And what remains in hand, to be paid to the new Scavenger.

Those who refuse to account, shall be Refusal to account and Imprisonment.
Assesment for repair of the High ways.
committed to Prison, to remain without Bail, until a true account made, and
what in their hands paid, etc.

For repairing several Highways in the said Parishes, an Assesment may be made
on all Inhabitants, etc. to be allowed by the Justices at their Quarter
Sessions, and levied by such persons as they shall direct: And what raised to
be employed according to the directions of the Justices toward repair of
Highways, and to be Distress and sat.
levied by Distress and Sale, if not paid within 14 days.

No such Assessment shall exceed in any Assessment, what.
one Year, 4 d. in the Pound for Real, and 8 d. per Pound for Personal Estates.

Touching new Sewers, Sinks and Vaults Concerning Sewers.
made since 12 Car. 2. they shall be subject to the Commission and Statute for
Sewers, as if they had been therein mentioned: And the Commissioners Power
touching them is the same.

Also for Lighting the Streets in the Penalties on such as hang not out Lights.
Night, in any of the said Parishes or Places; It is Enacted, That every
Houshoulder, from Michaelmass until Ladyday yearly, whose House is near the
Street, shall hang out Candles, or Lights in Lanthorns, every Night on the
outside, from the time it grows dark until 12 in the Night, upon pain of 2s.

None shall suffer their Cart to stand in On such as stay their Carts too long
in the Hay-market, etc.
the Hay-market near Piccadilly, or in Southwark, or any Place within the Bills
of Mortality, laden with Hay or Straw to sell, from Michaelmass till Lady Day,
after Two of the Clock in the Afternoon; and from Lady Day till Michaelmass,
after Three of the Clock, in pain of 5 s.

Every Truss of Hay between the 1st of How much Trusses of Hay must weigh.
June and 31st of August, being new Hay, shall weigh 60 pound, old Hay 56
pound: And those that after the 15th of December 1690, shall offer to sell Hay
of less weight, shall forfeit for each Truss 18 d.

The Conviction of these Offenses, to be Constables, etc* to levy the Penalties
of these Offenses.
either by the View of one Justice, Confession of the Party, or one Witness
upon Oath. The Penalties of all the said Offenses to be levied by distress and
sale, by the Constables or Headburroughs, upon Warrant under Hand and Seal of
one Justice, rendering Overplus.

In default of Distress, or Payment, within Imprisonment for lack of Distress.
six Days after demand or notice, left by the Constable, etc. at the Offenders
House, Offender is to be committed to the Common Gaol by Warrant from one
Justice, to remain until payment.

The Forfeitures to be disposed, one Forfeitures, how to be disposed.
moiety to the Overseers for the Relief of the Poor of the Parish where the
Offense is committed; the other, to him or them that shall discover and
prosecute for the same, in case the conviction be by discovery and prosecution.
But if by View of the Justice, etc. then the whole to the Poor, unless and if
for a default of Payment; then one moiety to be toward the repairing and
cleansing the Streets, to be paid to the Scavengers.

And note by this Act, The Wheels of Penalties on such as make the Wheels of
their Carts, contrary to the Statute.
Carts, Carrs, and Drays, used for Carriage from place to place in the Cities
of London and Westminster, and Parishes aforesaid, where the Streets are Paved,
shall contain six Inches in the Felley in breadth, without any Iron-work, and
to be drawn only by two Horses, after they are up the Hills from the
Waterside, upon penalty of 40 s. every time, to be levied, as aforesaid: But
this Act not to extend to Country Carts, or Wagons, bringing Goods to the
Cities or Places aforesaid; or that shall carry any Goods half a mile beyond
the Paved Streets of the said Cities and Places.

And note further, That no Person in Forfeitures on Hog-Keepers in London,
Westminster, etc. The Swine, etc. forfeited. Constables, etc. may search and
seize such Swine.
London, Westminster, Southwark, or the Parishes aforesaid, shall breed, feed,
or keep any sort or manner of Swine within any part of the Houses or Backsides
of the Paved Streets, where the Houses are contiguous, upon pain of forfeiting
them to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, for the use
of the Poor.

The Constable, Churchwardens, Chapelwardens, Overseers, Beadles,
Headburroughs, or Tithingmen of the respective Parishes, etc. or any of them,
may by Warrant from the Mayor of London, or any other of their Majesty's
Justices of the Places respectively, search to find such Swine, and to seize
and sell them; and to deliver the Money to the Churchwardens or Overseers, to be
distributed to the Poor, as they shall think fit.

And for cleansing and keeping clean the London Streets, how to be cleansed and
kept.
Streets, Lanes, and Passages of London, and the Liberties thereof, It is
Enacted, That the same shall be ordered and managed, and Rates and Impositions
laid and levied, and all other ways and means used and observed, according to
the ancient usage and custom of the said City.

The Lord Mayor, or any Alderman of Nusances there presented.
the City, upon his own proper knowledge and view, may present in open General
Sessions, the laying of any Ashes, Soil, Dust, or Rubbish, or other nuisance or
obstruction in the Streets, Lanes, or Passages: And the Lord Mayor and Justices
at the Sessions, may thereupon immediately assess Fines, not exceeding 20 s.
for any one Offense; and the Fines shall be levied and paid to Fines assessed
and levied.
the Chamberlain of the City, for the use of the City, to be employed in the
public Payments of the same City.

And such as shall be Prosecuted for acting General Issue pleaded, and Acts
given in Evidence.
by virtue of this Statute, or the Statute made 23 Car. 2. for the better
Paving and Cleansing the Streets and Sewers in and about the City of London,
may plead the General Issue, and give the said Acts, or either of them in
Evidence, 2 W. and M.

Four Justices are authorized to allow a Tax for Repair of Bridges in the
Highways.
Tax, for Repair of any decayed Bridges in the Highway; which must be assessed
by the Constable, and two of the sufficientest Inhabitants in the Parish.

But this is where a Common Bridge in the Kings Highway is in decay, and that
it cannot be proved, who, nor what Lands are chargeable to the Repairing
thereof, Stat. 22 H. 8. cap. 5.

CHAP. XIV.
About Horses.
COnstables have something to do in Constables to measure Stoned-Horses.
assisting such as seize (for any Man may seize) Stoned-Horses of lesser
statute than is allowed by the Statute, and to measure the same; viz. any
Stoned-Horse being Two years old, and not Fifteen Hands high, from the lower
part of the Hoof to the upper part of the Wither, on pain of 40 s. between the
King and Prosecutor, such Horses being put to feed upon Forests or Commons,
(Except Commons where Mares are not usually kept,) Stat. 32 H. 8. 13. 8. Eliz.
cap. 8.

But if such Horses make an Escape into a Common, he is not to be questioned.

Fen-Grounds of the Isle of Ely, and of the Counties of Cambridge, Huntingdon,
Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk or Suffolk, are excepted, and there the Horses
need be but 13 Hands high. Ibid.

Constables also are to assist at Michaelmass, And to assist at the Driving of
Forests.
or within 15 days after, to drive Forests and Common Grounds, on pain of 40 s.
And they may also drive them at any other time; and so may the Keepers and
Owners of the Ground, 32 H. 8. 13.

This Act extends not to Cornwall.

CHAP. XV.
About Hunters and Hunting-Dogs, etc.
COnstables, etc. upon a Warrant under Constables to search for Dogs, Nets,
Snares, and Engines.
the Hands and Seals of two or more Justices of the Peace, have Power to search
the Houses of Persons suspected, and not qualified to keep Setting-Dogs, or
Nets, Snares and Engines, to take Pheasants or Partridges, etc. and may take
away their Dogs, and cut their Nets, etc. Stat. 7 Jac. cap. 11. 22 and 23 Car.
2. cap. 25.

Also to levy upon a Warrant from a Justice by distress, the Forfeiture of such
as course, kill, hurt or take away Deer, Conies, etc. in Parks, Warrens, or
other Grounds, where they are kept, 13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap.
5.

See Wingate's Abridment, Tit. Hunters and Hunting.

CHAP. XVI.
About Malt.
COnstables and Bailiffs of Towns Constables to view and sell Malt badly made.
ought to view and search the Malt there made or put to sale; and if they find
any ill or deceitfully made or mingled, they may with the Advice of any one
Justice of Peace, cause the same to be sold at such Rates as the Justice shall
think fit.

And therefore observe, That Malt is When Malt may be said to be badly made.
said to be ill made, and deceitful, if in the making thereof it be not in the
Fat-floor, steeping and drying three Weeks at the least; (Except in June, July
or August, and then 17 days may serve): Also when by Rubbing, Treading and
Fanning, the Makers have not taken out of every Quarter half a Peck of Dust or
more; (for which neglect he forfeits 20 d. a Forfeitures.
Quarter, for every Quarter thereof sold) Or if it is made of Mow-burnt or
spired Barley, or mixed good and bad together; (for which mixing the Seller
forfeits 2 s. for every Quarter thereof sold); and these Forfeitures are to be
divided betwixt the King and the Prosecutor, and the Prosecution must be within
one Year.

But this extends not to such as make Malt for their own provision, Stat. 2 Ed.
6. cap. 10. 21 Jac. 1. cap. 28.

See Dalton's Just. Peace, fo. 87.

CHAP. XVII.
About Physicians.
COnstables and other Officers in London, Constables to aid the College of
Physicians.
and within seven miles round, are to be aiding and assisting to the President
of the College of Physicians; and all Persons authorized by the said College,
for the due execution of the Laws and Statutes relating to the said College,
Stat. 1 M. Parl. 1. Sess. 2. cap. 9. 14 H. 8. cap. 5.

CHAP. XVIII.
About the Plague.
IF the Constable Command any Person Constables to punish such as being
Infected, go abroad.
infected with the Plague (from which the Lord in mercy deliver us) to keep his
House, and notwithstanding such Person shall wilfully go abroad and converse in
Company, having any infectious Sore on him, it is accounted Felony in such
infected Person so to do; and though he shall have no Sore appear about him, he
may for his Offense, by the Appointment of a Justice of Peace, be punished as a
Vagabond, and also bound to his Good Behavior for a Year.

Also the Constable, or other Officer, To levy Moneys for the Relief of the
Poor Infected.
which wilfully neglects to levy the Tar, as shall be appointed by the Justices
or Head Officers, for the Relief of the Poor infected with the Plague, forfeits
for every Offense Ten shillings, Stat. 1. Jac. 1. cap. 31.

CHAP. XIX.
About Quarter-Monies for Maimed Soldiers, etc.
COnstables and Churchwardens are Constables to levy Moneys for Relief of poor
Maimed Soulders.
to levy by distress and sale all Moneys rated on any Person, within their
respective Limits, for the Relief of poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners, and
are to pay it to the High Constables, upon the forfeiture of 20 s.

Quartering Soldiers.
NOte, That Constables, Headburroughs, Soldiers, how to be Quartered.
and other Chief Officers of Towns and Villages within England, Wales, and
Berwick, and no others are to Quarter and Billet Officers and Soldiers in
Their Majesty's Service in Inns, Livery-Stables, Alehouses, Victualing-houses,
and all Houses selling Brandy, Strong Water, Cider, or Metheglin by Retail, to
be drunk in their Houses, and no other; and in no private Persons whatsoever.

And if any Constable, etc. shall Quarter Soldiers upon any private House,
without consent of the Owner, he shall be liable to the parties Action for
Damage.

If any Military Officer shall take upon him to Quarter Soldiers otherwise, or
abuse the Mayor, Constable, etc. or menace them to discourage them in their
Duty, by this Act, such Military Officer shall be Ipso facto cashierd.

Note, The Conviction by two Witnesses before two Justices of the Peace or more
next adjoining, are to pay it to the High Constables upon the forfeiture of 20
s.

They are also in the same manner to For Releif of Prisoners
levy such Rates as are made for the Relief of the Prisoners in the Kings.
Bench, and Marshalseas, and also of Hospitals and Almshouses, and for Releif
of the Poor in their County, and this they must likewise pay to the
High-Constables, on forfeiture of 10 s. Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 3.

See after in the Duty of High Constables, Chap. 22.

CHAP. XX.
About Tobacco.
THe Acts for preventing Tobacco Tobacco planted, etc. to be destroyed by the
Constables, etc.
Planting, being expiring, were revived 19. Maii, ^ Jac. 2. for 7 years, and
thence to the end of the next Session. And by these Acts, all Sheriffs,
Justices, Constables, etc. upon Information, that there is any Tobacco set,
sown, or planted, or growing within their Precincts, are within 10 days to
cause the same to be Burnt, Plucked up, or destroyed, except it be in a
Physick-Garden, or in Exceptions.
other private Garden, and not exceeding one half of a Pole, in any one place
or Garden. 12 Car. 2. cap. 34.

Persons resisting the Officers, forfeit Forfeitures and commitment.
5 l. and may be committed till they enter into Recognizance with Sureties, not
to do the like again. Ibidem and Stat. 15 Car. 2. cap. 7.

The Constables are also upon Warrant, Presentment and Conviction.
to search and present at the next Quarter Sessions, the said Offense of
sowing, planting, or making Tobacco, and their presentment shall be a
Conviction, except the party Traverse the same. Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 26.

And by this last Stat. Constables, Tythingmen, Constables forfeiture.
etc. are within 14 days after Warrant, from two Justices, to destroy all
Tobacco planted, or growing in any Ground, upon forfeiture of 5 s. for every
Rod unconsumed, and so proportionably betwixt the King and Prosecutor.

Persons Resisting, shall forfeit 5 l. to Forfeitures of persons Resisting.
be levied by Distress and Sale, or be committed for three Months, and such as
refuse to assist the Constable upon Conviction before two Justices, forfeits 5
s. or to be committed for a Week. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Cap. 26.

Physic Gardens, and Gardens for Chyrurgery Exceptiens.
are excepted: The Officers and Assistants being sued hereupon, may plead the
General Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence. Ibidem.

CHAP. XXI.
About Weights and Measures.
IN every City, Borough, and Market Where common weights, etc. ought to be
kept.
Town, there ought to be common Weights and Measures sealed, at which the
Inhabitants may freely weigh, and the chief Officers of such places, whether
they be Constables, Bailiffs, etc. are upon request to mark and sign such
Weights and Measures to any of the Kings Subjects, taking for the marking of
every Weights to be marked.
Bushel one Penny. Stat. 8. H. 6. ca. 5. Stat. 11. H. 7. cap. 4.

And Constables are required to search Constables to search for, seize and
break unlawful Measures.
and examine, if any buy or sell by any other Bushel than Winchester measure,
which contains 8 Gallons to the Bushel or Strike, and sealed by the Clerk of
the Market; and if any person does not strike the same even with the brim; and
any Constable may seize and break such other Measure, and present the Offender
at the next private or Quarter Sessions. Stat. 22. Car. 2. cap. 8.

CHAP. XXII.
The Power and Duty of a High-Constable alone, as it is limited to him in
particular.
THe High-Constable, or Constable High Constables duty about Clothiers, etc.
of the Hundred, may hear and determine the Complaints of Clothiers, Drapers,
their Carders, Spinners, and other Laborers. For by the Stat. 4 Ed. 4. Chap.
1. Clothiers and makers of Cloth, are to pay their Carders, Spinners, and
other Laborers in ready money, and not in little Wares, or other things, upon
pain to forfeit three times so much Forfeitures.
as their Wages. And they must deliver them their Wool by due weight, and the
Carders, Spinners, Fullers, Dyers, Sheermen, and other Laborers, must do their
work faithfully, upon pain of forfeiting double damages; and the High-Constable
may upon due examination of the Parties, determine the Duties, Forfeitures, and
Damages, and upon Nonpayment of the Commitment.
same, may commit the Party to the Gaol, till payment be made.

The High-Constables are also empowered High-Constables to search, seize and
sell Tenters, etc.
to enter into any place, to search for any Tenters, Ropes, Rings, Head
wrenches, or other Engines for stretching of Cloth; and if they find any, to
deface them, and if the Owners shall afterward make use of them, the
High-Constables, may seize and seli them, and distribute the money to the poor.
Stat. 39 Eliz. cap. 20.

It is also the Duty of the High-Constables, Constables to pay over the moneys,
for the Relief of poor Prisoners. Penalty.
to pay over to the Collectors, appointed by the Justices at the Quarter
Sessions, what Money they receive from the Churchwardens, assessed on any Parish
for the Relief of poor Prisoners, and this they must do on the penalty of 5 l.
Stat. 14 Eliz. cap. 5.

And they are to pay over as aforesaid, what moneys they shall so receive for
the Relief of poor Prisoners, in the King's Bench and Marshalseas, under pain of
20 s.

And so of moneys received for the Relief Maimed Soldiers, etc.
of maimed Soldiers, and Mariners, upon pain of 40 s. Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 3.

See before Chap. about Distress, Highways, Quarter-moneys, etc.

CHAP. XXIII.
Concerning the CONSTABLES of London.
THere is some difference both in Difference between London Constables and
others.
the Election, Oath, and Office, of these Constables, and the Constables before
treated of, though their Office in common extend to such things as are
generally spoken of before; yet by Custom and Acts of Common Council, there are
some particulars wherein they vary: And therefore observe,

That such as may be Constables in Freemen.
London, are to be Freemen of the City.

This City is divided into 26 Wards, Constable of the Ward.
and every Ward into 26 Bounds or Precincts, and for every Precinct there is a
proper Constable.

These Constables are nominated and represented How these Constables are
appointed. On S. Thomas's Day. Twelfth-Day.
by the Inhabitants of the Parish, or Precinct, in the Vestry; and on S.
Thomas's Day, at the Wardmote (if thought fit) confirmed, or else excused, and
another appointed in his place.

After they are approved and confirmed at the Wardmote, they are to appear in
Guild Hall, at the Court of Aldermen, there holden on Monday next after Twelfth
Day, to be sworn. See Calthorps Reports How Sworn.
page, 129.

The substance of their Oath is,

First, To keep the King and Queens The Oath.
Peace to their power.

Secondly, To arrest such as make Affrays, Riots, Contests, or Debates in
breach of the Peace, and to lead them to the House or Counter of one of the
Sheriffs, and in case of Resistance, to make Outcry on them, and to pursue them
from Street to Street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be arrested.

Thirdly, To search (at such times as they shall be thereunto required, by the
Scavengers or Beadles,) the common Noysance of their respective Wards, and upon
the like request, to help the Beadle and Raker to gather their Salary and
Quarterage.

Fourthly, To present to the Mayor and Ministers of the City, such Defaults and
Things as in their respective Wards, are done against the Ordinance of the City.

Fifthly, To certify to the Mayor and Common Council of the City, the Names of
such persons that let or hinder these Constables in the doing their Office.

Sixthly, To certify and show, (once at the least in every Month,) to one of
the Clerks of the Mayors Court, and in the same Court, the Names and Surnames
of all Freemen, which they know to be Deceased, within the respective Parishes
where such Constables Inhabit; and also the Names and Surnames of all the
Children of all such Freemen so Deceased, being Orphans of the City.

Note, It is allowed, that such Person Deputy hired.
as is nominated and chosen for this Office, may hire a Deputy to serve in his
stead; and if the Deputy be thought fit and duly qualified for the Place, he is
to be Sworn, Deputy sworn. The Arms of the King and the City.
and must answer for his own Defaults.

Such as are chosen and admitted to the Office of Constable in London, are
obliged to put the Kings Arms, and the Arms of the City over his Door or (if he
live in an Ally) at the End of the Ally toward the Street; to signify, that a
Constable lives there.

Note also, That a Constable of London The extent of a London Constables
Authority, as to Warrants, etc.
has power to serve Warrants, and execute his Office (if required) throughout
the whole City.

To certify Names and Dwellings.
It appears by the Articles of the Wardmote Inquests, That every Constable is
from time to time, to certify to that Inquest the Name, Surname,
Dwellingplace, Profession and Trade of every Person, who shall newly come to
dwell within his Precinct, and to make and to keep a perfect Roll thereof.

Also to search and enquire, at least once a Month, what Persons be newly come
to lodge and sojourn there: And if he find by their own Confession, or by the
Record of any of the Books of any Alderman of the city, That such new Comers
are Indicted, or cast out of any other Ward for their bad Life and Disturbance,
and refuse to find Sureties for their good Behavior, they and their Landlords,
or Receivers, are to have. Warning, that they Warning to depart. Imprisonment.
Fine.
depart, and if they refuse to depart, they may be Imprisoned, and their
Landlords Fined to as much, as he was to have Rent for one Year, for his House
or Room so set to these new Comers, Calt. Rep. 138.

The Common Prisons for Offenders in The Common Prisons of London.
London, are Bridewell and the Compters; to the last of which the Constables
may send such Persons as are taken upon the Watch abroad late at Night, and
appear unruly or suspicious.

And as to keeping the Watch in this About keeping Watch in the City.
City, you may observe, That in every Ward there are a certain number of
Watchmen appointed by Act of Common Council: And by Custom, all the Constables
in each Ward attend by Turns, one every Night, according to his Turn, to go the
Rounds, and take care of such other things as belong to his Office.

And the Constable and Beadle, every Night, are to warn such Persons as are to
Watch in their several Precincts; and if those Warned do not appear, the
Constable usually appoints Hired men in their steads, who are to pay the
Constable therefore, according to the Custom of the City; and if they Refuse to
pay, the Lord Mayor will compel them.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Duty and Office of Churchwardens.
THese Officers are very Ancient, Churchwardens, how chosen.
and are to be chosen in every Parish yearly, by the Consent of the Minister
and Parishioners in Easter-Week. If the Minister and Parishioners cannot agree
in their joint Choice, then the Minister may choose one, and the Parishioners
another, Book of Canons, 1 Jac. 1. An. 1604.

But this Canon shall not prejudice a Custom.
Custom to choose otherwise.

These Officers are to take care for the Their Care.
providing and preservation of the Goods of the Church; as the Books, Communion
Plate, and other decent Ornaments and Furniture of the Church, during their
Office.

And they may by the Name of Churchwardens, How they may Purchase, etc.
purchase moveable Goods or Chattels; and also sue or be sued, for or about
such Goods, for the use and benefit of their Parish, 12 H. 7. fo. 27.

And if they be once possessed of any Action for taking Goods out of their
possession.
Goods or Ornaments belonging to the Church, and any person steal them, take
them away or abuse them, they of their Successors may have their remedy at
Common Law by Indictment or Action, as there is occasion, and recover to the
use of the Parish.

But if things be given to the Churchwardens Equity for Goods given, whereof
they had no possession.
by Will, as Money, or other moveable things, of which they never had
possession, they have no way to recover them, but in the Spiritual Court, or in
Equity.

See 3d part of Cook's Rep. Hadman's Case, Kitchen p. 277. Finche's Law l. 2.
c. 17.

Neither can they prescribe to have, Lands Prescription for Lands. A Pew built
in the Church, etc.
to them and their Successors.

If a Man make and set up a Pew in the Church, or hang up a Bell in the
Steeple, they thereby become Church Goods, (though he do not expressly give them
to the Church) and he, nor his, nor any other may afterward take them away;
but the Churchwardens may sue him or them that do it, 10 H. 4. fo. 9. Kitch. p.
277.

Yet they have no such property in the They may not impair the Goods of the
Parish.
Goods of the Parish, as that they can give, sell, release, hurt or impair
them; but if they do, the Parishioners may elect New ones before the Year be
out, and the New ones may have an Account against the others, 2 Ed. 4. fo. 7.

If the Organs be taken out of the Organs.
Chuch, the Churchwardens may have an Action of Trespass for the same though
the Action.
Vicar took them; because they belong to the Parishioners, and not to the
Parson: As was Adjudged in the Kings Bench, Trin. 12 Jac. 1.

But as touching any Estate of Lands, For Estate of Lands, etc. the Vicar, etc.
must bring the Action.
or Profits of any Lands, the Churchwardens cannot intermeddle; and if any
Person break the Walls, Windows, or Doors of the Church, eat up the Grass, or
cut down the Trees in the Churchyard; the Parson or Vicar, and not the
Churchwardens must have the Action, 8 H. 6. fo. 9.

If the Churchwardens prosecute Causes Prohibition granted.
in the Spiritual Court, which are merely Temporal, Writs of Prohibition will
be granted against them, Roll's Cases 2d part, 286, 287, 289.

About the Seats in the Church.
THe Churchwardens are to Repair the To Repair the Seats in the Church.
Seats in the Church; but the Ordinary or Bishop of the Diocese ought of common
Right, to place or displace such as shall sit therein.

Except such Seats in Chapels, as belong Prescription for Seats.
to Noblemen; and such other Seats, as any Person can prescribe to fit in by
reason of his Estate, descended from his Ancestors, etc. But then he must
prescribe, That he and his Ancestors, whose Estate he has, had used to Repair
such Seat, etc. and to sit there, Roll's Cases 2d part, fo. 288.

These Churchwardens also, by the Common To Repair the Body of the Church, etc.
Law, are to see to the Repairs of the Body of the Church and Steeple; but the
Chancel is to be Repaied by the Parson. And the Churchwardens are not bound to
Repair any part of the Church or Isle, which any man claims by Prescription, to
Prescription. Churchyard.
him or his House.

Also they are to take care, That the Church and Churchyard be kept clean and
decent.

Also to provide Books of Common Prayer, To provide Ornaments and other
Requisites.
Books of Homilies, a Parchment-Book for Registring Christnings, Weddings and
Burials.

Also, Fonts, Pulpits, Tables, Alms* Chests, Communion Cups, and other
Ornaments and Furniture requisite; and a Chest with three Locks and Keys
wherein to keep the same.

Also Bread and Wine for the Sacrament, according to the number of the
Communicants, 37 H. 6. 30. 12 H. 7. 10.

Now for defraying the Charges of these Churchwardens make Rates, etc.
things, the Churchwardens (with the assent of the Major part of the
Parishioners) usually impose Rates upon the Parish.

But its said, That if the Parishioners (upon public Notice for that purpose
given them) do not assemble, the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, or
the greater part of them, may make the Rate.

See 5 Co. Rep. fo. 65.

But here Note, That persons are How the Parishioners are chargeable.
chargable toward the Reparations of the Church, in respect of their Lands.

And toward the Church Ornaments, and other Requisites for Worship and Service,
in respect of their Dwelling, or Habitation, or Personal Estate,

See Roll's Cases 2d part, fo. 291.

These things hereafter mentioned, are accounted Church Reparations; viz.
The Walls of the Church, and Church What are accounted Church-Reparations.
Steeple. The Churchyard Walls, of Stone or Brick, etc. The Windows, Iron-Bars
and Glass. The Roof of Timber, with Laths, Nails, Priggs, Dogs and Bolts of
Iron. The covering of Lead, Tiles, Slates, or Shingles. The Floor with Stone,
or Paving-Tile. The Doors with Locks and Keys, Stairs, Floors, Bells, Wheels
and Ropes in the Steeple. The Pulpit and the Pews (or Seats, not made by
Private men by Custom.)
All these are to be done by Land-Rate, Land Rate.
though the Occupier of such Lands live in another Parish.

These hereafter mentioned, are accounted Church-Ornaments, etc. viz.
The Communion Table, and Coverings What are accounted Church Ornaments, etc.
thereof. The Communion-Cups, the Bread and Wine. The Bible, and other Books
appointed to be kept in Churches. The Surplice, Pulpit-Cloth and Cushion,
Washing the Communion-Cloaths and Candles. The Clerks and Sexton's Wages, and
the Expenses of Churchwardens and Sidesmen, about the necessary Affairs of the
Parish. And all these are to be Rated upon the Inhabitants of the Parish, and
not on Outdwellers. Out-dwellers.

Churchwardens are to make Presentiments Presentiments.
according to the Articles delivered them, and according to the Canons.

They are to see, That all their Parishioners That the Parishioners resort to
Church.
resort to Church Sundays and Holydays.

They are not to permit any to stand Idle, Walk, or Talk in the Churchyard,
etc. Can. 19.

Vide the late Act of Indulgence, and vide antea.

They are to suffer no Plays, Feasts, To suffer no Plays, etc. in the Church.
Drinkings, etc. or other prefane Usage to be kept in the Church, Chapel, or
Churchyard; nor the Bells to be Rung without good cause, to be allowed of by
the Minister and themselves. Can. 88.

They are to suffer no man to Preach License to Preach.
within their Churches or Chapels, but such as shall show their License; and
also to see that the Peace be duly kept in the Congregation; and that all
Persons Excommunicated Excommucated Persons. Churchwardens to Account.
be kept out of the Church, Can. 50, and 85.

At the end of their Year, or within one Month after, they are to give a just
Accou^nt of what they have received and disbursed, and to deliver up what Money,
or other things belonging to the Church, they have remaining in their hands, to
their Successors by Bill Indented: And if they refuse so to do, they may either
be Presented at the next Visitation Court; or else the succeeding Churchwardens
may have an Action of Account against them Action of Account. Allowances.
for the same at Common Law: But they shall be then allowed all necessary
Disbursments and Expenses about the Affairs of the Parish, Can. 89. 8 Ed. 4.
fo. 6.

In some Cases, Churchwardens are jointly concerned to act with other Officers,
or else equally empowered with them.

First, They are to join with Constables, In what Acts Churchwardens must join
with Constables.
in Apprehending such persons as Disturb Ministers, in levying Forfeitures for
Swearing or Cursing; or for killing Hares, Pheasants, or Partridges.

As likewise for Tippling and Drunkenness, Profaning the Sabbath, destroying
Fish unlawfully, levying 12 d. for not coming to Church every Sunday, etc.

Also in making Rates for maimed Soldiers or Mariners, and conveying Prisoners
to Gaol; seizing Irish Cattle, receiving Rogues brought to them and passing
them away.

In Choosing Surveyors, and appointing Days for Working in the Highways, etc.

Which things are before set forth in the Office of The Constable.

Secondly, They are to join with the In what Acts they must join with the
Overseers of the Poor.
Overseers of the Poor in the Execution of their whole Office, and have an
equal Authority and Charge with them therein. The Particulars whereof are set
down in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Office and Duty of the Overseers of the Poor.
THese Officers are Yearly appointed, Overseers, how appointed.
chosen, and made by two or more of the Justices of the Peace of the County,
(whereof one must be of the Quorum) dwelling in or near the Parish for which
they are elected.

The Justices therefore are yearly under Their number.
their Hands and Seals, at Easter, or within a Month after, to appoint two,
three, or more substantial Housekeepers to be Overseers of the Poor; and if the
Justices make default in such Appointment, every Justice of that Division
forfeits 5 l. Stat. 43 Eliz cap. 2. Dalton Just. P. fo. 93.

These Officers ought to be substantial They are joined to the Churchwardens.
Persons, having Wealth, Wisdom, and a good Conscience, Dalt. fo. 93. and are
to be joined and assistant to the Churchwardens of the Parish, in the Oversight
and Ordering of the Poor of the Parish.

And to that end, the Major part of these Their Actings to be allowed by two
Justices.
Overseers and Churchwardens, may (without the rest) do any thing belonging to
their Office: Yet nevertheless they ought to have the Allowance of two Justices
(whereof one to be of the Quorum) to every thing they do.

These Officers of Overseers and Churchwardens, To meet in the Church once a
Month.
are once a Month to meet in the Church, on Sundays (after Evening Prayer) to
consider and advise together of Matters belonging to their Office, and to use
their utmost diligence in the executing thereof on the Penalty of 20 s. for
every Default; Penalty.
But such as have just cause of Absence allowed of by two Justices, may be
excused, Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 2.

And by this it appears, That the Churchwardens Churchwardens Authority equal
with theirs. Their Care of the Poor.
have an equal Power and Charge with the Overseers, and may be punished for
their neglect or refusal to meddle, Dalton Just. P. fo. 93.

These Officers are chiefly to take care of the Poor, either that they Work, or
be Relieved if not able; and also to settle them in their Habitations.

Note, There are reckoned three sorts of Three sorts of P
Poor People:

1. Such as are poor by Impotency; as Impotent and decrepit. Poor by Misfortune.
Aged and Decrepit, Blind, Lame, Distracted, Lunatic, tender Infants, etc. 2.
Such as become poor by Casualty; as maimed or disabled in their Bodies, or
Callings, undone by Fire and the like, or overcharged with Children. 3. Such as
have made themselves poor, Poor by Idleness, etc.
by Riot, Idleness, Drunkenness, etc. and such as are dissolute Persons,
pilfering Vagabonds, etc.
As to the first, poor by Impotency, etc. Full Relief.
the Overseers are to provide for them, that they have necessary Relief and
Allowances propartionable to their Needs.

As to the second sort, poor by Casualty, Some Work, some Relief.
etc. if these be of ability and strength, they are to be set on Work by the
Overseers, and to be further Relieved according to their several Necessities.

As to the third sort, they are also to be Full Work.
set on Work at the House of Correction, and to maintain themselves by their
hard Labor, so as they may not be chargeable to the Town or Country: Yet in
cases of manifest Extremity they are to be relieved Charity.
by the Town.

See Dalton Just. P. fo. 100, and 101.

Again, as to the first sort, poor Impotent Rich persons to Relieve their poor
Relations.
persons, not able to work, you must observe, That the Father, Grandfather,
Mother, Grandmother, and the Children and Grandchildren (not being Bastards) of
such Poor persons, being able, shall relieve such poor Relations in such manner
as shall be assess'd at Quarter Sessions, upon Forfeiture of 20 s. per Month
during Refusal, to be Forfeitures.
levied by these Officers on a Warrant from two Justices ( Quorum unus) by sale
and distress; and Imprisonment for want of Imprisonment.
Distress. But the Justices can do nothing against one that lives out of their
County, Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 2.

Also if a Poor man want a House, the Overseers erect a Cottage.
Overseers (by consent of the Lord of the Manor) may erect a Cottage on the
Wast, and lodge Inmates therein, notwithstanding Stat. 31 Eliz. cap. 7.

As to the second sort, observe, These Officers To set persons on Work.
are to set to work all such Persons (married or unmarried) as have no Means to
maintain themselves, or use no ordinary and daily Trade, to get their Living
by; and to set to Work and Bind forth Apprentices, To Bind Apprentices.
the Children of such whose Parents they shall not think able to keep and
maintain them, Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. Dalton fo. 93, 94, 95. 7 Jac. 3.

As to the third sort; If any of them Idle persons sent to the House of
Correction.
appointed to Work, shall refuse so to do, or to work for the Wages assessed,
any Justice of Peace may send them to Gaol, or the House of Correction.

And that such Overseers, etc. may be enabled to set such People at work; they
may with consent of two or more Justices (one to be of the Quorum) set up, use
and Overseers may use any Trade.
follow any Trade, Mystery, or Occupation, only for the setting on work and
relieving the Poor of the Parish or Place, Dalton fo. 94. Stat. 3 Car. 1. cap 4.

These Officers may license their Poor to To License their Poor to Beg.
Beg within their own Parish; but not in the Highway.

And note, That no Inhabitants ought to serve any Poor at their Door, but those
of their own Parish, and that have such License, upon pain of 10 s. for every
time Penalty.
they do so, Dalton fo. 99, 126. 39 Eliz. 3. Stat. 1 Jac. cap. 7.

Concerning Rates, and Settling of the Poor.
FOr Enabling these Officers to relieve To make Rates, and how.
the helpless Poor, It is Enacted, That they (or the greater part of them) may
weekly, or otherwise, raise by Taxation upon the Occupiers of Lands, Houses,
Tithes, Coal-Mines, saleable Underwoods, etc. in their Parish such Rates as
they shall think necessary: Which Rate or Tax must be allowed by two Justices
(one to be of the Quorum,) by virtue of whose Warrant these Officers may levy
the Rates by Distress, on the Goods of such as refuse to pay: And for want of
Distress, the party Distress. Imprisonment. Who are chargeable with these Rates.
may be committed to Prison till payment, Stat. 43 Eliz. c. 2. Dalton fo. 97.

Note, These Rates ought to be made according to men's Visible Estates, either
Real or Personal, within the place only, and not for any Estate they may have
elsewhere: And the Tenants and Occupiers are only chargeable, and not the
Landlords; except they hold the Land in their own hands, 1 Bulstr. fo. 354.

All Lands are chargeable with these Lands, how chargeable.
Rates by the Pound, or according to the Value; and an Hundred Pounds in Stock
or Goods, at 5 or 6 l. a year, and so proportionably.

The Quarter Sessions will relieve such Relief.
as are grieved by these Rates or Taxes.

As to keeping out of, and Settling Poor people in the Parish, observe these
things:
1. THat 40 Days residence quietly in Forty Days Settlement, how to be
accounted.
a Parish, is accounted a Legal Settlement by Stat. 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. but
Stat. 1 Jac. 2. which revives the other Statute for 7 years, and to the end of
the next Session, directs, That the 40 Days shall be accounted from the time of
Notice of their abode (which the Parties are bound to give) in Writing to the
Churchwardens, or Overseers.

2. By the Statute 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. If a Coming to dwell in a Tenement under
10 l. per Annum.
Stranger come into a Parish to dwell in any Tenement, under Ten pounds a Year,
and refuse to give Security to discharge the Parish; any two Justices (one to
be of the Quorum) on Complaint of the Churchwardens or Overseers within the 40
Days, may send him to the place where he was last Legally settled. And such as
find themselves grieved, may appeal to the Sessions.

But Note, That any person may go Going abroad by Certificate; to work above 40
Days.
abroad to work in Harvest, or other Employment, with a Certificate from the
Minister, one Churchwarden and one Overseer, that he is a settled Inhabitant in
their Parish: And if in such case he fall Impotent, after he has been in a
strange Place above 40 Days, he may be returned to the first Parish; for his
stay in the other shall be counted no Settlement.

Persons refusing to go, or not remaining in the Parish where they ought to be
settled, may be sent by the Justices to the House of Correction, 14 Car. 2. 12.

Some Cases about Settlements, etc.
A. Having a Wife and Children, takes A Family illegally turned cut of the
Parish.
a House in the Parish of B. for a Year, and in that Year is wrongfully turned
out of possession, and thereupon takes a House in another Parish; out of which
he is also put within two or three Days, and thereby wanting a place to shelter
him, gets into a Barn in another place, and there his Wife is Delivered of
another Child: In this Case its said, they are all to be sent to the Parish,
out of which they were first Illegally forced, Resol. of the Judges, Sect. 24.

One Born at A. left that place 10 years, An Inhabitant becoming Vagrant, how
to be settled.
and lived in B. taking a House and paying Rent there for two or three years;
and afterward left that place also for six or seven years, and then came to C.
in another County, and there was 20 weeks at work; but becoming Impotent, did
wander and beg, and being taken as a Vagrant, It was ordered, That he should be
Passed and settled at A. where he was Born, 1 Bulstr. fo. 357.

And here Note also, That no man but a Vagrant Beggar sent to the place of his
Birth. Others to the House of Correction.
Vagrant Beggar ought to be sent out of any Parish, to the place of his Birth
or last Habitation; for if any refuse to work in the Parish where he is settled,
or to work for the Wages assess'd, the Justices are to send him to the House of
Correction, Dalt. fo. 126. 39 Eliz. cap. 9. 1 Jac. cap. 7.

And Note also, That if any Disturbance Disturbing a lawful Settlement.
be made to any Settlement, lawfully Ordered by the Justices, either by the
Constables refusing to receive and convey a Rogue, where they ought to do it:
Or by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, in refusing such a one as is
duly sent to be settled there. In such case they forfeit Forfeiture.
5 l. by Stat. 29 Eliz. cap. 4.

A. lives in a House at B. with his Children; Lives in one Town, Works in
another.
but works in C. being hired there by the Year: In this case its said, his
Children are settled in B. and not in C. in case of A's Death.

If a Woman unmarried be hired in one Child got in one place, born in another.
Parish, and there got with Child; and then goes into another Parish, and is
there settled in Service, or otherwise, for two or three Months, and then is
found with Child, and Delivered: In this Case, Its said, she and her Child
shall be settled in this Parish where she is, and not be sent to the Parish
where the Child was begotten, Resol. Judic. Sect. 12.

Concerning Bastard Children.
OBserve further, That the two next Justices Punishing the Mother of a
Bastard-Child, etc.
may take order, as well for the Punishment of the Mother of a Bastard-Child;
as also to compel her and the reputed Father, to save the Parish harmless by
allowing Money weekly, and may Imprison him or her, if that Order be not
performed. The Justice also (to discover the truth of the Matter) may examine
the Mother upon her Oath, concerning the Father of the Child, Dalt. fo. 37, and
38. 18 Eliz. cap. 3. 7 Jac. cap. 4.

If a Woman be Delivered of a Bastard-Child Bastard born in one Parish, and
carried into another.
in one Parish, and then goes into another Parish with her Child: In this Case
the Child, after it is Nursed, is to be sent to and settled in the place where
it was born, and not to remain with the Mother, Resol. Judic. Sect. 21.

If A. have a Bastard-Child by B. born Bastard-Child, kept 10 years with the
reputed Father, how to be settled after the Fathers death.
in D. and the reputed Father marries another Woman, and they breed the Child
10 years in the Parish of S. (the Mother of the Child being a single Woman, and
in Service all this while) and then the reputed Father dies: In this Case its
said, the Child is to be sent to the Mother first, to be maintained by her, if
she be able; and if not, it must be kept by the Parish of S. where it was
settled 10 years with the Father, 2 Bulstr. 350.

Concerning the Putting forth, and Binding Apprentices.
FOr the doing of this, It must be observed: What poor Children may be put out
Apprentices.


First, That they are to be such Peoples Children, whose Parents are unable to
maintain them; and to be done with the consent of two Justices, Stat. 7. Jac.
cap. 3.

Secondly, That the Children so put forth, Of what Age they ought to be and how
long to be Bound.
ought to be above seven, and under fifteen years of Age, when they are first
Bound; and they may bind the Man-child till 24 years of Age, and the Woman
child till 21 years of Age, or that she shall be married, which shall first
happen, 43 El. 2. Dalton fo. 83.

Thirdly, These Officers may (with the What persons may be compelled to take
such Apprentices.
help of the Justices) compel any man whom they think fit within the Parish, to
take a Poor man's Child, with Money or without, as they see occasion, Resol. Jud.
Q. 1.

And if the Master and Officers cannot agree, the Justices thereabouts, or in
their defaults, the Sessions must end the Matter, Dalt. fo. 95. Res. Jud.
Quest. 2.

Fourthly, They may put them to Weavers, Tradesmen, Husbandmen, Houswives,
Gentlemen, etc.
Masons, Dyers, Fullers, or any other Trade, as well as to Husbandry or
Housewifery: And if all Men that have, or may have use for Servants, whether
Knights, Clergymen, Gentlemen, Yeomen, or Tradesmen, are bound to take
Apprentices: And if they be Rich, though they Table themselves, and allege
that they have no occasion for Servants; yet they may be forced either to take
them, or give Money toward the Placing of them with others: And if they refuse
to pay the Sum imposed upon them, two Justices of Peace may make Warrants to
levy the same by distress and Distress.
sale of the Offenders Goods. Or they may Present and Indict such as refuse to
take Indictment.
such Apprentices, at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace, Stat. 43 Eliz. cap.
2. Dalton fo. 83, 95. Res. Jud. Quest. 4.

So may the Parents of the Children be The Parent of the Children Indicted.
Indicted, if they (not being able to bring them up honestly) refuse to part
with them; or if they shall entice their Children away after they are bound,
Dalton Just. P. fo. 78, and 96.

If the Children shall refuse to go to be The Children sent to the House of
Correction. To be Bound by Indenture, and how.
Apprentices, when ordered, the Justices may send them to the House of
Correction, till they shall be content to be bound, Dalt* ut supra.

Note, these Apprentices must be bound by Indenture; the Indenture to be made
between the Justices, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, and the
Apprentice of the one part, and the Party that takes the Apprentice on the
other part. Or it may be said, to be with the consent of the Justices.

The Form whereof is as follows:

THis Indenture made the First Day of The Form of the Indenture.
December, in the Third year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady,
William and Mary by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini, 1691. Witnesses,
That A. B. and C. D. Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of St Giles's in the
Fields in the County of Middlesex, and E. F. and G. H. Churchwardens of the
same Parish, by and with the Consent of J. K. and L. M. Esquires, two of Their
Justices of Peace for the same County, have placed, and by these presents do
Place and Bind N. O. being a poor Or you may say, Son or Daughter (of such an
one) unable, by reason of his Age and great Charge, to bring up and maintain
his (or her) said Son, or Daughter, as the case is.
Fatherless Child, as an Apprentice with P. Q. of the said Parish of St.
Giles's in the Fields, Tailor; and as an Apprentice with him the said P. Q to
dwell, from the Day of the Date of these presents, until he the said N. O.
shall attain the Age of 24 If it be a Girl, you may bind her to 21, or Day of
Marriage; and a Boy may be Bound to 24.
Years, according to the Statute in that case made and provided: By and during
all which time and term the said N. O. shall and will faithfully serve the said
P. Q. his Master, in all his lawful Business, according to his power, wit, and
ability; and honestly and obediently in all things shall behave himself toward
the said P. Q. his Wife, Children and Family. And the said P. Q. for his part
promises, Covenanteth and agrees, That he the said P. Q. the said N. O. in
the Art, Skill, and Myste^ of a Tailor Or in the Art and and Skill of
Husbandry, or Housewifery, as the case is.
, shall teach and instruct, or cause to be taught and instructed, the best way
and manner that he can, according to his knowledge; and also to find and allow
unto his said Apprentice sufficient Meat, Drink, Washing, Lodging, Linen,
Woollen, Shoes, Stockings, and all other things meet and necessary for such an
Apprentice, during all the said Term. In Witness whereof the said Parties to
these presents, have to the same interchangably set their Hands and Seals the
Day and Year first above written.

Let the Churchwardens, Overseers, and Apprentice, seal and deliver one part to
the Master: And let the Master seal the other part to them.

And it may be the better to get the two Justices to signify their Consent, by
Indorsment on the Backside of the Indentures.

Note, that Mayors, Bailiffs, or other Head Officers of Corporate Towns, have
in their several Precincts like Authority, as the Justices of Peace have in the
Counties, for all the uses and purposes in this Act: And the like has every
Alderman of every Ward in the City of London, Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 2.

Note, this Placing of Apprentices may be to any Man, or single Woman, or
Widow, whom the Officers and Justices think fit to receive them, either to
learn a Trade, or Husbandry, or Housewifery.

And note, That all such as are bound Such Indentures are safe.
to the Overseers, etc. as aforesaid, may safely be received and kept as
Apprentices, by their Masters or Mistresses, to whom they were so bound, 1 Jac.
1* cap. 25. 21 Jac. 1. cap. 28. 3 Car. 1. cap. 4.

By the Stat. 7 Jac. 1. cap. 3. Money given How Money given to put out* poor
Children, shall be employed.
to put out poor Children Apprentices, is to be employed by the Corporation, or
Parson, Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers, accordingly, on pain that
every of them forfeit five Marks. And the Person that takes Money with such
Apprentice, shall give Bond to repay it at seven Years end, or within three
Months after: Or, if the Apprentice dies.
Apprentice dye in the mean time, then within one year after his death; and the
like of the death of the Master, Mistress, Master dies
or Dame, so as the Money may be employed for putting out others.

If a Master etc. shall put his Apprentice Master may not take away his
Apparel. How an Apprentice may be discharged from his Master. Overseers to be
assisting to other Officers.
into Apparel, he cannot take it away from him, though he should afterward
part with his Apprentice, Bro. Tresp. 93.

And note, that An Apprentice cannot be discharged from his Apprenticeship, but
by four Justices at the least in open Sessions: by Agreement in Writing under
his Masters hand, Dalt. Just. P. fo. 79.

You may perceive, by what has been said before, that these Officers are to be
assisting in some cases to Constables, as for Irish Cattle, etc. which is left
to you observation in reading this Treatise.

The Overseers are to receive for the Fines and Forfeitures to be received by
them.
Poors use, the Fines laid upon such as with Nets, Snares, or Engines, take and
kill Fish, Conies, etc. unlawfully, without the Owners consent, Stat. 22 and 23
Car. 2. cap. 25.

Also a Third part of such as Travel with above five Horses in length. See the
next Chapter, and vide Antea Chapter for Highways.

By the Stat. 30 Car. 2. cap. 3. upon the Forfeiture for not Burying in Woolen.
Ministers Notice to the Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor, under his
Hand, That no Affidavit is brought to him according to the Statute for Burying
in Woolen, they are within eight Days after to repair to the Chief Magistrate
of any Town where the Deceased was Buried, else to a Justice of Peace; who upon
the Ministers Certificate are to grant a Warrant, to levy the Forfeiture, viz.
5 l. by distress and sale of the Goods of the Party deceased; or in default
thereof, of the persons Goods in whose House the Party died; or the Goods of
any that had a hand in putting the Party deceased into any Shroud or Cossin,
made or lined, etc. with any thing but Sheeps. Wool, contrary to this Act, or
that ordered the same: And if such person were a Servant, and died in the
Masters Family, the Masters Goods to be liable. And if such person died in the
Family of his Parents, then the Parents Goods to be liable: One part of this
Forfeiture to the Poor of the Parish, the other to him that will sue for the
same.

Note, no Penalty shall be incurred where the Party died of the Plague.

If a Justice be not in the Parish where the Party shall be Interred, the
Affidavit may be administered by any Parson, Vicar or Curate in the same County,
other than of the Parish or Chapel of Ease where the Party is Interred, and
they are to attest the same under their hands gratis, Stat. 32 Car. 2. cap. 1.

Officers neglecting their Duty by this Forfeitures of Officers*
Act, forfeit 5 l. for every Offense, to be recovered by Action brought within
six Months after the Offense: One fourth part to the King, two to the Poor of
the Parish, and one fourth to the Informer, 30 Car. 2. cap. 3.

These Officers within four Days after Overseers to Account.
their Year ended, and others chosen, are to make a true Account to two
Justices, of what Moneys they have Received and Disbursed, what Wares they have
in their hands, or in the hands of any of the Poor, what Prentices they have
put out, etc. 43 Eliz. 2. Dalton fo. 96.

And they are also to give an Account at their Sessions, or to any two Justices
at their monthly Meetings, of the Name and Quality of every person Interred
since their former Account; and of the Certificates, and Account of
Certificates and Burials, etc.
their levying Penalties, and of the disposal thereof, on pain of 5 l. to be
levied by distress and sale; and their Accounts shall not be allowed till they
have accounted for the Burials, 30 Car. 2. 3.

Upon their last Accounting what is remaining, To pay over the Remainder.
Commitment.
they shall pay over to the New Overseers; if they refuse to account, the
Justices may send them to Gaol; and if after they have accounted, they refuse
or fail to pay over the Money in their hands to their Successors, the same may
be levied on their Goods by distress; and in default Distress.
of distress, to be sent to the Gaol, there to remain till payment and delivery
of the Arrears and Stock remaining, as aforesaid, Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. Dalton
fo. 96.

Note, That the Churchwardens and Overseers, Forfeitures of the Churchwardens
and Overseers, for Neglect in their Office.
for every Default and Negligence in their Office about the Poor, every of them
forfeits 20 s. The default to be proved either by Confession or Examination of
Witnesses, and is to be levied by the New Churchwardens and Overseers, or one
of them, on Warrant by distress and sale; and for want of Distress, the
Offender may be Committed by two Justices to Gaol till payment: The Forfeitures
to be employed to the use of the Poor of the same Parish, 43 Eliz. cap. 2.
Dalton fo. 97.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Office of a Surveyor of the Highways.
THese Officers are Yearly appointed, How and for what appointed.
to look after the necessary Reparations of the Highways, within the Parish or
Precinct for which they are chosen.

Something has been spoken concerning these Officers in particular, for
London, Westminster, and the Parishes within the Weekly Bills of Mortality. See
before the Vide antea.
Chapter about the Streets, Lights, etc.

But observe further in general, That these When to be Chosen.
Officers are to be chosen on Monday or Tuesday in Easter-Week, by the
Churchwardens, Constables, or Tithingmen, for the time being, with the advice
and consent of the major part of the Inhabitants; and they may be Two or more
in number, as the largness of the Parish requires; and being Chosen, and having
Notice thereof given them by the Constables, etc. the next Sunday after, they
are immediately after such Notice, to take the Office upon them, in pain of
forfeiting 20 s. Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. cap. 8. 14 Car. 2. cap. 6.

Note, by the Stat. 22 Car. 2. 12. they are to be chosen some Day in
Christmass-Week, and six Days Notice.

The Constables and Churchwardens upon Days set apart for mending the Highways.
choosing the Surveyors, are to appoint six Days between that and Midsummer, to
be set apart for the mending the Highways, and must give public Notice thereof
before the several Days, Stat. 5 Eliz. 13. 22 Car. 2. cap. 12.

By this last Statute, if they cannot be mended by Midsummer, they must be
mended before the Feast of St. Luke.

These Officers are to take care, that the How the Parishioners are to work on
those days.
Parishioners do their Work on the Days appointed, according to these Rules;
viz. Every one having a Ploughland (that is, so A Ploughland, one Cart and two
Men.
much as one Plough may plough in a day) in Tillage or Pasture in the Parish,
or keeping there a Plough or Team, shall on every of the said Days, bring or
send one Wain or Cart fit for Carriage, provided with necessary Tools, with
Oxen or Horses, etc. according to the usage of the Country, and two able Men,
who are to work as the Surveyors shall appoint, Eight hours a Day, 2 and 3 P.
and M. Eight hours
cap. 8.

Every other Householder, Cottager and Cottager and Labourer.
Labourer in the Parish, being able to work, and not a Servant hired by the
Year, must by himself, or some other able man, work 8 Hours at the appointment
of the Surveyors Eight hours
on every of the six Days, as aforesaid, 2 and 3 P. and M. cap. 8.

Such as have no Carts, yet being in Subsidymen, two Able men.
Subsidy 5 l. in Goods, or 40 s. in Land, or above, must find two able men to
work every of the said six Days, 18 Eliz. cap. 10.

Where the Usage is to carry Materials Materials carried on Horseback.
for such amendment on Backs of Horses, or by other Carriages, the Inhabitants
shall send them in with able Persons to work with them in like manner, and
under the like Penalties, as is appointed for Carts and Teams, 22 Car. 2. cap.
12.

If any fail to make their Days labor, or neglect to send their Carriages,
etc. the Surveyors shall complain to the next Justices of Peace, who upon Oath
thereof by one Witness, may levy by distress and sale of Goods, for every day
Labourer neglecting (without a reasonable cause) Penalties on a Day-Labourer. A
Man and Horse. A Cart and two Men-Penalties levied by Surveyors or Constables.
1 s. 6 d. for every Man and Horse 3 s. and for every Cart with two Men, 10 s.
Which Penalties shall be employed for Repairing the Highways in every
respective Place and Parish, 22 Car. 1. cap. 12.

Note, by the Statute 2 and 3 P. and M. the Forfeiture was but 12 d. a man, and
10 s. for a Team and Two men; and the Penalties to be levied by the Surveyors
by distress and sale, and for their neglect within one Year to do it, then by
the Constables and Churchwardens.

If the Surveyors shall think any of the Surveyors may command Men instead of
Carts.
Ploughs or Carts needless, any of the days they may spare them, and instead
thereof require two able men, who must come upon the aforesaid Forfeitures, 2
and 3 P. and M. 8.

If six Days work in the Year will not If six days will not do, then to appoint
more.
serve to amend the Highways, the Surveyors must appoint more: For if the
Highways be not sufficiently amended, the whole Town or Parish may be Indicted
for it, and the Parishioners are bound to come or send, as aforesaid, Dalt.
Just. P. fo. 69.

Where the Highways cannot be amended before Midsummer, they shall be Repaired
before the Feast of S. Luke, 22 Car. 2. 12.

It is said, The Owner of Lands, if he be Tenant to be charged*
not the Occupier thereof, ought not to be charged toward the repair of the
Common Highways; but the Tenant who occupies the Lands is to be charged, Roll's
Cases 1st part, fo. 390.

Surveyors may take and carry away so What things the Surveyors may take from
other men's Grounds, without leave.
much Rubbish, and small broken Stones already dug, out of any man's Quarry
within the Parish, without the Owners leave, as they shall think fit; or they
may gather loose Stones in any man's Ground; but may not dig for new Stones
without leave, nor take great Stones which are already dug. But they may dig
for Materials in likely or probable places, lying near the place where the Way
is decayed, for Sand, Stones, Gravel, etc. so as it be not in Houses, Gardens,
Orchards, Exceptions.
or Meadows, (for in those they may not dig without the Owners leave) nor may
they make a Pit above ten Yards in breadth or length; and they must fill it up
again at the Charge of the Parish, within a Month, upon pain to forfeit 5 Marks
to the Owner Penalties.
of the Ground, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Stat. 5 Eliz. cap. 13. They
may also by this Statute turn a Watercourse, Watercourse.
hurtful to the Highway into any man's Ditch.

Owners of Grounds adjoining to the Forfeitures on such as Trim not their
Hedges.
Highways, not keeping their Hedges low, and cutting down Trees and Bushes
growing over the same, forfeit 10 s. Also they that scour not their Ditches
next adjoining to the Ground that is next the Highway, to the end the Water may
have the better Passage out of the Highway, shall forfeit 12 d. for every Rod,
Stat. 18 Eliz. cap. 10.

If any person scours his Ditch, and Scourings thrown into the Highway.
throws the Scourings into the Highway, and suffers it to lie there 6 Months,
forfeits 12 d. for every Load, 18 Elix. 10.

These Forfeitures upon Stat. 18 Eliz. 10. Forfeitures, how to be levied.
to be levied by the Surveyors by distress and sale; and in their default not
to do it within a Year, then the Constables and Churchwardens by Warrant may do
it.

If the Surveyors neglect to present the Forfeiture for not presenting.
Offenses against Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8. and 5 Eliz. c. 13. within one
Month after they shall be committed, forfeit 40 s.

By the Stat. 22 Car. 2. 12. they are to Return of Defaulters.
return the Defaulters within a Month after every default to some Justice of
Peace, who shall present the same at the next Quarter Sessions.

By the same Stat. 22 Car. 2. cap. 12. no Forfeitures of such as Travel with
above 5 Horses in length.
Carriage with any burden (other than such as are employed about Husbandry,
and in carrying Hay, Straw, Corn unthresh'd, Coal, Chalk, Timber for Shipping,
Materials for Building, Stones or Ammunition, or Artillery for the Kings
Service) shall go in any Highway with above 5 Horses in length: And if any draw
with more Horses or Oxen, they shall all draw in pairs, except one Horse,
Owners of Carriages or Beasts One Third to the Surveyors.
offending, shall forfeit 40 s. for every Offense; one Third to the Surveyors
of the Highways* in the Town, etc. where committed for the Repair of them;
another Third to the Overseers of the Poor of the Overseers Third. Discoverers
Third.
Parish, where, etc. another Third to him that shall discover the same, to be
imposed and levied as the Penalties imposed by this Act on Constables and
Surveyors, for neglecting to put the Laws in execution.

That is to say,

Every Constable or Surveyor of the Five upon Surveyors, etc. for neglecting
their Office.
Highways, neglecting to put the Acts touching Repairing* etc. Highways in
execution, or wilfully suffering any Wagons or Carts to pass in any other
manner, than by this Act is allowed, shall upon Complaint to a Justice of
Peace, by the Oath of one Witness, or View of the Justice himself, be
convicted, and incur such Fine as the Justice shall impose, not exceeding 40 s.
to be levied by the High-Constable, or other Officer, by Warrant under Hand and
Seal of such Justice, to be employed for the mending the Highways of the Parish
or place where such neglect shall be, 22 Car. 2. cap. 12.

Lastly observe, That two Justices of Surveyors Accounts, etc.
Peace by the Stat. 18 Eliz. may take the Accounts of the Surveyors of the
Ways; and the petty Constables and Churchwardens, for such Forfeitures (within
that Statute) as they have levied, Stat. 18 Eliz. 40. Dalton Just. P. fo. 71.

AN APPENDIX.
HAving spoken briefly in the IVth Chapter of the Constables Duty in executing
the Justices Warrant, and how the Officer is bound at his peril, to take notice
of the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Justices, I will here set down (as an
Appendix to the former) some further Rules and Precedents touching the nature
and effect of Warrants; which may be of good use to our several Officers, for
whom this Treatise is intended.

A Warrant, or rather Summons for making a New Constable, etc. to be Sworn
before the Justices of the Peace.

This Summons is directed to the Person Elected, or intended to be Elected,
thus;

To our Loving Friend A. B. of C Yeoman.
THese are to require you, to make your repair to us, or some other Justice of
the Peace of this County, to take the Oath of a Constable, [or Tithingman] to
serve within your Town of C. you being Chosen and Ordered by the Leet of your
Town, to undertake the same Office. And herein fail you not, as you will answer
the contrary, etc.

Or thus;

WHereas A. B. of your Town, the New Constable thereof, is (by reason of his
Age and Impotency) very unable and insufficient to execute the said Place;
These are to require you, whose Names are hareunder written, to be before me at
my House at C. to Morrow [or such other time as is convenient] by Ten of the
Clock in the Morning, that I may make Choice of one of you to be Sworn, to
undertake the said Office. And / hereof, etc. Dated, etc.

Note, this Swearing of Constables, etc. by the Justices, is only in case of
necessity, and when it is long to the Quarter Sessions, or Leet.

And though it may not be necessary for Concerning Hand and Seal to a Warrant.
the Justices to put their Seals to these Summons, which are directed to the
Parties themselves, not obliging them to act upon any other person or thing;
Yet Note, that there is a necessity that the Justice of Peace do subscribe his
Name to his Warrant, commanding an Officer to act upon some other person or
thing. Though to put his Seal in every case is not required; for in a Warrant of
the Peace, or Good Behavior it is thought not to be needful, nor where an Act
of Parliament says, That the Justice by Warrant (or by Warrant under his hand)
may do such a thing: But where the Law says, that he may or shall do it by
Warrant under his Hand and Seal, there it must be under his Hand and Seal, or
it is not good. And it is now usual and most safe for a Justice to put his Seal
to every Warrant after this manner, And hereof fail you not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals [or Day and Year of making the Warrant.
my Hand and Seal, as the case may be] this first Day of January, in the Third
Year of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary, Annoque Dom. 1692.

Or thus;

Sealed with our Seals [or Sealed with my Seal] and Dated the first Day of
January, in the Third year, etc. Annoque Dom. 1692.

Note, That if the Warrant express the place where it was made; as [ Dated at
D. and given under my Hand, etc.] though it was not really Dated there; yet the
Warrant is good, and shall be taken to be dated where the Warrant does say it
was dated.

The Rules that have been observed to the completing a Justices Warrant,
whereby he Commands an Inferior Officer to do something belonging to his
Office, are as follow:

First, That the Warrant must be plain Rules.
and clear, and not ambiguous and doubtful, so that the Officer need not be
forced to enquire what the Justice means.

Secondly, That it be completely filled up, and not left with Blanks in it.

Thirdly, The usual form of the Warrant begins thus:

These are in Their Majesty's Names to require you, etc. though it is sufficient
to say, These are to require you; howbeit the Warrant does carry the more
Majesty in it, when those Words are used in it.

Fourthly, The Title of Direction, may either be above the Warrant thus;

To the Constable of Dale.

Or in the body of the Warrant thus;

A. B. Esquire etc. To the Constable of D. Whereas, etc.

Fifthly, The Warrant may be directed, to any Officer, as the Sheriff, his
Bailiffs, Constables, Tithingmen etc.

Or, To the Sheriff, and to all Bailiffs High-Constables of Hundreds, and
Constables and Tithingmen of Towns and Parishes within the County of A. and
every of them jointly and severally.

Or, it may be directed to these Officers and to others that are no Officers
together.

Or, to them that are no Officers alone thus;

To A. B. and C. D. both of E. in the County of G. and to either of them.

But this must be understood of Warrants of the Peace, Good Behavior, and such
like Warrants, wherein the Justice of the Peace is left at liberty, to direct
his Warrant to whom he will. For if the Law does direct him to whom to send his
Warrant, (as diverse Acts of Parliament do, some of them appointing him to
direct his Warrant to the Constables, some to the Constables and Churchwardens,
some to the Churchwardens, some to the Constables or Churchwardens, some to the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor); in this case the direction of the
Statute must be punctually pursued; for it is dangerous to vary from it ever so
little.

But where the Justice is left at liberty, to direct it to whom he pleases, it
has been thought the best way to direct it to a common and known Officer;
which is the High-Constable of the Hundred, or Constable of the Town, etc.

Sixthly, The Warrant for an Arrest may be, to require the Officer to bring the
Offender before the Justice that makes the Warrant, or before him or some other
Justice of the County; and either way is good.

Seventhly, In every Warrant of the Peace, or Good Behavior, where Sureties
are to be found, the Warrant ought to contain the special Cause or Matter, that
the Party arrested may provide Sureties: But if it be for some great Crime, the
cause may be concealed.

Eighthly, In every Warrant to command an Officer to carry a man to Gaol, it is
usual to insert a Clause to the Jailer at the end of the Warrant to this
purpose: That you him convey to the Common Gaol of this County, and him deliver
to the Gaeler or his Deputy there, who are hereby required him to receive and
detain, until he shall from thence be delivered by due course of Law.

And note that it is usual, and a good Close of every Warrant sent to an
Officer, to require him to give an account how he has executed it, in this
manner: And that you be then there with this Precept, to give us an account of
your Execution of it. Or thus; That you give me an account within 14 Days next
following, of your Execution of my Warrant.

Ninthly, Note, there is very little difference between a Warrant of Commitment
and a Mittimus; for both are to do one thing, and they differ a little only in
the Form.

Tenthly, Where a Statute does give Power to a Justice of Peace, to compel men
to do any thing, he may send his Warrant, to require them to come before him;
and if they refuse, he may proceed at Law.

Eleventhly, The Justices of the Peace may send their Warrants for any thing
that does relate to a special Sessions, either to compel Appearance or
Attendance there, or Execution of any thing there done, under their own Hands,
or by the Clerk of the Peace, as the business of the Quarter Sessions is done.

Twelfthly, Observe, That where a Statute is penned thus, that the Constables
or Churchwardens (by a Warrant from a Justice of Peace) shall be enabled to do
a thing; in this case the Justice may justify the making of such Warrant.

Some Precedents of Warrants.
1. WArrants and Precedents relating to the exercise of the Office of a Justice
of Peace out of the General Sessions, are of several sorts, viz. They concern
either Treasons, Felonies, Misprisions, Praemunires, Forcible Entries, Forcible
Detainers, Riots, Routs, and Unlawful Assemblies, Security of the Peace and
Good Behavior, or other Misdemeanors or Offenses of several sorts.

2. As concerning Treasons and Felonies upon Information, made of any Treason
or Felony committed, any one Justice of the Peace may direct his Warrant to the
Sheriff, or to the High-Constables or Petty-Constables, or to all or any of
them to make search for the Traitors or Felons, and also for stolen Goods.

The Form of a Warrant to Apprehend a Traitor.

J. G. Esquire One of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the County of N.
To the Sheriff of the said County, and to all High-Constables,
Petty-Constables, and other Their Majesty's Officers, Greeting, etc. Whereas L.
M* and R. S. are vehemently suspected to have committed Treason, whereof I have
received Information: These are therefore in Their Majesty's Names straightly
to charge and command you, and every of you, upon sight hereof, without delay,
within your several Bailiwicks, Hundreds, and Constablewicks, to make diligent
search for the Bodies of the said L. M. and R. S. and them and either of them
so found, to arrest and attach; and immediately upon such arrest, to bring
before me at my House at B. in the said County: Whereof fail not at your peril.
Sealed with my Seal, and Dated the 7th Day of M. in the Third Year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, William and Mary; King and Queen, etc.

The like Warrant may be made for the apprehension of Felons.

A Warrant for keeping the Peace.

Essex ss. A. B. and C. D. Esquires, To the Sheriff of the same County, and to
all High-Constables and Petty-Constables, and other Ministers and Officers
appointed to keep the Peace within the same County, Greeting. Whereas we are
informed, that there is a great Meeting appointed to be had at E. within this
County, upon the 1st Day of February next, under pretense of a Fair, then and
there to be kept, [ or, under pretense of a Cock-fighting to be there had; or,
under pretense of a Race to be there Run, and the like] when and where, by
occasion or under color thereof, it is suspected there may be some notorious
Breach of the Peace, by a Fray, Riot, Insurrection, or otherwise; For the
preventing whereof, and the keeping of the Peace, These are to authorize and
require you, and every of you, that calling to your Assistance and Aid such a
number of Persons as you shall think fit; All which Persons are by us required
to assist you, and that you be then there provided during the same Meeting; and
by all the lawful waeys and means you can, see the public Peace be kept and
preserved, and the Breakers and Disturbers thereof punished: And hereof, and to
give us an account of your doings herein, within 14 Days after the same Day be
past, you are not to fail at your peril. Given under our Hands and Seals at S.
within the same County, the 1st Day of, etc.

Note, That whatever the Justices of the Peace may do, or the Sheriff or
Constable ought to do, in order to the keeping of the Peace; the Justices may
by (...) Warrant as this is command them (...)

A Mittimus for Felony to (...)

Middlesex ss. A (...) To the Keeper of (...) his Deputy there being. W^ (...)
withal the Bodies of ^. ^. (...) before us by J. K. of L. in the County of M.
with Robbing him on Monday last, and the taking of Ten Pounds from his Person,
which the said E. F. and G. H. upon their Examination confessed.

Note, If the Felon upon Examination confess the Felony, the Mittimus must say
so; for then he is not bailable.

Or thus;

Who stand charged before us upon the Suspicion of stealing Six Sheep, being
the Goods of N. O.

Or thus;

Who is charged before us with a Suspicion of a certain Felony by him
committed, as it is said [ or otherwise, as the case is.]

Commanding you to receive the same E. F. and G. H. into the said Gaol, and
them there safely to keep, until they shall be from thence delivered by due
order and course of Law; hereof fail you not at your peril. Given under our
Hands and Seals at P. in the said County, the 1st Day, etc.

Note, That in every Mittimus care must be had to set down the Offense, and the
manner and time of Punishment.

A Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue to Bridewel.

Glouc' ss. A. B. and C. D. etc. To the Master or Governor of the House of
Correction, or his Deputy there. Whereas J. S. a sturdy Vagrant Beggar, was
this day brought before the Constable of D. and charged, as well with Begging
and idle Wandering abroad, as also with other disorderly Behavior; so as he
appears to us, to be dangerous to the Inferior sort of People, contrary to
the Laws of the Nation in that case provided. These are therefore to require
you, to receive the said J. S. into your Custody, and him safely to keep in
your House of Correction until the next Quarter Sessions, to be holden for this
County; and that during all the time he shall continue with you, and be in his
good health, you do hold him to work, and punish him by putting Fetters and
Gives upon him, and by moderate Whipping of him; and that you give him no more
for his Maintenance, than what he shall deserve or earn by his Labor; and that
you have the said J. S. and this Precept at the said next Quarter Sessions.

A Pasport.

Sussex ss. A. B. one of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the County
aforesaid; To all Constables, Bailiffs, and other of Their Majesty's Officers
of the same County, and to every of them, Greeting. Forasmuch as the Bearer
hereof C. D. being brought into great Poverty and Necessity, has desire to
Travel unto the City of E. in the County of F. where he says he was Born, and
has some Friends yet living, by whose means he hops to be greatly relieved:
In consideration whereof know you, That I the said A. B. have Licensed the same
C. D. to Travel and Pass the direct way from G. into the said City of E. so
that his Journey be not of longer or further Continuance than 20 Days next after
the Date hereof, desiring you, and every of you, to permit and also to aid and
relieve the said C. D. in his Journey, so that he show himself in no respect
offensive to Their Majesty's Laws. In Witness whereof I have, etc.

Note, That in such a Passport the Party ought to be described, lest he make
any other partaker of the use of his Passport: Unless he be a Rogue, for then
he always remains in the Constables hands.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. I.
OF the Definition of the Title CONSTABLE. Page 1 When Constables were first
appointed. 2 Of High-Constables. 3 Of Petty-Constables. ibid. Constables, when
and where to attend. 6 Of the Choice and Fitness of Constables, and of the Oath
to be taken by them. 7 When and where Constables, etc. may make a Deputy. 10
The Form of the Constables Oath. ibid.
CHAP. II.
OF the several Duties incumbent on all Constables after they are Sworn,
according to the particular Branches of their Oath. page 13 The Heads of the
Oath. ibid. For the preventing and preserving the Peace ex officio. 15 The
Constables Authority about an Affray. ibid. Of Hurting the Constable, or his
Assistant. 17 Arresting persons Offensively Armed. 18 Suppressing of Riots. 19
Apprehending of Felons. 22 Constables, when and how to raise Hue and Cry. 23
Hundred fined, for not making Fresh-suit. 24 Concerning Escapes suffered by the
Constables. 25 Constable sued for suffering a Felon that is in his Custody, to
destroy himself. 26 Where the Constable may discharge the Prisoner. ibid.
Arrests made by Private persons. 27 Prisoner pinnion'd and fettered by the
Constable. ib. How the Constable may deliver up the Prisoner. ibid. Of Felons
taken in another County. 28 The Constable to see the Watch be duly kept in the
Town, etc. ibid. Watchmen, how to be qualified. 29 The Constables Duty
concerning Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars. 31 Concerning Gypsies. ibid.
The Punishment of Rogues. 34 After Whipping to have a Testimonial, and the Form
thereof. 35 The Constables Forfeiture, for not apprehending of Rogues. 39
Reward for Apprehending of Rogues. ib. Constables may set on work Laborers in
Hay or Corn Harvest. 41 The Constables Form of a Testimonial, for a Servant
that departs from his Master. 42 Orchard-Rabbers, Hedge-Preachers,
Wood-Stealers, etc. 44 The Constables Duty concerning Unlawful Gaming-houses.
46 The repressing of Drunkenness, and profane Swearing, 47 The Penalties
levied, or the Officer forfeits 40 s. 48 Penalties upon such as use Unlawful
Games and Pastime on Sundays. 52 Penalties on such as work on the Lord's Day.
54 Against Disturbing Preachers. 56 Concerning Popish Recusants. 57 Recusant
refusing to take the Oaths. 58 Concerning Conventiclers. 59 The Constable may
break open the Doors, to search for Conventiclers. ib. How the Constable shall
make Presentment of Bloodshedding, Outcries, Rescues, or other Offenses,
committed or done against their Majesty's Peace within their Limit. 61 When and
where the Constables must make their Presentment. ib. How the Constables ought
to Execute the Justices Warrants. 62 The Constable not obliged to show his
Warrant. 64 Concerning the Constable taking the Offenders word for his
Appearance. 64 Arresting a wrong Person. 65 Where the Constable may break Open
the House. 66 Punishment for such as Abuse the Justices Warrant. ibid. Before
what Justise the Offender must be carried. ib. When Offenders must bear their
own Charges of Commitment. 67
CHAP. III.
THe Constables Office about Seizing of Arms, etc. 68 A moving Papists 10 Miles
from London and Westminster. 70
CHAP. IV.
COncerning the Bailiffs, Constables, Sheriffs, etc. stating their Accounts.
ibid.
CHAP. V.
THe Constables Office about Seizing of Cattle. 71
CHAP. VI.
THe Constables Office about providing Carriages, etc. for the King. 73
CHAP. VII.
THe Constables Office about Cloth. 75
CHAP. VIII.
THe Constables Office about their Majesty's Customs 76 Concerning Taxes and
Aid-Mony. 77
CHAP. IX.
THe Constables Office about Distress for Rent, etc. 79
CHAP. X.
THe Constables Office about Excise. 81
CHAP. XI.
THe Constables Duty concerning Fish. 82
CHAP. XII.
ABout French, and other Prohibited Goods. 83
CHAP. XIII.
ABout Highways, Hay-Carts and Hogs, Streets and Bridges. 86 Penalty on
Scavengers that neglect their Duty. 92
CHAP. XIV.
Constables Duty concerning Horses. 98
CHAP. XV.
ABout Hunters and Hunting Dogs. 99
CHAP. XVI.
ABout Malt. 100
CHAP. XVII.
ABout Physicians. 101
CHAP. XVIII.
ABout the Plague. 102
CHAP. XIX.
COncerning Maimed Soldiers. 103 Of Quartering Soldiers. ibid.
CHAP. XX.
ABout Tobacco. 105
CHAP. XXI.
ABout Weights and Measures. ibid.
CHAP. XXII.
THe Power, etc. of a High-Constable alone. 108
CHAP. XXIII.
THe Duty of Constables of London. 110
Of the Duty and Office of Churchwardens. 114
CHAP. XXIV.
CHurchwardens, how Chosen. ibid. How they may Purchese. ib. About the Seats in
the Church. 116 Churchwardens Duty in making Rates. 117 What are accounted
Church-Reparations. 118 What are accounted Ornaments. ibid. Concerning
Presentiments. 119 In what Acts Churchwardens must join with Constables. 120 In
what, with Overseers of the Poor. 121 Of the Office and Duty of the Overseers
of the Poor. 121
CHAP. XXV.
OVerseers of the Poor, how appointed. ibid. To be assistant to the
Churchwardens. 122 The Overseers care of the Poor. ibid. Concerning Rates, and
settling the Poor. 125 Concerning Bastard Children. 129 Their Duty about Putting
forth and Binding Apprentices. 130 Forfeiture for not Burying in Woollen. 136
Overseers to Account. 137 Neglect of their Duty. 138 The Office of a Surveyor
of the Highways. 138
CHAP. XXVI.
SUrveyors of the Highways, when to be Chosen. 139 Days set apart for Mending
the Highways. ibid. Penalties levied by Surveyors. 141 What things the
Surveyors may take from other men's Grounds without leave. 142 Forfeitures of
such as Travel with above five Horses at length. 143 Fine upon the Surveyors
for neglect of their Duty. 144 Surveyors Accounts. ibid.
FINIS.

