Toward the VINDICATION Of the Second Commandment: By EDM. GURNAY, Batchelour
in Divinity, and Minister of Gods word at Harpley in Norfolk.

Exodus 34.14. For the Lord whose Name is Jealous, is a jealous God.

June 18. 1639. Imprimatur Cantabrigiae per Ra. Brownrigg, Procan. Samuel Ward,
Thomas Bainbrigg, Thomas Bacheroft.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for J Rothwell at the Bear and Fountain in
Cheap Side. 1661

Toward the VINDICATION OF THE Second Commandment.
THE man that esteemed the Commandments of God above thousands of gold and
silver, Ps. 119.72.
is called in Scripture, The man after Gods own hearts; 1 Samuel 13.14.
and our Savior tells us, that whosoever observes his Commandments, and
teaches men so, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven:
Matthew. 5.
Great cause therefore is there for the sons of men to be infinitely in love
with the Commandments of God; and to think no time so well spent as that which
is bestowed about doing some service or other about those Commandments:
sometime in opening and clearing their passages; sometime in filling up their
pits and valleys; sometime in making plain their roughness and stumbling-plots;
sometime in delving through their cliffs and altitudes; sometime in making
Bridges and Passe-overs upon their bottomless gulfs; sometime by one means and
sometime another, preparing the ways of the Lord, Isa. 40.6.
and making his paths straight: that so their prospect becoming clear and
thorough, and their grounds made firm and direct, the Children of men may from
all quarters be allured unto them; and leaving their own by-ways, walk
together in them, to the glory and praise of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Commandment which I for my part have especially observed, and done my
diligence to see what comers and goers are likely to do any violence unto, is
that which is accounted the Second. And because none are more likely to make
bold with that Commandment, then they that are addicted unto Images, I thought
it a good course for me toward my doing the better service in the business, to
examine all kind of Arguments which may any way be made in favor of Images;
and such of them as I should find not sufficiently to conclude (though they
concluded never so little) to give notice of them unto the World. Those of them
which in these my ensuing pains I purpose (more or less) to except against,
shall be these:

Arguments in favor of Images.
1. That there is little hope for us in these times to prevail against Images,
when as the Learned Writers in former times have so little prevailed against
them. 2. That every Child being able to perceive by them, that they have
mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, etc. it can be but a frivolous
(fantastical, iconoclastical, etc.) piece of work to make any business about
such poor things. 3. That now in the time of the Gospel, the Church of God is
at more liberty for the use of Images than it was in the time of the Law. 4.
That the present people of England, are of better strength and judgment than
to worship Images, or to take any harm by them. 5. That if any amongst us do
sometime a glance of honor unto Images, so it be but a Civil honor and not
the Divine, (dulia and not latria) no just exception can be taken thereat. 6.
That Images are profitable for many good and holy uses. 7. That they be special
good to give instruction. 8. That they be no less effectual toward the
quickening of devotion.
Where unto we answer in order.

The 1. Argument answered.
To the first, which pleads how little hope there is for us in these times to
prevail against the strong holds of Images; we answer, First, That not only a
hope to prevail, but also an apprehension of duty is a fair (if not the better)
motive unto the attempting of business: it being no dispensation unto the Dog
to give over his barking because the Thief will not be gone, but rather it
lying upon him to double his barking, so much the more; Ezekiel. 2.5, 7.
and the Lord appointing his Prophets to speak his words unto the people,
whether they will hear them or not. Secondly, considering how the light
fallings of weak water ( Gutta cavat lapidem, etc.) do in time make hollow the
hardest flint; it is not a thing to be despaired of, but that our weak
distillations, if we can rightly level them upon the faces of these Images,
which the over-flowings of others have already so well washed upon, may pit and
fret into them a greater defacement than hitherto has befallen them; the
latter droppings always making the first dint in the flint, though never a
whit more piercing than those that fell before. Thirdly, one good effect we are
sure shall follow upon our pains, whether it be by writing or speaking (yea,
though it be but babbling or scribbling) and that is this; That in the mean time
Falsehood shall not be able to prescribe any peaceable possession against the
Truth, as long as any amongst us shall, though with never so stammering a
tongue but babble, or never so ragged a quill but scribble against the same.
Yea, the perverse world it self shall reap some benefit by our such babbling
and scribbling; there being good hope for them, that the Lord will not come
himself in person to vindicate the Truth (which when he does, fire and
brimstone must follow) as long as he shall observe any of the sons of men
fighting for it, and that we have not utterly forsaken the field. And as for us
the pusillus grex, and sorry company of these babblers and scribblers (for so
the industrious contenders for the Truth use to be termed;) beside the reward
which the God of truth has laid up for those that sell all they have toward
the purchasing of this pearl, Matthew. 13.46.
we shall also in this vale of misery reap many a sweet contentment; And while
we are muddling in the mines of this hidden Truth, and working for it through
the hardest rocks, we shall meet with many a living spring wherewith to refresh
our thirsty souls, and many a clear fountain wherein we may bath and revive our
tired spirits; and all the way along as we go by the silver streamings,
pleasant passages, delicate windings, turnings and returnings of this crystal
and celestial Truth, we shall every foot be entertained with most admirable
varieties of sparkling and spangling and most unsatiating contemplations.

The 2. Argument answered.
The second allegation toward the favoring and bearing with Images, is this,
That every child being able to discern how such kind of things have mouths and
speak not, eyes and see not, etc. it can be but a frivolous piece of work to
make any business about such poor things. Whereunto we answer: If the Lord our
God be a jealous God, and withal especially jealous against Images; what
mortal man shall once dare to term it a frivolous piece of work to be never so
cautelous against Images? For can we be too cautelous or too timorous, how we
provoke the jealousy of the most terrible God? Now, that the Lord so is,
namely, both a jealous God, and also especially jealous against Images; many
considerations have offered themselves to make it good: and we fear we shall
offend the Lord, unless we admonish the Sons of men thereof.

Touching therefore the first of them, namely, That the Lord is a jealous God;
it is no more than the Scripture every where supposes: And the Prophet Esaias,
when he says that he puts on Jealousy like a Cloak, gives us fairly to
think, not only that the Lord is a jealous God, but also that he will be known
and plainly profess himself to be: the Cloak of a man being his most outward
garment, and which does, livery-wife, best make a man known from other men.
Yea, Moses goes further, and makes it no less than one of the names of God,
to be a Jealous God: For thus he says, The Lord whose name is Jealous, is a
jealous God. Exodus 34 14.
Whereof also, finally, good reason may be given: For what more fit to make the
name of a thing than that which is sufficient to distinguish the thing from all
other things of the same kind? And does not the Name of The Jeal^^s God,
sufficiently distinguish the true God from all other gods whatsoever? For as
for other gods, so far were they always from being jealous gods, as that
though their lovers went to never so many beside themselves, yet to them it was
all one; whenever they returned unto them, and brought their gifts with them,
like common Whores they received them without more ado: Whereas the true God
was always so far from admitting any partners with him in his love, as that
when at any time his people went unto any other god beside himself, he did most
severely punish them; Josh. 24.20.
and (as Joshua at first gave them warning) after he had done them never so
much good, he would do them as much harm. True indeed, Isaiah 40.17.
strange it may seem, that he in whose eyes all the Nations of the earth are as
nothing, should once vouchsafe to look upon the sons of men; much more, that
he should love them, and that with the highest degree of love, the love of
Jealousy: notwithstanding, whatsoever the cause be; whether it be because he
would amaze the sons of men with the immensitie of his love, or whether it be
to make them the more watchful over every thing that offers to get into
their love; whatsoever the cause be, so it is his pleasure, and so he has
determined, even with no less love than the love of Jealousy to embrace the
sons of men.

But now concerning our second suppose, namely, That the Lord is so especially
jealous against Images: that we grant may well seem something strange,
especially considering what a world of creatures there are which both have
Images as well as these (whatsoever the eye sees being an Image) and all such
kind of Images as may far better ravish the beholders than these counterfeits
possibly can. Notwithstanding, first, thus much we are sure of, That none of
the Commandments are grounded upon his Jealousy but only that which is
against Images; Thou shall not make any kind of Images, etc. -- For I the Lord
thy God am a Jealous God. Secondly, all the false Gods that ever were, what
were they else (ordinarily) but Images? Thirdly, not only the Images of
honorable Creatures (as of Saints, Princes, Parents, etc.) and of profitable
Creatures (as Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Horses, Fowls, etc.) but also of terrible and
hateful Creatures (as Lions, Dragons, Serpents, etc.) and even of noisome,
common, and vile Creatures (as Mice, Rats, Cats, Dogs, Worms, etc.) have been
made Gods of: Which may the more plainly convince, that not only the thing
signified by the Image, but also the Image it self was the thing so deified and
regarded. For though it be never so manifest that such kind of things have
mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, etc. yet such (who knows not?) is the
perverseness of man, as that if he once sets on it, he will maintain, that
not only the thing that has eyes and sees not, etc. but also the thing which
neither sees, nor has eyes, nor any similitude of eyes, is notwithstanding a
God: witness not only those old Heathens, which made a plain stone their God,
Live. dec. 3. lib. 9.
and which also they called Matrem Deum, the Mother-God; but also the Disciples
of Trent at this very day, which maintain that to be the very true God, which
has the perfect similitude (at least the similitude) of a Cake of Bread. For
though all their wits and senses do never so strongly reclaim against such
monstrous Positions; yet if they once set on it, they will be so far from
relenting thereupon, as that they will rather double their resistance so much
the more, and make that a Principal argument that it must be so, because their
common sense says it cannot be so: Even just as they which Austine speaks
of, qui in illo figmento numen in esse credebant, August. in Psalm 113.
quia vitalem in eo motum non videbant; which kind of argument none but such as
had resolved to be wilfully mad would ever make. Fourthly, we find, the
Scripture far more frequent in forbidding the making gods of Images and
worshipping them, than in making gods of any other kind of things and
worshipping them: And yet the making gods of other things is as much forbidden
as the making gods of Images; even in the first Commandment, Thou shall have
none other gods but me. A fifth reason why the Jealousy of God may so
especially set it self against Images, may be this, Because no kind of false
gods be so fit for the purposes of false-priesthoods as Image-gods be; namely,
because such kind of gods may both be most easily contained in their Temples,
under their locks and keye, and shall put them to little or no charge, either
to guard them (for they are not worth the stealing away) or to find them daily
meat and drink (for there is no life in them;) they having also many
concavities and cells fit for wire-drawings, jugglings, and such miraculous
feats; and finally, being apt to be continued in their full glitterings and
beauties, and to make as fair a show when they are rotten as when they were
first made. Sixthly, there is no kind of false god which does beget the mind of
man with a more gross opinion of God and Religion than an Image-god: And that
may be a special cause why the true God does take such indignation against
Images. For when such kind of things are esteemed for gods as have eyes and see
not, mouths and speak not, etc. the beholders are given to think, that either
there is not any true God at all; or if there be any, that he is some poor,
brute, senseless thing, and such as can do little good or harm: And thus much
also a mere natural man, Varro, could observe, when he said, that the first
setters forth of Gods by Images, did not only increase error, but also take
away all fear of religion: whereof Austine gives this fair reason, August. De
Civ. Dei 4.31.
Quia facile dii possunt in stoliditate similacrorum contemni, i.e. Because the
stolidity of Images made men think accordingly of their Gods. Moreover, there
is no kind of false God so hard to be dispossessed and cast out of the heart of
Man as these Image-gods. For whereas all men are at the first in the state of
Childhood and ignorance, and Children and ignorant Persons are most easily
taken up with these Image-Gods: it so comes to pass, that they take up the
first and deepest rooms in the hearts of men; and so must needs be most hard to
remove and cast up again. Again, there is no kind of false God that does more
strongly resist the entertainment of the true God than these Image-gods: which
may well be another special cause of the true Gods indignation against them.
For the true God being altogether invisible, and taking up his mansion only in
the heart; and these Image-gods being nothing but visible, and having no
abidance but in the outward eye; it must needs be, that such as have once been
taken up with them, will very hardly be brought to brook and put confidence in
the invisible God. And though at length they be brought to acknowledge, that
the true God is altogether invisible; yet will it be a hard matter for them to
put up a Prayer to that invisible God, but these old wonted Images will
obstruct and infect the same: It being a good reason which Austine gives, why
the Heathens did rather direct their Prayers unto the Images of the Sun or
Sea, than unto the real Sun or Sea it self; August. in Psalm. 113.
because (says he) they might think it more likely that the things which carry
the similitudes of men (as those Images of the Sun and Sea, called Phoebus and
Neptunus, did) should hear their Prayers, than such kind of things as had no
similitude, but either of an Orb, as the Sun has; or of a wavie and
undeterminate nature, as the Sea has. Finally, when men will not stick to give
incredible sums of money for Images, Plin. hist. Not 35.10.
as sometime twenty talents of gold, sometime thirty, forty, fifty, sixty,
eighty, and an hundred for an Image; has not the Lord great reason to be
Jealous of Images? For what more likely to become an Idol, than that which men
esteem at an unreasonable rate; and that also notwithstanding the Lord has
pronounced of it, Isa 44 10.
that it is profitable for nothing? But to conclude, (for it would be an
endless piece of work to heap up all the probabilities that offer themselves
for this purpose:) That which one of the Fathers affirmed of his times, Lact.
2.7.
when he says, Tanta homines imaginum cupiditas tenet, ut jam viliora ducantur
illa quae vera sunt, i. e. So greatly are men enamoured upon Images, as that
now-a-dayes the more true and real things are, the more vile and base they are
esteemed: what age has not found it true in their particular times? As if the
sons of men had a desire to compare with their Maker, and to find more
excellency in their own works than in his. Surely (may we not say?) the true
and real Servants and Saints of God were not more esteemed and respected when
they lived, than their Images have been: And no doubt it will easily be
granted, that when poor Lazarus himself would not be suffered to peep in at the
doors, the picture of Lazarus shall be advanced in the parlour. Last of all,
Not only the Heathens in their times, but also the very people of God in their
times, have they not continually doted upon, and run a Whoring after Images?
Yea, and that also as well in the time of the Gospel as in the time of the Law?
For what else meant those tumults, wars, and bloodsheds in the time of the
Eastern Empire, about the setting up and pulling down of Images? Tom. 2. hom.
2. part 2.
as our Homily at large declares. And even in these last times (at least as
far as the bounds of Rome extend) has extremity of zeal been wanting unto the
cause of Images? For, We must adore, Naclantus, in Romans 1. cited more largely
in the Homily, Tom. 2. hom. 2. p. 3.
says one of their Doctors, not only before an Image, but also the Image it
self. And another of them thus, Constantius, in lib. Carol. Magn.
The same honor which is due to the Trinity, do I attribute unto an Image, and
who so does not likewise, him I accurse. And their most Classical Doctor thus,
Bellarm. De imag. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 21.
The Images of Christ and the Saints are to be reverenced, not only as they
are Samples, but also per se proprie, properly and by themselves; even so far
as that the veneration may settle and determine it self upon the Image, and non
solum ut vicem gerat exemplaris. And whoever among the Heathen did more
thoroughly rivet and imp the soul of man into an Image, toward the making it
most perfect in Idolatry? But enough no doubt has been said to make it
probable (and more than probable we are loath to make it) that the Jealousy of
God is more strongly set against Images than against any inveiglement which the
soul of man is apt to be beguiled withal whatsoever. And therefore to judge us
frivolous (idle, precise, fantastical, iconoclastical, etc.) for being
cautelous against Images, or for our resolving to admit of no reasons in their
behalf but such only as shall be substantial and demonstrative, is a judgment
(we are persuaded) that pleases not God: And therefore we wi^^ proceed and
persist in our intentions, and not give over till we have acquainted the world
with our exceptions against the rest of the allegations.

The 3. Argument answered.
The next whereof is this; That now in the time of the Gospel the Church of God
is at more liberty for the use of Images than it was in the time of the Law.
Whereunto we answer, First, That the time of the Law being the special time for
types, shadows, figures, and similitudes, which all were a kind of Images; the
argument should rather follow on the contrary, and conclude, That Images do
rather lose than gain any liberty by virtue of that Laws exspiration. For it
being the determination of God to divide his Church into a state of minority,
and a state of maturity, and the state of minority being that which was under
the discipline of Moses Law; the Lord di^ think it good to set forth that state
of minority in such kind of attires and liabiliments as might best agree and
suit with the fancy of minority; which when the time of gravity and maturity
should come, should thereupon be put off and laid aside; even no otherwise than
as the blooms of our trees fall away upon the putting forth of the fruit.
Secondly, when the time of the old Law began first to exspire, we do not find
that the primitive Church did take any more liberty for the use of Images than
it did before; or that Idolatry was esteemed a less sin than it was before,
but rather a greater; Rev. 21.8.
S. John pronouncing a more terrible punishment against it (even the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone) than the old Law in so express terms ever
did; and calling even upon Babes to beware of Idols; and terming it a doctrine
of Balaam, 1 John 5.21. Rev. 2.14.
to teach liberty of eating meat that was (though but) sacrificed unto Idols:
Acts 15.20, 29.
which also the Apostle charged the Gentiles (for their first Lesson) to
abstain from. Thirdly for many generations together immediately following the
Apostles times, Tom. 2. hom 2. p. 2.
the Church of God (as our Homily at large declares) would not endure so much
as the sight of Images in places where Gods name used to be called upon.
Fourthly, the founder part of the Catholic Church have always esteemed the
Decalogue to be of eternal force, and to be rooted in the Law of Creation,
before any positive or Mosaical legislation was: as also Gods punishing
Idolatry in the old Canaanites which lived before the time of Moses Law, and
his promise to a thousand generations (the tenth part of which time the Law of
Moses was not in force) may import. Finally, the Church of England at this day
continually publishes a Law against the worshipping of Images; and in her
Commination pronounces the first and last curse against them that so do. We
will therefore without more ado esteem them at too weak a pass, and not worthy
any further to be contested against, which for the succouring of Images find
themselves driven to plead the abrogation of Moses Law.

The 4. Argument answered.
The fourth allegation is this, That the present people of England are of
better strength and judgment than to worship Images, or to take any harm from
such kind of things. Whereunto we answer, First, That so also ignorance and
dullness of conceit are far enough off from worshipping Images, or taking any
harm by them; witness the brute Beasts: it requiring oftentimes a good degree
of understanding, to be so much as capable of some kind of deceit. Yea,
profaneness and irreligion will also neglect, deride, and spoil Images as much
as this strength and judgment; witness Dionysius, Rabshakeh, Nero, and those
like Atheists. For as when profane persons hear one another swear by the blood
and wounds of God, and are not moved thereat; the cause why they are not moved,
is not any strength of religion, but only their sympathizing with one another
in profaneness and irreligion. So likewise if any proceed not so far as to do
reverence unto such kind of Images as represent the wounds and passions of God,
there is no necessity to think them so specially strong in religion; it being
no more than incredulity also and irreligion may withhold them from. Secondly,
as ignorance, profaneness and irreligion, so also carnal policy and
affectation will make a show of this kind of strength; witness those Manichees
in the time of Augustine, which out of this carnal policy, to win the Pagans
unto their side against the sound Christians, Contra Adimant. cap. 13.
simulabant se favere simulacris, and made a show as if they could well enough
endure Images. As also witness those Corinthians in the time of Paul, 1 Cor. 8.
which out of an affectation to be thought strong men, would needs make nothing
of it to be present at those Idol-festivals. Thirdly, admit it were out of some
degree of sound strength indeed, that our people at this day are so far from
worshipping Images; yet must this strength needs be general? Shall we suppose
that there are not any weak ones or little ones amongst us? Or shall the
weakest of our times be supposed wiser and stronger than the wisest or
strongest in former times? Those ancient Chaldeans, Egyptians, Persians,
Grecians, and Romans, from whom we have received our principal arts and
sciences; yea, the very people of God, unto their wisest Solomon; yea, at this
present day, the Papists (whose abilities in all kind of faculties, arts and
sciences, languages, antiquities, subtilties and policies, who does not
acknowledge?) have not all these fallen by Images? And must all these, for
strength of brain and ripeness of judgment, needs come short of our little
ones and very vulgar? For what though the truth be never so abundantly preached
amongst us? is every child as ready to hear a preacher as to gape and gaze at a
picture? Admit also that preachers should at all times so abound, and withal
find so little to do, as to never leave calling upon men to beware of those
blocks which they wittingly cast in their own way. Fourthly the Scripture (we
know) judges covetousness to be a worshipping of Images; Col. 3.5.
and the mere coveting of Images is a kind of covetousness no doubt: And are
there none amongst us which are culpable of that kind of covetousness? Fifthly,
admit that none of our people be observed to do any perceivable worship unto
Images; no more does the covetous man do any perceivable worship unto his
money, but uses it as familiarly as any thing in his House; And yet the
Scripture makes him an Idolater. Finally, Ephesians. 5.5.
if none of our people may be supposed to be so foolish or so weak as to
worship Images, why do our Laws so peremptorily and continually forbid them so
to do? Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, says our Law; and,
Lord, incline our hearts to keep this Law, answers the people; and yet none
of our people must be supposed so foolish as to break such a Law! Surely,
superfluous must the Law needs be, and most frivolous the Suffrage of the
people; or most presumptuous the Suppose. We conclude therefore, that as the
Suppose is not easy to be granted, That our people are so far from worshipping
Images; so also were it granted, it would not thereupon follow, that therefore
our people are of such special strength and judgment; it being no more than
ignorance, profaneness and irreligion, carnal policy and affectation have
brought men unto.

The 5. Argument answered.
The next allegation is this; That admit sometime some of our people do let
fall some glance of honor unto an Image; yet if it be but a Civil kind of
honor and not the Divine (dulia and not latria) no just exception can be taken
thereat. Against which position we thus demonstrate;

That which is properly due to the Creator may not be given to any kind of
creature (much less unto the Image of any creature) but only by virtue of the
Creatours express appointment;

But all kind of honor, glory and praise, of what degree or kind soever, is
due only to the Creator.

Therefore no kind of honor, glory or praise, of what degree or kind soever,
may be given unto any kind of creature (much less unto the Image of any kind
of Creature) but only by virtue of the Creatours express appointment:

But never did the Creator appoint any jote, or scrat, or scruple of honor to
be done unto Images;

Therefore must not any the least jote, or scrat, or scruple of honor be done
unto them.

Touching the first ground of this our demonstration, namely, That the Lords
proper due must not be disposed of but by virtue of his own express
appointment: It is no more then the Law of the whole world does acknowledge; no
man upon earth esteeming himself an owner of that which any besides himself
has power to dispose of: And therefore we shall not need to make any more
words toward the establishing of this ground, which the freehold of the whole
world is grounded upon.

Likewise also our second ground, namely, That all honor, glory and praise is
due only unto the Lord; is as clear a principal, and needs no more words to
establish it: the Scripture every where ringing it in our ears, that unto him
all honor, glory and praise is only due; and the condition of his honor of
necessity enforcing as much: For the honor of God cannot be infinite (as of
necessity it must be) if any jote or scrat or scruple of any kind of honor
could be found not to belong unto him. Notwithstanding, because we find in the
Scripture how the Lord appoints us to give honor unto men; as namely, unto
Parents, Masters, Kings, Governors, etc. whereby it may be imagined, that
perhaps the Lord has dispossessed himself of some kinds and portions of
honor: as also, for that it may be thought that some kinds of honor are too
little, or common, or base to be presented unto the Lord; and that therefore
the sons of men are at liberty to dispose of those kinds of honor as
themselves think good, and so (finally) to their Images as they list: we
therefore purpose to stay a little longer upon this point; namely, until we
have declared, That neither Gods appointing us to give any kinds of honor unto
men, is of force to dispossess himself thereof; nor again, that the
littleness or smallness or commonnesse of any kind of honor may be of force
to exempt the same from belonging unto the Lord.

Touching then the first of these, namely, That the Lords appointing us to do
any kinds of honor unto men, is not of force to dispossess himself thereof,
we prove; Because the rest of his gifts which he daily gives unto men, as
wisdom, riches, power, authority, etc. do not thereupon cease to belong unto
the Lord, but do still remain in his dominion and property nevertheless; even
as the seed which the Husbandman sprinkleth in his field, does nevertheless
belong unto the Husbandman. For as those gifts of wisdom, strength, riches,
etc. so also the gifts and portions of honor which God bestows upon men,
both may be, and also must be improved unto the Lords final honor and
advantage: That being (no doubt) the reason why our Savior appoints us to
give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars; Because unless our Cesars and
Governors be stocked and furnished with such portions of honor, authority,
etc. they shall not be able to bring up whole Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, and
Families unto the Lords final honor, as their office is to do. Secondly, if it
had been the intent of the lord, to part finally with those kinds of honor
which he appoints us to give unto men; it had been necessary that those kinds
of honor should have been specified and laid out and severed from those kinds
which were to be reserved only unto the Lord: for else the sons of men might
hap in their mutual honoring one of another, to go beyond their bounds, and
make bold with the Lords peculiar honor: But as we nowhere find any such
specification or partition; so also we may everywhere find, how those kinds of
honor which are most likely to be proper unto God, as might, majesty and
dominion, fear and trembling, singleness of heart, etc. are notwithstanding
allowed to be given unto men: As on the other side, those kinds of honor which
may be thought of a more common and inferior nature, as obedience, love,
subjection, thankfulness, etc. are notwithstanding usually called for to be
performed unto God. Thirdly, if those kinds of honor which God allows us to
perform unto men should thereupon cease to belong unto the Lord, by that means
neither the honor of the eye, the tongue, the knee, yea nor of the heart, nor
of the singleness of the heart should belong unto the Lord; because with all
these we honor men. We conclude therefore, That the Lords appointing us to
give any kinds or portions of honor unto men (whether Kings, Parents, Masters,
etc.) must not be of force to make us think that those kinds of honor do
thereupon cease to belong unto the Lord.

And that the commonnesse of any kind of honor is not of force to abase it, or
dismiss it from being presentable unto the Lord, even no more then the
commonnesse of coin does make the coin less presentable unto the King, it will
easily be granted. For as our receiving the Sacrament with that mouth wherewith
we receive common meat, is no dishonor unto the Sacrament; we having Gods
Ordinance so to do: so likewise our honoring God with those kinds of honor
wherewith we honor men, needs not to be feared as any dishonor unto God; we
having the Ordinance of God to warrant us so to do. But rather, as the money
which we pay unto our Creditours assignees both may be and also must be as good
money (for the quantity of it) as that which we pay unto the Creditour himself.
So likewise the honor which we perform unto Gods assignees (as Parents,
Princes, Masters, etc. are) both may be and also must be (for the quantity of
it) as good and sound as that which we perform unto God himself.

Finally, that neither the littleness (no more than the commonnesse) of any
kind of honor may be of force to dismiss it from presenting it self unto the
Lord, it is as easy (and no less material) to declare. For, first, if the
littleness of any kind of honor might be of force to put it by from being
presented unto the Lord; it would thereupon follow, that no honor at all
should be presented unto the Lord from the sons of men. For all the Nations
of men (the Scripture says) are not only mean and little, Isa. 40.17.
but also as nothing, yea, less than nothing in his eyes. Secondly, the Lord
everywhere professes himself the Maker and Creator of all things; and so
strictly stands upon his prerogative therein, as that (when time was) he
would not suffer the poorest kind of creatures that are (even lice) to own
their production from any singer but his own. Exodus 8.17, 18, 19.
Thirdly, the least degree of humane honor (whereof only our question is) does
it not of necessity contein the honor of the heart? it being scarce worthy the
name of an honest action, much less of an honorable action, which proceeds
not from the motion of the heart. But the heart we know, though it goes alone,
and is not accompanied with either knee, or tongue, or eye, or any bodily parts
(for these are oftentimes fast bound by sickness, imprisonments, or necessary
callings) yet is it allowed to have access unto the Lord, and to present him
with such sighs, and groans, and ejaculations, and thanks, as it thinks good.
Fourthly, (that no sacrilegious disposition may take up this trick of robbing
the Lord, by excusing the neglect of it, by the littleness or poorness of it)
the Lord himself has said it and sworn it, that unto him every knee should
bow: Isa. 45 23.
Which also he Apostle extending to the knees of things in Heaven, Phil. 2.10.
and things on Earth, and things creeping under the Earth; he gives us fairly
and plainly to know, that the least ability in the nature of man, not only
may, but also must find a knee to bend unto him; our least muscles and
knuckles, inclinations and dispositions, having more composition than the
nature of Angels, and more understanding than the nature of Worms and creeping
things have. Yea the very hairs of your head are numbered, says our Savior:
Mat. 10.30.
And therefore if the Lord keeps a reckoning of our hairs, shall we think he
will neglect the excellencies and honors of our substantial abilities? the
least lifting up of the eye, or the least motion of the lip, being able to do
God more honor then multitudes of our hairs, who knows not? It is true
indeed, the Lord sometime rejects some kinds of honor, as the honor of the
lips, the tongue, the eyes, etc. but it is not because they be small and
little, but because they that offer them are false and double, and think with
their lip-labor to be quit of the Lord, and so to keep their hearts and
substantial parts to themselves: Even like unto deceitful debtours, which with
the tendering a small sum of money, intend to defeat their creditours of the
main. For else, as the penny being as good silver as the pound, and having the
Kings stamp as well as the pound, may not be rejected from bearing a part in
the Kings tribute no more than the pound: So the tongue and the lips, and never
so outward abilities, being the Workmanship of God, no less than the parts
most inward and supreme, may not be debarred from tendering their offices and
services unto the Lord, no more then the parts never so able and supreme: the
withholding the least of them being of force to make our greatest honors
imperfect (as the want of a farthing may hinder the clearing of the debt;) and
their access being of force to make the greatest honors the great; as the
least digit is of force to give an augmentation to the greatest number. We
conclude therefore, That as the Lords appointing us to perform diverse kinds of
honor unto sundry sorts of men, is not of force to dispossess himself of
those honors; so also, neither is the commonnesse or littleness of any kind
of honor, of any force to exempt or dismiss the same from belonging unto the
Lord And so the first ground of our Demonstration is most certain and manifest,
namely, That all kind of honor, glory and praise, of what degree or kind
soever, is wholly and perpetually due only unto the Lord; and consequently,
That no degree or kind of honor whatsoever, may be given to any kind of
creature (much less to the Image of any kind of creature) but only by virtue
of the Lords express and special appointment; even no more than a creditours
money may be paid unto any but such as the creditour has assigned to receive
it.

Now, that the Lord never assigned nor appointed any kind of honor to be done
unto Images, we must take it for granted, and assuredly believe it, until we
find his express word under his own handwriting for it. And lest any should
busy themselves unprofitably, and mispend precious time about seeking for some
Texts and parcels of Scripture to prove such a matter, we shall give them a
sufficient Item to save them that labor, and that is this: That unless the
Scriptures which they bring for the honoring of Images, be far more plain,
peremptory, and abundant than any that can be brought for the honoring of men
(as Parents, Princes, Masters, etc.) they must not be admitted. And the reason
of this our Item and Caveat is this; Because men being reasonable and
understanding Creatures, and such as are able to improve the honors that are
done unto them, unto the honor and glory of the Lord; it is a thing not
incredible unto flesh and blood, that some degrees and kinds of honor should
be done to them: and therefore a few words from the mouth of God, or under his
handwriting, might be sufficient for such a purpose. But now for Images, which
are most palpably void of all understanding, and utterly unable to improve the
honor that is done unto them unto the Lords final advantage; it must needs be
a thing most incredible unto flesh and blood, and contrary to all the rules of
reason, that any honor should be done unto them; And therefore, unless we have
most peremptory charge from God so to do, and that far more abundantly than
ever we had for the honoring of men, it must not be done. But so far is the
Scripture from such super-abundance of charge for the honoring of Images, as
that whereas it everywhere (and most expressly in the Commandments) teaches
the honoring of men (as Parents, Masters, Kings, etc.) it scarce once
affords any shadow of appointment for the honoring of Images: And therefore
we may securely conclude, That the Lord did never appoint any jote or scrat of
scruple of honor to be done unto them. And so our Demonstration against the
doing of civil honor unto Images, is abundant and complete; The force whereof
by the strings of art may thus be contrived;

That kind of honor which the Owner of all honor did never appoint us to
give unto Images, must not be given unto Images.

But the Civil honor is such a kind of honor, as the Owner of all honor did
never appoint us to give unto Images;

Therefore the Civil honor must not be given unto Images.

But because every capacity is not apt to be fastened upon by Demonstrations,
nor ready enough to gather negatives from the the want of affirmatives (though
in all kind of grants and conveyances betwixt man and man, the want of an
affirmative is negative sufficient) it has therefore seemed good unto the
indulgence of God, to declare his mind in this point to be expressly negative:
and that not only in general, when he forbids the worshipping of any thing
which he has not commanded; Deuteronomy 1^.3.
and elsewhere he says, Isa. 42.8.
My glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven Images; but
also most especially, and with his own mouth from Heaven, when he says, Thou
shall not bow down to them nor worship them; there being no kind of honor,
whether actual or intentional, real or personal, corporal or spiritual, natural
or moral, domestic or civil, divine or humane, but may easily be found most
palpably forbidden in that short clause. Yea, what kind of honor can be
imagined but may be found denied unto Images in the first half of that clause,
Thou shall not bow down unto them? For all honor being testimonium
excellentiae, and attributing some degree of excellency to the person unto whom
it is given; it must needs be, that whosoever gives honor, does with all
perform some degree of bowing down: the attributing of excellency of necessity
implying some bending, stouping and submission of the mind at least. For though
some degrees of bowing down do not proceed so far as to be visible and outward,
yet may they be true and real bowings down nevertheless: Even as well as there
be many kinds of knees which are not bodily and visible (as the knees of
Spirits, Hearts, and Angels) and yet are true and real knees even by the
judgment of the Scripture. Secondly, admit there were some kinds of honor
which did not imply a bowing down (at least in the judgment of such weak ones
as know not bowing down, but that which is outward and visible) yet when the
Commandment adds further, Neither shall thou worship them, what could be said
more toward the barring them all possible honor whatsoever? Thirdly, in our
English style, the title Worshipful is more common than the title Honorable,
and inferior thereunto: And therefore the things which must not be worshipped,
much less may be honored. Fourthly, if all honor include either a bowing
down, or a doing worship, then much more must the Civil honor be found so to
do: it being a necessary condition in the Civil honor, That it be not only a
true and real honor, but also that it be an outward and visible honor; for
else it cannot serve to distinguish one person from another, as the intent of
Civil honor is to do. Fifthly, if by Civil honor we mean those kinds of
honor which pass betwixt man and man; so we shall both bow down to Images and
worship them also, if we give them Civil honor in that sense: For unto men we
usually bow down, and term them Worshipful, Honorable, Excellent, Majestical,
etc. Yea, Prostration and Adoration ( Nam civilis est adoratio, Andrews, Resp
ad Ballarm. Apol. 8.
quis nescit?) have been esteemed allowable unto men. Sixthly, if by Civil
honor we mean those kinds of honor which are due to the Civil body, and the
heads thereof; so the Civil honor shall contain a principal kind of honor.
For if Parents and Masters, which are but members of the Civil body, must be
honored with fear and trembling, and singleness of heart; then much more must
the Civil body it self, or such as represent the same, be so honored. Again,
if by Civil honor we mean only such forms of honor as by local and civil
Constitutions do pass for acknowledgements of honor; such as peradventure the
uncovering of the head may be esteemed: (for the uncovering of the head is not
in all Nations, and from the Womankind in no Nation, esteemed as a doing of
honor) yet we must know, that when once any ceremony is admitted for a form of
honor, and is habituated thereunto, it must be esteemed as a Civil knee; and
the doing so much unto an Image, must be judged a bowing down thereunto, and
that of the nobler kind of knee. Finally, they that set forth the Civil honor
by the term of dulia, with telling us that it is no Idolatry, unless latria be
given unto Images; they do but give us exchange of words, Greek and foreign
terms, for familiar and modern; tha^ so the truth being obscured and puddled by
the means, their Idols may the better give us the slip. For the word dulia
signifying service, and all service implying a bowing down; it is plain, that
the giving so much unto Images, is a palpable bowing down unto them. Secondly,
the word latria signifying only such a kind of service as consists in
famulation and attendance, which is the most easy and liberal kind of service;
it is plain, that if the giving so much unto Images be granted to be against
the Commandment, then the giving so much as dulia is apt to signify, is much
more against the Commandment. Thirdly, it is manifest in the Greek text, that
dulia and latria are ordinarily used as words of one and the same
signification; and that latria as usually given unto men, and dulia as usually
unto God. Repl. art. 14.
So as well might B. Jewel compare this distinction to that of the Physicians
Wife, who when (belike) she had maintained that Pepper. was cold, and thereupon
was opposed by some of the Wives, that it was hot enough in the mouth: she
salved the matter with this distinction, That though it was hot in working, yet
it might be cold in operation; and so with her learned distinction put all the
women to a stamme, and with a strong hand carried the cause: And so we may well
think, that when this Image-worshiping (or Image-honouring) was first commended
unto the world, and withal was opposed by those that were faithful unto the
Commandment; the maintainers of it, partly being too great and too headstrong
to mend their error, and partly not being impudent enough to deny the
Commandment, and partly (finally) not being allowed to work otherwise than by
Argument, at length drew forth these distinctions, That it was but a Civil
honor, and not the Divine, only dulia and not latria, which they allowed unto
Images: And so by the means of such new and strange terms, they put many of
their opposers to a stamme; especially such as more loved the peace of the
World than the peace of Conscience, or thought it an imputation to their
learning, not to understand Greek, and far-fetcht distinctions, though never so
senseless and impertinent. But when at length it grew most manifest, that
through the gap of these distinctions the Commandment of God was not only
notoriously incroached upon, but also in a manner trodden under foot; it was
time for the servants of God to stand in the gap, and to resist such
incroachers to the face. And for this cause, we for our part have taken the
more pains about the stubbing up these distinctions; which hitherto have been
the special Ivy-tods where these Images have a long time harbored themselves
and bred their paddocks in; and whereunto, when at any time they have been
closely pursued, they have used to betake themselves, as their only sanctuary
and refuge: which after they shall be once finally put by, they shall be
plainly discovered to be stark-naked stocks and blocks, and not only unworthy
of any honor, but also most worthy to be thrown into the fire.

The 6. Argument answered.
The sixth allegation is this; That Images are profitable for many good and
holy uses. Whereunto we answer, That Satan also may be found profitable for
many good uses; 2. Cor. 11.14.
for he is able to change himself into an angel of light: and yet the children
of God must have nothing to do with him. As also they that compassed sea and
land to make a Proselyte, Matthew. 23.15.
no doubt were commendable for industry and many good parts: and yet their
Disciples were far the worse for them. Luke 16.
And the false Steward which was thrust out of his Lords house for doing
unjustly, was notwithstanding acknowledged able to do wittily and wisely. Yea,
mere natural men have been wiser than to be taken with this kind of argument:
witness those Lacedaemonians, which would not suffer the Poet Archilochus to be
read in their schools (though they acknowledged him to excel for wit and
Poetry) ne plus moribus noceret quam ingeniis prodesset. Valor Max. lib. 6.
cap. 3.
Yea, the principal advancers of Images (the Church of Rome) will not admit of
this kind of argument in their behalf; For though they acknowledge the
Scripture to be both profitable and divine, yet will they not suffer thereupon
that the Scriptures should be published. And yet the profitableness of the
Scripture is incomparably more (were it not impiety to make such comparisons)
than the profitableness of Images; and the danger incomparably less; every
Child and Innocent being in danger to take harm by Images, whereas none but
the perversely minded are in danger to take harm by the sincere, milken,
divine, and grace-ministring Scriptures. Secondly, there being such a
profanesse in the heart of man to sin by Images, even to the making gods of
them, or the worshipping them; it had need be some great weight of profit (no
less peradventure than the weight of necessity) that may make the use of them
be esteemed so much as profitable. For though a man may catch fish with a
golden hook, yet who will judge it a profitable course to fish with a golden
hook? the loss of one golden hook being more than an hundred catchings will
countervail. Yea, better it were, says our Homily, that the arts of painting,
Tom. 2. hom 2. p. 3.
plaistering, carving, graving, and founding had never been found nor used,
than one of them whose souls in the sight of God are so precious, should by
occasion of Image or Picture perish and be lost. Thirdly, admit we could never
so securely and without danger make profitable uses of Images: Yet if the Lord
our God be a Jealous God, and so professes himself to be, it concerns us
first to be well assured whether the Jealousy of God be not likely to be
offended with our conversing with such kind of things. For the jealous Husband
is not content with this, That his wife is a profitable wife, and a thrifty
wife, and a chaste wife, unless she also refraineth the company of the man
which her Husband has professed his jealousy against; for the Husband that is
not jealous, will expect so much at his wives hand, that she be both profitable
and chaste also; And therefore the jealous Husband (and consequently the
Jealous God) must be further gratified than so. Fourthly, if it be found that
the Lord is not only a Jealous God, but also especially Jealous against Images;
then the profit which may (though lawfully) be made of Images, not only should
be of no force with us to admit of them, but should rather be of force with us
to abandon them. For as a Subject whose Prince holds him in jealousy
concerning his Crown, the more good parts he has, and the more popular he is,
the more hasty ought the true subjects be to suppress him or abase him, rather
than to make any special reckoning of him: So also these Images, it once it be
found by them that the Lord stands in Jealousy of them concerning his Honor
and Throne, the more profitable and plausible things they are supposed to be,
the more speedy ought the servants of God be to deface them, rather than for
their supposed usefullnesse to regard or endure them.

The 7. Argument answered.
The seventh allegation is this; That Images are special good to give
instruction. Whereunto we answer, That there is nothing in all the world so
silly or so barren, but that some kernels of instruction may be picked
therefrom: Prove. 24.30, 31, 32.
I went by the field of the slothful, says Solomon, and lo, nettles had
covered the face thereof, etc. -- I looked upon it, and received instruction.
So that a very nettle-bush may prove a book of instruction to them that can
turn such kind of books: the wit of man being as apt to sack intellectuals out
of every thing it lights upon, as the Be is able to contrive honey out of
the very weeds. And so, no doubt, these Images may occasion good meditations,
and serve to put us in mind of things most excellent and divine; even as the
sight of a Stable or a Manger may move us to think upon our Savior, and the
consideration of Sin or Satan may incline us unto devotion and thanksgiving:
But that Images are special good to give instruction, (which is the question)
that we deny. For first, all the instruction which they afford is only
concerning matters of fact; namely, that such a thing was done (or supposed to
be done) or that such a person or creature there was: but whether the fact,
person, or creature, etc. was good or bad, whether to be imitated or avoided;
and what were the causes, ends, effects, and consequents of such things
(without which kind of knowledge there can be no edifying instruction) they
cannot say. Secondly, as the instruction which Images afford, is only
concerning matters of fact; so also do they not declare so much with any
certainty, but rather they make things more uncertain than they were: things
coming within the compass of fables and fictions after once the Painters and
Carvers (which think they may lie by authority) have had a hand in them.
Thirdly, the instruction which they afford is only such as the outward eye is
capable of: For neither the ear (which is the principal door of instruction)
nor any of the other senses, are so much as capable of Image-instruction.
Indeed there is some kind of knowledge (we may grant) which cannot so readily
be had as by Images: as namely, what kind of countenance Peter, or Paul, or the
dead had; or persons far remote have: But yet, as such kind of knowledge can
have no certainty in it (and what goodness in knowledge without certainty?) so
also were it never so certain, what is the beholder the better for it? For is
he able to make his countenance according? Or if he could, what should he be
the better? For a fool may resemble a wise man in the outward countenance; a
wicked man, a Saint; a Peasant, a Prince; and yet remain wicked, base, and
foolish nevertheless. Fourthly, as the instruction which Images afford, is
common, uncertain, and such as the outward eye only is sensible of; so also for
the most part it is such as none can make any thing of, but such as knew the
matter before. For as one that is dumb, may perhaps with his becknings and
noddings and putting out his finger, do some common intelligence to such as
have wit enough to understand him: so these Images, if they meet with one that
loves to stand ridling and spelling something out of a wall or a gay, like
enough they may seem to say something; Tom. 2. hom. 2. p. 3.
but else (as our Homily notes out of Hierom) they do but amaze and dull the
understanding of the unlearned, with their golden sentences and eloquences, and
so leave them. Fifthly, these Images do take up a great deal more roomth and
breadth in the fancy and outward senses than needs: For such, we know, is
the agility of humane capacity, as that it can upon the least sight of ordinary
things (though it be but a rush about the finger, or the least serole of
letters upon a paper) be put in mind of things never so distant and important:
so far is it from needing clusters of Images, or whole pourtraitures, to be put
in mind of common things. Sixthly, these Images do fret and eat into the fancy
and outward senses more deeply and indelibly than other courses and means of
instruction use to do. For as our table-books, the more deeply and hardly they
be written upon, the sooner they are attrited and worn away: so our fancy and
outward senses, the more deeply that notions be imprinted in them, the sooner
will their abrasity, voydablenesse, and receptivity (which are the peculiar
conditions of those outward senses) be distempered and confounded. Now, whereas
voices, and letters, and other means of instruction (which do not wrap up their
notions in Images) do readily pass through these common senses; and having
presented their matter to the inward senses, presently vanish away; these
Images do not so: but being such kind of things as the fancy and outward
senses are apt to be tickled and pleased withal, they dally and play with
them, and soke into them. And as idle Travelers turn their Innes into
dwelling-houses; so do these turn our table-books into paper-books, and make
(in a manner) their final repose in those faculties which are intended only for
passage and conveyance. Moreover, by reason of this over-deep inhesion of these
Images in the fancy and outward senses, not only those outward senses are
attrited, distempered and perverted by the means, but also the inward senses
are wronged and defrauded. For as our bodily meat, if it stick over toughly in
the stomach, our inward veins and appetites must remain so much the longer
empty and unserved; so likewise the nutriment of the mind (which is nothing but
notions) the longer it is retained in the outward senses, the longer must our
inward senses remain jejune and without their sustenance: It being a good
reason which Seneca gives, why he would have us well to digest our reading,
Because, says he, Epist. 84.
alioquin in memoriam ibunt, non in ingenium. i. e. otherwise they will stuff
the memory, but the wit and judgment they will augment little or nothing at
all. Yea, finally, by such tough cleaving of the notions unto the fancy and
outward senses, the inward senses shall not only be delayed and defrauded, but
also vitiated and infected. For the inward senses having nothing to sustein
them but that which is conveyed unto them through the passages and conduits of
the outward senses, if those outward senses be so ingrained and dyed (or rather
daubed over) with those glaring and infective notions, how shall it be avoided,
but that all the notions which pass through them will also taste of the cask,
and so feed the inward senses with the like kind of glaring, gross, impure,
fantastical, and in the end Idololatrical notions? So as this supposed most
excellent property of Images, namely, for that they can so deeply imprint their
notions in the memory and outward senses, may rather be esteemed as a principal
exception against them, and enough to make all those that desire to be divinely
(or but intellectually) minded, to abandon them.

The 8. Argument answered.
The eighth allegation is this; That they are special quickners of devotion.
Whereunto we answer; If the instruction which they afford, be so gross,
common, uncertain, impure, and dangerous as we have declared; how can the
devotion be any better which arises therefrom? For if we should suppose that
without the means of foregoing instruction they are able to beget us with
devotion, such a Suppose were a right-down making gods of them; it being the
property of God only, illabi menti, to touch immediately upon the soul without
the means of some foregoing instruction preparing thereunto. Secondly, when at
any time the Saints and Servants of God in their hymns and songs did cite all
the works of God to bless and praise the Lord, yet never did they say, O ye
Images, bless ye the Lord: though Images, being apt to make as fair a show as
the best, if they had been thought such special quickners of devotion, how
could they have been left out in those general musters, where not so much as
Nights, and Darkness, and Worms are allowed to be absent? Thirdly, the life
and apple of true devotion consisting in nothing so much as in the immediate
fruition of God; it must needs be, that the things which are most apt to
further our devotion unto God, should have most congruity with the nature and
properties of God: But so have not Images; but are rather more discrepant from
the nature and properties of God than any other kinds of things whatsoever. For
while the Lord calls one way, what do they but call another way? while the
Lord calls inwardly, they call outwardly: while the Lord calls to the
center, they call to the circumference: while the Lord stands knocking at the
door of the heart, they stand rapping at the door of the outward eye, and
playing upon the ball thereof; whereat unless they enter, their very life and
being is at an end: Whereas the Lord, on the contrary, is so far from entering
at that kind of door, as that when once he spoke to his people face to face,
the outward eye was not vouchsafed the least glimpse of his countenance, but a
perpetual memento was given to the contrary, Deuteronomy. 4.12.
that then they saw no similitude, but only heard a voice. Psa. 18.11.
The Lord also usually makes darkness his secret place, his pavilion round
about him; whereas these Images hate all darkness no less than the gates of
death. Yea, finally, not only in their conditions, operations, and habitations,
but also in their very natures, what more contrary than God and Images? For
whereas the Lord is altogether invisible; these Images are nothing else but
visible: Whereas the Lord is incomprehensible; these Images every childs eye
can comprehend: As also, whereas the Lord is Almighty; these Images are the
most mightless things that are: The Lord again is all Spirit and Life; but
Images are worse than dead; for the dead were once alive: Finally, the Lord is
all truth, but Images are all false and counterfeit: those being counted the
most excellent Images which come nearest unto the Life; and the nearer a thing
comes to the Life when it is most void of Life ( mendacium quo verisimilius
eo nequius) being so much the worse. But very like it will be answered against
all that we have hitherto said, That though Images have no congruity with the
divine nature of God, yet well may they resemble his humane nature, and so in
that respect become so especially operative unto devotion. Whereunto we answer;
That if very living man upon earth does incomparably more lively represent the
humane nature of God than any Image possibly can, then how can any Image be so
special good for such a purpose? Secondly, admit some picture could set forth
the natural countenance of our Savior more peculiarly than the countenance of
any living man ever did (though who can be certain of any such matter?) yet, we
know, the virtue and efficacy of our Saviors incarnation did not consist in
this, that he was a man of such or such a countenance; but only in this, that
he took man's nature upon him. Thirdly, the Scribes and Pharisees did well know
his natural countenance indeed; as also they that crucified him: and yet they
had no more devotion toward him than they that most mortally hated him.
Fourthly, 2 Cor. 5.16.
St. Paul telling us, that if we had known Christ after the flesh, yet now must
we know him so no more; even so much might be of sufficient force to put us
beside this gross conceit, That the picture of our Saviors natural
countenance is so specially operative unto devotion. But (once more) very like
it will be alleged, that the efficacy of such a picture does not consist so
much either in that it so represents his humane nature, or in that it so
lively expresses his natural countenance, as in this, that it sets forth
his death and sufferings: And such a kind of Image (called the Crucifix) has
been found by experience to be so powerful unto devotion, as that many
beholders have not been able to withhold from tears at the sight thereof.
Concerning which kind of Image, we desire to be endured a while, until we make
some what a large answer. First therefore we demand who they are that such kind
of Images do so work upon, are they believers, or are they unbelievers? As for
the unbelievers, it is most like that they will rather despise him that so
suffered, than be moved to regard him (much less to put confidence in him)
thereupon: It being most likely in the eyes of flesh and blood, that the person
which so suffered was not so much as an innocent person: or if so; yet that he
was rather some poor wretch that was not able to save himself from the fury of
his enemies, then such an one as could with the least breath of his mouth have
destroyed all his enemies; there being nothing in the picture to lead him unto
any better constructions. Yea, if the unbelieving beholder be a malicious
Infidel, the picture may move him to insult over the God that so suffered, and
to carry such Images about in his processions and triumphs, the better to
please and magnify his own false gods. But if they must be only believers
which shall be so edified by those kind of Images; yet if there be other
courses* nearer hand, which may more readily and abundantly put us in mind of
those sufferings, then is not thy Crucifix so special good for such a purpose:
which is the question. For that short Article of our Creed, He was crucified,
dead, and buried, descended into Hell, does it not far more readily, plainly,
certainly, abundantly, securely, and wholesomely set forth the sufferings of
our Savior, then the Image possibly can? First, more readily it does: in that
every child can have the Article ready at his fingers end; whereas the Image,
were it never so portable, cannot always be at hand. Secondly, more plainly it
does: in that it expressly tells us who it was that so suffered; whereas the
Image does only present unto us a man fast nailed to a cross, but who the man
was, or whether he was so much as an innocent or a malefactor, it is not able
to say. Thirdly, more certainly it does: in that the Article is the voice of
God and of the whole Church of God; whereas the Image is but the device of men,
and of such kind of men as challenge a liberty to deceive. Fourthly, more
abundantly it does: in that it informs us that he was both crucified, dead
and buried, and withal descended into Hell; whereas the Image does only
declare his crucifying, and no more. Finally, more securely and without
indangering the beholder it does: namely, for that it presents all these
sufferings and undergoings only to the ear; whereas the Image presenting them
to the outward eye, and withal still remaining constantly in sight without
vanishing away, is apt to detein the fancy of the beholder, and allure him to
dwell upon it, and to embrace, and perhaps to bemone it, and bedabble it with
carnal tears, and to speak unto it, and call upon it, and, Pigmalion-wise, to
wish it alive, and in the end to bow down unto it, and worship it, and make a
perfect Idol of it: For what more apt to become an Idol then such an Image as
is supposed to be a special Image of our God, and from whence (as it were from
a pap) men are appointed and wonted to suck their daily devotions! Moreover, as
these kind of Images can add nothing to the knowledge of the weakest believers
concerning the sufferings of our Savior; so do they also greatly dishonor,
profane and vilify those infinite and unexpressable sufferings of our Savior:
namely in this; in that they make no more of them then may be made of the
sufferings of mortal men. For all they that at any time suffered the like
death of the cross, if they had been pictured as they hung in their agonies
and torments, would they not have been more doleful spectacles then any
Crucifix did ever represent! The more wicked also the person is that so
suffers, the more dismal and woeful the outward appearance of his pains
being likely to be. Yea, not only the most precious sufferings of our Savior
are profaned, and infinitely vilified by such kind of vulgar and common
expressions, but also his Majesty and Person is plainly belyed and blasphemed
by the means: namely in this; that his person is exposed to the view of the
world, as hanging actually dead upon a cross, and double gibbet, whereas he
now actually is, and for ever shall be sitting at the right hand of God in the
state of eternal glory. And shall then such kind of Images not only be made
of him, but also be commended unto his servants as the special motives unto
devotion? Or shall the tears which (belike) do flow from the beholders of such
Images, be esteemed such undoubted arguments of such devotions? As if there
were not false tears, as well as true tears; blind and superstitious devotion,
as well as that which is sound and good! For if the Heathen, when they were at
their superstitions, could mutuum stuporem alere, stupifie and amaze one
another to see linteatum senem media lucernam die praeferentem; Seneca, De vita
beata, 27.
and such like authorized and senseless lies* can we make question, but that
hypocrites also in the Church of God will be as active to cast themselves into
the like sits and pangs of Devotion, and that even to the expression of tears!
Or, at the best, is it not very like that such kind of tears have no better
Original then the tears of those women had which so lamented when they saw our
Savior go to his Suffering? which, if our Savior so rejected, when be bade
them not weep for him, but weep for themselves; Luke 23.28.
is it likely that he will be any better pleased with thy like kind of tears
which now also most unseasonably (he being now past all possibility of
suffering) thou bemonest him withal, and that at the motion of an Image? But if
thou have a desire, O man, to present thy God with a drink offering of
acceptable tears indeed; follow that counsel which he gave those women, and
weep not for him, but weep for thy self. And if thou have a desire to weep for
thy self, enter into thy self, and behold thy sin; for thy sin is the only
Fountainhead of acceptable tears. And within thee thou may most lively
behold thy sin flourishing in all the quarters and regiments of thy whole man:
yea, if thou do but descend into the cellars of thine own hard heart, thou
may see how from under the flintstone thereof thy sin bubbleth up, and
fometh out, and plays forth, and streameth along continually: So as, if thou
have a desire to weep rivers of tears for sin, there thou shall find continual
materials for the purpose. And in comparison of this course, thy going to
thine Image to help thee to weep for thy sin, is a plain going about the bush,
and all one as if thou should go to thy Physicians picture to move thee to
lament thy surfeting and drunkenness, when as thou have a burning ague gnawing
upon thee, which is the natural daughter, scourge and monitour of that thy
surfeting and drunkenness. We conclude therefore, That as no kind of Images are
specially good (if any way good) for instruction and devotion; so those kind of
Images which intend to make expressions of God, Tom. 2. h. 2. p. 3.
our Savior, etc. (which kind of Images our Homily judges to be most
dangerous) are more like to bring us into the pits of perdition, then unto the
springs of devotion; and to plunge us in the lakes of Idols, then to further
us unto the fruition of the invisible God: Whose coming, we know, is not with
observation, Luke 17.20, 21.
or with a Lo here, and, Lo there; Look this way, and Look that way; Look upon
this Image, or look upon that: For behold, O man, thy God is within thee, and
within thee he must be found: as also the devotions which he means to be
enterteined withal, must be kindled within thee: For within thee there is a
flint-stone, even thy heart, Which being often attrited upon with the Steel of
Gods Word, the Tinder of Christ crucified will foster the sparklings thereof,
until the breath of his Spirit shall have lighted thee a candle therewith; and
then thou shall soon be able to kindle such a fire in thy inner man, as the
Almighty God (whom the Heavens cannot contein) will condescend unto, sit with
thee at, and sup with thee by; and finally, prefer before all the flashes and
wild-fire-works of mortal man's divising whatsoever.

And now, Christian Reader, you have as much as we promised in the beginning;
namely, our Answers unto those Allegations in the behalf of Images which we
then specified. There be other arguments also which use to be made in their
behalf, which deserve to be no less excepted against, and which we hope our
selves to find a time to do; our Title, Toward the vindication of the Second
Commandment, keeping always our door open for such additions. These answers
which we have premised, we take to be both sound and safe, and agreeable with
the Church of England; as also we are persuaded that the Almighty God will be
pleased with the publication thereof: And therefore we commend the perusal of
them unto such as have authority in that kind of business. And so we finally
commend them, and our selves, and every indifferent Reader unto the Grace of
God.

FINIS.

