Englands Grievance DISCOVERED, In relation to the COAL-TRADE: WITH The Map of
the River of TINE, and Situation of the Town and Corporation of NEWCASTLE. THE
Tyrannical oppression of those Magistrates, their Charters and Grants; the
several Trials, Depositions, and Judgments obtained against them; WITH A
Breviate of several Statutes proving repugnant to their Actings; With Proposals
for reducing the excessive Rates of Coals for the future; And the rise of their
Grants, appearing in this Book. By Ralph Gardener of Chriton in the County of
Northumberland, Gent.

London Printed for R. Ibbitson, in Smith-field, and P. Stent at the White
horse in Giltspur street, without Newgate, 1655.

For his Highness Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
May it please your Highness,
THe Nation finding your fatherly care over them, in the well ordering and
governing according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs, endeavoring peace,
causing Justice and Law to be equally administered, have cause, and do bless God
for the same.

Upon serions consideration whereof, I shall not dare or presume to use
Arguments to induce your Highness to lend an ear to hear the Nations grievance,
or what may be presented for its good; but do humbly present herein, some
collections of Records, taken out of most Judicatures, concerning the abuse of
the Coal-Trade, the Borough and Corporation of Newcastle upon Tine, its
Charters, Evidences and Depositions, proving thereby general wrongs, and
insupportable burdens, viz.

First, Forcing people to lose their lives, others to swear against themselves,
others to cut purses in their Courts for gain, and all to themselves; illegal
and false arrests, and Imprisonments, refusers of Bail, and disobeyers of
Habeas Corpuses; great and usual Impositions and arbitrary Fines; contemners of
your Law, Judges, Jurors, and Witnesses in their own causes; converting all
Fines, Felons Goods, and Wrecks, to their own use; destroyers of that famous
River of Tine, forcing ships and boats to sink, and imprisoning those that dare
to succor them; Ingrossers of all Coals, and other commodities, into their own
hands, from the Inheritors, by Patent, with other irresistible Oppressions,
like to the Spanish Inqusition, and practice of the High Commission, and
Star Chamber, being put in execution at this day in that Town by command of the
Magistrates and other their Officers. And what they cannot do by force of their
Charter amongst themselves, against any private person opposing, then by
Combination ruin them at Law, by their Delatory Plea, and out-pursing them, to
the high dishonor of God, and your Highness, and tending to the peoples undoing.

Humbly beseeches, for the glory of God, the fame of your Law, the contentment
of the free people of England, the preservation of Trade and Navigation, and
increase of your public Revenue,

II. That no confirmation be of that Tower of Newcastle upon Tines Charters,
or usurped powers, but that a speedy remedy be had, either by Quo wa^ranto or
otherwise, and their Magistrates may suffer according to their offenses.

III. That no Arrests be made in that Town, except by process from above, or
under forty shillings, by reason they understand not the Law, and commonly
their Judges will master Reason.

IV. That Commissioners of Sewers in Northumberland, and County of Durham, be
forthwith empowered for the preservation of that River, otherwise it will be
quite choked up, and thereby no Coals to be got but at excessive Rates.

V. That an Ad quod damnum be granted for a Market at Shields, which will
prevent the loss of many a poor souls life for the future.

VI. Or that a revival of that never to be forgotten Statute 11. Ri. 2. Cap. 7.
for a free Trade to all, which voided all Monopolies and Charters, as being the
greatest grievance in a Commonwealth, etc. It will not only make this your
Nation equivalent with Venice, Holland, and other free rich States, in riches,
but preserve Timber, and reduce Coals under 20 s. the Chalder all the year at
London, but also augment to your public Revenue above 40000. l. per an. in
that very Port of the River of Tine.

VII. That your Royal protection be granted to such who prosecute a cause in
behalf of your Highness, from the hand of violence, during the time of their
prosecution. That the Clause in the 21. K. James, chap. 3. viz. for all
informations upon penal Statutes to be prosecuted in the respective Counties,
be void, by reason the Judges, alias Sheriffs, are the offenders, and no right
can be got against them; the honorable Judges of both Benches hands being tied
up, for want of an Appeal, obstructed by the aforesaid Statute.

VIII. If their Charters and illegal Privileges be confirmed, undoubtedly it
will sacrifice the Peace of your Nation, lessen your Interest with the
Freeborn, weaken your Power, loose the bonds of a quiet Government, extirpate
the pure Laws, and advance disorder and confusion; it being humbly conceived,
this happy change of Government voids their Charters, (they being no Laws, but
merely Prerogatives) to Englands comfort.

IX. That Sheriffs and their Substitutes may be liable to the punishment of
Perjury for breach of their Oath in denying Bail to such as are capable, for
not returning Writ^ of Habeas corpus, and other their false Returns, as others
in other natures.

X. And that a Law be created for death to such that shall commit Perjury,
Forgery, or accept of Bribery.

XI. All which are laid at Your Highness and Councils feet, to do as God shall
direct, for the relief of the oppressed.

Ever subscribing my self a Servant to your Highness and the public, RALPH
GARDENER.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Set not out the Map of the River of Tine for ships to steer their course by;
but for a Demonstration to such Judges as may be appointed Regulators of the
great abuses done thereunto: nor the Effigies in my Book for other Corporations
to act the like by; but that the irregular proceedings therein, and cruelty of
this Corporation of Newcastle, may the plainer appear, not only to his
Highness, and Council, Parliament, Admiral, Army, Judges, Gentry, but also to
the commonalty of the Nation, that they may expel out of their thoughts such
tyranny as is there enacted by Charter-Law, being nothing more of my labors
and pains than what I am bound in Duty and Conscience for the relief of the
oppressed, resolving with Gods assistance to continue so doing, to the
uttermost of my power. Probably I may have omitted some circumstances relating,
yet am I confident nothing comprehended but the naked truth, and what omissions
are in this, in my next will appear (if I miscarry not by an unknown hand.) I
doubt not but some person may answer this i^ Print, or require further
satisfaction therein, I am ready to receive the one, and declare the other; but
well I know, the truth hereof cannot be disproved; Such may (if they please)
whose natural dialect is detraction apt to stain and sting with calumny and
slander, sooner than make a just defense to join issue upon, to stand and fall
by (as I am by this) challenging any to brand me with the least of injustice I
ever did them, being ready with my fortune to make good what I prosecute. The
thing I aim at, is a right understanding between the free and unfree men of
England; a perfect love, every one enjoying their own, and to be governed under
our known and wholesome Laws, as also an obedience thereunto, and not by a
hidden Prerogative, alias Charters.

It being a wonder there dare be such presumption in this Corporation, to
exercise such insolences, which were the greatest obstructors of our Nations
Liberties, by garisoning that Town. The Mayor, Aldermen and Recorder, with the
Burgesses and others, against the freeborn of England, which prohibited all
Trade from the 9th. day of January, 1642. to the 14th. of November 1644* in
that Port, which caused Coals to be four pound the Chaldron, and Salt four
pound the weigh, the poor Inhabitants forced to fly the Country, others to
quarter all Armies upon free Quarter, heavy Taxes to them all, both English,
Scots and Garrisons. Plundered of all they had, Land lying waste, Coal-pits
drowned, Salt-works broken down, Hay and Corn burnt, Town pulled down, men's
wives carried away by the unsatiable Scots, and abused. All being occasioned by
that Corporations disaffection. And yet to tyrannize, as is hereafter
mentioned, I appeal to God and the World.

Ralph Gardner,

Charter-Law with its Practice discovered*
CHAP. I. Newcastle upon Tynes Patron.
King John surnamed without land Reigned 17 Years and 7 months* died ^9 dai^
of october* 121^. Was buried at Worcester in the 51. Year of his age*



(A) KIng John who usurped the Crown of England, was (only for formalities
sake) sworn by a Bishop, who being demanded the reason why he did so, said,
that by the gift of Prophecy, certified, that at some time King John would take
the Crown and Realm of England, and bring all to ruin and confusion, he
pretending the King his Brother was dead in the time of his being absent beyond
Sea; being the first Author of Charters (for gain) and people like himself, for
lucre of gain sold their Birthright, to become Bodies Corporate, and
oppressors of the freeborn people of England: For before Charters were, all
the Freeholders of England were free to make Laws for the good of the Nation;
but Corporations being subordinate to such Laws as he by his Prerogative gave
them, being repugnant to the known fundamental Laws of England.

In the first year of his reign dreadful tempestuous weathers by rains, that
the grounds were so spoiled, that whereas corn was sold for one shilling the
Boule, in King Henry the seconds days, then cost 13 shillings the Boule; also
an abundance of fish found dead upon the Land by the corruption of the waters,
no hay could be mowed, and hale as big as hens eggs.

(B) He was an Usurper, a Tyrant, a bloody person, a Murderer, a perjured
person, a covetous person, a demolisher of famous Towns with fire, and a seller
of Englands Supremacy to the Pope See chap. 49. (B)
, whose reign was oppressive, and end shame. For further satisfaction I refer
you to his true History, I shall only give a brief of some passages in his
reign.

He made a Law that all Jews that would not turn Christians should pay a
certain great sum of money or be imprisoned, and when they did turn, they they
should have their money again, a young Merchant paid 60 l. to continue a Jew,
and after turned to be a Christian, then he demanded his money from the King,
but he being unwilling to part with money, demanded what reason he had to turn,
and sent for his Father and Mother to dis-swade him and to persuade him to
change again to be a Jew.

(C) He gave command that all the Jews in England and Wales to be forthwith
imprisoned, men, women, and children, by reason they turned so fast to be of
his Religion, and then seized on all their riches to satisfy his covetous
disposition, and such as would not confess where their money was, pulled out
their teeth and eyes, and then took the thirteenth part of all estates
moveable, to war against the Earls of Marsh, who desired him to forbear, but he
would not, for which they dispossessed him of all his Lands in France, etc.

He having little love, to his Wife Izabel the Queen, was divorced, pretending
she was too near of K^n to him, and so took another.

(D) He murdered Duke Arthur Earl of Brittan his eldest Brothers Son, being
Heir to the Crown, in the Castle of Roan in France, and chased William de
Branes out of England, and caused his wife and children to be starved to death
in Winsor Castle.

He dis-inherited many of the Nobility without Judgment of the Law, and put to
death Ramp Earl of Chester for reproving him for lying with his Brothers Wife,
and reproached others of his Nobles, telling them how often he had defiled
their beds, and defloured their Daughters.

(E) He granted to the City of London their Charter, and Letters Pattents to
choose their Mayor yearly in the tenth year, 1210, who governs well, etc.

(F) He removed the Exchequer from London to Northampton, and got a great Army
to go against the King of Scots, but the King of Scots met him and did him
homage, and gave him his two Daughters as pledges, and Eleven thousand Scotch
Marks, and upon his return took homage of the Freeholders of England, and
swear them to his allegiance, 11 year* 1211.
all above 11 years of age.

(G) He made oath to be obedient to the Pope of Rome by name Innocentius, to
Randolphe his B^ll, who went with his Nobles to Dover where he met with the
said Popes Bull, and there resigned the Crown with the Realm of England and
Ireland into the Popes hand, 13 year* S 1212.
See his Oath in chap. 59. (B): Upon which the Bishops who he had banished,
returned to England by leave from the Pope. King John met them and fell flat
upon his face on the ground, and asked them forgiveness, melting bitterly into
tears, etc.

(H) He grants the very next year after his power was given to the Pope, unto
the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, Letters Pattents to be a Corporation, and to
hold the said Town in Fee-farm at the rent of 100 l. per annum,
as by the said recited Letters Pattents in the second Chapter more at large
appears An. 1213. 14 year, 1213*
(Surely this Charter is not good by Law, etc.)

(I) He was the cause of firing the chief Town in Northumberland called
Morpeth, and caused many more Towns in England and Wales to be burnt.

The Barons of England being armed, demanded of him the Laws and Liberties
granted by King Edward the Confessor, vulgarly called St. Edward, he desired
respite till Easter, and gave Sureties to perform them.

(K) He met with the Barons of England in Running Meadow, 15 year.
between Winsor and Stains upon the 16 of June, granted under his hand to them
the Liberties of England, without any difficulty, and the whole Realm was sworn
thereunto: And soon after subtlely and privately sends to the Pope and other
Nations for Armies to make void those Charters and Liberties granted to the
Barons, and to subdue England, and promised them great rewards, Forty thousand
Soldiers that were to have Norfolk and Suffolk to conquer England for King
John were all cast away on the Sea. The Pope sends in great strength, who
landed at Dover, and destroyed many Towns by fire; and with the sword slew many
thousands of people, the Pope excommunicating the Barons particularly by their
names, great subversion and dissolution thereupon fell, laying all Hedges and
Ditches level, tormenting the Barons, 16 year.
with their wives, etc.

(L) The Barons were necessitated to send for Lewis, Son to the King of France,
for to come with an Army to join with them to conquer King John, whose
cruelties were intolerable, which was done, and King John overthrown, and
forced to flee toward Lin; being poisoned by a Monk at Swinsted (the reason he
gave was, that if he had lived half a year longer, 17 year.
a half penny loaf would cost 20 s.) he died, and was buried at Worcester, and
King Henry the third, Son to King John of nine years of age, was crowned at
Gloucester, etc.

(M) The reason of King John his granting Charters in England, and making
Corporations, was for that he had but little land, to raise great Rents from
them, and to assist him with strength by out-voting the Knights of (M) the
Shires, as is hereafter expressed; For all Freeholders of England that had forty
shillings a year, met two times a year at Sessions Meadows near Rockingham
Castle in Northamptonshire, and there made such Laws as the Nation was
governed by, and confirmed by the King.

(N) King John resolving to have Moneys and Aid of men to go to Normandy to
conquer them, could not conveniently motion it, by reason of the numerousnesse
of the Freeholders, but made a speech to them, that he had contrived a very
^it and convenient way for the making Laws for the good of the whole Nation,
which was, that by reason he conceived it a great trouble, for all them to come
so far for that purpose, only to make Laws, that they would choose two Knights
of every Shire and County in England and Wales, and give to them the full power
of the Nation, and then the said Knights to come and fit with him in Parliament
at Westminster, and also to allow them four shillings a day, out of the County
stock, which more plainly appears in the Statute of 35. Hen. 8. Chapter 11. Knights
to have 4 s. per diem, and Burgesses 2 s. per diem.

(O) King John when he had got the hundred and four Knights in Parliament, they
having the full power of the Nation from the Freeholders, immediately required
from them great Subsidies, and Armies to go for Normandy, to recover such Lands
as he had lost.

(P) The Knights answered, they only were entrusted to make Laws, and not to
tax the Freeholders, who had entrusted them, and not to raise Armies, and
that by so doing, they could not discharge the trust reposed in them.

(Q) The King finding his expectation frustrated, having nothing doubted, but
to have wrought his design on so small a number (Mastered his passion, and not
long after acquainted the Knights, that he was sorry for the great burden which
lay upon them for making Laws, being for a public, and that they were too few
in number, and that he had found out a way how to ease them, and bring in a
great revenew to free the Nation from impositions.

(R) Which was, that he resolved to Incorporate all the great Towns in England
and Wales, and depute Magistrates to govern as his Lieutenants, and every
Corporation should hold their Town in Fee-Farm from him and his heirs at a
certain Rent, some more, others less, according to the quality, etc.

(S) Also that every Corporation should choose two Burgesses to ^it, and vote
with them in Parliament, they knowing the state of every County, and the
Burgesses of the Corporation (by which means the Burgesses being more in number
then the Knights might out-vote them, and vote for him) the Knights meddled not
therein at all, but were out-voted by these Vassals and Tenants to the King,
they granting to him what ever he demanded, or else must forfeit their
Charters: And he granted to them what ever they demanded etc.

(T) The Freeholders of England were represented in Parliament by their
Knights in their Election; And if the Burgesses were Freeholders, then
represented in the same Knights.

(V) But if the Burgesses were no Freeholders, then no power in England to
make Laws, or to ^it in Parliament to out-vote the true Representative, which
are the Knights, especially representing no body further then the will of the
King, who was only to confirm Laws, but not to make them.

King John had four considerations in making great Towns Corporations: 1 To
assume ^ Prerogative. 2 To raise vast sums of Money. 3 To divide the Nation. 4
To enslave bodies Corporate by being his Vassals and Slaves.


Charters are no Laws, and nothing is binding that is not lawful, no Laws are
made but by Parliament, read Stat. 2. Edw. 3. 8.

CHAP. II. Newcastles first Charter.
(A) KIng John by his Letters Pattents dated the day of in the fourteenth year
of his Reign, and in the Year of our Lord, 1213. Granted, Demised, and
Confirmed to the honest men of the Newcastle upon Tyne, and to their Heirs, his
Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, with all the Appurtenances, to Fee-farm, for one
hundred pounds, to be ^endred to the said King and his Heirs, at his Exchequer
(to wit) at the Feast of Ea^ter fifty pounds, and at the Feast of St. Michael
other fifty pounds, saving to the said King the Rents, Prizes, and Assizes in
the Port of the said Town. Further he grants to them, and confirms one
hundred and ten shillings and six pence of Rent, which they have by the gift of
the said King in the said Town, of Escheats, to be divided and assigned to
them, who lost their Rents by occasion of a Ditch or Trench, and of the new
work made under the Castle toward the River or Water, so that thereof they
might have the more, that lost the more, and they that lost the less, should
have the less. He also granted to them, for him and his Heirs, that in nothing
they should be answerable to the Sheriff, nor to the Constable, for those
things which belong to them, as the said Charter testifies. Wherefore he
wills and firmly commands, that the said men, and their Heirs may have and
hold the same Town with its Appurtenances to Fee-farm, for the said hundred
pounds yearly to be paid, as is aforesaid, well, and in peace, freely, quietly,
and entirely, with all Liberties and free Customs, which they were wont to
have in the time of King Henry the 2. Father of the said King John as by the
said Letters Pattents appears. The said King John was the cause of burning
Morpeth the chief Town in Northumberland, and many more Towns in Wales, because
of the enmity between him and the family of the Bruces, who originally were
planted in Wales. Wherefore the said Charter made by the said King John to the
said honest men of Newcastle upon Tyne, cannot be valid in Law, because in the
fourteenth year of his Reign, he subjected himself to be a Vassal to the Pope
of Rome, as is aforesaid, and for many other reasons mentioned in the said
Charter it self, considered in themselves.

In this Charter of King John that he grants to the honest men of Newcastle
upon Tyne, he mentions not the Port of the River of Tyne, from Sparhawk at
Tinmouth-Bar upon the Sea, to Hadwyn streams above Newburn in Northumberland;
neither is there so much as one syllable, whereby the said King grants to them
the two third parts of the said River, or any of the Fishing between the said
places, etc.

CHAP. III.
(A) KIng Henry the Third being earnestly supplicated by the good men of
Newcastle to confirm King John's Charter, which was done upon the second day of
July in the year of our Lord, 1234. the said King Henry did not enlarge their
jurisdiction at all, but only grants them the Charter in the very same words
as King John had in his Charter granted.

(B) King Henry the Third by his Letters Pattents under the Great Seal of
England dated at Westminster the first day of December in the three and
twentieth year of his Reign, upon the good men of Newcastles supplication,
thought it fit to give them License to dig Coals, and Stones, in the common
Soil of that Town, without the walls thereof, in the place called Castle-field,
and the Frith; and from thence to draw and convert them unto their own profit,
in aid of their said Fee-farm Rent of a 100 ^. per Annum, and the same as often
as it should seem good unto them; the same to endure during his pleasure, which
said Letters Pattents were granted upon payment of twenty shillings into the
Hamper, nothing more was given, neither Lands, etc. but only to work the Coals,
during pleasure, for their own use.

(C) King Henry the Third, was petitioned again by the same honest men, for so
they were called by King John's Charters ( probi homines:) That his Majesty
would be graciously pleased to give them all the Stone and Coals in a place
called the Frith adjoining to the former, the better to enable them to pay
their Fee-farm Rent, which also was granted, paying forty shillings per Annum
into the Hamper upon the eleventh of May, in the one and thirtieth year of his
Reign. All which Coals and Stones, have, do, and will amount to many thousands
of pounds, yet no land above the said Coals, was granted unto them.

CHAP. IV.
(A) KIng Edward the First, in the Nineteenth year of his Reign, was
supplicated by the good men of Newcastle, to grant them a sum of money, and a
License for the building of a Wall round the Town (on which Wall one of the
Mayors of Newcastle was hanged) as by the Record of the Registery appears, That
two third parts of the River of Tyne from Sparhawk to Beadwyn shelves were in
this Kings hands. And for such Lords as held any Fishings on the South Side of
the said River of Tyne, which went to the Mid-stream, they were mere intruders
of one sixth part more then was their own, for whereas they were to have had but
one third part, they claimed half.

(B) And that this King gave License to build a Wall about the Town of
Newcastle, and gave money toward this wall, which was not bestowed.

(C) And that diverse purpreslures were then incroached upon, by the good men of
the Town of Newcastle, upon the Moat of the Newcastle built by William Rufus
adjoining thereunto. And to the end that the then Sheriff of Northumberland
might present these encroachments into the Chancery, whereby to discover their
unjust dealing and intrusion upon the said Moat of the said Castle, they the
said good men gave to him the said Sheriff a gift or bribe of ten Marks that
he might not vex them, as by the said Record more at large appears, etc.

CHAP. V.
THe said King Edward the Third, by his Letters Pattents dated at Westminster,
the tenth day of May in the one and thirtieth year of his Reign confirms all
former Charters, with an addition of his own, that he for himself, and his
Heirs, Granted, Demised, and Confirmed unto his honest men of the Town of the
Newcastle upon Tyne, his Town of Newcastle before called Manchester, with all
its Appurtenances for a hundred pound per Annum to be paid to the said King,
and his Heirs, etc. Which he the said King confirms to the said men, and
Burgesses, and to their Heirs for ever. And because on the behalf of the said
Burgesses of the said Town, it was humbly supplicated to the said King, That
whereas the said Moore and Lands called Castle-fields, and Castle-moor on the
North-side of the said Town of Newcastle, from a certain place called Ingler
Dike, etc. as the same are butted and bounded, etc. even to the said Town of
Newcastle, are the lands and soil of the said Town of Newcastle belonging to
the same, beyond memory; with all profits coming of the said Lands, Moor, and
Soil, as by an Inquisition thereof taken, and returned into the Chancery
appears. And albeit the said Burgesses, and their Predecessors from the time
they have had the said Town to farm, they have held the said Moor and Land, as
though it were appertaining to the said Town, and have always hitherto
peaceably, and quietly had, and reaped all the profits coming of the said Moor
and Lands, yet the said Burgesses (now they are turned from honest men, to
Burgesses, the next will be to --) For that there is no mention made of the
said Moor and Lands (albeit they be of the Appurtenances of the said Town) do
fear that they may be impeached afterward, and for that the said Town, as well
by reason of the last Pestilence at that time, as by the hazards of Wars, and
diverse other adversities, was so impoverished, and destitute of men, that the
profits of the said Town sufficed not for the payment of the said Farm (as they
then pretended.) The said King being willing to provide for their indemnity in
that behalf, and for him, and his Heirs granted,
that they and their Heirs might have and hold the same Moor and Soil, as if it
were appertaining to the said Town, with all profits out of the same, etc. And
that they the said Burgesses, and their Heirs in the said Moor and Lands, may
dig, and may have Coal, Slai^, and St^ne there; and from thence may draw them,
and may make their profit of the said Coals, Slait, and Stones* and other
profits coming out of the said Moor and Lands, in aid of the payment of their
said Fee-farm, without impeachment, etc. As by the said Letters Pattents (made
by the King himself, and his Council, and by the Fine of forty shillings paid
in the Hamper) more at large appears.

By these last mentioned Letters Pattents the Burgesses of Newcastle, can
challenge no title in the said Castle-moor and Castle-field, because the said
Letters Pattents are contrary in themselves. This is the first claim the said
Burgesses lay to the Castle-moor, being a quantity of eight hundred and fifty
Acres of ground, besides Pasture for all their Kine, and Coals for all their
Fuel, which are gotten upon the said Castle-moor.

CHAP. VI.
KIng Richard the Second, by his Charter dated the ninth day of April in the
first year of his Reign, 1378. confirms all the former Charters, and Grants to
the Town of Newcastle the same privilege as granted before in diging of Coals,
Slait, and Stone in Castle-field, and Castle-moor, but does not grant the
(Land) only the Coals, Slait and Stone, for the Towns best advantage.

CHAP. VII.
KIng Henry the Fourth, being humbly petitioned by the Burgesses of Newcastle,
that his Highness would be graciously pleased, to divide the Town and
Corporation from the County of Northumberland, and to grant them a Sheriff,
with more Liberties and Immunities which was granted, that the Corporation of
Newcastle shall be a distinct County of it self dis-joyned from the County of
Northumberland, and not to meddle in the said new County as by the Charter more
at large appears upon Record in the Tower of London, 7. Ed. 6. 10. 1. Mary. 3.

This was a preparative for the Town of Gates-head, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
(A) QUeen Elizabeth obtained a Lease from the late Bishop of Durham, dated the
26. of April in the 24. year of her Reign, 1582. of all the whole Manors of
Gates-head and Wickham, and all the Coal-pits, and Coal-mines within the said
Manors of Gates-head and Wickham aforesaid, and in all the common Wastes, and
Parks belonging to the said Manors at the Rent of ninety pounds, per Annum, or
thereabouts, for ninety nine years, which the Earl of Leicester procured from
the said Queen, and sold, or gave the same to Sutton of the Charter House, who
for twelve thousand pounds, as is reported, sold the same to the Mayor and
Burgesses of Newcastle, It is conceived, that this Le^se is void, by reason the
Corporation forfeite^ it being garrisoned against the Parliament, etc.
but when he understood the yearly value, which was worth at least fifty
thousand pounds per Annum, attested by Doctor Cradock, sometimes Archdeacon of
Northumberland deceased, this Lease being called the Grand Lease, was granted
to Sir William Readal, and others for the use of the Mayor and Burgesses, and
free honest men, and expires the 26. of April, which shall be in the year of
our Lord, 1681. as appears in the 11. Chap. (I) 7. Edw. 6. 10.

CHAP. IX.
(A) QUeen Elizabeth requires the great Arrear of two pence per Chaldron, which
was granted to King Henry the Fifth, as Custom by the Parliament, as appears
by that Statute, Chapter the tenth, ninth year, which was neglected to be paid
unto the Crown by the Mayor and Burgesses for many years together, insomuch as
they were not able to pay the same, but humbly beseeched those Arrears may be
forgiven, by reason of their inability: And to grant them a Charter to
incorporate a new fraternity or brotherhood to be called Free Chap. 21.
Host-men, for the selling and vending of all Coals to shipping. And in
consideration thereof, they would pay to her Majesty, and her successors twelve
pence for every Chalder, exported from thenceforth to the free people of this
Nation. The Queen conceiving that twelve pence upon every Chalder would be
better for the future, and well paid, would rise to a greater Revenew then the
two pence so long in arrear could endamage, which was granted upon condition
specified in that Grant, remaining in the Exchequer, with many seals to it;
That they should sell all Coals to Masters of Ships; At this day the Fitters
reckon with the Masters for so much a Chalder, as eleven shillings for so many
as is conceived to be aboard the Ship, and then he goes with the Master to
reckon, which the said Masters pays the one shilling per Chalder Custom,
being allowed in his hand, the Master conceives he does not pay it further then
being left in his hand by the Fitter; but if the Masters will look upon that
Lease, they will find they are to have the best Coals for ten shillings, and
the worst for nine shillings the Chaldron at most, and now they pay eleven
shillings, by which means the one shilling per Chaldron is paid by the Master,
and not by the Host man, and so falls upon the whole Nations back. I refer you
further to the Lease, for if the Master buy dear, he must needs sell dear.

(B) By the same fallacy they wronged the King of his Customs, 9. Hen. 5. 10.
which plainly appears in that Statute, if you please to read it, the same, they
have to cheat the Queen and her Successors for the twelve pence per Chaldron.

CHAP. X.
(A) QUeen Elizabeth being humbly entreated by the Mayor, and Burgesses of
Newcastle, that her Majesty would be graciously pleased to grant them a Charter
of Liberties concerning Sea-jurisdiction, and of Admiralty in that Port (to
wit) between Sparhawk in the Sea, and Hadwyn streams, being fourteen miles in
length, for the advance of the estate of that Town, which also was granted as
follows.

(B) The Queen by her Letters Pattents dated the thirtieth day of August in the
one and thirtieth year of her Reign, This Statute of 2 Edw 3 8 Will void this
Charter by reason it is against Right.
touching the Office of the High Admiralty of the River of Tyne, and Port of
Newcastle, grants the Reversion to the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, by
reason it was granted under the Great Seal of England, bearing date the fifth
of February 1522. unto Charles Lord Howard of Effingham, amongst other things,
in his said Pattent in the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, etc. for
life, who outlived the Queen, and dyed 26. January in the sixteenth year of
King James, the Mayor and Burgesses pretending they had right thereunto from
King Henry the sixth, which if they had, was extinguished upon the Queens grant
to the High Admiral, etc. And by this grant of hers to Newcastle, she only
grants what is in her to grant, which is only the Reversion after the
surrender, forfeiture, or death of the aforesaid Lord High Admiral, but she
dying before the Lord High Admiral, it is conceived her grant is void. And it
was never since confirmed by any other to the said Mayor and Burgesses; for
King James upon the 28 of June in the sixteenth year of his Reign, two days
after the Lord High Admiral died. The Commission or Letters Pattents of the
Admiralty of England was conferred upon the Duke of Buckingham, so that
Newcastle by this change has but a slender pretense of Right to the Admiralty
of that part of Newcastle.

(C) The said Corporation humbly beseeches her Grace, Newcastles Petition.
to increase, enrich, enlarge, and establish (as much as in her lay) their
Authorities and Jurisdiction in Sea-businesses, with larger Privileges,
Exemptions, Liberties, and Immunities, and those being called by various names,
to establish into a certain Body, and reduce and create the Name of the
Incorporation, upon which Petition, the Queen made the Town and Corporation of
Newcastle a free Town, in these words.

(D) That the Burgesses and Inhabitants of the said Town from henceforward for
ever, shall be one body Corporated, or body Politic, in substance, Fact, and
name, by name of a Mayor and Burgesses. And that by that name, they may have
perpetual succession. And persons able in Law, capable to have, purchase,
receive, and possess, Lands, Newcastle Incorporated. To purchase Lands. See
Stat. 15. Rich. 2. 5.
Tenements, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Franchises, and Hereditaments of what
kind, nature, or form soever they shall be, to them and their Successors in Fee
and perpetuity. And to assign them over by the name aforesaid. To sue, and be
sued by one Name. See Ed. 3 6.
And by the same name to implead or sue, and be sued, answer, or to be
answered, defend, or be defended in any Court of Record.

(E) And to have a common Seal for their causes and businesses, and to break
and change the same at their pleasure.

(F) Likewise, Confirms all former liberties.
she confirms by the said Charter to the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their
Succesors, that they only of the said Town with its Members and Appurtenances,
and also that they may have all the same Customs, Liberties, Privileges,
Franchises, Immunities, Exemptions, Q^ittances and Jurisdictions, how many, and
how much soever has been granted by former Kings, by what name or names
soever, or by what pretense they have or do enjoy, or claim the same. To have
and to hold, and to be holden of the said Queen in Fee-farm, etc.

(G) Also grants by the said Charter unto the Mayor and Burgesses and their
Successors, full authority, power, and faculty of Mittigamus, constituting,
ordaining, making, and establishing from time to time such Laws, Making Laws
See Stat. 19. Heu. 7. 7.
institute Judgments, Ordinances and Constitutions according to their sound
discretion, being good, wholesome, and necessary for the public good and weal,
and common profit, and good rule of the said Town.

(H) The Mayor and Burgesses, have power hereby to inflict punishments, pains,
penalties, and imprisonments To punish Offenders. See Stat. 9. Hen. 3. 29.
Commanding Obedience.
of bodies, (and by Fines, or Amerciaments, may levy, and have to them, and
their Successors without calumny or impeachment) requiring all persons to yield
obedience to such Laws, etc. Provided those Laws, Ordinances, Institutions, and
such like Customs, be not repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of England.

(I) Also that the Grants, which the said Town of Newcastle, Sparhawk and
Headwyn Streams their libert ies.
and the Circuits, Precincts, and Jurisdictions thereof, to stand as well in
breadth, as length, as well by land, as by water, as was accustomed before the
memory of man, as they were wont to extend themselves, and in the River of
Tyne, from a place called Sparhawk in the Sea, to Headwin streams, seven miles
above Newcastle-bridge. And to pull down all walls, hedges, and blocks
offensive, etc.

(K) And further, Entrance to the Office of High Admiralty.
by the said Letters Pattents, the Queen does grant unto the said Mayor and
Burgesses upon the surrender of the same, Letters Pattents of the same High
Admiral of England, by death, forfeiture, surrender, or other means, to become
void for ever. And may have and hold within the said Town one Court of
Admiralty of Record, Keeping Courts.
every Monday throughout the year. In which Court, the Mayor, or Recorder to be
one: And to begin upon the vacancy of the said Office, to hold by plaint in the
same Court to be levied, all, and all manner of Pleas, Suits, Plaints, and
Demands. For which Debts, Contracts, Covenants, Trespasses and Deceits,
Matters, and Offenses whatsoever to the said Court of Admiralty belonging, and
to hold Court of Pleas according to the Laws and Customs of the said Court of
Admiralty of England, and other Legal ways and means, Punishment.
whereby the truth may the better be known with power of any temporal
constraint See Stat. 28. Edw. 3. 3.
or mulct, or any other pain according to the Laws and Customs, of the said
late Queens Court of Admiralty of England, to be compelled, or to do, and
administer Judgment, the order of Law being kept.

(L) And likewise she ordains Justices of the Peace, Laws of England executed.
to conserve the Peace in the said Town and Port for the putting in execution
the Statutes and Ordinances made at Wstminster in the eighteenth year of King
Edward the third concerning forestalling of Merchandises upon the water, or
upon the Sea. Fore-staling. See cap. 50. A. 49, 5, 48. A.
And the thirteenth of Edward the first, the five and fortieth of Edward the
third; the thirteenth of Richard the second, and seventh of Henry the fourth,
and Henry the sixth, the four and thirtieth of Henry the eighth, and the fifth
and sixth of Edward the sixth Statutes at Westminster, against Regrators,
Fore-stallers, and Ingrocers, to enquire after such offenders against the Laws
and Statutes aforesaid, to hear and determine such like Indictments and
Punishments.

(M) That the Sergeant at Mace, Officers to do their duty.
all Juries, Pannels, Inquisitions, Attatchments, Precepts, Mandates, Warrants,
Judgments, See cap. 36. c. D
Sentences, Processes, or other things whatsoever to do, for the dispatching
thereof.

(N) The Queen gives further power unto the Mayor, to choose all Officers in
the said Court whatsoever, to remove, and expel them as they shall see cause,
according to Law and Equity.

(O) That the Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, three, or more of them, See chap.
30. B chap. 29. D. All acknowlegements Wreck, etc. View of dead bodies,
murdering, drowning
whereof the Mayor, or Recorder to be one of them, may have for every
acknowledgement of al and singular such like Pleas, Plaints, Suits, and Demands
of Debts, and other Sea-businesses and offenses, and also disseizing of all
wrecks * at Sea or Port, happening, and of the death, drowning and viewing of
all dead bodies of what persons soever, which in the said Town and Port
howsoever slain or drowned, or to be slain, drowned, or murdered, or brought
to death by any other means.

(P) Also the custody and conservation of the Statutes, Wreck. Coronors.
the wreck at Sea, and of the Office of Coronors See chapter 48. A. 29. 49. A.
in the third and fourth year of King Edward the first, and to punish
Delinquents according to Law.

(Q) The Mayor of the same Town for ever, has hereby power to receive
acknowledgements for any cause whatsoever in the Admiralty Court determinable,
and to record and enrole the said Recognizance, to release, cancel, lessen, and
qualify at their pleasure according to Law. To fine and qualify.
Also to demand execution according to the manner of the said High Court of the
Admiralty of England. See Stat. 25. Edw. 1 5.


(R) The said Queen does give and grant by the said Letters Pattents unto the
said Mayor and Burgesses, All fines for their own use is given.
and their Successors, all, and singular Fines, Redemptions, Issues,
Amerciaments, See c. 42. A 41. A.
Forfeitures, Perquisites, and profits whatsoever appearing, happening, coming,
assessed, imposed, or taxed, or then after to be upon any by the aforesaid
Court for their own proper use and behoof, without any account to the said
Queen, or her Heirs to be levied so soon as ever it shall be adjudged by them,
without any unquietness, vexation, or trouble of the said Queen, her Heirs and
Successors, Justices, or other Ministers, or Subjects whatsoever.

(S) Also to have all manner of such like goods and Chattels, Weiffs, Wrecks To
have all profits and wrecks.
of the Sea, Goods floating or swimming upon the water, and driven to the shore
See c. 30. A 29. D Sta. 17. Ed. 2. 11 To have all Felons goods, etc. See c. 53.
A
sunk to the bottom, and goods due to more by proportion, Treasure found,
Felons of themselves, Deodands, and other casnalties, as well upon as by the
Sea or Shoars, and Maritine parts, as upon or by the fresh water, howsoever,
whenever, or wheresoever, or in what manner appearing, happening, or coming,
which to the Admiralty of England does belong.

(T) And all Royal Fishes, Sturgeons Sta. 17. Ed. 2. 16. Royal Fishes. Sta. 17.
Ed. 2. 11
Whales, Porpoyses, Dolphins, Rigoseres, and Grampeses.

(V) That the said Queen willed, Justices of Goal delivery,
that the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen for the time being, three or more of
them, whereof the Mayor or Recorder to be one, from time to time ever
hereafter, to be Justices at the Goal delivery, and to deliver out of prison in
the same, committed to the same Goal for what cause soever.

(W) That they may erect Gallows within the liberty of the said Town, Gallows
and to hang them.
for Felons, Murderers and other Malefactors whatsoever within the Town or
Port, and to commit them to the Goal, till they be from thence delivered by due
course of Law. See Chap. 53. (A.)

(Y) All which of her special favor, she grants without Fine into the Hamper.
Dated at Westminster the 30. of August, in the 31. year of her Reign. It is
conceived this is void, by reason granted without any consideration into the
Hamper.

CHAP. XI. A brief of the Privileges contained in the Charter of Liberties
granted by Queen Elizabeth to the Mayor and Burgesses of the Town of the
Newcastle upon Tyne, the 22th. of March. in the 42th. year of her reign. As
follows.
The Twelve Companies of Newcastle be as follow.

Cordwinders Butchers. Tailors, Fullers Drapers Mercers. Skinners.
Corn-Merchants Tanners. Sadlers. Bakers. Smiths.
I find not Brewers nor Carpenters. Observe.


(A) THat the Town of Newcastle is an ancient Town, and that they have had
Laws, Jurisdictions, etc. and that the said Town has suffered no small loss by
reason of diverse differences, etc. fol. 1. concerning the manner of loading and
unloading Sea-coals at the same Town, fo. 2. whereupon the said Mayor and
Burgesses humbly petitioned the said late Queen for the better maintenance and
government of the said Town, that she would vouchsafe to amplify her
munificence and favor toward the said Town, fo. 2.

(B) The said Queen for her and her Successors, grants to the said Mayor and
Burgesses and to their Successors, that they only of the said Town with its
members, shall have and enjoy all the Customs, Liberties etc. which were granted
to their Successors by several Charters, fo. 3. which the honest men of the
Newcastle upon Tyne, etc. by pretense of what Corporation soever they held and
enjoyed, fo. 4, 5. To have, hold, and enjoy the said Town, and all Customs,
etc. fo. 5. to the said Mayor and Burgesses and their Successors, to their use
for ever, to be holden in Fee farm; rendering the ancient Fee farm of 100 li. at
Michaelmas only, fo. 6. and that they may have all such Liberties, Customs,
etc. without the let of any one, etc. fo. 7.

(C) The said Queen grants, Choice of the Mayor and other Officers.
that the Mayor, ten Aldermen, and Sheriff of the said Town, etc. and other
Four and twenty of the more discreet and honester Burgesses of the said Town,
etc. may choose the Mayor and other Officers of the said Town within five days
after the choice and oath taken by the Mayor, fo 7, 8. which said Mayor and the
other twenty four Burgesses, in all thirty six, shall be at all times then
after, Power to make Laws for themselves not repugnant to the Laws, of England.
the common Council of the said Town; fo. 9. and shall have power in making
Laws, etc. fo. 10 for the good Government of the said Town, etc. fo. 11. and
for the good government of the Markets and Fairs within the said Town and
limits thereof, etc. and for the Declaration by what means the Ministers,
Castlemore is without the limits.
Officers and Artificers of the said Town, and their Factors Servants and
Apprentices in their Trades, etc. fo. 12. and also for their better
preservation, letting and setting of their Lands, Tenements, etc. And that the
Mayor and Common Council of the said Town or the greater part of them, To
punish Offenders against such Laws.
whereof we will the Mayor and six Aldermen, thirteen being, seven to be etc.
as often as they shall make such Laws, etc. and such pains, punishments,
penalties or imprisonment of bodies or by fines, etc. fo. 14. upon all
Delinquents contrary to such Laws, etc. as shall be necessary for keeping, fo
15. of the said Laws, etc. and to have and retain the said Fines, etc. to their
own use, etc. fo. 16. so that the same Laws, etc. be not repugnant to the Laws
of the Kingdom of England See Sta. 19. Hen. 7. 7.
, fo. 17.

(D) And further the said late Q. grants, Election of the Mayor, Sheriff, and
other Officers at what time.
that the election of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Common Council and all
other Officers and Ministers to be chosen, etc. shall in every year be upon
Monday next after Michaelmas day fo. 18. honest men and Burgesses of the twelve
Societies, lawfully chosen in the accustomed place, to wit Drapers, Mercers,
etc. fo. 19. and that they name and present two honest men of every mystery,
etc. being twenty four in number, being sworn that they or the greatest part of
them shall choose and name the Mayor, The Port belongs to the Castle, and not to
the Town.
fo. 21. the 22, 23, 24 25, 26, 27. leaves are concerning the choosing of the
Mayor, the Sheriff, of two Coroners, one Clerk of the Chamber, who shall
administer an oath to the Mariners and Masters of ships at the Port of
Newcastle; Oath to Master of ships.
and in the same manner, and the same day yearly may name eight other
Burgesses, etc. fo. 28. to be Chamberlains of the same Town, and one
Sword Bearer before the Mayor, and eight fo. 29. Sergeants of the Mace, and one
Recorder fo. 31. and there shall be twenty four Electors for one year fo. 31,
32. new election of Aldermen, dying or being deposed, fo. 33. and the Alderman
newly chosen shall be Alderman during life, Officers for life
fo. 34. Officers chosen by the Mayor under their common Seal shall be admitted
to their places, fo. 35, 36, 37. To fine such as refuse to hold their places
upon election, To fine refusers of Offices.
fo. 38. the said fine not to exceed 200 Marks, fo. 39, 40. 41. The like for
the Sheriff. fo. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. or if any Officer (save the Recorder) die
within the year then to choose another, fo. 47, 48, 49. And if the Recorder die
within one year next after his election, or be removed from, or leave his
Office, etc. then to choose another fit person learned in the Laws, The Recorder
no Burgess.
albeit not a Burgess in his place, etc. fo. 49, 50, 51. And if the Mayor of
the said Town be deposed, removed, or die, then to choose another within twenty
days, etc. fo. 51, 52. The like for the Sheriff, etc. fo. 53, 54. William
Jennison named first Mayor, Every Officers name.
fo. 55, 56. John Savel one of the Barons of the Exchequer, first and modern
Recorder, fo. 57. William Selby, etc. and nine others are made the first and
modern Aldermen, fo. 58. James Clavering appointed first, and the modern
Sheriff, etc. fo. 59. The said William Jennison Mayor, and thirty five persons
more are appointed to be the first and mordern Common-Council-men, From the 18.
leaf to the 65 leaf concerning the Officers of Newcastle.
etc. fo. 60, 61. Matthew Chapman, and Rowland Tempest are appointed to be
first, and the modern Coroners, etc. fo. 62. George Dent appointed first Clerk
of the Chamber, fo. 62. Francis Burrel and seven others, appointed to be the
first and the modern Chamberlains of the said Town, fo. 63. George Still
appointed Sword Bearer, fo. 63 George Selby and seven other persons appointed
to be the (...) Sergeants at Mace, etc. fo. 63.

The said Queen grants to the said Mayor and Burgesses and their Successors for
ever, To hold Courts of Record.
that they may hold one Court of Record in Guilde-hall, See chap. 42. C.
before the Mayor upon Monday in every week through the year, except in the
weeks of Christmas, Easter, and Penticost, etc. fo. 65. and another Court upon
Wednesdaies and Fridaies in every week throughout the year, except in the
several weeks aforesaid; and all Pleas of Debts, Covenants, Deteiner,
Trespasses, etc. fo. 66, 67. and pleas of Court of Pipowder, etc. fo. 68. and
Courts of the Upper-Bench, Justices of the Bench, and Justices of Assize before
the said Mayor, fo. 69, 70. And that the Mayor and Burgesses in the Court* to
be holden before the Mayor, and in the Court to be holden before the Sheriff
and their Successors, in all and singular Suits, etc. may attatch the parties
Defendents in the same Suits, etc. fo. 71. in their Lands and Goods, and commit
them to their prison called Newgate, etc. fo. 72, 73.

The Mayor, Conservators of the peace Chap. 37. Chap. 36.
the ten Aldermen and Recorder of the said Town for ever, to be jointly and
severally Keepers of the Peace, etc. within the said Town, etc. and to chastise
and punish malefactors, etc. fo. 73, 74, 75, 76.

And further, To enquire of all misdemeanors to the Law Forestallers,
Regrators, etc.
That they the 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, or 3 of them, whereof the Mayor to
be one, be Justices of the said late Queen, her Heirs and Successors, to
enquire upon oath, etc. fo. 76. of all Murders, etc. Forestallers See St. 5, 6.
Ed. 6. 15.
, Regrators, etc. and of all other matters whatsoever done or committed, etc.
fo. 77, 78, 79. so that the Keepers of the Peace in Northumberland and Durham
do not enter for any matter of Peace, etc. to be ended and determined in the
said Town of Newcastle, f. 80.

(F) The Queen grants to the said Mayor and Burgesses and their Successors,
Reasonable Taxation of fines etc. for the Towns use.
that they may as often as need shall require impose, etc. Fines See St. 25.
Ed. 2. 6.
, Penalties, Taxations, Customs, etc. for the public use of the Mayor and
Burgesses of the said Town, to be kept in their common Chamber, and to be
expended for their public use, fo. 81. or by their Officers from time to time
to be levied, such as before time were lawfully taxed and imposed, etc. and
that the said Mayor, etc. may use all the means they can to levy and gather the
same, fo. 82.

(G) The Queens pleasure further was, Gaol-Deliveries and Coronors, etc.
that the Mayor^ Recorder, and Aldermen of the said Town, or five, or more of
them, See Sta. 3 H. 7. 1 Town Moor is without their liberties, only liberty to
get Coals.
whereof the Mayor to be one, be Justices for Gaol Deliveries, etc. fo. 83. and
that the Coronors * of the said Town shall deliver all Juries, Inquisitions,
panel Attatchments, etc. and make return of them to the Mayor, etc. in all
their Gaol Deliveries, etc. fo. 84. and do execute the Precepts of the Mayor,
They have no other liberties b^t within the walls of the Town.
etc. in such manner as any Sheriff of England was accustomed to do at the
Gaol Deliveries for their several Counties; and that the said Mayor, Recorder,
and Aldermen may fo. 85. erect Gallows within the Liberties of the said Town to
hang Felons, Quere, what Interest they have in the Port, for it extends seven
miles above, and seven miles below the Town of Newcastle which is further then
their right of Inheritance reaches.
etc. And that the said Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, or five, or more of them
may take and Arrest what Felons, Thieves and Malefactors soever, within the
Town and Port of Newcastle, and Port aforesaid, or the Precinct, or Liberties
of them, are found, etc. and may bring them to Prison there fo. 86.

(H) The said Queen gives License to William Reddel, and to six others, and to
what subjects or subject whatsoever, of the said late Queen her Heirs and
Successors, Assign or Assigns, Tenants, or Farmers, fo. 87. of the Manor of
Gatesside, and Wickham with their Appurtenances in the County of Durham, by
virtue of a Lease to the said Queen made (amongst others) by Richard late
Bishop of Durham by his Indenture dated the 26 of April in the 24 year of her
Reign, Q. Eliz her Lease of the Manor of Gat. and Wick. made to W. Reddel, and
others in trust for the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle for the time being See
Stat 7. Ed. 6. 10.
1582. for ninety nine years from the making thereof; and that the said Assign
or Assigns, Tenants, Farmers, fo. 88. of the Premises so demised, and their
survivors. The said Manors or Lordships of Gates-side and Wickham, with their
Appurtenances may grant and assign to the said Mayor and Burgesses, and to
their Successors for the residue of the years then to come; and to the Mayor
and Burgesses of the said Town, and to their Successors, That the said Manners,
and Lordships of Gatesside, fo. 89. and Wickham aforesaid, with their
Appurtenances may have and hold, during the residue of the years then to come,
the said Queen for her, her Heirs and Successors, gave special License,
notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain The copy concerning the Sta. of Mo^t^.
whither the Lease be good or not. 15. Ric. 2, 5.
or any other Statute, etc. fo. 90.

(I) The Queen pardons and releaseth to the said Mayor, and Burgesses, and to
their Successors, and to every Subject and Subjects whatsoever, etc. All, and
all manner of pains, Penalties, forfeitures, and sums of money, and all other
charges whatsoever to the said Queen, or to any her Progenitors, fo. 91.
theretofore forfeited by virtue of an Act of Parliament of King Henry the fifth
at Westminster in the ninth year of his Reign, only published for the
assurement of Keels by Parliament Commissioners assigned, or by pretense of
another Act of Parliament begun at Westminster in the one and twentieth year of
King Henry the eighth, fo. 92. Entitled an Act concerning Newcastle, and the
Port there, for the loading or unloading of any Merchants goods within this
Kingdom, or elsewhere to be sold from any Ship or Ships, or other Vessels, in,
or at any place or places within the Port and River of Tyne, between Sparhawk,
fo. 93. and Hadwyn streams, but only at the said Town of Newcastle, See this
Act at the Rolls, whether there be such a penalty or not? because the same is a
private Act
and not elsewhere, under pains and forfeitures in the said Act contained and
specified. And by virtue of another Act of Parliament at Westminster aforesaid
the three and twentieth of January in the first year of the late Queen
Elizabeth, Entitled an Act limitting the times of exposing upon
Land-Merchandizes from parts beyond the Seas, and concerning Customs and
Sweet-Wines, and there it was enacted (amongst others, for, and concerning fo.
94. the loading or unloading in, or from any Ship, or other Vessel, any Goods,
Wares, or Merchandises against the said Act, etc. or to the late Queen, due,
and forfeited by virtue of the said Acts, and all the Goods, and Chattels,
Lands, and Tenements of the said Mayor and Burgesses, etc. being the foresaid
penalties and forfeitures, etc. fo. 95.

Now follows the Charter of the Free Hoast-men of Newcastle.

(K) Moreover the Q. grants to the said Mayor, and Burgesses, and to every
Subject and subjects of hers, her Heirs and Successors, Inhabitants and
Burgesses of the said Town commonly called Hoast-men in every season fitting,
and hours accustomed, the Customs and Subsidies, and other profits to the said
Queen her Heirs and Successors due to be paid, and to the Customers, and fo.
96. Collectors of the said Queen and Successors agreeing thereupon to be
charged or discharged, shipped or unshipped, Pit-coals, Grind-stones,
Rub-stones, and Whet-stones near Newcastle, etc. such Ship, Vessel, etc. was of
such a capacity, or for any other reasonable cause, that they could not fitly
apply to Newcastle, that then in such case, the Mayor and Burgesses of the said
Town, as their servants, etc. fo. 97. might and may load and unload such ship
and ships, vessel, and vessels with Coals and Stones abovesaid, in their Port
between Sparhawk and Newcastle, being distant by estimation not above seven
miles. And further the Queen wills, fo. 98. and commands the said Mayor and
Burgesses, etc. and their Successors, and every Subject and Subjects of her,
her Heirs and Successors, Inhabitants of the said Town called Hoastmen, that
they the same ships being of such a capacity that they cannot fitly sail to the
Town of Newcastle, to charge, and discharge themselves of Coals and Stones, fo.
99. so nigh Newcastle as conveniently may be done without fraud, etc. and that
under the pain of one hundred shillings to be levied for the Queens use, 100.
shillings for every Ship or Vessel.
her Heirs and Successors, to be forfeited for every ship or vessel so charged
or discharged, contrary to the true intention mentioned in the said Letters
Pattents, and for that the Queen wills that the Mayor, Burgesses and
Inhabitants of the said town, etc. fo. 100. being Burgesses, may serve the
Queen and her Successors with more commendable service, and may furnish the
Queen, etc. with Mariners more cheerfully in our greatest wars, as we have
heard they have done in times past; and for that the said Town has been a
faithful fortress and defense, fighting against the Rebels in times past, and
has behaved it self most dutifully to us, and to our Progenitors, All Felons
goods granted.
etc. fo. 101. resisting the said Rebels. The Queen therefore gives and
grants to the Mayor, Burgesses, and their Successors all the Felons, goods,
unto themselves, and of Fugitives convicted and attainted, and of Outlawed
persons, etc. fo. 102.

(L) And whereas the Town of the Newcastle upon Tyne, Halam a Rebel they took
in the 29. year of K. Hen. 8 he sided with Sir Th. Moor to maintain the Popish
Religion, this was here great service.
is a Town of Merchants, a Mart, or Market of great fame, and stuffed with a
multitude of Merchants dwelling therein, and of others, as well homebred
thither flowing, and there expecting their Trade of Merchanting, and thereupon
it is necessary to order and establish a certain Order within the said Town,
fo. 103. and the speedy recovery of Debts to Merchants, etc. due according to
the Statute of Acton Burnel, etc. The Queen grants, fo. 104. to the Mayor and
Burgesses, The Queen and her Heirs, and Successors are to have their Clark of
Recognizances.
and their Successors, that the Mayor for the time, for ever thereafter shall
have power, together with the Clerk to that end ordained, to take Recognizances
according to the form of the Statute of Acton Burnel, and of the Statute of
Merchandise made in Parliament in the time of King Edward the first, and that
there shall be a Clerk in the same Town, which shall be called the Clerk of the
Queen, her Heirs and Successors, to take Recognizances of Debts, according to
the said Statute, fo. 105. The Queen appoints William Jackson Gentleman to be
her first, and then modern Clerk for taking Recognizances of Debts within the
said Town, to enjoy the same during his life, and after his death the Mayor and
Burgesses, etc. fo. 106. are empowered to prefer to the said Office, fo. 107.
another of the Burgesses of the said Town to be the Queens Clerk (as before)
and to continue so long as it should please the Mayor, The Mayor to have a Seal.
etc. fo. 108. And shall have a Seal in two pieces for sealing the said
Recognizances, See chap. 46. A
and the Mayor to have the custody of the greater piece, and the Clerk, fo.
109. shall have the custody of the lesser piece of the said Seal, etc. So that
if a Merchant, or any other shall be made a Debtor, he may come before the
Mayor and Clerk of Recognizances, and before them acknowledge his Debt, and day
of payment, fo. 110. And the said Mayor and Clerk may do and dispatch all other
things which by the Statute aforesaid are requisite, etc. fo. 111. The said
Clerk is to have such Wages, Fees, Rewards, and Emoluments for the execution of
the said Office, as any other Mayor of any other Town or City in England, etc.
fo. 112. lawfully, and of right has or receives, etc. fo. 113.

(M) The Queen grants by the said Charter to the Mayor, The Town of Newcastle
discharged of Toles, etc.
and Burgesses and to their Successors, and to the Inhabitants of the said
Town, that they be quiet and discharged, fo. 113. of Toles, Passages, Poundage,
Murage, Chimage, Paunage, Lastage, Stallage, Carriage, Picage, Tronage, Hidage
and Wharsage for their Goods and Merchandises, as well by Land as by Sea, as
well in Fares as in Markets, and all secular Customs over the Queens Lands, on
this side and beyond the Seas, etc. fo. 114.

The Queen further grants to the said Mayor, Profits of Toles of Markets and
Fares in Newcastle and liberties to be levied for the use of the Mayor.
Burgesses and their Successors, that they shall have for their public use all
and singular such like Toles, and all other Customs, Toles, Profits, and
Advantages in Fares and Markets, holden and to be holden within the said Town,
and any other times whatsoever by themselves, They may take but pay no ^oles.
fo. 115. to be levied and gathered, and to be expended to, and for the use of
the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their Successors, etc. and the said Queen
forbids that any man disturb them, etc. fo. 116.

(N) The said Queen also grants to the said Mayor and Burgesses and their
Successors, that no Merchant Stranger See 3 Ed. 1. 20. Chap. 29. 48, 49.
Merchant Strangers selling and buying of merchandises at Newcastle.
, from the liberty of the said Town of Newcastle, may sell to any Merchant
Stranger, any their merchandises within the said Town (except Victuals, and
besides in Markets and Fares, to be holden within the said Town and limits
thereof) nor such Merchant Stranger may buy any Merchandises (except and
besides as it before excepted,) fo. 117. of any Merchant Stranger within the
same Town and liberty thereof other than in gross, upon pain and forfeiture
See. Sta. Rich. 2. 7. 14 Rich. 2. 9. 5. 6. Edw. 6. 9. See cha. 51. A.
of those Merchandises to be had and levied for the public use of the said
Mayor and Burgesses, fo. 118.

The Queen moreover grants that the said Mayor and Burgesses and their
Successors, See chapter 49. D cha. 51. A. A general confirmation of all liberties,
etc.
fo. 118. may have hold, etc. all such like Liberties, Customs, Franchises,
etc. and all other the premises, etc. to the said Mayor and Burgesses granted
and confirmed, as is before expressed, and that they may enjoy and use them for
ever fully, freely, etc. without impeachment, molestation, etc. fo. 119.

Further the Queen pardons and releaseth to the said Mayor and Burgesses and
to their Successors, all and all manner of Actions, Suits, Impeachments by Writ
of Quo Warranto See St. 30. Ed. 1 A discharge of all former actions to be
brought against them by Writ of Quo Warranto. It does not clear since.
Burgesses to be admitted by the Mayor and Burgesses.
to be brought or executed against the said Mayor, fo. 120. and Burgesses and
their Successors, by the said late Queen etc. or by any of her Officers by
reason of any Franchize, Liberty, etc. by the said Mayor and Burgesses, or
their Predecessors, within the said Town and limits thereof, before times
challenged or usurped, and that the said Mayor and Burgesses shall be quit and
altogether discharged for ever, fo. 121.

The Queen further grants that every person or persons who for ever hereafter
shall be admitted to be Burgesses, etc. shall be admitted by the Mayor and
Burgesses, etc. or by the greater part of them, fo. 122.

(O) Moreover the Queen (often considering in her mind of how much avail it is
to the Commonwealth of England, A new Free Grammer-School to be erected and
called by the name of Qu. Eliz. her Free Grammar School.
to have Youth well educated and instructed from their tender years, etc. fo.
123. ordains and grants, that within the said Town of Newcastle and the
Liberties thereof, that there be erected, and for ever there be one Free
Grammer-Schoole, which shall be called the Free Grammer-School of Queen
Elizabeth in Newcastle, and shall consist of one Master and Scholars to be
instructed in the same, and that they the Master and Scholars of the same
School, fo. 124. for ever hereafter shall be one Body corporate in Law, fact,
and name, by the name of the Master, and Scholars of the Free Grammer-School
of Queen Elizabeth in Newcastle upon Tyne, etc. and by that name may have
perpetual succession, and shall be in perpetual times to come, fo. 125.
persons able and capable in the Law, of having, purchasing, etc. Lands,
Tenements, etc. to them and their successors in Fee simple, or for term of
years, so they exceed not the yearly value of 40 li. and so they be not holden
of the said Queen her Heirs and Successors in chief, nor by Knights service,
etc. f. 126, 127, 128. and that the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle and their
Successors or the greater part of them, etc. fo. 129. shall have power to make
an honest, learned and discreet man to be the first and modern Usher in that
School, there to continue during the good pleasure of the Mayor and Burgesses,
etc. fo. 130. and if it happen the Master and Usher to die or leave the said
School etc. fo. 131. then they may choose other men to be Master and Usher, etc.
fo. 132, 133.

(P) ANd whereas the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle more deeply considering
and weighing the effect of diverse Letters Pattents, etc. And whereas the said
Town is an ancient Town, and the Mayor and Burgesses of the same, time out of
mind fo. 133. of man, they have had a certain Guild or Fraternity, commonly
called Hoast-men See Sta. 21. Jacobi cap. 3. Mayor and Burgesses Petition,
having been an ancient Fraternity commonly called Hoast-men, for the
discharging and better disposing of Sea-Coals, etc. that they may be
incorporated in one Body. The Queen ordains them so to be, names 45 to be the
Guild or Body corporate. This is called a Monopoly, in the Stat. of the 21. K.
Jam. c 3.
, for the discharging and better disposing of Sea-coals, and Pit-coals,
Grind-stones, Rub-stones, and Whetstones, in and upon the River and port of
Tyne, which Guild or Fraternity is granted or established by none of the said
Letters Pattents: Whereupon the said Mayor and Burgesses have humbly
supplicated the said Queen, that in supply of the said defects, That We would
exhibit Our liberality and favor, fo. 134. and that We would vouchsafe to make,
reduce, and create the said Guild into a Body corporate and politic, etc. The
said Queen therefore Ordains, fo. 135. appoints, and grants, that William
Jennison the elder, and 44 persons more, commonly called the Hoast-men of the
said Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Brethren of the said Fraternity, and all
others which now are or hereafter shall be elected, admitted, etc. into the
said Guild or Fraternity, of the said Hoast-men of Newcastle upon Tyne, f. 136,
137. hereafter, and shall be one Body corporate and politic in Law, Fact and
Name by the name of the Governor, and Stewards, and Brethren of the Fraternity
of the Hoast-men in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne. etc. one body corporate
and politic, really and at full, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors We do erect,
make, ordain and creat, Enables them to become purchasers in perpetuity.
etc. And that by the same name they may, and shall have a perpetual
succession, and are, and shall be in perpetual times to come, persons able, and
in Law capable to have, purchase, receive, and possess, fo. 138. Lands,
Tenements, Liberties, etc. to them and their Successors in perpetuity See Stat
15. Rich. 2. 5. 7. Ed. 1.
and otherways, and to give, grant, demise, etc. the same Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, and to do all other things by the name aforesaid, and that
by the same name they may plead or be impleaded, etc. in what Court soever.
etc. fo. 139, 140.

(Q) And that the said Governor, To make a Seal and break it at pleasure. See
chap. 46 A
and Stewards, and Brethren of the Hoast-men of the Town fo. 140. of Newcastle
aforesaid, and their Successors that seal at their pleasure, may break, alter,
and make, as to them shall seem good. And the Queen appoints that there be
and shall be for ever hereafter of the number of the Hoast-men, etc. which
yearly upon the fourth of Jan. fo. 141. shall be chosen, etc. by the said
Brethren of that Fraternity, etc. to be Governor, etc. And likewise there shall
be for ever hereafter two honest and discreet men of the said number of
Hoast-men, etc. fo, 142. who shall be the said fourth of January chosen by the
said Governor, Steward, To have a Governor.
and Brethren of the said Fraternity, etc. And that the Queens will in the
premises may have a more excellent effect, She fo. 143. assigns, names, and
creates William Jennison the elder to be the first and modern Governor, etc.
fo. 144. Moreover She has assigned, named, constituted and appointed Francis
Anderson, and John Barker to be the first and modern Stewards of that
Fraternity, etc, fo. 145, 146, 147, 148, 149.

(R) The Queen further grants to the said Governor, Power to make Laws in their
Guild, as be pure, wholesome, good, and profitable for the good Government of
the said Company.
Stewards and Brethren of the said Fraternity of Hoast-men, etc. and to their
Successors fo. 149. that the said Governor, Stewards, and Brethren, etc. and
their Successors, etc. shall have in every fit time for ever hereafter full
power of meeting in their Guild Hall, or in any other place convenient within
the said Town, and there to constitute, make, fo. 150. such Laws See 19 Hen. 7.
7
, Institutes, etc. which to the said Governor, Stewards, and Brethren, etc.
good, wholesome, profitable etc. according as they shall think good, for the
good Rule and Government of the Governor, Stewards and Brethren of the said
Fraternity, and for Declaration by what means and Order they fo. 151. and their
Factors, Servants, and Apprentices in their Office and businesses concerning
the said Fraternity they shall have carry and use, etc. And that the Governor,
Stewards, and Brethren of that fraternity, etc. as often as they grant, make,
ordain, or establish such Laws, Institutes, inform fo. 152. and they may impose
such pains, penalties See Stat. 25. Ed. 1. 5. To impose penalties by fine or
imprisonment upon the Offender.
, punishments, and imprisonments See 28 Edw. 3. 3. And to have al fines for the
Companys use. See cha. 43. D. Such Laws to be observed, if they be not
repugnant to the known Laws of England. See St. 19. Hen. 7 7.
of body, or by fines, etc. upon all Delinquents against such Laws, (S)
Institutes, etc. as to them shall be thought necessary and requisite, and as to
them shall be thought best for the observation of the said Laws, Ordinances,
etc. fo. 153. and the said fines and amerciaments at their discretions they may
levy, have, and retain to them and their Successors to the use of the Governor,
Stewards, and Brethren aforesaid, without calumny, etc. All which, and singular
Laws, Ordinances, etc. the said late Queen wills to be observed; so that the
said Laws, Ordinances, fo. 154, etc. be not repugnant to the Laws or Statutes
of the Kingdom of England.

And further the Queen grants to the said Governor, Stewards, and Brethren,
etc. and to their Successors, that for ever hereafter they and their
Successors, etc. fo. 155. may have and shall have full power from time to time
at their pleasure to choose, name and ordain other inhabitants, and Burgesses of
the said Town, etc. to be and shall be Brethren of the said Fraternity, etc.
who, so elected, nominated and sworn, shall be named, and be Brethren of that
Fraternity.

Moreover fo. 156. the said Queen grants license, power, and authority to the
said Governor, Stewards, and Brethren, etc. and to their Successors, that they
for the time being and their Successors and every of them for ever hereafter
may and shall quietly and peaceably, They to have all the loading or reloading
of coals* etc. in that Port, in any part of the Port notwithstanding the
Statute of the 21. Hen. 8. c. 18. See Sta. 21, Ja. 3. a monopoly.
have, hold, use, and enjoy all such Liberties, Privileges, etc. fo. 157.
concerning the loading, and unloading, shipping, or unshipping of Stone-coals,
Pit-coals *, Grind-stones, Rub-stones, and Whetstones, (T) And that they may
for ever hereafter load and unload, ship and unship, in or out of any ships or
vessels, Pit-coals, and Stones aforesaid, within the said River and Port of
Tyne, in any place or places as to them shall be expedient fo. 158. between the
said Town of Newcastle, etc. and the aforesaid place in the aforesaid River,
called the Sparhawke, so nigh to the said Town of Newcastle, etc. as
conveniently may be done, according to the true intention of these Letters
Pattents, It is conceived this Charter could not repeal that Statute.
as the men and Brethren of the said Fraternity at any time have used and
accustomed, notwithstanding the Statute of King Hen. 8. the 3. of November, in
the 21. year of his reign, and from thence adjourned to Westminster holden
published 1559. Entitled, An Act concerning Newcastle, and the Port and etc.
to the same belonging, or any other Act etc. notwithstanding: And the said
Queen also wills, etc. for that express mention etc. Witness the Queen at
Westminster the 22 of March, in the 13 year of her reign. fo. 160.

What a world of profits is given from the Crown which ought to maintain it,
and would have so filled the Coffers as that there had been little need of
Sesments, etc.

Having read some works of those late famous Expositors of the Law, I drew two
or three heads out as Observations for the knowledge of those who know them
not, written by way of explanation of our known Laws, as being a Law used time
out of mind, or by prescription.

The Law of Nature is, that which God infused into the heart of man for his
preservation and direction, and that the Law of England is grounded upon six
principle Points; the Law of Reason, the Law of God, diverse Customs of this
Land, of diverse principles and maxims, diverse particular customs, and of diverse
Statutes made in Parliament.

The fundamental Laws of England are so excellent that they are the
Birthright, and the most ancient and best Inheritance that the free people of
England have, for by them, they enjoy not only their Inheritance and Goods in
peace and quietness, but their Lives and dear Country in peace and safety.
Cooks Preface to the sixth Replication, and on Littleton l. 2. c. 12. sect. 213.

Sometime it is called Right, sometime Common Right, and sometimes Communis
Justitia; and it is the same Law which William the Conqueror found in England,
the Laws which he swear to observe, were Bonae etc. approbatae antiquae Regni
legis.

Charter-Law being so repugnant to the above written, and so destructive to the
weal of the people, that never any Writer ever writ of them, nor ever any
Parliament Enacted their publication, knowing they were no other then
Prerogative, and dies with the Donor. And it is an infallible rule, where no
Law is published, there cannot be any transgression, or obedience required.

The Corporation of Newcastle has but two Supporters to stand and fall by,
first, Prescription, secondly, Custom.

As to Prescription a Quo Warrante will avoid that upon a legal trial, it
being understood that Charters are void by reason of the change of Government,
if not, yet by breach of Charter, exceeding their power, being nothing else
then a fallacy.

And as to plead Custom, they have no right, nor never in possession of what
they claim, Customary Right is good Law, but Custom without Right, is but an
old error, and ought to be removed; Drunkenness and Swearing is customary, is
it fit it should stand because of its custom?

Kings were before Corporations, and could have better justified themselves for
a continuance, than Corporations, by reason they might plead Hereditary, or
Electary, Conquerors or Customary, yet being found a grievance was taken and
removed for their Arbitrary actings, why then must their power stand, that is
no Law?

If it were justice to execute those two Judges, Empson and Dudly, for only
putting a Statute Law in execution not repealed, which is above Charters, being
grievous to the people; it were nothing more to execute Justice upon such who
acts the same without any Law.

King John who was a Murderer, yet commanded a murderer to be taken from the
Altar, and sent to the slaughter, Here was Justice.

Why do not our just Judges send such like from the Charter to the slaughter?
If Strafford lost his life for acting oppressively by an Arbitrary power, why
not others for the same?

CHAP. XII. King James his Charters and Orders.
Mars, Puer, Alecto, Virgo, VULPES, LEO, Nullus. Iam^s king of England Scotland
and Ireland ^^



(A) KIng James in the second year of his reign, being humbly supplicated by
the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, that he would be graciously pleased to
confirm all their ancient Grants and Charters, and to give them further powers,
especially of the River of Tyne, The King confirms their Charters, but grants
nothing new, only alters the Election of their Officers, and prescribes them
new Oaths to be administered to the said Officers in their Elections, which
Charter is in the Chapel of Rolls.

(B) Also the King and his Council grants them the confirmancy of the River of
Tyne, by giving nine Articles upon the 29. of January 1613. and joined in the
said Order. The Bishop of Durham and other Justices of Peace of the County of
Durham and Northumberland, with the six Aldermen of the said Town of Newcastle:
But three years after being weary of partners, the Mayor, Aldermen and a Jury
of the Burgesses, exhibited a great complaint to the King and Council at
White Hall, of the great decay of that River occasioned by the said
Commissioners, through their neglect, and breach of Trust. Which Complaint,
begat this following Reference from the Council Table, and further power to add
to the former, See chap. 34. (C.) 35. (A.B) 28. (A P)

(C) Whereas upon complaint of the decay of the River of Tyne, and of the daily
abuses done and committed to the prejudice of the same. Certain Articles were
granted on the 29 of January 1613. and commanded to be put in execution for the
remedy of such abuses. And for as much as a Jury of Newcastle-men have by their
Petition to this Board grievously complained those Articles were wholly
neglected by the Mayor and six Aldermen of the same Town, and the Bishop of
Durham and Justices of Peace, all which were joint Commissioners for the
preservation of that River; The River decaying so fast, that in short time it
would be dord and wrecked up with sand, etc. If not Order soon taken therein.
The Council Ordered Sir Ralph Winwood, Sir Julius Caesar, and Sir Daniel Dun
one of the Judges of the Admiralty, with the assistance of the Trinity Masters
of London, See Chapters 19, 24, 25, 26, 28, 34. (A. B) 35 (A. B)
to draw up Thirteen Articles more to be joined with the former nine. And by
special Order of his Majesty's Council at White Hall was given and commanded
that all the said Two and twenty Articles be put in execution for the
conservation and preservation of the River of Tyne by the Commissioners
hereafter named. Or else to forfit all the Towns Liberties into the Kings
hands. See chap. 13.

(D) And though the Commissioners formerly appointed for the execution of the
former Articles, are persons of place and quality, and otherwise well deserving
of the public. Yet for as much as contrary to the Trust reposed in them they
have altogether neglected their duty therein, whereof further notice may be
taken as occasion shall require. It is thought expedient that these persons
following be named and authorized Commissioners for the due performance and
execution, as well of the said former Articles, bearing date the 29. of January
1613. as of those now devised and published, with the joint consent and good
liking of the Aldermen of the Town of Newcastle, and others attending their
Lordships in that behalf, for the safety and conservancy of that River.

(E) The Names of the Commissioners at Newcastle for the River of Tyne.
The Mayor William Warmouth Timothy Draper Cudb. Bewick. Tho. Wynn Leo. Car
Robert Ledger John Stubs. Robert Chamberlain. John Holbourn Hen. Johnson Edw.
French Tho. Ewbanck George Wallis Ralph Cox John Eaden John Butler.
(F) 29 January, 1613. See Sta. 23. Hen. 85.


1 That the owners of every Salt-work on either side of the said River of Tyne
built and to be built, do within six months build up their Wharfs and Keys
sufficiently above a full Sea-mark in height of the water to be appointed by
the Mayor and six Aldermen, to the end, neither Coals nor Rubbish do fall off
into the River.

2 That all Wharfs and Keys in all parts of the River of Tyne, be damned and
backed with Earth, and not with Ballast.

3 That no Ballast be cast at shields by any vessel which loadeth either with
Coals or Salt, or other Commodities, nor any Ballast Wharfes to be built there,
or used for that purpose. See Chap. 19. (H) 24. (E) 18. (A)

4 That all Salt-pan Owners shall carry away their Pan Rubbish from off their
Keys or Wharfs every forty days that none fall into the River.

5 That no Ballast be cast but upon sufficient Ballast Wharfs, built, and to be
built above a High Water mark, and to be allowed by the Mayor and six Aldermen
in any part of the River. See Chap, 49. (G)

6 That the Surveyors, Unladers, and casters of Ballast, according to their
offices and duties, shall every week cause all the Ballast which falls off the
Ballast shores into the River, to be taken up again, and cast upon the Ballast
Wharfs. And to take care that the Ships have a good sail to lie between the
ship and shore, that none of the Ballast fall between into the River. See Chap.
49. (G) 14. (B) 34, 35.

7 That no Coals nor Stones be dug within sixty yards on a straight line
from a full Sea-mark in any part of the River, to the end none fall in.

8 That some strict and severe punishment be inflicted by the Mayor and six
Aldermen upon any such Master of Ship or Keels as shall presume to cast any
Ballast upon any insufficient shores, or into the River. See Chap. 49. (E) 39.
14 (C)

9 That there shall be no wyers, dams, or other stoppage, or casting of Ballast
in or near the said River, or Creeks running into the said River of Tyne, or
within eight miles of the Town of Newcastle, but such as shall be allowed by
the Mayor and six Aldermen of the said Town* such shores being sufficiently
Wharfed. See Chap. 34.

Thirteen Articles more granted, Feb. 14. 1616.

10 That no Lighters, Boats, or Keels with Ballast be suffered to go up and
down the River of Tyne in any night Tide, to prevent the Keel men's casting
Ballast in to the River, they often using so to do, being more easy, and less
labor to cast it into the River than upon the top of the Ballast shores, which
spoils the River, the Commissioners are to take care herein to see the putting
hereof in execution and to punish offenders. See Chap 49. (E)

11 That Strangers shall be appointed every week to cleanse the Streets in
Newcastle of their Ashes and other rubbish, to prevent the rain from washing
the same into the River thorough Loadbourn.

12 That all the Gates on the Town Key be locked up every night except one or
two to stand open for the Masters and Seamen to go too and fro to their ships,
which will prevent servants casting Ashes, and other Rubbish into the River.
And that those two Gates be constantly watched all night long. See Chap. 49.
(E) Chap. 14. (B)

13 That all servants dwelling with any the Inhabitants residing or inhabiting
in the Town of Gates-head, and Sand-gate, and the Close in Newcastle, be sworn
every year, not to cast any Rubbish into the River. See Chap. 49. (E).

14 Whereas there has been an ancient Custom in Newcastle that every Master
of any Ship, who is known to cast any Ballast at Sea, between Souter and
Hartly, or within fourteen Fathom water of the Haven, to the hurt of the said
River, was brought into the Town Chamber; And there in the presence of the
people, had a knife put into his hand, was constrained to cut a purse with
moneys in it, as who should say he had offended in as high a degree, as if he
cut a purse from the person of a man, whereby he might be so ashamed that he
should never offend again therein; And others by his example were terrified
from trespassing in the like kind, that now in the time of so general wrongs
done to the River, and the great number of ships which comes into that haven,
this ancient custom be revived, and put in execution. See Stat. 8. Eliz. 4.
See Chap. 39. (A)

15 That whereas much Ballast falls off into the River of Tyne, between the
Ships and the Ballast shores, in casting of it out of the Ship to the great
hurt of the same, the Commissioners are to set every Winter season, the poor
Keel-men and Shewel-men
on work to cast into Keels such Ballast and Sand fallen into the River, and
then to cast it on the Shores or Wharf again.

16 That some trusty truly substantial men, Burgesses of Newcastle be appointed
to view the River every week, and to make Oath for the abuses and wrongs done
unto the * same, two to be Masters of the Trinity-house of that Town, they to
have no Coals, nor Mines, nor Ballast shores, and to be appointed by the
Commissioners. See Chap. 39. (35.)

17 That every owner of ground * adjoining on that River be ordered to sense
the same grounds to prevent the banks from falling and washing into the River,
with the great floods flashes, and rains, to the great annoyance thereof, See
chap. 49. (E)

18 That the Commissioners, namely, the Mayor, and others named before, do give
unto the Masters, Skippers of Keels, a Commission to be a company for the
ordering such their Brotherhood, and for them to punish such as cast Ballast
into the River, or does other wrong, out of their Keels, they having been a
Company formerly, consisting of one hundred and sixty, which was for the good
of the River; That the two great Pools of water, lying on the back of a
Ballast-shore, be forthwith filled up, to prevent undermining of the shore, to
the hazard of the River, if the wall, and Ballast fall down.

19 That all the Ballast shores in the River of Tyne be constantly kept in good
repair * otherwise a hundred thousand Tuns of Ballast will fall into the River
to the destruction thereof. See Chap. 34. *

20 That no ship or Vessel be suffered to load at Shields, or any Road-stead in
the River, but as near the Town of Newcastle as can be, for when they load in
remote places, the wrongs cannot be so soon seen. See Chap. 19. (H) 24. (E)

(21) That the Commissioners do take good Bonds from the Owners of such shores
as shall be built to lay Coals on for Ships, These Articles are all void,
notwithstanding it is all the power they can claim.
and shall take view of such places as shall not do hurt to the said River *
either by casting Ballast on them indirectly, or to suffer them to go to decay
after there is no use made of them, and to keep the Ballast from washing into
the River. See Chap 13. 34, 35.

These were present in Council that granted these Articles?

Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Steward,
Lord Arrundel, Lord Chamberlain, Lord Admiral, Earl Buckingham, Lord Bishop of
Ely, Lord Zouch, Lord Carew, Mr. Comptroler, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Sec.
Windwood, Mr. Secretary Lake, Mr. Chancellor Exchequer, Mr. of the Rolls. Mr.
Attorney General.
All these Articles are broke except the fifth for cutting purses, and the
ninth Article in stopping up the two pools, etc. read the following Order, etc.

The Council Table ordered that Leonard Car, and Cuthbard Beuwick two of the
Commissioners which attend this business, be allowed their charges, for their
pains and attendance, and likewise this Board might be the better assured, with
what care and diligence these directions are pursued, that the Commissioners do
every quarter certify of the proceedings herein, that further order might be
taken upon any defect that might happen, and as shall be found expedient.

CHAP. XIII. An Order to seize all Newcastles Liberties, etc.
UPon an Order now taken concerning the River of Tyne, and diverse Articles,
conceived fit by the board for the preventing of such disorders, and abuses as
are done, and committed to the detriment of the said River. It is thought fit,
and so ordered for the better observancy of the said Articles; and the more
careful endeavors of the Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Newcastle, for the
reformation and amendment of such things as are hurtful and prejudicial to so
famous a River, which have been slighted and neglected beyond that which any
way may be reasonably thought of, in a matter of so great importance.

That upon the first just complaint renewed to this Board in that kind, his
Majesty's Attorney General be hereby Authorized without further question, or
warrant, to direct some course for the seizing of all the Liberties of that
Town into the Kings hand; of which their Lordships pleasure and resolution, is
that such Aldermen and others of that Town, as are now here attending that
business, were by the Board required hereby to take notice. Given at our Court
at White Hall this 16 of February, 1616. See Chap. 19 (A) 24 (A) 25 (A) 26 (A)
28 (A) 34 (A) 35 (A, B.)

There were these present in Council.

Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chamberlain, Lord Arrundel, Lord Vic.
Wallingford, Lord Steward, Lord Bishop of Ely, Lord Zouch, Mr. Comptroler, Mr.
Vic. Chamberlain, Mr. Sec. Windwood, Mr. Sec. Lake, Mr. Chan. Excheq. Master of
the Rols, Mr. Attorney General.
It is conceived a Writ of Seizure lies in this case, by reason of the many
grievous complaints exhibited for their exorbitant abuses committed against the
weal of the Nation in that River in the spoil thereof as appears, * And in not
putting all those Articles in execution for preservation thereof. etc.

In Michael^as 1643. in the presence of Mr. Justice Snape, Steward of the
Liberties of St. Katherines London, the Lord Chief Justice St. John did direct
to seize St. Katherines Liberties for not yielding obedience to a Writ of the
Common Bench, executed in St. Katherines, and the Attorney that gave the advice
was committed (a good president.)

CHAP. XIV. A return by the Commissioners of Newcastle in the due execution of
their power, etc.
(A) THe Commissioners for Conservancy of the River of Tyne at Newcastle,
returns their quarterly account of their diligent care in the due execution of
the two and twenty Articles aforementioned unto the Council Table, by Mr.
Leon. Car, and Mr. Buewick, with order to petition the Council for a^
explananation upon some of the said two and twenty Articles, and for further
power for the preservation of the said River, especially upon the one and
twentieth Article, to whom the bonds should be made; It was Ordered to the
Mayor for the time being, etc.

(B) Also prayed resolution, who should repair and mantain the Ballast shoars
and Coal-Wharf, as is expressed in the nineteenth Article, Ordered that as well
the Owner as the Tenant be bound to such reparation during the time use was
made thereof, and only the Owners afterward.

(They also humbly craved their resolutions of the sixth Article, and twelfth
Article, who should be at the charge of cleansing the River of the Ballast, and
pay the Watchmen, etc. It is Ordered that the Town-chamber defray both the one,
and the other, by reason they receive the profits of the River, etc. See Chap.
12. (6) Chap. 34. 39. 49.

(C) They also prayed the resolution of the eighth Article for the punishing of
Masters of Ships; It was Ordered that the Commissioners should take bond, *
with sufficient Sureties to appear before the Council to answer their contempt,
and to such as refuse to give bond, then the Commissioners to commit them to
prison till they give Sureties to answer at London, etc. See Chap. 41. (C)

Ordered that the Commissioners shall have power for ordering the Wharf, and
new shoars in every place in that River, after they are once erected, as well
for the strengthening as backing of them with Ballast, as with other Earth. See
chap. 18. (F)

(E) That the Commissioners, there at least, shall subscribe every Ticket, and
the Mayor * for the carrying up of every Keel of Ballast from the ships at
Shields to Newcastle ballast shoars, for the more faithful execution of that
service. See chap. 49. (G.) *

(F) Ordered that the Commissioners shall have power to order and determine of
such rewards as shall be given to every Wherry-man, or Fisherman * or other
that shall truly present any offense or offenders against any of the Articles
prescribed, to be taken out of such Fines, Mu^cts, and Amerciaments, as shall
be imposed upon any the Delinquents against the said Articles. See Chap. 39.
(A) *

(G) Ordered that the Commissioners shall have power to cause the ballast
already become noisome, or in any part of the River, or like to do hurt, from
the Land to be removed to a new Wharf, or fit place. See Chap. 34. (A) 35. (A.
B.)

CHAP. XV.
KIng James on the 14. of April, in the seventeenth year of his Reign grants
unto Alexander Stevenson Esquire; and his Assigns for fifty years the whole Castle
of Newcastle, with all Appurtenances thereunto any way belonging, at the Rent
of forty shillings per annum, except the prison, wherein is kept the sons of
Belial, it being the County prison for Northumberland; the said Mr. Stevenson
dyed, and left Mr. Auditor Darel his Executor; and left him that Lease, it
being all he was like to have toward the payment of the said Mr. Stevensons
debts, which was due to the said Executor and others, amounting in the
principal to two thousand and five hundred pound, besides damages, which
amounted to as much more, who is kept from his right by the instigation of the
Mayor and Burgesses, upon an Inquisition taken the 18. of August, in the 18.
year of King James, at Newcastle; It was found to be in Stevenson, and now in
his Executors, the said Stevenson dyed in October, 1640. they claiming a right
from one widow Langston, relict to one John Laugston Groom, Porter, etc. but
that Title the Law will quickly decide upon a legal Trial, but the County of
Northumberland has the reversion, who is kept from having a free passage to
the Assizes, by the Mayor and Burgesses, who shuts up the gates which is the
right passage, and at such gates which be open, the people of Northumberland
coming to do their service at the Assizes holden for that County in that
Castle, are arrested and cast into prison by Newcastle, where none can bail
them, but Burgesses of Newcastle, and often thereby such people have their
Cause overthrown, by such restainment.

In Easter Term, in the 18. year of King James, Sir Henry Yelverton Knight: Attorney
General, exhibited an Information against the Mayor and Burgesses concerning
the premises above mentioned, where all plainly appears, amongst other things
of the Town, not to belong to them etc.

CHAP. XVI.
(A) IN or about the eighteenth year of King James an Information was exhibited
in the Star Chamber by the Attorney General, against the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle by the name of Host-men, for that they having the preemption of Coals
from the Inheritors in Northumberland, and County of Durham by their Charter of
free Hoast-men 42 Queen Eliz. * they having the sale of all Coals, who force
ships to take bad Coals, or will not load them, with unmarketable Coals: being
brought for London, prove much to the damage of the people

Which grief begot great Suits between the Merchants and Masters of ships, to
their disquieting and high charge, upon which this Information was brought
against the said Hoast-men for selling of bad and unmerchantable Coals, and
much Slate amongst them, for which they were all fined, some 100 li. a piece,
some more, others less, being found guilty; and ordered to do so no more, but
it is proved they continue the same to this day. See chap. 43. (A)

CHAP. XVII.
(A) KIng James upon the 28 of January in the 16 year of his Reign grants the
Admiralty of all England, etc. to the Duke of Buckingham, it being surrendered
by the Lord High Admiral, so that the Title of Newcastle by virtue of the
Chrater of the 31 year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign is conceived of little force.
See chapter 10. (B)

CHAP. XVIII. King Charles.
The high and Mighty Monarch CHARLES by the grace of GOD King of Great
Britain France and Ireland

P. Stent ex^udit



(A) SIr Robert Heath, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas was building a
Ballast Wharf or Shore on his own Land at Shields adjoining upon the River of
Tyne, seven miles from Newcastle; but the Commissioners of Newcastle, the Mayor
and Aldermen with others, obstructed the building thereof, pretending it would
spoil the River; but the Lord Chief Justice well knowing it to the contrary by
the advice of most of the ancient Trinity Masters of London, and other
experienced Traders thither, went on with the building thereof, upon which in
the year 1632. the said Mayor and other Commissioners exhibited a complaint to
the King and Council against the same at Whitehal, complaining that if any
Ballast Shoars or Wharfs were built at Shields, it would much spoil the River
and hinder Trade and Navigation, at which there was a legal Trial, it appeared
to the contrary, the King and Council upon the 13th. day of July, 1632. Ordered
that Sir Robert Heaths Ballast shore should be built.

(D) In February next the Commissioners of Newcastle complained again upon the
same business, by pleading some new matter in their Petition, and the reference
they obtained on their Petition, was Ordered by the King and Council this 13th.
of February 1632. that Sir Robert Heath's Ballast-shoar should be built. The
Commissioners aforesaid put in the third Petition, not doubting but that by
such new matter they should prevent the building of the said Shore. Ordered by
the King and Council, the 27 Feb. 1632. That Sir Robert Heath's Ballast-shoar,
Wharf, or Key a building, shall be built go forward, and be quite finished. See
chapter 13. (A) 19 (A) 20 (G) 34 (A. B).

CHAP. XIX.
THe Mayor and Burgesses exhibited another great complaint to the King and
Council, wherein nine several absurdities appeared, by Capt. Crosier, and
especially against Sir Rob. Heaths shore, etc.

At the Court at Greenwich the 1. of June, 1634.

King Charles.
Lord Arch. Bish. Canterbury Lord Keeper. Lord Arch Bishop of York. Lord
Treasurer Lord Privy Seal Lord Duke of Lenox Lord Marquis Hambleton Lord
Chamberlain Earl of Dorset Earl of Bridgewater Lord Vi. Wimbleton Lord
Newbrough Mr. Treasurer Mr. Comptroler Mr. Vice-Chamberlain Mr. Secretary
Winwood Mr. Secretary Cook.
Upon consideration this day had at the Board, his Majesty being present in
Council, of a complaint made by the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, against
the Ballast-shoars, lately built by the said Sir Robert Heath at Shields upon
the River of Tyne, pretending the same to be a great prejudice of the shipping
and Navigation, and to the annoyance and damage of the said River, the care and
consideration thereof was by his Majesty especially entrusted unto them, (E)
and upon hearing the allegation on both sides, with their learned Council in
the Law, it was thought fit and ordered, that the said Shore should be finished
and backed with Ballast to make it fit for the Salt Works, which for his
Majesty's Service are begun, and intended to be performed. (G)

In the first place that the Seamen should have liberty freely to cast their
Ballast there (H) without interruption, if they find convenient, none being
compelled to it, or hindered from it. That neither those of the Town of
Newcastle, nor free Hoast-men (I) (which sell all Coals) do hinder the same
indirectly by denying, or unnecessary denying to carry down coals in Keels or
Lighters to the ships which shall cast their Ballast at that Shore, to the end,
this shore which may be for the safety and encouragement of Navigation and
Shiping, may be so used, as the same may neither be prejudicial to the Town in
diverting or withdrawing of Trade, nor to his Majesty in his Customs or Duty,
nor hurtful to the said River.

His Majesty will refer the ordering hereof to himself, as well in the
particulars aforesaid, as in all other things thereunto appertaining, in such
sort as both the Town and Seamen, shall find his Majesty's Regal care over
them, Sic subscripsit Ex. Majest. See 12, Chap. 3. 18. (D. F) 23, (A) 42. (E)

It is conceived Orders are no Laws, and the latter Order which contradicts the
former, voids it; So by this of King Charles, voids King James's for the power
of the River, in Chap. 12. (I)

CHAP. XX. Jarrow Slike, etc.
(A) ON the 4th. of December 1634. certain Lands and Wastes were discovered to
the late Kings Commissioners, at the Commissionhouse in Fleetstreet, as
belonging to the Crown concealed, especially a parcel of Land or Waste in the
River of Tyne, called Jarrow Slike at South-Shields in the County of Durham,
which the water at a full Sea covers every Tide, and is by estimation 300
Acres, a fit and convenient place for ships to cast Ballast at, for many years
to come, without any prejudice to the River, and great furtherance of Trade,
See Chap. 56. Chap. 34. (A. B)

The Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle hearing thereof put in their Claim to the
said Commissioners, and alleged that all that ground belonged to them, with
all other grounds to a low water mark, from the full Sea mark on both sides the
River from a place called Sparhawke in the Sea, to Headwin-streams, which is
seven miles above Newcastle, being fourteen miles in length granted to them and
their Heirs for ever, from King John by Charter, and confirmed by his
Successors; and therefore beseeched time to make it so appear. (There being no
such thing granted, could never make it appear.) Along time was given them, but
nothing appeared as truth of any such Grant, and two years after, upon the
first day of July, 1637. they instead of wearying out the Commissioners and
Gentlemen that discovered the same, was called to make good their claim, then
they became Petitioners to the Kings Commissioners, that they would be pleased
to sell that parcel of wast ground called Jarrow-slike to them, and to admit
them to purchase the same, for which they would give two hundred pounds, by
reason it lay more convenient for them, then any else, but they would give no
more money for it. See chap. 18. ( A. B) See chap. 2.

Upon which, one Mr. Thomas Talbot, and Mr. Richard Allen of London gave four
hundred pound and got it. The King upon the 27 of November 1637. by his Letters
Pattents under the Great Seal of England, confirmed the same Jarrow-slike, and
waste ground upon the said Talbot and Allen, and their Heirs for ever, they
paying in to the Exchequor five pound per annum, as a Fee-farm Rent, which said
ground is in contest between the said Gentlemen, and Sir Henry Vane.

If this ground to a full Sea-Mark were really the Corporation of Newcastles.
it would have so appeared in the Charter granted by King John, and also they
then might have made good their claim, and not to have become Petitioners to
purchase the thing which was their own before even as they do in this, so in
other things.)

Also if all ground be theirs from a full Sea-mark, why were they Tenants to
the late Dean and Chapters of Durham, of certain ballast shores built to the
low water-mark, on which all ballast is cast.

And if all ground were Newcastles from a full Sea-mark, why should Mr. Bonner,
etc. buy the Lady Gibs ground, and build a Ballast-shoar to a low water-mark,
and wrong the Town of their right. And why should not Gates-head, and both the
shields which are built to a low water-mark, pay Newcastle rent, etc. See Chap.
18. (B) 34. (A. B.)

CHAP. XXI.
(A) KIng Charles in August in the 13. year of his Reign created a new
Corporation of free Hoast-men in Newcastle (called in English Coale-Engrossers)
and grants a Lease to Sir Tho. Tempest Knight, with others for the selling of
all Coals, exported out of the River of Tyne, and to receive eleven shillings,
and four pence per Chaldron Custom, and twelve shillings from all strangers
which shall be transported over Sea, and to have two pence per Chaldron toward
their charge, and power, to seize of all Coals sold by the Owners of such Coals
sold; In which Lease, it is ordered, That if Masters of Ships have not their
due measure at one and twenty bouls to the Chaldron, then upon information
given, the one half of such Coals and Keels to be forfeited to such Master, and
the measures to be looked after by sworn Commissioners, and that this Lease
(Monopoly) to continue for one and twenty years from January then last past, It
is conceived this Lease i^ void both by Law, etc.
and that nothing be done or acted by pretense or color of this Lease to the
prejudice of the King. See Chap. 11. (P) 8. (A) See Stat. 21. King James 3. See
Chap. 46. (B.)

If any such prejudice the people, the King is also prejudiced here, the people
cannot sell their own Coals, etc. which is a prejudice. See his Oath Chap. 59.
(A.)

CHAP. XXII.
(A) KIng Charles in June following in the fourteenth year of his Reign,
incorporates another Company of Coal buyers, namely Mr. Tho. Horth, and other
Masters of ships, to buy all Coals exported out of the Ports of Sunderland, the
River of Tyne, Newcastle, Blithe, and Barwick, paying to the King one shilling
per Chaldron Custom, and to sell them again to the City of London, not
exceeding seventeen shillings the Chaldron in the Summer, and nineteen
shillings the Chaldron all the Winter, provided they had a free Market, and a
just measure at Newcastle, etc. which they were debarred of by reason of the
foregoing Lease granted to Sir Thomas Tempest. See Chap. 11. (P)

CHAP. XXIII.
(A) KIng Charles in July following, grants another Pattent to Mr. Sands with
others, for the farming of the Customs of one shilling aforesaid upon every
Chaldron, at the yearly rent of ten thousand pounds, by this you may see no
small quantity Issues out, etc. See chap. 11. (B)

But there are some other Gentlemen which has this benefitial Lease at
present, namely Sir John Trevor, with others, who pays (as I hear) one
thousand four hundred pound per annum, (having some years yet to come in the
Pattent) I wish the poor had it after them at the rent of five thousand pounds
per annum. And it is the judgment of wise men, that those Gentlemen are wanting
of many hundreds of pounds per annum, which might be made as well as the
former, etc.

CHAP. XXIV.
Die Jovis October. 8. 1646.
By the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Admiralty, and Cinque Ports etc.
WHereas the Committee has been petitioned by Barbery Hilton Window, on the
behalf of her self, and diverse Masters of Ships, trading to Newcastle, whose
names are here subscribed to the said Petition, that the Petitioners may
receive the benefit of loading and unloading at the Ballast-wharf, erected at
Shields, about seven miles from Newcastle, as tending to the good and
preservation of shipping, etc. For that by reason, the River is wrecked up with
sands, and sunk ships, that ships of great burdens cannot pass up without
hazard and danger of losing, which liberty as by their Petition is set forth,
they enjoyed for sixteen years past until of late the Mayor and Commonalty of
Newcastle have enforced them to come up to their own shoars.

Now for as much as this matter, as it is represented unto the Committee, may
tend much to the security of ships, the advancement of Navigation, and
encouragement of Trade, (E)

It is Ordered therefore, that the Petitioners shall be at liberty to load and
unload at the Shields as is desired, and directed, until other Order in that
behalf be given.

And if the Magistrates of Newcastle, and such others as is therein concerned,
shall hereafter desire to offer reasons to the contrary, this Committee will be
ready to hear them, and to do therein, what shall stand with Justice. See chap.
19. (G, H, I)

Warwick, Alex. Bence, Salsbury, Jo. Roll, Esquire. Bence, Ed. Prideaux, Giles
Green.

It is conceived this Order voids King James Orders for preservation of the
River in the Two and twenty Articles, and confirms King Charles, etc. See Chap.
19.
CHAP. XXV.
At the Council for Trade at White Hall, Septem. 26. 1651.
(A) IN pursuance of a reference of the Council of State of the 8. of Feb.
1650. to take into consideration the Petition of some Captains and Masters of
ships, with others trading to Newcastle, with a paper of their grievances
annexed to the same, setting forth. etc. See 12. Chap. the 19. and 24. Chapter

(B) That in case of any disaster to ships after extremity of weather, or
otherwise, though in great distress. See Chap. 29. (C) 30. (A, D, S) 33. (A)

(C) Are debarred to take the assistance and help of any other neighboring
Ship-wrights, and Carpenters of their own hired servants, who they have
entertained in their ships for their Ship-Carpenters. See Chap. 36. (A) 38. (C.)

(D) But are constrained either to carry their ships to Newcastle, or to remain
there in perril, till one be sent for, or procured from Newcastle, who will not
come upon reasonable terms. See Chap. 30. (B) 38. (A, B.)

(E) complaining also that the Town will not suffer them according to ancient
Liberties and Customs, to heave, and cast out Ballast at convenient and
sufficient shoars where they may do it without endangering their ships. See
chap. 29. (C) 30. (A) 32. (D) 35. (B) 41. (A) 43. (D) 44 (A.)

(F) Nor to load, nor unload, where they may with safety perfom it.
Notwithstanding some orders heretofore to that end obtained from the late King,
and from the Parliament, but are most injuriously forced to carry up their
ships to Newcastle through most dangerous parts of the River by reason of
Sands, Shelves, and diverse * sunk ships in the way, with other particulars to
the like purpose.

(H) The Council having taken the said papers into consideration, and it
appearing that the said Town of Newcastle, however, they justify not the
hindering of any Master to make use of his own hired Ship-Carpenter, coming
along with him in the said ship, do notwithstanding justify the hindering of
any other Ship-Carpenter to work or assist him, if not a Freeman of their
Town, and do claim the sole employment of their own free Ship-wrights within
the whole Port of the said Town. See chapter 12. (I) 29. (C) 31. (A) 34. (C) 32.
(C. B) 35. (A. B) 38. (A) 49. (A) 50. (C).

(I) As also do justify the sole erection, keeping and heaving of all the
ballast-Shoars within the said Port, (K) And the hindering any person to load or
unload at any place of the said Port, save at the said Town, or as near it as
conveniently may be.

(L) This Council having further received the Depositions and Examinations of
several Mariners and Masters of ships belonging to the Town of Newcastle, and
others also of the Town of Ipswich; and having also advised with some Masters
of ships, ancient and experienced Traders sent and chosen by the Trinity-House
of London, with some others, do after full debate had, and hearing at diverse
meetings the reasons on both sides alleged, offer, See chapter 33. (A) 38. (A. B)
56. (A)

(M) That the said practice of the said Town of Newcastle, in debarring Masters
of ships to make use, within the River of Tyne of what Ship-Carpenters they
please, or find fittest for their own convenience, and in constraining them to
use only the free Ship-wrights of the said Town of Newcastle, is very
prejudicial to Trade and Navigation, See chapter 33. (A) 38. (A. B. C)

(N) That it has appeared to this Council, notwithstanding any thing to the
contrary alleged, etc. that through the Winds, Rains, and other casualties
washing down the Ballast of those that are called the Town of Newcastles
Shoars, having been a great newsance and prejudice to the River, and in the
higher parts thereof. See chapter 34. (C) 35 (A. B)

(O) And that the practice of the said Town of Newcastle in constraining the
said Masters of ships to come up the River and to heave out their Ballast at
the Town shoars only, (P) and hindering them to load Coals and discharge their
Ballast where they may with safety perform it, as well to the Road-stead it
self, as to their shipping; is a damage and inconveniency to Trade and
Navigation. See chapter 34* (C) 44. (A) 41. (A) 44. (E) 32. (D) 43. (D) 29. (C) 31.
(A)

(Q) To hinder any ships to buy or take in at any place of the said Port, Bread
and Beer, for their own spending and victualling, is also a very great
hinderance to Trade and Navigation. See chap. 48. (A) 49. (C. D. G.) 50. (A)
51. (B) 44. (E) 29. (A)

(R) That notwithstanding for the better regulating such farther Liberties as
shallbe granted, in the granting of the said Provisions, building of
Ballast-Shoars, defraying the charge, and for the preservation of the River for
the future, be entrusted into faithful, able men's hands to see the same put in
execution, as to the wisdom of the Parliament shall be thought fit, etc.

John Johnson, Clerk. pro tempore.

CHAP. XXVI. A Judgment at the Common Law obtained against Newcastle, etc.
(A) THomas Cliff a Ship-Carpenter, who has been very instrumental in saving
many ships from sinking, and at easy rates, for his working upon a ship in the
same River of Tyne in the year 1646. had got a ship off the Rocks with the help
of his Servants, and other Workmen, for which the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle sent down Sergeants with other Burgesses to the Town of
North-Shields, which is in the County of Northumberland, to bring the said
Cliff and Servants to their Prison, in which service the said Sergeants killed
his Wife, brake his Daughters Arm, and ^ed his Servants to Prison *, as you may
read, Chap 36. And then sued the said Cliff by an English Bill in the
Exchequer, and held him in suit five years and upwards, the Suit being
commenced in the name of the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle Complainants,
against Tho. Cliff Defendant, the Merchants and Burgesses of that Corporation
came in as witnesses in their own Cause, as you may find upon Record in the
Exchequer, where they were examined, in the year 1649. Janu. 27, by virtue of a
Commission, etc. also they were cross examined, etc. which said Suit was
transferred to the Common Law, and to be tried at York Assizes in Hillary 1651.
the Verdict went for the Defendant Cliff, which said Judgment expresses that
the Mayor and Burgesses ought to be severely fined, etc. for their unjust claim
in that Port of the River of Tyne, and shall pay 30 l. costs, etc. which said
Bill is in the Office of Pleas in Lincoln's Inn, etc. See chap. 19. (C) 24. (A)
25. (A) 54. 28.

CHAP. XXVII.
To the Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The humble Petition of Ralph Gardner of Northumberland, Gent. in behalf of
himself and many others, whose desires are thereunto annexed. etc.
Shows,
(A) THat many great Complaints of grievances and oppressions presented to the
Council of State, in the year 1650. in writings by many Captains and Masters of
Ships, with others, against the Magistrates of Newcastle upon Tyne in relation
to Trade and Navigation.

The Council of State, by Order transferred the same to be examined by the
Council for Trade, and after a long Debate at several times, diverse Witnesses
were sworn, and Counsel had on both sides.

The Council for Trade drew up a Report thereupon, to present to the
Parliament, conducing much to the good of Trade and Navigation, which said
Report has lain dorment ever since, to the great detriment of the Commonwealth
in the excessive prizes of Coals and otherwise.

Your Petitioner humbly prays, That those Reports and Papers may be called for,
and reviewed, and these annexed desires inserted, to do therein as to Your
Wisedoms and Justice shall seem meet.

And as in duty bound shall pray, etc. Ralph Gardner.
Henry Ogle, 29 Sept. 1653.

Gardners Desires to the Parliament.
(B) THat North-Shields be made a Market Town, it being seven miles from
Newcastle, and twelve miles from any Market in the same County, which would
relieve the Garrison of Tinmouth Castle, the Inhabitants which be thousands,
the great confluence of people resorting thither, the great Fleets of ships
daily riding there would further them to make many more Voyages in the year,
save Boats and men's lives, which are often in danger of being cast away in
stormy weather *, also by which means the people would be releived with
provisions during the time the River is frozen, and half in half cheaper than
from the second hand, besides the lost of a days labor, and great charge to
the poor in going by water in boat-hire, and save the life of many a man and
beast from falling into Coal-pits, which lies open after the Coals wrought out,
being covered with snow, etc. See chap. 29. (A) 48. (A) 49. (B) 50. (A) 51. (A)

(C) That the Mayor and Burgesses may no more imprison poor Artificers only
for working upon their Trades in or about the River, See chap. 36. (A) 38. (A.
C)

(D) That they may not cast men into prison for saving of ships from sinking,
nor keep men in prison till they give them Bond never to work upon their Trade
again. See chapter 33. (A) 36. (A) 38. (A)

(E) That they may not force all goods brought in by Sea for the Salt and
Coal-Works use, at and near the Shields, to be carried up to Newcastle where
there is no use for the same. See chapter 50.

(F) That the Coal Owners of Northumberland and County of Durham may have free
liberty to sell their own Coals to ships, and not to be inslaved by the free
Hoast-men of the Town of Newcastle.

(G) That any person may have liberty to build ships and vessels in the River
of Tyne, without the molestation of the Magistrates of the Town of Newcastle,
for the increase of Trade and Navigation.

(H) That no Masters of ships may be imprisoned for refusing to swear against
themselves, according to the practice of the Star Chamber, it being a great
discouragement to Trade, and disquieting of the spirits of many conscientious
persons, etc. See chap. 39. (A) 49.

(I) That all unreasonable and arbitrary fines may be mittigated as shall be
agreeable to Justice and Equity. See chapter 41. 42. (A)

(K) That no more ships may be compelled up the dangerous River seven miles,
whereas they need to go but one mile: never any Coals being to be had at
Newcastle, which would save many ships from sinking, and cause them to make
upwards of three Voyages in the year more than they do, which would cause two
or three hundred thousand Chaldron of Coals more to be sold, and the excessive
prices to fall under twenty shillings the Chalder all the year, See chapter 29. (C)
32. (C) 31. (A)

(L) That the trust of the River of Tyne be put into faithful Commissioners
hands, the Mayor, and Aldermen, and Commissioners of Newcastle having betrayed
the trust reposed in them for conservancy thereof, that whereas within in this
twenty years above twenty ships of the burden two hundred Tuns rid a float in
most Roadsteads in the said River, now not above four of the same burden at low
water. See chap. 12. (^) 34, ( C). 35. (A, B)

(M) That their Charters granted to their Corporation may be called in, and
viewed, and other Grants and Orders granted by King James, and what is found
offensive to the Commonwealth may be repealed, as it now stands, proves
destructive to the peoples right. Septem. 29. 1653.

All which are presented to your Honors to do therein as God shall direct you
for the good of his people.

Ralph Gardner.

Tuesday October ^. 1653.
(N) THe Petition of Ralph Gardener of Northumberland Gentleman, in the behalf
of himself, and many others, whose humble desires are thereunto annexed, being
this day read, the Committee conceives it proper for the Committee for Trade,
and therefore do recommend the same to their consideration.

Anthony Rous.

At the Committee for Trade and Corporations, sitting at Whitehall, October. 18.
1653.
(O) WHereas a Petition has been exhibited to this Committee by the said Ralph
Gardner of Northumberland Gentleman, in the behalf of himself, and many others,
complaining of several grievances, they sustain by the Corporation of the Town
of Newcastle; It is ordered, that the said Petition, and complaint be taken
into consideration by this Committee on Tuesday the 15. of November next,
whereof the Mayor and Corporation of Newcastle aforesaid, are to have
convenient notice.

Samuel Warner.

(P) The Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle Petitioned the Committee beseeching
their honors for a copy of the Petition and paper exhibited, and to grant them
fourteen days time longer, to make their defense, which their Honors granted,
but ordered their Agents to attend the 15. day of Novem. to hear the Witnesses
on the Commonwealths behalf, examined, and to receive what further should be
brought in by way of charge against the Corporation, by reason a great trial
was had before their Honors, with the late Farmers of the Customs, which took
up all that day, the eighteenth day was appointed for Newcastles business, on
which day most of the Witnesses were examined upon this following charge, and
proved it in presence of the Corporations Agent, and when they were all dismissed
and gone, the Agent desired further time, and the Witnesses to be cross
examined, to which the honorable Committee replied, that further time they
would not give in a matter of so high concernment, and it was too late to
cross examine the witnesses, he not desiring it when they were there, and he
present, but granted him a copy of the charge.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Heads of the Charge exhibited by Ralph Gardner of Northumberland Gent. to
the Committee for Trade and Corporations, against the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle, 1653.
(A) THat the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, have, and do imprison
Artificers, only for their working upon their lawful Trades. (See Stat. 1,
1301.)

( B) That they do force Masters of Ships to cut purses, in their open Court
for gain to themselves, and imprisons them if they refuse. See Stat. 8. Eliz. 4.

(C) That they force all Masters of ships to swear against themselves, and
notwithstanding they have swore the truth, others are called in to swear
against them, which is for a Fines sake, which profit accrues to the Mayor,
Burgesses and witness for their own use.

(D) That they do impose Arbitrary Fines so excessively, that without payment
is committed to prison, which said Masters are there detained till the said
Fine be paid.

(E) That they have robbed people in their open Markets and in passing through
the Town, of their goods, alleging foreign bought, and foreign sold, all
people not being free of that Town are reputed foreigners.

(F) That they have imprisoned men for saving ships fom sinking, and detains
them till compound, whose poor wives, and children are ready to starve, also
keeps them in prison till they enter into bond never to work upon their Trades
again.

(G) That they of that Corporation have taken an Oath amongst themselves not to
work with, nor employ any un-freemen, but to suppress all such from working in
that Corporation, or the whole River of Tyne.

(H) That they do imprison poor Masters of ships for letting their ships from
sinking, and denies bayl.

(I) That they seize of all such goods as any poor Master does save when their
ships are sinking, which is all the poor Master has left in the world to
relieve his wife and family, and poor Seamen.

(K) That when any ship is sinking, though seven miles from Newcastle, none
must help to save her, but Newcastle-men must be sent for, who comes at
leisure, besides having his demands which is excessive.

(L) That they ingrosse all Merchandise, and other dead victual, and provision
which comes in by Sea, and then forces the Countries to give them their own
rates for what they want.

(M) They will not suffer any Provisions to be bought at Shields, or any Market
to be there, notwithstanding people are often drowned in going and returning
from Newcastle Markets, and also many are ready to starve in the Winter season
by reason the River is then frozen up, and so become Innavigable.

(N) That they by Engrossing all Corn into their hands have kept it to so
excessive Rates, that the poor could not buy it, but have been constrained to
eat beasts-blood, baked instead of bread.

(O) That by such hoarding up the corn, and the people not able to buy the same
being so dear, many country people were necessitated to eat Dogs and Cats, and
to kill their poor little Coal-horses for food.

(P) They have hoarded up so much corn, and keeping it for such excessive gain,
that in the very time of scarcity and misery amongst the people many have been
found starved to death in holes, hundred bouls of corn were cast into the
River, being spoyld with the Rats, and rot, the very Swine could not eat it.

(Q) That they will not suffer any of the Coal Owners in any of the two
Counties to sell their own Coals, but the owners must either sell their Coals to
the free Hoast-men, at what price they please, and then all ships must give
them their own price, or get none, which makes Coals so dear.

(R) That no ship shall be laden with Coals, etc. that will not do what the
Mayor and Burgesses commands them, by going up the River seven miles with
ballast to their great loss of time, and hurt of their ships.

(S) That ships have been often ten or fourteen days in sailing up and down
the River only to discharge their Ballast, they for the most part taking in
their loading at Shields. See chap. 32. (C)

(T) That other ships which have taken in their loading at Shields, with Coals
and Salt have made their Voyage to London and back, before such ships which
were so compelled to Newcastle, could get ready, and ordinarily is the cause of
their loss of three Voyages in the year, by such compulsions. See chap. 32. (D)

(U) That they force all ships with materials brought in by Sea for the
absolute use of the Salt-Works and Coal-works, at and near Shields, to be
carried to Newcastle, and laid out upon their Key, though they have no use for
the same, and the customs being already paid, and Officers at Shields
attending; often the boats that fetches them sinks in returning to Shields. See
chap. 50. (C)

(W) That ships have often sunk in returning empty from Newcastle to Shields,
there being nothing to be had at Newcastle, and such ships are only to take in
Salt or Coals at Shields: No Salt to be got elsewhere, but at Shields in that
River, and thereabouts. See chap. 29, 30, 32.

(X) That they will not tolerate any Seaman, though never so able a Pilot to
guide a strangers ship into the River, over Tinmouth-Bar, though he be in never
so great distress, but a Freeman must be sent for from Newcastle, there being
but two at Shields, by means whereof the ship is often ready to be lost before
any can get seven miles up, and seven miles back again. See chapter 32. (A)

(Y) That they force all ships, though never so long, great, or weak, to sail
up the River, to cast out their Ballast upon their Shoars, for the gain of
Eight pence for every Tun a ship carries, which is an Arbitrary Imposition; see
chap. 32. (B. C) it formerly being but Four pence. And one ship with another
carrys an 100 tun every voyage, etc. See chapter 29. (C)

(A B) That they force Masters of ships to pay for Eighty tun, when indeed they
have but Forty tun, and so oppress the poor Masters, whereby the price of Coals
must needs be enhanst: See cha. 44. (A)

(A F) That they have spoiled the River with their Ballast Shoars, by ships
sinking in sailing up the River, and returning back, Their ballast-Shoars being
so full, and heavy, and hilly, that every shower of Rain, and storm of Wind
does blow and wash down the ballast into the River, besides the weight in
pressing down the walls t^ the great prejudice of the Commonwealth; by the
obstruction of the River, and endangering of shipping. See chap. 34. (A) 35.
(A. B)

(A. G) That by the negligence of the Commissioners for the River, above Three
thousand Tuns of ballast have fallen into the River in one Nights time. See chapter
34 (C). None taken up, etc.

(A. H) That within this Twenty years, where Twenty Ships of a certain burden
could have rid afloat in most Road-steads in the River at a low water mark, now
not above Four ships can ride afloat, etc. See chap. 35. (B)

(A. I) That ships have made Twelve Voyages in the year, within this 20 years,
when they had liberty to cast their ballast at Shields, and now they make but
Four or Five Voyages only, being obstructed by the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle, in compelling the ships up the River, seven miles, to cast out their
ballast upon their own Shoars, etc. See chap. 32 (D)

(A. K.) That they will not suffer any Ballast-shoars to be built at or near
the Sheilds, by reason the owners of the ground will not sell it to them,
notwithstanding there are convenient places for Shoars for above this hundred
years to come, without any prejudice to the River, and to the great advantage
of the Commonwealth, See chap. 29. (C)

(A. L.) That they do hinder the stock of the public Revenue above Forty
thousand pounds per an. in Customs, decla^^. See Chap. 45. (B. E. F.) 32. (D)

(A. M) That they do hinder a trade all the Winter season, by reason neither
ships nor boats can pass up the River, which is often frozen below the
ballast-Shoars, called the Bill-point, and half down the River, it never
freezeth lower. See chapter 35. (B)

(A. N) That the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle have combined and made new
Ordinances amongst themselves, that what free Hoast-men or filler of Coals,
shall sell any Coals to such Ship-Masters as shall cast any ballast at Shields,
and not upon their own ballast Shoars, shall forfi^ and pay 20 l. a time, or
lie in prison till the same be paid. See ch, 43. (D) 30. (D)

(A. O) That all such Coals as shall be sold, and not being free of that
Corporation shall be confiscated for the Corporations use. See 21. Chap. (A)

(Some say if what is here alleged be nothing but the truth it were pity, but
they should receive judgment according to their respective offenses, but if it
appear otherwise, it were pity, but the evidence upon oath, with my self,
should receive the same judgment.)

(A. P) That the Mayor and Burgesses by having betrayed the trust reposed in
them by King James, in the two and twenty Articles for the preservation of the
River of Tyne, have forfeited all that Corporations liberties into the States
hand, by the exorbitant abuses committed, and neglect in not putting them in
execution. See chap. 13. (A) 34. (C)

(A. Q) All which said charge was proved upon Oath before the Council at
White Hall, 1650. And the Committee for Trade and Corporations at White Hall in
November 1653. And Order was given that Mr. Thomas Skinner be desired to draw
up an Act for a free Trade in that Port and River of Tyne, to present to the
Parliament. See Cha. 54. (which Act was intended.) Whether it be consonant to
Religion or reason, that these things so perpetrated aforesaid, against the
good of a Commonwealth should be neglected, and in not being timely regulated,
I refer to better judgments.

Ralph Gardner.

(A. R.) Mr. Mark Shafto, Mr. Ralph Jennison, Mr. Robert Ellison, Mr. Tho.
Bonner, the Recorder and Aldermen of Newcastle, with Mr. John Rushworth, one
Maddison, and one Michael Bonner, with many more of the Burgesses, appeared at
White Hall on the 29. of November, being the day appointed for the Town to
plead to the charge, they having had the copy of the charge, where the full
Committee was met, and many Parliament Men more, where the Petition, the
charge, and the desires were read, to the foregoing Gentlemen.

(A. S.) The Corporation, Agents and Aldermen humbly begged ten weeks longer
time, by reason they were not ready, nor prepared to answer the charge, for it
struck at all that was near and dear unto them Oppression.
. And hoped the Town would not be surprised, and that they did conceive Mr.
Gardner had sent down that order to affront the Town, by reason it was dropped at
the Mayors door by a boy; And that there was a Paper printed by Mr. Gardner
which was as full of lies, as words, which did conclude them, and dishearten
their Witnesses, also that the Scots having tumbled their Records, could not
draw up an answer in so short a time.

(A. T.) In answer to the Town, it was humbly moved, their Honors would give
no longer time, by reason it was the day set, and agreed upon, that they of the
Corporation should plead, and that it was no new matter insisted upon, but what
was debated at that Board two years before, the Records and Judgment given
against Newcastle being in their Honors custody, and that they were as well able
to plead then, as at any other time, and if there were any new matter it should
be withdrawn, and was willing to join issue upon the former Judgment granted
two years before, at the same Board.

The Towns Agents altogether refused that, and hoped their Honors would not
insist upon the former Judgment, but to give them longer time, they not being
ready to plead to the said charge, nor came prepared upon the earnest
solicitation of the Towns Agents: The Committee told them, that if they would
deal clearly and heartily with them, as to give in writing under their hands
such an Answer to the charge as they would stand and fall by, then they would
give them their own time, if not, then they would record that fair motion, and
that they must plead by reason they appeared, and entered upon a plea, and their
work was very short, for all that they had to do, was to plead Guilty, or not
Guilty; if guilty, then to make it good by what Law they did such things as was
laid to their charge, (and if not guilty, then it was left to Mr. Gardner to
prove his Charge, (who indeed had proved all sufficiently) and therefore would
give no more day, what ever, then the 13 of December, and Mr. Gardner left free
to bring in what more he had to charge them with; Upon the 12 day of December,
the Parliament was dismissed.

But the Honorable Committee met in White Hall, and drew up another report,
and signed the same against the Corporation of Newcastle, and would have
presented the same to his Highness the Lord Protector.

But I conceived to give a Narrative was better, though it be large, yet such
things as are pertinent, might be sooner collected being put together, and more
satisfactory to all hands, then lying in several Courts distractedly, not
doubting, but thereby to reap the fruits according to my labor, I not in the
least dispairing, and am satisfied with the change, desiring God to go along
with him in all his Highness undertakes.

CHAP. XXIX. Depositions.
Ships upon Sands; Others sinking, others sunk; Boats, and Provisions cast
away, and people drowned, etc. and others cast into Prison for saving ships
from sinking. All done at Newcastle, by Order of those Magistrates, Mr. Fuller.
all Wreck being given them by Charter.



ANdronicus Andronicus or the unfort^^nate Polititio^^*
the Tyrant, and also an Heathen King, being overcome with a reluctance of
heart, seeing the miserable condition poor Merchants and Seamen were in after
Shipwreck, (and should receive so bad a reward from people, whom they came to
for help or shelter) by having their goods seized on, their throats cut, and no
relief afforded by those that got all the Sea had cast up for succor, they
never taking any pains for the same; made a law, whosoever took a bit of wreck
for their own use should be put to death, but that all should be preserved for
a time, or the worth, for the right Owner, and if not looked after by the
Owner, then for such, as were sufferers by shipwreck for the future, and the
people paid for their pains in saving of it. For which Law they were cannonized.

Let not Tyrants and Heathens outstrip us in Mercy and Justice. This Law we
want.

(A) Mary Hume* upon her Oath said, That all Ships and Boats, are compelled by
the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, to sail up the River to their
Ballast-shoars and Town, with all manner of victuals which are brought into
that River, and will not suffer any Market to be at Shields which is seven
miles from them, and twelve miles from any other Market Town in the same
County, and that they compel all people to their Markets. * By which means, the
has known many Ships and Boats cast away, in the said River by stormy weather.
(Read Stat. 27. Edw. 1. *) See Chap. 49. (B) *) Chap. 10. (S) 31. (A)

(B) She the said Mary further affirms, that she has known many people
drowned, and Boats cast away in stormy weather in that River, and provisions.
And that in or about the year 1650. one William Rea of Shields was drowned in
coming from Newcastle Market. Also a young Gentleman, son to Mr. Snape Minister
in Northumberland, was drowned in that River, both which, were found and buried
at Shields, but no Coroner * viewed their dead bodies, which she has heard
should have been done by Newcastles Coroner, being tied to it by Charter. See
chap. 10. (O, P) Also William Grays mother in Law, of North-shields, in going
to Ma^ke^ was cast away, etc. Mary Hume.

(C) J^hn Mallen Master of a Ship, upon his oath said, That the Mayor and
Burgesses of Newcastle, do deny to load any ships, nor suffer any others to
load them with Coals, who refuse to sail up that dangerous River seven miles to
cast out Ballast upon their shoars, which compulsions causes the loss of many
ships * and vessels in that River amongst Sands, Shelves, and sunk ships, it
being merely for the gain of eight pence per tun of Ballast. See chap. 31. (A,
B) 32. (B) *

(D) That he this Deponent was in company with one Mr. James Beats, of
Alborough, who was Master of a new ship, being compelled to sail up the River
to cast out his ballast upon their unlawful Ballast-shoars. And in returning to
Shields to take in her loading of Coals, in the middle of the River his ship
sunk, and none durst help to save her for fear of being imprisoned, as others
were for the like, nor to weigh her up again. See Chap. 30. (A)

(E) The Freemen came and required a greater sum * to weigh her up, then she
was worth; so the poor Master was forced to leave her upon small terms. But
soon after, they got her up, and set her to Sea for their own use, which the
said Master Beats might have done the like, if those of Newcastle would have
tolerated the Un-freemen to work, who were as well able to perform that
service. See Chap. 30. (F) 36. (A) * Stat. 2. Ed. 6. 15. *

All Wreck is given to them. See Chap. 10. 8.

John Mallen, Thomas Heislewood.


CHAP. XXX.
(A) THomas Gosnal Master, affirms, that the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle,
by compelling all ships up that dangerous River of Tyne seven miles, is the
cause of the loss of many ships; and that Mr. Cason lost his ship upon the
Bill-point which sunk, but by weighing her up again, it cost him near two
hundred and fifty pound. All which might have been saved, if ships could be
tolerated to cast Ballast at Shields. See Chap. 25. (B) Chap. 10. (S) 32. (C.
E.)

Thomas Gosnal.

(B) Edmund Tie of Ipswich, Senior, upon his Oath said, That being with his
ship laden with Coals, riding at Anchor at Shields with the Fleet of ships
ready to put forth to Sea, his ship sunk by a sad disaster to his undoing,
being most of it his own, and in the time of sinking, procured help to save
what goods he could, for relief of himself, and Seamen, who had saved to the
value of one hundred and fifty pound, and sent them on shore to Shields in the
County of Northumberland. * The Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle

(C) Sent down their Officers, and seized of all his goods, and sent them to
Newcastle, and carried him, this Deponent, to their Prison, and kept him above
six months, because his ship sunk. The Goods and Ship were worth about eleven
hundred and fifty pound, and would detain him in Prison till he did weigh up
the said ship, who had not wherewithal to relieve himself, Exodus 22. 21.
Notwithstanding they were certified so much under the Bailiffs hands and
Town-Seal of Ipswich, and had continued him longer, if he had not procured a
Habeas Corpus for his removal to London. See Chap. 25. (B) 10. (S) Stat. 3.
Edw. 1. 15. 34. 14. Rich. 2. 9. 23. Hen. 6. 10.

Edmund Tie.

(D) Thomas Heislewood of London, Master of a ship, upon his Oath said, having
taken in his ships loading of Coals in the River of Tyne, was putting forth to
Sea with the Fleet, but by a storm was cast a shore near Tinmouth-Bar, and in
great danger of their lives which were on board of the the said ship, and was
constrained to cast his Coals into the Sea, and thereby got his ship to
Shields, where she lay like a Wreck, the water having free passage in and out.

(E) He this Deponent got on shore, and repaired to one Collier a free
Carpenter of Newcastle, desiring him to mend his ship, and for hastes sake, he
would procure thirty or forty of his Neighbors, Masters of Ships Carpenters to
help him, but the said Free Carpenter replied, that he had taken an * Oath in
Newcastle with their Company, neither to work with any Unfree Carpenter, nor to
set any on work, by which means, he this Deponent was constrained to patch up
his ship with his single Carpenter, and adventure to London to get her upon the
stock, where he, and his company were in great hazard of their lives, and loss
of the ship. See Chap. 10. (S) See Stat. 19. Hen. 7. 7. (2 Edw. 6. 15. *)

Tho. Heislwood.

(F) Henry Harrison Master, upon his Oath said, that his ship was laden with
Corn, If all Masters should be thus tied to buy all things of them, judge of
the consequence.
coming in at Tinmouth-Bar, lost her Rudder or Steerer of his Ship; He this
Deponent desired another of a Freeman of Newcastle, who would not furnish him
under forty shillings, * but this Deponent got a good one of an Un-freeman, one
Thomas Cliffe of Shields Carpenter. See Chap. 29. E. 36. (A)

Henry Harrison.

CHAP. XXXI.
(A) MIchael Bonner of Newcastle, Merchant, and Water-Sergeant in Janu. 1649.
being examined upon Oath * at Gates-head by virtue of a Commission in a cause
depending in the Exchequer between the Mayor and Burgesses Complanants, and
Thomas Cliffe Defendant, said, That a ship called the Adventure of Ipswich
which was sunk in the year 1646. (Mr. Thomas Casen being Master) one other ship
called the Providence of London (Humphrey Harrison of London being Master,)
which sunck in the year 1649. One other ship called the Refuge of Ipswich,
sunck in October 1649. (Mr. Edmund Tie being Master.) Another ship called the
Henrietta Maria, sunck in the year 1644. All which ships were weighed out of
the River of Tyne, at the sole charge of the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle

Michael Bonner.

Some calls this Deposition Perjury, * but I refer it to the judgment of the
Reader that reads the following Deposition, which proves that most of the
abovesaid ships lie sunck, and did three years after the Deposition. See Stat.
5. Eliz. 9. *

(B) Cap. George. Phillips of London, upon his Oath said, That there lies
several ships sunck in the River of Tyne between Sparhawk and Heborn Steath,
namely the Adventure * of London; Humphrey Harrison of Sunderland late master,
sunck in, or about the year 1649. One other ship called the Refuge of Ipswich
sunck in October 1649. at Shields, (Edmund Tie the late master.) One other ship
called the Henrietta Maria sunck in the River, in, or about 1644. And one other
in the South Road, late belonging to Mr. Bulman. And also one other ship
belonging to a Scotch-man, lies sunck near unto the low Lights. And that the
chief cause of ships sinking in that River is, by being compelled by the Mayor
and Burgesses of Newcastle to sail up that dangerous River to cast Ballast upon
their unlawful Ballast shoars, for the gain of eight pence for every Tun so
cast out. George Phillips, and Tho. Hesilwood proves the like.

CHAP. XXXII.
(A) GAwen Pots affirms, That no strangers ship whatever, though she be in
never such great distress and sinking, must be pylotted into the River by any
other Seaman, then a Freeman of Newcastle: In the intrim one is sent for
(being sixteen miles forward and backward) often, either she is lost, or driven
by storm away.

Many others proved the like.
(B) Jeremiah Law, Master of a ship, upon his Oath, 1650. said, That the Mayor
and Burgesses of Newcastle, compelling all ships up the River to their
Ballast-shoars amongst the dangerous Sands* Shelves, and sunck ships, is the
cause of much harm and loss of many ships, and loss of many Voyages in the
year; besides loss to the State, and spoil of the River, it only being done
for the lucre of eight pence for every Tun of Ballast to some private persons,
which brings them in many thousands of pounds in the year, and that there are
many sunck ships in the River, between Sparhawk and Hebourn Steath. See Chap.
29. (C)

Jeremiah Low, Mr. Phillips, Mr. Hesilwood,
Prove the like.
(C) John Mallen Master of a ship, upon his Oath said, That by the Mayor and
Burgesses compelling ships up the River to their Ballast-shoars with their
Ballast, was the cause of Mr. Tie, and Mr. Worses two ships running on the
Sands near Jarrow, where they were both in great danger of being lost.

Mr. Yaxleys ship in a condition of sinking, but three unfree Carpenters being
ready, saved her, Mr. John Willy in the like condition.

Cap. George Phillips was fourteen days in getting up and down to Shields, by
which means much damage is done to their ships, and loss of several Voyages,
and Trade is obstructed.

Capt. George Phillips, Mr. Hesilwood, Mr. Cason, Mr. Mors, Mr. Yaxly, and Mr.
Willey,
Prove the like.
(D) Mr. Keeble, Master of a ship, proves, that himself, with many other
Masters of ships, namely Mr. Wright, etc. have made twelve Voyages in the year
when they cast Ballast at Shields within these twenty years, and doubts not but
by Gods blessing to make as many again, if the ships be allowed to cast Ballast
there, which may be done without hurt to the River, and more safety to ships,
and a great revenew to the public. Whereas now, being compelled up to
Newcastle shoars, which has spoiled the River, they cannot make above four,
five, or six Voyages in the year at most, which is many thousand pounds per
annum loss to the State in Custom.

Keeble.

(E) Henry Robinson upon his Oath said, That being compelled by the Mayor and
Burgesses up the River to their Ballast-shoars, his ship set upon a Sand, and
broke her K^elson, to his great damage, and loss of Voyage. And that Mr. Cason
his ship, set upon the point of the Bill, and overset, which cost him two
hundred and forty pound the recovering of her again, besides the loss of
Voyage.

Thomas Gosnal proves the like.

CHAP. XXXIII.
(A) THomas Cliffe upon his Oath said, That in April 1646 Arthur Lyme Master of
a ship, being in the River of Tyne, his ship in great distress and danger of
sinking, obtained the present help of three ship Carpenters which were ready at
hand to save his ship from sinking. And because they were not Freemen, the
Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, sent down several Carpenters belonging to
Newcastle, to force them from work, and carried them away to Prison, with the
said Master for setting them on work, no Trial at Law was had, or other
offense committed.

Tho. Cliffe.

CHAP. XXXIV.
(A) Bigs upon his Oath said, That all the ground * on both sides of the River
of Tyne to a full Sea-mark, is the right of the Town of Newcastle, and belongs
only to the Mayor and Burgesses, all the way from Sparhawk to Headwin streams.
And that he knows the same by reason he has seen often the Water-Sergeant of
Newcastle (by name Charles Mitford) Arrest men, both Masters and others. This
Deposition was taken in behalf of Newcastle at Gates-head in Jan. 1649. in the
suit between the Town and Cliffe, and remains in the Exchequer.

Bigs.

Some calls this also Perjury, but it is left to the judgment of the Reader in
reading the next Deposition. See Chap. 18. (D. F.) Stat. 5. Eliz. 9. *

(B) William Gibson of Newcastle Merchant, in Jan. 1649. at Gates-head upon his
Oath said, That the ground on both sides of the River of Tyne, from Sparhawk to
Headwin streams from a low water-mark, was not belonging to the Town, nor Mayor
and Burgesses of Newcastle, but to the respective Owners in each County
adjoining on the River. And that he knew the same by reason of former Trials,
and so adjudged. And that the Town had only the Arresting upon the water, but
not upon the land. See Chap. 20.

William Gibson.

(C) Thomas Horth of London Merchant upon his Oath said, That he had known the
River of Tyne above five and twenty years. And that by reason of the Mayor and
Burgesses of Newcastle, compelling all ships with Ballast, to sail up the River
seven miles to unload their Ballast, and out of Keels upon their own shoars, by
Ballast and other rubbish falling in, has spoiled three parts of the River, *
whereas within this twenty years, twenty ships of the burden of two hundred
Tuns a piece, could have rid a float in most Road-steads in that River. And now
not above four or five at a low water-mark, by reason they have so little
ground, that it is so over full and hilly with the Ballast, that the Winds and
Rains, every time does wash and blow great quantities off into the River; And
that in one night, the shore called the Bill-ballast Key, brake down, and at
least three thousand Tun of Ballast, sand, Gravel, and stones, fell down into
the River, * and they never knew any taken up, * neither will the Mayor and
Burgesses suffer the Owners of grounds adjoining to the River to a low water
mark, to build any Wharfs, Keys, or Ballast-shoars, though more convenient
then any are, and would serve for many years without any prejudice to the
River, to unlade all Ballast at; neither will they the said Owners, sell their
grounds to the said Magistrates to be inslaved, by which means the River is
spoiled. See Stat. 34. Hen. 8, 9. * 30. Ed. 1. See Chap. 12. (6) 14.) B.)

Thomas Horth, George Philips, and Tho. Hasilwood,
proves the like.
CHAP. XXXV.
(A) GEorge Philips Captain, Master of a ship of London upon his Oath said,
That the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle is the cause of hindering a Trade for
Coals, Salt, etc. the greatest part of the Winter season, to the great
impoverishing of the two Counties, Northumberland and Durbam, out of which all
Coals, Salt, etc. comes (none being to be had, nor ever was in Newcastle) by
reason the foresaid Mayor and Burgesses having the pre-emption, and will not
let the right Inheritors sell their own Coals to any Ships; (B) Nor suffer any
of the Owners to build Ballast-shoars upon their own land, except they will sell
it them. Many of which places near unto the Shields, is far more convenient
then any of those unlawful shoars belonging to themselves, at, or near
Newcastle in the highest part of the River, which has so much spoiled the said
River, especially a place called the Pace-sand, that it is the spoil of many
ships in sailing up and down to cast out Ballast, and to take in Coals. (C)
That it must be a good neap Tide, that there is above ten foot and a half at
high water. And most ships draw twelve foot. Also where there has lately been
ten foot at low water in a place called the Bill, there is not now above eight
foot, occasioned by the Sand and Ballast falling off the Towns Ballast-shoars.
(D) And that the River in the Winter is often frozen, below the Towns
Ballast-shoars, at the Bill (but never lower) That no ships can get up to
unlade their Ballast, and take in Coals, Salt, etc. All Salt being made at
Shields, where the River is never frozen, but all ships restrained from casting
Ballast there, though there be more convenient places, and would serve all
ships to cast their Ballast for above fourscore years without any hurt to the
River or shipping. (F) And cause them to make more Voyages in the year.

John Mors, Walter Keeble, James Shrive, Thomas Hesilwood, Rob. Swallow, Geo.
Hill, John Keeble, Henry Harrison.
And many other Masters of Ships, proves the like.
(B) Thomas Hosilwood of London, master of a ship upon his Oath said, That all
the Ballast-shoars above the Bill-reach, have been the spoil and ruin of the
River of Tyne, and does believe that if no care be taken speedily therein,
there will be no Navigable River, to the utter impoverishing of those Counties.
And a great prejudice of the whole Nation, the greatest part of Navigation in
that River being spoiled, as appears in most Road-steads in the said River of
Tyne, what with the ballast falling in, and ships sunck, that when as within
these twenty years, twenty ships of the burden of two hundred Tuns could have
rid afloat at low water. At St. Lawrence Road-stead, now not above three ships
of the same burden; At the Hands and Dents hole Road-steeds, where twenty
ships of the same burden, now not above eight can ride afloat. At St.
Anthonies, where twenty of the same burden, now, not above three can ride
afloat. At the Bill Road-stead, where twenty of the same burden might have
rid, now not above six. At the North Road-stead, where twenty ships of the same
burden could have rid a float, now not above four. And at the South Road-stead
where twelve ships of the same burden could have rid a float at low water, now
not above three can ride. (B) And that within these few years when ships did
cast ballast at Shields without the molestation of the Mayor and Burgesses,
ships made ten or twelve Voyages in the year, whereas now, they can make but
four or five Voyages. See Stat. 34. Hen. 8, 9. 23. Hen. 8. 5.

Tho. Hasilwood, Rob. Yaxley, Geo. Philips, Walter Keeble and Hen. Harrison,
with many more Masters of ships, prove the like.
CHAP. XXXVI.
A John Hall. B Ann Wallice. C Thomas Rutter, D Ann Cliff. E Free Carpenter. F
Cliffs man.



(A) HEnry Harrison Master of a ship upon his Oath said, that in April 1646. a
ship sailing into Tinmouth Haven, by storm was cast upon the rock near Tinmouth
Castle. The Master got a shore with all expedition, and obtained the present
help of an ancient Ship-Carpenter, by name Thomas Cliff of North-Shields with
three of his men to save the said ship from perishing, which ship had been
quite lost, if the said Master should have run to Newcastle to have agreed with
the free Carpenters, whose excessive Rates * and demands, often surmounts the
value of the ship in distress; and their tediousness in coming and going that
distance, that often the ships in distress are quite lost.

(B) The said Cliff and his men saved the ship and got her off, and brought her
to the lower end of the North Shields, and laid her upon the Sands to mend her.
Where the three Carpenters were at work. And Ann the wife of Thomas Cliff, and
Ann Wallice his Daughter standing (to see their Servants work) near unto the
ship.

(C) The Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle sent Thomas Rutter and John Hall, two
Sergeants, with Thomas Otway, Richard Tederick and other free Carpenters of
Newcastle to Sheilds, to seize upon all the aforesaid Workmen for daring to
save any ship from sinking in that River, with command to carry them to prison.

(D) The two women seeing their Servants trailing away, railed against their
evil practices, for which Thomas Rutter with a club, by several blows upon Ann
Cliffs body and head knocked her down to the ground; the other Sergeant John
Hall, by several blows with a Rule or Trunchion broke Ann Wallice her arm, and
then perceiving Soldiers coming from Tynmouth Castle, both the said Sergeants
fled to Newcastle, where they were protected from the hand of Justice.

(E) The said Ann Cliff was taken up, carried home, got to bed, and in few
weeks dyed * thereon. For which the said Rutter was indicted, and found by the
Jury guilty, yet did not suffer. The said woman required her friends, as they
would answer it at the last day, they should require her blood at the hands of
Rutter, he being her death. The poor men kept in prison *, and Cliff kept in
suit at Law for his working by Newcastle, and his men, and they forced to give
Bond never to work again. See Chap. 25. (B) 29 (E) 30. (F) 1 Edw. 6. 12. *.

Henry Harrison, Thomas Cliff, and Elianor Lounsdale,
all prove the like.
CHAP. XXXVII.
(A) THomas Salkield Gent. upon his Oath said, That he being at Shields in the
County of Northumberland, upon the Two and twentieth day of May, 1653. saw a
great number of men belonging to Newcastle, with Swords drawn, and Pistols
cockt, who environed a Gentleman, who was peaceably in his house, and shot at
some of the said Gentleman's servants, and beat his Wife, and much blood was
spilt, they pretending they came by Warrant, and produced a Warrant from the
Mayor, Mr. William Dawson, Mr. John Butler Sheriff of Newcastle, to take him
and carry him away to prison under pretense of debt; but the Seamen got
ashore, sell upon the said Newcastle-men, wounded and disarmed them, and
relieved the said Gentleman. See Stat. 2 Edw. 3. 3. 4. Ric. 2. 37. Hen. 6.

Tho. Salkield, Lettice Hume, Mary Hume,
and many others, prove the same.
(B) Thomas Salkeild, Gent. upon his oath said, he knew a Gentleman cast into
Newcastle Prison upon a bare Arrest in August 1652. And laid actions upwards of
Nine hundred pounds, where Twenty pound could not be recovered. And kept him
locked up in a prison from all comforts in a Tower above 36 foot high, being
forced to evacuate in the same Room he lay, and eat his meat, by reason he was
locked from the house of casement.

(C) He offered good Bayl, Freemen of Newcastle, who were accepted and entered
in the book, and two days after raced out again, and he still kept there. He
desired to be admitted to defend his own Cause in their Court, but they refused
it.

(D) Desired to go with a Keeper to Counsel, which was also denied: His Friends
and Servants often not admitted to come to him.

(E) Proffered good Bond to be a true Prisoner, to the end he might have the
benefit of the fresh Air, for preservation of his health, but at the Goalers
house, which the Sheriff granted at the first, but presently after refused,
saying, that the Mayor, Aldermen, and himself had a meeting, and resolved he
should have no liberty, being an enemy against their Privileges.

(G) The said Gentleman offered them that what any could recover against him by
Law, they should have it without Law.

(H) Constrained to drink the Goalors Beer, not fit for men's bodies.

(I) No Trial ever against him; They disobeyed two or three Habeas Corpusses,
which the Sheriff received, and his Fee, and was proffered to have their
charges born, but never returned them.

(K) Refused substantial Bond to appear at London before the Judges, And after
five months imprisonment, he brake prison in February following.

(L) And he further affirms, That upon the third of February 1652. one John
Cuthberison being imprisoned upon an action of 5 l. debt, but no trial ever had
against him for the same, was upon this Gentleman's getting away, cast into the
Dungeon by the Command of the Magistrates of Newcastle, where they laid setters
of iron upon him, to force a confession from him whether he did not help the
said Gentleman out; where he lay upon the cold earth, without either Bed,
Straw, or any other thing to keep him warm, or firing; And fed him only with
bread and water, and fused comfort able subsistence to be brought unto him.

(M) The poor man being not worth, in the whole world, forty shillings, and two
children a begging, and himself kept in prison after this impression, begging
for food.

(N) And that he was certainly informed, that some of the Officers of Newcastle
had counterfeited a Letter, and set the Gentleman's name to it, and read it to
the said Prisoner, thereby persuading him to confess he helped him out of
prison. See Stat. 23. Hen. 6. 10. 1 Edw. 1. 15. See chap. 41.

Thomas Salkeild.

Horns Mirror says, It is an abuse that prisoners be charged with irons
before they be attainted, Cap. 8. Sect. 1. 2 Edw. 3. 10. 1 Edw. 3. 10.

Bracton says, To lay a man in chains is against the Law, for a prison is to
keep, not to punish.

And it is commanded by the Law, that neither Felon nor Trespassor be punished
nor tormented in prison, fo. 11. 17.

Fleta says, It is lawful for Sheriffs to keep prisoners in prison, but not to
punish them, but keep them. etc. 33 Hen. 1. P. Inst. 54. See chap. 41. (A)

CHAP. XXXVIII.
(A) RAlph Tailor public Notary and Steward to the Carpenters of Newcastle,
upon his Oath at Gateshead in January 1649. said, That the Mayor and Burgesses
of Newcastle did sue *, imprison *, and fine * Robert Johnson, Alexander
Hearon, and William Portice of the Town of Gateshead, John Hubbert of
South-Shields, and John Readhead, only for working upon ships in the River of
Tyne, being Carpenters, and made them to pay their fines, imposed upon them by
the Mayor and Burgesses. See Stat. 2. Edw. 3. 6. 28. Edw. 3. 3 *. 9. Hen. 3. 29
*. 43. Eliz. 2 *.

Ralph Tailor, and Mich. Bonner
prove the like.
(B) Michael Bonner Merchant and Water-Sergeant of Newcastle, at the same time
upon his Oath said, That the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, arrested and
imprisoned, and set a fine upon one John Hardcastle a Carpenter, for working
upon a ship in the River of Tyne, he not being a Freeman of that Corporation,
and made him enter into a Bond of 100 l. in May 1648. never to work upon his
Trade again, and made him pay his fine.

Michael Bonner.

(C) John Hall upon his Oath said, That the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle
did arrest, Imprison, fined, sued, and forced Bonds from one Richard Tailor,
Henry Atcheson, and Robert Lambert, Smiths, whose Wives and Families inhabits
at North-Sheilds in the County of Northumberland, and Thomas Brocket, of
Gateshead in the County of Durham, Smith, for no other offense than for working
upon their lawful Trades where they dwell; Tailor and Brocket stood out suit;
Atcheson entered into Bond, never to work upon his Trade to the ships on the
River, and Lambert kept in prison till almost starved *, his Wife and six small
Children begging for food. See Stat. 9. Hen. 3: 29 *. 43 Eliz. 2.

John Hall.

(D) Ralph Bows of Newcastle late Burgess, but disfranchized, upon his Oath
said, In January. 1649. that formerly he had seen an ancient Writing belonging
to the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, purporting that it was unlawful for
any Tradesmen to work or live in any port adjoining to the River of Tyne, but
only at the Town aforesaid, and that the Mayor and Burgesses have had the
punishing of all such as did work. As also the correction thereof in that Port,
etc.

Ralph Bows.

It is pity this Gentleman is not restored to his freedom again for this his
great discovery. Surely this said writing was made by the Corporation
themselves, it was so conscienciously drawn, it having so little regard to the
Weal of the public.

CHAP. XXXIX.
D. The Mayor and Witnesses. C. The Master Swearing.

A. The Master cutting a Purse. B. The Clarks telling the money. To swear
against themselves. To be Imprisoned. To cut a Purse. To pay a Fine. Are four
punishments for one offense.



(A) THomas Hasilwood of London Master of a ship upon his Oath said, that all
Masters of ships, which sayleth into to the River of Tyne for Coals, Salt, etc.
The Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle compels them to * swear against
themselves, whether they did not cast ballast at Sea between Sowter and Hartly,
or within fourteen fathom water, to the hurt of the said River of Tyne. And
when the said Master has sworn the truth, that he did not, then a poor drunken
Fisherman, or other, is called into the Town-Chamber, and makes Oath that the
Master did cast ballast, when in truth he did not, he having part of the Fine
for the same.

( B) Then the Masters Oath is invalid and laid aside, * and forthwith is
commanded to pay a Fine of five pounds, or else to cut a purse, which hangs up
in the Town-Chamber, with sand and money in it, and so much as is therein, he
must pay, or is sent to prison, and there to lie till he does pay it. See Chapter
14. (F) * 12. 5. 17. K. Charles (19. Hen. 7. 7.)

Tho. Hasilwood, John Lockwood, and Sam. James
Masters of ships, proves the like. Read these Statutes.
(C) Thomas Bradford of Lyn affirms, that in, or about the year 1652. The Mayor
and Burgesses of Newcastle, compelled one Richard Nes^ing Master of a ship to
cut a Purse * hanging up in the Town Chamber with moneys in it, and paid money
for so doing. See Chap. 12. (5) Stat. 8. Eliz. 4. *

Tho. Bradford.

(D) In Spain if any person do inform against another, let the suggestion be
what it will, and the Information never so false, the party informed against,
is sent to prison, and there kept till he do confess that it is truth, and
thereupon is lead to the Stake and executed.

(E) The Heathen Kings, when they condemn a person to dye for any offense,
first sends him a pair of Scales, and a weight. If the Malefactor sends him so
much gold as the weight weighs, is saved, otherwise not.

(F) The Star Chamber practice was to put a man to his Oath to betray himself,
and confess as much as he pleased, and then other witnesses were brought in
against him, as that of the Lord Bucan, and the Warden of the Fleet upon a
complaint made against the Warden in the Star Chamber, etc. Stat. 17. Charol.

CHAP. XL.
(A) John Harrison of London upon his Oath said, That all Masters of ships
belonging to the Coal Trade at Newcastle, are compelled to swear how many Coals
and Chaldrons they have aboard their ships at Newcastle when they are laden,
which is impossible to swear, by reason they buy their Coals by weight; and
often the Masters occasions draws them aside, so are not then aboard when the
Coals are shipped, but trusts to his, or their Mates. And often the Coal-boat
has much water which weighs heavy. Also great store of Slates, and other
rubbish: And often the ships are laden in the night, so that this Oath is a
great vexation to their spirits, and disquieting thereof, and conceives that
never a time a Master swears but he is perjured, and often deceived by the
Keels-men in the Nails.

Cap. James Greenway,
proves the like.
( B) The Oath, Ex Officio. No man is bound by the Law of God, or Laws of the
Land of England to betray himself, In criminalibus, licet in contractibus, not
in criminal offenses, but in contracts and bargains, it may be whether he did
make the contract or bargain in question, but never used to a Malefactor, for
if Witnesses do not come in against him, he is cleared by Law, and not put to
his Oath to accuse himself.

(C) Many are constrained to take an Oath, De rebus Ignotis, to answer to they
know not to what, but Gods Command is, Swear not at all.

(D) Query, whether it be lawful for one to swear being forced?

(E) The answer, Magistrates may impose an Oath, with these three limitations;
First, If the thing be weighty. Secondly, If otherwise it cannot be known.
Thirdly, If it be not a snare to catch a man's self, or trick to make him accuse
himself. Secondly, Magistrates should be very wary how they enforce or
constrain men to swear, because they often thereby add fuel unto the fire of
Gods wrath, by making men forswear themselves; And therefore it were better to
loose the thing in question, than hazard the loss of a brothers soul, by
making him perjure himself. Paul would rather choose never to eat flesh, than to
offend his weak brother.

(G) If ye believe him when he swears, why not upon a solemn protestation? It
should be considered, whether such as is to be put to his oath, fears God; then
he dares no more lie than forswear himself: And if he fear not God, how will he
fear to forswear himself?

(H) The practice in Newcastle is worse, for notwithstanding a man is put to
his Oath against himself, it will not stand, but another is called in to swear
point blanck against what he had sworn.

CHAP. XLI.
(A) WIlliam Ling Master of a ship of Ipswich upon his Oath said, That Henry
True Love Master of a ship with himself, did cast their Ballast at Sheilds upon
a sufficient shore, without any harm to the River, for which (B) the Mayor and
Burgesses of Newcastle, arrested them both, and detained them, till they did
pay ten pounds fine for this offense, as they called it.

(C) He this Deponent, with Mr. True Love tendered sufficient Bail, Freemen *,
to answer the great Council, or the Common Law for any thing that they had
done. This they could not deny by their power. P. 17. N. 7. (D) But the Mayor
and Aldermen sharply reproved the Bonds-men for daring to offer themselves as
bail. And told to him this Deponent, and Mr. True Love, that for a great Council
there was none: And for the Common Law, that they had within themselves, and
needed not to yield to any other Court: And that to prison they should go, and
lie and rot, till they had paid the fine, P. 17. N. 7.

And then cast them both into their stinking Common Goal, where only a wall
parted them and such as had the plague, where they lay in that sad and
miserable condition in hazard of their lives. (G) and was forced to pay the
said ten pounds, and all charges, besides the loss of their Voyage, which
amounted to above 80 li. to their owners. (H) * There was no Trial at Law, nor
any other offense committed, but they could get no right, by reason they were
to have the fines, and being Judges, Jurors and Witnesses in their own Court,
and for their own benefits. See Stat. 11. R. 29 (A) See chapter 18. (C) 23. Hen. 6.
10. See chapter 37. (D) 28. Edw. 3. 3. (F) 1. Rich. 2. 13. 99. (G) 1. Ed. 3. 15. (C)

William Ling, and Henry True Love,
swears the like.
(B) Joseph Priestly, with John Walker the Minister of Jarrow, and twelve more
upon a Trial at Durham Assizes, between the Dean and Chapters Plaintiffs,
against Thomas Talbot, and Richard Allen, Gent. concerning the right of Jarrow
* Slike, which by verdict was given to the Defendants, upon their Oaths said,
That they knew Jarrow Slike by estimation Three hundred Acres, where a wall was
building to have it a Ballast-shoar for the good of Ships and River, 22 Feb.
1638. By Ling, and True Love. And that the Ballast which was cast thereon, was
cast without any prejudice to the River, and there lay safe and sad, and that
neither the wind could ever blow it off, nor the rain, nor waves could wash it
into the River. See chap. 34. (A. D.) *

Joseph Priestly, John Walker.

How long will ye give wrong Judgment, to accept the persons of the ungodly?
Psa. 82. 2.

CHAP. XLII.
(A) CAptain Robert Wyard of London upon his Oath said, That he with his ship
being in the River of Tyne at Newcastle, in November. 1649. where one of his
ships company (it seems) did cast two or three straw Mats out of one of his
ships Port-holes, yet to this Deponents unknowledge, which could do no harm to
the River, by reason of its swiming to Sea It could do no harm to the River,
other than endanger the choking of the fish.
, but one Edward Green, and one Wilkinson, two Freemen of Newcastle, standing
a quarter of a mile from the ship upon the Land, made Oath at Newcastle, That
this Deponent cast out ballast into the River, to the prejudice thereof.

(B) Whereupon the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle seized him, and fined him
twenty pounds Yet the 10 l. did not cleanse the river thereof.
for the same, and constrained him to pay ten pound of it, and ten pound to
Green, and eight pounds to Wilkinson, and twenty four pounds more the Suit cost
him, being fined by them, for saying they were forsworn, to say he cast ballast
into the River, when he neither did, nor was out of his Cabin when the Mats
were cast in. 1 Timothy 6. 10.


Robert Wyard.

(C) And further says, That the Mayor and Burgesses were Plaintiffs, Judges,
Jurors and Witnesses in this cause of their own fines. See chap. 11. (E) Stat.
5. Eliz. 9.

If these men be fined so high for so small an offense, and that igorantly?
what must those men that have offended arrogantly and knowingly a thousand
times more? Thomas Peach, Master of the Ann Speedwel of Ipswich, who by storm
was cast upon the Rocks near Tinmouth Castle, and for casting his ballast
overboard to save his ship, was fined by the Mayor and Burgesses.

Mr. James Talbot, for his men sweeping the Bins of his ship where there could
not lie above one shovel full of ballast, was fined five pounds, and laid it
down; some they took, and some they returned to him again.

CHAP. XLIII.
(A) NIcholas Pie of London Creup, upon his Oath said, That Mr. Thomas
Partridge of Gateshead Master, being loaded at Newcastle by Thomas Read,
Fitter, with bad and unmerchantable Coals, which he had sold for good Coals to
Mr. Clark of London, and M. O^ridge, M. Godfrey, M. Harrison, and others at the
rate of 31 l. the score, but proving so bad, that he was threatened to be sued
by the said Gentlemen that bought them, and was constrained to compound for the
same, and lost 6 li. in every score. And that he has known much bad Coals,
which the Freemen of Newcastle forces Masters of ships to take, to the great
loss on all hands:

Nicholas Pie.

Pray look into the tenth year of King James, what punishment has been for the
same formerly.

The said Thomas Read did give 20 li. as part of satisfaction to the said M.
Tho. Partridge the Master, and in consideration of his great wrong, etc.

(B) Captain Gregory Butler, Captain of a man of War for the Parliament, upon
his Oath said, That in April 1650. He this Deponent wanting some ballast for
his ships use, being at Shields, required a Master of a ship of Yarmouth, to
cast his Ballast into his ship for the States use, which the said Master did
with much care, and no prejudice to the River. (C) For which the Mayor and
Burgesses of Newcastle refused to suffer any Coals to be laid on board of his
ship, till he paid 5 li. fine for this contempt* and forced him to pay a fine,
and to pay eight pence for every Tun of ballast (besides) computing it to 48
Tun, and then, and not before, he could get any Coals See chap. 44.

Gregory B^^ler.

Thomas Partridge Master affirms, that Mr. Alderman Samuel Rawling forced him
to pay for 80 Tun^ of ballast, when he carried but 42 Tun. Every Freeman pays
six pence the Tun, and un-Freeman pays eight pence, there is no warrant to
demand any such sum.

T^omas Partridge.

(D) Richard Leaver of Ipswich, master of a ship upon his Oath said, That for
his casting out ballast at Shields upon a more convenient shore than any was at
Newcastle, and without any hurt to the River, went to Newcastle to the
Coal-Fitter to be laden, but could get none, by reason of a combination of the
Free Hoast-men who had made a new Ordinance * amongst themselves in the Free
Hoast-mens Court, that who should dare to sell a Coal to any such Master of a
ship, as did not cast ballast upon the Town shoars should forfeit twenty pound
a time.

(E) Upon which this Deponent waited above ten days and could not get Coals
for money, but at last prevailed with one of the Fitters of Coals at Newcastle
by promising him to save him harmless, and he would load him, which was done.
For which the said Mayor and Burgesses cast the said Fitter into prison, where
he lay till a Fine of five pound was paid for his ransom, with other Charges,
which he this Deponent was forced to pay, besides loss of his Voyage; This was
without any trial at Law, etc. (See 19. Hen. 7. 7. *) 28. Ed 3. 3.

Rich. Leaver.

CHAP. XLIV.
(A) RIch. Leaver of Ipswich Master of a ship, upon his Oath said, That for the
only gain and advantage of some Aldermen and a few other private persons of the
Town of Newcastle, no Masters of ships can be tolerated to cast Ballast in any
part, but at their Ballast-shoars, which is unlawful and very prejudicial to
the River and Trade. And must often pay for eighty Tun of Ballast * when indeed
there is but forty to be paid for. (B) And do hinder all Coals from being sold
to any ship which do cast Ballast at Shields upon as sufficient Shoars, and
better than the other, both for the good of the River, and less hurt to ships,
and more Voyages made in the year. (C) Also that the Mayor and Burgesses do
prohibit all the Coal-Owners in both Counties of Northumberland and Durham for
selling their own Coals, it tending to the said Owners utter undoing, and the
cause of many Voyages lost in the year, to the great prejudice of the poor, and
much loss to the State. (D) And that there is more convenient places to build
Ballast-shoars, which will last for hundreds of years without hurt to the
River, at, and near Shields, then where they are at present. See Chap. 43. See
the following Deposition.

Richard Leaver. Cap. Butler, Samuel James, Cap. Philips, and Jeremiah Low,
proves the like.
(E) Thomas Cartwright of Lyn Merchant, upon his Oath said, That by reason all
Coals are engrossed and sold by the Freemen, the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle only, tends to the great impoverishment of the Coal-owners of the
two Counties, where all the Coals are.

(F) Also that it is the cause of the high and excessive Rates of Coals at
London and Seacoasts, and loss to the Masters several Voyages in the year.

(G) And to the State likewise in customs of the three shillings per Chalder.

(H) And that he has known many ships denied to be laden with Coals, only for
casting ballast at Shields to their extraordinary loss, which is the cause of
Coals being sold the dearer, they staying so long for them.

(I) And that the said Mayor and Burgesses being the sole cause hereof, and
likewise engrosse all provisions coming in by Sea; and sets their own Rates
thereon, and takes excessive * Towl, one peck of every grain of Corn. See Stat.
22. Hen. 8. 8. *. See Chap. 44. (C) (A.)

Tho. Cartwright, Mr. Symonds, and Will. Reavely
proves the like.
1 The pre-emption of Tyn, Soap, Salt, Cards, etc. was adjudged grievous, and
why not Coals, which is of as great use, nay more, as appears by Ordinance of
Parliament, 1640. (A) also they were damned by the judgment of the sage Judges
in Sergeants-Inn upon a Conference then had before that Parliament began, as
being repugnant to the Law.

2 And why a Monopoly of Coals more upon the Owners, then on any thing else in
England? And more of them to be inslaved then any other people of England? I
appeal to God, the whole world, as also to the Coal-Engrossers themselves
whether it be just? etc.

CHAP. XLV.
(A) DEcember 1653. A Charge was exhibited to the Committee for Inspections,
and advance of Customs against Mr. George Dawson Collector of the Customs of
Newcastle, the Contents being as follows, viz.

( B) That the State has been, and is much wronged in their Customs in that
Port, by reason some of the said Customers, are Traders, Merchants, etc. And
many ships vexatiously troubled without just cause, only by reason they buy
not their Coals from them, and ordinarily give Coals for reparation
Custome-free. As also a second charge exhibited to the Commissioners of
Customs, not doubting but to receive Justice at either place, here follows the
Deposition, viz.

(C) Jonas Cudworth of Newcastle upon Tyne Draper, upon his Oath * in December
last, said, That Mr. George Dawson of Newcastle, Collector of the Customs in
the same Port, did exercise the Trade of a Free-Host-man Coal-Ingrossers.
in the year 1651. and employed for his Fitter one Tho. Read, who loaded
several vessels with Coals, and cleared them in the name of the said Mr. Dawson.

(D) And in the year aforesaid, one John Grip master of a Hoy belonging to
Hamborough, was laden with Coals by the said Thomas Read; and information being
by this Deponent to the Survey or of the said Port, by name Mr. Meriton, that
the said Grip had shipped a great quantity of Coals more then he had cleared
for, and paid the duty of Customs. The said Mr. Meriton had acquainted the
said George Dawson herewith. After which notwithstanding, information was made,
and seizure also should have been made. He the said George Dawson did admit of
a Post entry of a small quantity of the said Coals, and after Cocket granted,
and did not unload the said Vessel to discover the fraud and seize the same.

(E) This Deponent further said, That about the same time, the said George
Dawson did unload another Vessel belonging to Peter Hofman of Dantzick to his
great damage before any Cocket granted; and refused to let any Entry be made,
though offered before full loading. And for reparation thereof, he gave to the
said Master four Chalder of Coals custom free. And the said Master, George
Dawson, had, and has parts of ships, * and Trades over Sea with Coals. (See
Stat. 3. Hen. 7 7. *) 14. Rich. 2. 10.

Jonas Cudworth.

(F) These are humbly, to certify, That David Lindiman Master of a Ship called
the Fortune of Statin, did load his ship with Coals in the said Port of
Newcastle upon Tyne, and cleared in the Custom House for threescore and twelve
Chalder of Coals. And that Jonas Cudworth of this Town came and told me, That
the State was wronged of Custom for forty Chaldron of Coals in that ship, and
gave the names of the Masters of Keels or Boats that laid the Coals aboard, and
requested they might be sworn, which was done, and the Information found true.
The said Mr. Lindiman did pay for forty Chalder of Coals, more then he had
entered for in the Custom House, which Custom amounted to fifty and odd
pounds. All which I humbly conceive the State had been defrauded * of, if the
said Jonas Cudworth had not informed thereof. See Stat. 11. Hen. 6. 15.

Tho. Meriton Surveyor.

Newcastle upon Tyne 23. of March. 1643.

It is the old Proverb, Foul Birds bewrayes their own Nest.

If one ship could cheat the State so much as fifty odd pounds Custom, What do
hundreds of ships do? See chap. 46. (B.)

CHAP. XLVI.
(A) GEorge Philips of London Master and Captain of a ship upon his Oath said,
That for his casting Ballast at Shields upon as sufficient Ballast-shoars as
any can be, could not obtain his loading of Coals, for doing thereof, being
denied by the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, and lay five weeks for the
same, and at last obtained favor from one Major Tolburst, and Mr. Readnal, to
furnish him with Keels or Lighters, to fetch such Coals as he could procure.
And when he had loaded his ship, Mr. George Dawson Collector of the
Custom House, and * Officer of the Corporation of Newcastle, sometimes Mayor,
Alderman, Justice of Peace, and Merchant, and Mr. George Blackstone Cheque of
the Custom House, issued out a Warrant under the Town-Seal and
Custome-house-Seal, to seize his Ship and Coals upon the 19. of April 1651.
which Warrant is extant amongst the Records at White Hall. See Stat. 3. Hen. 7.
7. * 11. Hen. 6. 15.

George Philips.

(B) Coals the Chalder at Newcastle, does cost the Masters of ships ten
shillings the Chalder Newcastle measure, and one shilling custom, ordained by
Queen Elizabeth.

For all Coals carried beyond Sea by any English man, pays by the Chalder for
Coals and Custom, eleven shillings four pence, as by an Act of Parliament of
the 28. of March, 1651. appears.

For all Coals carried by any stranger, pays the Chalder double, being for
custom per Chalder, two and twenty shillings eight pence, and Argiere duties,
etc. in all six and twenty shillings and ten pence custom, besides the price
of Coals and Fraught.

For all Coals at the Market in every Port two shillings per Chalder Excise
toward building of Frigots.

And for all Coals sold by the Tun one shilling per Tun. And for all Scotch
Coals two shillings six pence per Tun.

( C) And yet notwithstanding these Impositions, Coals might be sold for twenty
shillings the Chalder all the year long at London, with greater gain to the
Masters and Seamen, if Ballast-shoars, were at, or near the Shields.

(D) Provisions for the relief of the multitude of shipping above nine hundred
sail, and the Inhabitants there.

(E) Coals to be bought from the first hand, then there might be as many more
Voyages in the year, as now they make.

(F) The Masters of ships desires only their due measure, and then they would
not regard the odd Chalder given to the score; All which they are debarred of
most unjustly, for commonly where ships takes in at Newcastle one hundred
thirty six Chalder of Coals, and expects to make at London two hundred and
seventeen, or else loses, besides having bad coals a long Voyage, there are
computed three hundred and twenty Coal Keels alias Lighters, and every Keel
accounts to have carried every year eight hundred Chalder of coals to ships,
then judge how many thousand London. Chalder is carried away. See Chap. 23.

John Wrenham, Robert Re^x.


CHAP. XLVII.
People robbed in the open Market, and others, only passing through Newcastle.

A, C, E. Three Newcastle-men. B. Isabel Orde. D. John Williamson.



(A) ELizabeth Lumsdel, upon her Oath says, That one John Williamsons wife and
servants, having bought forty pounds worth of Tobacco (who dwelt at Braughton
in the County of Cumberland) which said Tobacco, all duties of Excise, Custom
or Toul were paid, and carrying the same through Newcastle toward
Carliste-Market, one Mr. Huntley, and Mr. Stranguage Merchants, made * a
seizure of the said Tobacco and Horses, by order from the Magistrates,
pretending it were Foreign bought, and Foreign sold, * and therefore confiscate
to their use. The poor people petitioned Sir Arthur Heisterigge for the same,
who interceded hard with them for the restoration thereof, but it was refused,
yet they fearing Sir Arthurs displeasure, sold the Tobacco for thirty pound,
and restored to the poor Owner but fifteen pounds thereof.

(B) This Deponent further affirms upon her Oath, that about the same time one
Isabel, wife to Henry Orde sitting in open Market selling a role of Tobacco,
who had paid all duties, the said Mr. Huntley, and Mr. Stranguage made *
seizure by strong hand of the said Tobacco from the poor woman, and would not
acquaint them with the reason, whereupon in passion she called them Robbing
Rascals, for which they sued her poor husband in their own Court, and put him
to great expenses; she this Deponent, with the said Isabel, hard petitioned
Judge Thorp for her Tobacco, who sent for the two Merchants, and demanded the
reason of their taking away the poor woman's Tobacco in the open Market, who
produced a Warrant from the Mayor, who likewise was sent for, by name Mr.
William Dawson, the Judge demanded of him, by what power he durst rob people in
the Market, who replied, Foreign bought, and Foreign sold, My Lord; but command
was given by the said Judge to restore the same, but after departure it was
not; then the Judge granted a Warrant for restoring the same upon his going
away, and when it was showed the Mayor, he snatched it, and put it up into his
pocket, and would not restore the said Tobacco* but slighted the said Warrant.
See Stat. * 3. Ed. 1. 24. ^1. Ric. 2. 7, 27. Ed. 1. 5. 6. Ed. 6. 9. See chap.
49. 51.

Eliz. Lumsdel.

CHAP. XLVIII.
(A) LEttice Hume, upon her Oath said, That no victual or other provisions
coming in by Sea for the relief of Northumberland or County of Durham is
permitted to be sold at Shields, but all is compelled to Newcastle by the
Magistrates, and there engrossed after three Market days, Tuesday, Saturday,
and Tuesday, and pays double Tole, * in and out, and pays double rates for the
same, and that she has often known Boats, and Provisions cast away, and
peoples lives in going and returning from Shields to Newcastle in stormy
weather too and from the Market, namely, one William Re^, with others in the
year 1650. at the same time, and before, nor never any Coronor sat upon any of
the dead bodies, nor young Mr. Snape, etc. And that greater Rates are given for
provisions being bought up by the Townsmen, then might be had at the first
hand. See chap. 11. (H) 44. (I) 49. (C) * Stat. 3. Ed. 1, 20. 23. Ed. 3. 6. *

Mary Hume, Lettice Hume
proves the like.
(B) Mr. Richard Blewet, brother to Commissary Blewet affirms, that in, or
about the year 1649. Rye was at sixteen shillings the Bowl in Newcastle, none
to be got for the poor, but from the Merchant who had bought it all up, that
the poor being in great want, Sir Arthur Haslerigge caused the said Commissary
to lay out a thousand pounds of the public stock upon Rye, from the first
ships that came, and to sell it for the relief of the poor, four shillings
under the Market, which was done.

(B) The Merchants of Newcastle, proffered to his said brother, the Market
price for all the corn he had bought, which was sixteen shillings the Bowl,
when they saw the said Commissary sell for eleven shillings per Bowl to the
poor, and the Commissary was a great gainer at eleven shillings, and paid as
much as the merchant.

( C) And by reason the said Commissary did refuse, some of them threatened, if
ten thousand pounds would break his back in suit for daring to sell Corn in
their Town, he not being a Freeman, it should. This Information I had from Mr.
Blewet, who will make it good upon his Oath, when called, and from Mr. Nich.
Ogle. They will neither do good, nor suffer good to be done; much like the Dog
in a Manger. See Stat. 5. 6. Edw. 6. 14. 23. Edw. 3. 6. 2. Edw. 6. 15. 5. Eliz.
12.

CHAP. XLIX.
(A) WIlliam Reavely of Lyn, Master of a ship upon his Oath said, That by
reason of the ships not casting ballast at Shields, above four if not five
Voyages are lost in the year complete.

(B) That all provisions brought in by Sea, are compelled up to Newcastle; and
there engrossed into the Free-mens hands, people often going to Market have
lost their lives; and many starved to death in the two Counties, which cannot
get to Newcastle market in the Winter season, by reason of the great storms of
snows, and the River frozen, and no market allowed for the Countries relief at
Shields, where many thousand of Passengers, Seamen, and Inhabitants are, being
twelve miles from any market in the fame County.

(C) That he this Deponent, and ships company, has often been constrained to
go to Sea without Bread or Beer, none being to be got at Shields on a sudden,
and have drunk water for above five days, which has so weakened his men, that
they were in great danger of their lives. And that from Newcastle, they often
send down dead Beer, and the Casks but half or three parts full, from the
Brewers of the said Town; and bread wanting above two pence weight in the
shilling, and not looked after by the Magistrates.

(D) That they the said Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle aforesaid, did ruin
one Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Hilton for brewing at Shields for the relief of the
ships. And that they rooked from him this Deponent twelve barrels of beer,
which he brought from Lyn for the relief of the poor at Shields, and made it
confiscate; Arrested him, and cast him into prison, sued him, and made him
enter into sixty pound bond never to bring in any more. Also kept a bag of Hops
which was sent to a friend in Northumberland, and that he has known them often
do the like to others, they being Judges, Jurors, and Witnesses in their own
cause.

(E) That they take excessive Tole *, above a peck of Corn of every Grain
brought to be sold by vessels, besides all other duties.

(F) That the said Magistrates force men to swear against themselves *, and
will not tolerate any Gentleman to build ballast-Shoars upon their own land.

(G) And that he this Deponent has seen ballast Warrants signed by one of the
Magistrates *, only for Keels to carry up ballast from Shields, and has seen
the Keel-men cast it into the River in the South Road, to the Rivers great
damages * And often dirt cast into the River by servants brought out of the
Gates when no watchmen were kept. See chapter 39. (A) 12. 4, 14. (C) 47. (B) 51.
See Sta. 27. Ed. 1. * 51. Hen. 3. 15 *. 11. Hen. 7. 4 *. 5. 6. Ed. 6. 9 *. 3.
Ed. 1. 20 *. 17. K. Char. *

William Reavely.

(G) Hugh Farrow of Lyn, Master of a ship upon his Oath said, that he and his
ships company having lain so long at Shields for a fair wind with the fleet,
that when they had spent all their provisions, at no time could obtain any from
Shields, by reason obstructed by the Magistrates. And having sent up his boat
and some of his men for some at Newcastle, the wind came fair, and on a sudden
the ships all set sail to Sea; So that he this Deponent must loose the
protection of the fleet, and hazard himself to the mercy of the Enemy, or must
leave his men and boat behind, which the latter he did, and was constrained to
drink stinking water for four days, for want of Beer, which might be
conveniently got at Shields. And he was in greater danger of loosing his ship
for want of his men.

Hen. Farrow.

CHAP. L.
(A) IO: Gardener of London upon her Oath said, That within this seven and
twenty years or thereabouts, she knew the usual practice of the Mayor and
Burgesses of Newcastle, was to ingross all provisions into their hands, as
Corn, etc. and have kept it * in their Corn-Lofts till so dear, and at such
high and excessive Rates that most people could not buy it. And that the people
of Northumberland, and County of Durham, being in great want for bread, that
many were constrained to let their beasts blood, and made Cakes thereof to eat
instead of bread, and in the Spring time many of those beasts dyed being
over-blooded.

(B) Other poor people killed their Coal-horses for food, some eating D^gs, and
Cats, and starved: Many starved to death *, sixteen or seventeen dead in a hole
together; and yet at the same time many hundred bowls of Corn cast into the
River being * rotten, and moldy, and eaten with Rats; And some of those people
boasting, they hoped to see the day a bowl of Corns price should buy a silk
Gown. This was not in the time of War. And the Countries might have had plenty,
if it had not been engrossed by them. See Stat. 5. Eliz 12. * 23. Ed. 3 6 *.

Jo. Garnerer. Major Will. Burton late Member of Parliament, Tho. Hesilwood, and
Will Reavely,
proves the like.
(B) Richard Tailor upon his Oath said, that the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle do compel all Iron and other necessaries, which comes in by Sea for
the Salt-pans and Colliers use, at and near Shields to be carried up to
Newcastle, and unladen upon their Town-Key at the charge of the owner, and to
pay Toule, and the same vessels forced to sail back to Shields empty, and often
such vessels sinks by the way; and their own vessels must be hired at their own
rates to carry it back again to Shields, being some times fourteen days in
getting down thither, though present use be for the same, and diverse times cast
away. So that ships utterly refuse to bring such Commodities, to be put to such
unnecessary and needless trouble and charge; And this is done constantly,
notwithstanding all duties are paid. And the ship or vessel comes only for
Salt at Shields where it is made, and not to Newcastle, where they have no
business, See Sta. 21. Hen. 8. 18.

Rich. Tailor. Will. Reavely.


(C) It were less damage to the Commonwealth for allowing Seamen for their
encouragements 5 l. Custom-free of goods, then thus to be abused by mere
pretenses of l^ss of Custom, especially by such who wrongs the Customs. See chapter
45. (F)

CHAP. LI.
(A) ALexander Symonds of Lin Merchant, upon his Oath said, that all
Commodities, as well dead vict^all, as other Merchandise are compelled up to
Newcastle which comes in by Sea; And there, by the Mayor and Burgesses, are
engrossed and bought up by them; nothing to be landed elsewhere but at
Newcastle, notwithstanding all ships do lie at Shields, and passengers; And
often in stormy weather, and River frozen, none can pass too and fro for any
relief from thence, and none to be had elsewhere. And if there be any it is
seized on by them of Newcastle, and confiscate to their own use. Namely Beer
from one Will. Reavely and diverse others, See chap. 11. (N) 47. (A) 49. (D) 50.
(A)

Alexander Symonds, and Thomas Cartwright,
depose the like.
(B) Captain James Greenaway of London affirms, that his ship was at Shields,
in company with a fleet of laden ships, where they all had lain a long time
for a fair wind, and had often spent their provisions. On a sudden the wind
came fair, and the whole fleet set sail for London. He this Deponent having
spent all his Bread, could get but two dozen at both Shields, yet was
necessitated to set to Sea with the Fleet, otherwise had lost their protection,
if staid till he sent to Newcastle for bread.

(B) The whole fleet being at Sea, the wind came cross, being a violent storm,
that it was five days before they could get so high as Scarborough, some
twenty leagues from Newcastle, and then the storm ceased: And he this Deponent
got ashore to Scarborough for bread, when the wind coming fair the fleet sailed
out of sight, so he lost their protection and company. (G) He getting aboard,
and sailing after them, was taken by a Dunkirk man of war, lost his ship,
goods, and money; his ^hip being worth 800 l. goods 200 l. and money 400 l. All
which might have been saved, if Bread, Beer and Provisions had been admitted to
be sold at Shields. Only are hindered by the tyrannical Power of the Mayor
and Burgesses of Newcastle.

James Greenaway.

(H) John H^ulden, upon his Oath said, That in or about the year 1648. A Master
of a ship was arrested and imprisoned only for selling of a little Corn to
Commissary West, by the Mayor of Newcastle, he alleging the Town was not
served. But Sir Ar^bur Hazlerigge caused the Mayor to release the said Master;
and demanded by what Power, Law, or Right they ought to imprison any man for
selling his own commodity in the Market or Key; And told Mr. Ledger then Mayor,
if he did not release him the Soldiers should.

John Holden.

CHAP. LIII.
Many poor women imprisoned, and hanged for Witches.

A. Hangman. B. Belman. C. Two Sergeants. D. Witchfinder taking his money for
his work.



(A) IOh. Wheeler of London, upon his Oath said, that in or about the years
1649. and 1650. being at Newcastle, heard that the Magistrates had sent two of
their Sergeants, namely Thomas S^evel, and Cuthbert Nicholson into Scotland to
agree with a Scotch-man, who pretended knowledge to find out Witches by
pricking them with pins, to come to Newcastle where he should try such who
should be brought to him, and to have twenty shillings a piece for all he could
condemn as Witches, and free passage thither and back again.

(B) When the Sergeants had brought the said Witchfinder on horseback to Town;
the Magistrates sent their Bell-man through the Town, ringing his Bell, and
crying, All people that would bring in any complaint against any woman for a
Witch, they should be sent for and tried by the person appointed.

(C) Thirty women were brought into the Town Hall, and stripped, and then openly
had pins thrust into their bodies, and most of them was found guilty *, near
twenty seven of them by him and set aside.

(D) The said reputed Witch-finder acquainted Lieutenant Colonel Hobson that he
knew women, whether they were Witches or no by their looks, and when the said
person was searching of a personable, and good like woman, the said Colonel
replied and said, surely this woman is none, and need not be tried, but the
Scotch-man said she was, for the Town said she was, and therefore he would try
her; and presently in sight of all the people laid her body naked to the Waste,
with her clothes over her head, by which fright and shame, all her blood
contracted into one part of her body, and then he ran a pin into her Thigh, and
then suddenly let her coats fall, and then demanded whether she had nothing of
his in her body but did not bleed, but she being amazed replied little, then he
put his hand up her coa^s, and pulled out the pin and set her aside as a guilty
person, and child of the Devil, and fell to try others whom he made guilty.

(E) Lieutenant Colonel Hobson perceiving the alteration of the foresaid woman,
by her blood settling in her right parts, caused that woman to be brought
again, and her clothes pulled up to her Thigh, and required the Scot to run
the pin into the same place, and then it gushed out of blood, and the said Scot
cleared her, and said she was not a child of the Devil.

(F) So soon as he had done, and received his wages, he went into
Northumberland to try women there, where he got of some three pound a piece.
But Henry Ogle Esquire a late Member of Parliament laid hold on him, and required
Bond of him to answer the Sessions, but he got away for Scotland, and it was
conceived if he had staid he would have made most of the women in the North
Witches, for money.

(G) The names of the prisoners that were to be executed, being kept in prison
till the Assizes, and then condemned by the Jury being Burgesses were, Matthew
Bulmer, Eliz. Anderson, Jane Hunter, Mary Pots, Alice Hume, Elianor Rogerson,
Margaret Muffet, Margaret Maddison, Eliz. Brown, Margaret Brown, Jane Copeland,
Ann Watson, Elianor Henderson, Elizabeth Dobson, and Katherine Coultor. These
poor souls never confessed any thing, but pleaded innocence; And one of them by
name Margaret Brown beseeched God that some remarkable sign might be seen at
the time of their execution, to evidence their innocence, and as soon as ever
she was turned off the Ladder, her blood gushed out upon the people to
admiration of the beholders.

John Wheeler, Elianor Lumsdel, and Bartholomew H^dshon,
proves the like.
(H) The said Witch-finder was laid hold on in Scotland, cast into prison,
indicted, arraigned and condemned for such like villainy exercised in Scotland.
And upon the Gallows he confessed he had been the death of above two hundred
and twenty women in England and Scotland, for the gain of twenty shillings a
piece, and beseeched forgiveness. And was executed.

(I) The Judgment nor Execution is not in question, nor questioned, being
ordinary; But only it being desired to know by what Law the Magistrates of
Newcastle could send into another Nation for a mercinary person to try women
for Witches, and a Bell-man to cry for them to be brought in, and twenty
shillings a piece given him to condemn them?

(K) Queery, and by what Law men are hired to give evidence to take away
peoples lives, and the convicted estates to come to the Jurors, being
extraordinary?

The Lord Protector, commands all Judges, Justices and Witnesses to appear to
execute Justice, and give evidence gratis.

Queen Elizabeth by her Charter grants to the Mayor and Burgesses, all fines
and fellons goods in that Town and Liberties, Zech. 11. 5. See chap. 58. (C. D.)

CHAP. LV.
A. Robert Sharp. B. A^^ Biulestone.



(A) John Wil^is of Ipswich upon his Oath said, that he this Deponent was in
Newcastle six months ago, and there he saw one Ann Biulestone drove through the
streets by an Officer of the same Corporation, holding a rope in his hand, the
other end fastened to an Engine called the Branks, which is like a Crown, it
being of Iron, which was musled * over the head and face, with a great gap or
tongue of Iron forced into her mouth, which forced the blood out. And that is
the punishment which the Magistrates do inflict upon chiding, and scoulding
women, and that he has often seen the like done to others.

(B) He this Deponent further affirms, that he has seen men drove up and down
the streets, with a great Tub or Barrel opened in the sides with a hole in one
end, to put through their heads, and so cover their shoulders and bodies down
to the small of their legs, and then close the same called the new fashioned
Cloak, and so make them march to the view of all beholders; and this is their
punishment for Drunkards, or the like.

(C) This Deponent further testifies, that the Merchants and Shoe-makers of the
said Corporation, will not take any Apprentice under ten years servitude, and
knows many bound for the same term, and cannot obtain freedom without. 5.
Eliz. 4.

These are such practices as are not granted by their Charter Law, and are
repugnant to the known Laws of England.

(D) Drunkards are to pay a Fine of five shillings to the poor, to be paid
within one week, or be set in the Stocks six hours, for the second offense, to
be bound to the Good B^haviour, 1 K. James 9. 21. 7.

(E) Scoulds are to be Duckt over head and ears into the water in a
Ducking-stool.

(F) And Apprentices are to serve but seven years 5. Eliz. 4.

I was certainly informed by persons of worth, that the punishments above, are
but gentle admonitions to what they knew was acted by two Magistrates of
Newcastle, one for killing a poor Workman of his own, and being questioned for
it, and condemned, compounded with King James for it, paying to a Scotch Lord
his weight in gold and silver, every seven years or thereabouts, etc. The other
Magistrate found a poor man cutting a few horse-sticks in his Wood, for which
offense, he bound him to a tree, and whipped him to death, related by William
Wall Vintner in Gates-side, Tho. Watson Scrivenor on Sandhill, and Ralph Watson
late Minister in Northumberland.

CHAP. LVI.
(A) FIve and twenty years ago, upon the Trial with the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle, and Sir Robert * Heath the judgment of the most ancient and
experienced Masters of the Trinity-House in London, were required in answer to
the Town of Newcastles objections, as is upon Record in the Trinity-House.

(B) Newcastles says, if Ballast-shoars be suffered to be built at, or near
the Shields * it would hinder the Towns Trade, and ^ndanger the River of Tyne.
Neither can any Ballast-shoars be built at Shields below a full Sea-mark, or in
any part of the River by any but Newcastle, by reason all that ground to a full
Sea-mark on both sides the River, is the Towns by Charter from Sparhawk to
Headwin streams, fourteen miles in length. See chap. 20. (A) 19 (E. G)

(C) Answer, to the first, it will not hinder the Town of Trade, but advantage
the whole Nation, especially that Town, by reason double Trade will be drove
thereby, and cause Coals to be cheaper at half Rates then now they are at, and
the River better preserved.

(D) Secondly, it will better the River, for Inning of void and waste grounds
and flats in Rivers causes the streams to be more strong, and run more swift,
which thereby will soowr and cleanse the channel, and consequently gain more
water to the River, preserve the banks from falling into it, help Navigation,
for the deeper the water, the more Navigable, the less danger, and more safety
for ships. See chap. 19. (H) *

(E) It is also answered by others, if the ground to a full Sea-mark be theirs;
then why should they proffer to King Charles * two hundred pound for
Jarrow-slike, 1637. All which the water covers, and is within a full Sea-mark.
See 20. chap. (C. D.)

(F) Also why should Thomas Bonner the Alderman, buy Sir Henry Gibs his
Ballast-shoar to a low water-mark at Jarrow for his use from the Town (were it
theirs before?)

(G) And why should Mr. Gibson * swear none of that ground which they claim to
a full Sea-mark is theirs? See 34. chap. (B.)

(H) In the Treasury at Westminister those ancient Records, will quickly decide
the controversy, making it appear, that the one third part of the River on the
South Side belongs to the Gentry of the Country of Durham, and all grounds to a
low water-mark; and the like on the Northside to the Gentry of Northumberland,
and the other third part free for ships and vessels to sail too and fro, for
the relief of the Inhabitants. See Chap. 34. (A) (*) (B) See Chap. 4. (*)

(I) It is too much, that the Corporation should be Lords of both the Sea, and
all the Land. And it is too little, the Commoners in both Counties, should have
neither Sea nor Land, being born to all alike.

A quo Warranto would know by what power they claim one shilling for every
Ballast Bill, one shilling for every Salt Bill, three pence for every Chalder
of Coals, two pence for every weigh of Salt, and eight pence the Tun for all
Ballast, and I am confidently persuaded (K) would void them all, for they are
neither customary, nor warrantable by Law, (so unlawful;) as for other duties,
as Tunage and Poundage, Customs, Lightage, otherwise called Beaconage, Boyage,
for maintaining of Peers, and Ancoridge with Tole, it will hardly be
questioned, except abused, let them complain that are agrieved etc. See Stat.
30. Edw. 1. 1301.

Instead of a Mayor in that, and such like Corporations, a King Cattelus spirit
to govern, were better, who hanged up all oppressors of the poor, for an
example, whereby he reigned twenty years in peace: Also a Lud, who made good
Laws, and took away all usages that were bad, and reigned long in peace and
plenty.

CHAP. LIVE. His Excellency, O liver Cromwell, General of all the Forces of
England Scotland, and Ireland, Chancelour of the University of Oxford, Lord
Protector of England. Scotland and Ireland.

RG. fecit. Peter Stent Ex^: 1653.

An Act for a Free-Trade in the River of Tyne for Coals, Salt, etc.
(A) WHereas Trade and Commerce is become now more than formerly the interest
of this Nation; And it is therefore the duty, as well as the wisdom of this
Parliament, to secure and advance the same: And in order thereunto, and for
other great ends of Honor and Safety to increase the Shipping, and encourage
Navigation. And And whereas a great part of the Stock, and wealth of this
Nation lies in the well husbanding and managing of those home Commodities of
Coals and Salt, Milstones, Glass, the chief trade whereof is exercised upon
the River of Tyne. And in the County of Northumberland and Durham.

(B) And whereas the Parliament has been informed of great exorbitances done
and committed, by the Town and Corporation of Newcastle upon pretense and
color of Powers, Privileges, and Franchises granted to the said Corporation,
whereby it appears, (C) That the free and quick trade of those Staple
Commodities, has been much obstructed, the River made dangerous, and in many
places almost Un-navigable, and increase of shipping, so considerable a Nurcery
of Martiners greatly ruined, and Navigation too much discouraged; for remedy
herein.

(D) Be it Enacted, Declared, and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by
the Authority thereof, That all former Powers, Privileges, and Grants made,
and granted to the Town and Corporation of Newcastle, or to any other person or
persons whatsoever for the conservancy of the River of Tyne, be, and are hereby
repealed, made void, and null, and the Committee of the Admiralty by Authority
of Parliament, or any five of them, be, and are hereby Authorized and required
to nominate and appoint fit and able persons, as well of the Counties of
Northumberland and Durham, Seacoast, and Port of London, as of the Town and
Corporation of Newcastle, to have the charge of, and to be Conservators of the
River of Tyne, and to invest, and empower the said persons, with all
privileges and power necessary, to enable them for the better, and more
effectual carrying on, and performance of the said service.

(E) And the said Commissioners are hereby further Empowered, and Enable from
time to time, to give, and prescribe unto the said Conservators, Rules, and
Instructions for to observe and pursue, and to require obedience thereunto, and
to receive and examine complaints, and to hear Witnesses upon Oath (which Oath
they the Commissioners or any three of them are hereby enabled to administer)
and to punish offenders by reasonable fine, and punishment by imprisonment, and
to displace, and to remove Conservators upon just and reasonable cause, and to
lessen, or add to their number as they shall see cause, and to direct and
order all other matters requisite, and necessary for the conservancy of so
famous and commodious a River, and for preventing of all such damages,
mischiefs, and newsances as may hurt or ruin the same, and to settle a stipend
upon the said Conservators, and to direct the same, and other necessaries, and
incident charges to be allowed, and issue out of the profits of the said River.

(F) And be it further Enacted and Ordained that sufficient and well fenced
Ballast shoars, Keys, and Steaths be built and erected either at Shields, or
such other convenient place, as the said Conservators, or the major part of
them shall think fitting; And the said Conservators are Authorized and required
to use and direct all good ways and means according to such powers and
directions as they shall from time to time receive from the said Commissioners
of the Admiralty to prevent and remedy all damages that may happen by loss of
ships, and men's lives at Sea, by casting their Ballast overboard, or into the
River, at unseasonable times, or unfitting places, or from the Ballast-shoars,
being carelessly kept through great winds, rains, or other casualties washing
down the Ballast, and that from henceforth, no Masters of any ships, or other
vessels, be constrained to go up the River, and to heave out their Ballast at
the shoars belonging to the Town of Newcastle, or be hindered to load Coals, or
discharge their Ballast, where they may with most convenience and safety
perform it, as well to the Roadsteads it self, as to their shipping.

(G) And further, that all Masters of ships, trading to the said River of Tyne,
have hereby liberty and power to make use within the said River of what
Ship-Carpenter, or Ship-Wright, or other Artificers or persons they please, and
find fittest for their own convenience in times of distress and necessity.

(H) And of what able Seamen they shall think fit for Pilots.

(I) And have hereby liberty to buy, or take in at any place of the said Port
of River, Bread, and Beer, and other necessaries for their own spending and
victualling.

(K) And that all Goods and Provisions which come in by Sea, for the use of the
Salt-works, Colleries, and other buildings, at, or near the Shields, may be
delivered at the Shields, course being taken for paying and satisfying all
duties payable for the said goods and provisions.

(L) And all persons, who are willing, are hereby encouraged, and have liberty
to build ships and vessels on the said River, for the increase of Trade and
Navigation.

(M) And that all this be done without any Fine, Imprisonment, Confiscation, or
other molestation of any person, vessel, or goods, for, or in reference to any
of the Princes, any Law, Usage, Practice, Custom, Privilege, Grant, Charter,
or other pretense whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding; Provided always,

(N) And it is hereby Enacted, that no Ship, or Vessel whatsoever, that shall
bring in any kind of Merchandise or Grain for the proper use of the Town of
Newcastle, usually coming to the said Town of Newcastle, and places adjacent
beyond, shall deliver, or land the same, or any part thereof, at any other
place within the said Harbor or Port, but at the said Town, or as near to it
as formerly have been accustomed.

(O) And to the end so useful a Commodity at that of Sea-Coal, wherein the poor
of this Commonwealth are so principally concerned, may come cheaper to the
Market; and that Coal-owners may not be in a worse condition then the rest of
the free people of this Nation.

Be it Enacted and Ordained, That the said Coal-owners in the respective
Counties adjacent to that River, may, and have hereby liberty to let Leases of
their Coal-pits, and to sell their Coals to whom they please, as well to ships,
as elsewhere for benefit of the public, though they be not free of that
Corporation of Newcastle, due course being taken for securing, paying, and
satisfying to the State all duties payable thereupon.

And be it further Enacted, That North-Shields in the County of Northumberland
be made a Market Town two days in the week to be holden, or Monday and
Thursday, for the relief of the Country, the Garrison of Tynmouth Castle, the
great confluence of people, and fleets of ships, and that the Commissioners of
the Great Seal, be hereby Authorized to issue out such powers as are requisite,
and usually done to other Markets in the Commonwealth.

This is the Copy of what was to have passed after debate, if the late
Parliament, had continued, etc. appointed to be drawn up by Order.

Having given a short Relation of the sad Events by Charters, and acted by
subjects, I shall now trouble your eye and ear to her what Kings have done to
these poor Northern people formerly. Therefore now deliverance is expected,
etc. leaving it to the judgment of the Reader to judge whether it be not time,
etc. viz.

The Danes laid claim to the Crown of England, the Kings laid claim to the
peoples Lives; and Corporations to their estates, (what was free?) Judge what
reason England has to submit to those Illegal Charter-laws, invented by a
Prerogative, whose usurpation was not to be owned, as by the sequel appears;
King Harrold who assumed the Crown of England to himself, lead an Army to
battle in Sussex, where William the Conqueror, Bastard Earl of Normandy met
him, having the assistance of the Earl of Flanders, by reason he was promised a
good part of England if he Conquered it, at which place King Harrold was
killed, and sixty seven thousand nine hundred seventy four Englishmen, In the
year 1060. at which time he consumed many Towns, subduing where ever he came,
except Kent, who contracted to hold their land in Gavel-kind, all England else
being overcome by this said Stranger, etc.

When the Normans ruled England, the Laws were in that Tongue, but they being
extinguished, we find the benefit of our Laws in our own Tongue, and doubts not
but to be restored to our ancient right; for so long as Monarchs were Rulers,
Monopolies were in force, but now such power being thrown out of doors, and
being become a Civil free State under the Government of our own Freeborn;
Chosen, according to the Command of God, as Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15. by which
Monopolizers dare not assume to petition for a revival of such their Illegal
grants, being found to be the greatest of evils in a Commonwealth.

All Kings were sworn that Justice should neither be bought nor sold, nor any
hindered from it; to ordain good Laws, and withstand all Rapines, and false
Judgments.

Charters are no other than Commissions, Impowring persons incapable of the
Laws, to be Judges and Justices in every respective Corporation, which Charter
and Commission is sold, and the members thereof are Judges in their own causes.
So Justice is both bought, and sold, besides breach of Oath, neither can a
Foreigner obtain any right, if it be against the said Corporation, so that it
is right in these Judges judgment to do wrong.

I shall give you a short Relation of the Miseries, the County of
Northumberland has tasted of to this day from William the Conqueror, and what
little need there is Newcastle should so Tyrannize over them, etc.
WIlliam the Conqueror having killed many, and destroyed the land, and brought
under his subjection, the people, caused such who did oppose his forces, at
Ely, to have their legs and hands cut off, and their eyes put out, and then
gave liberally to all his Norman race, Earldoms, Baronies, Bishoprics Honors,
Manors, Dignities, and Farms, all being got by the sword; Upon his Divisions,
etc. the Earl of Flanders sent to know what part he should have for assisting
him, who sent him word nothing at all, by reason all was but little enough for
himself; Then he gave to his Son Robert Cuming the Earldome of Northumberland,
who in possessing of it, acted such cruelty with his Army, which came against
Malcolm King of the Scots. The said Robert built the Castle called the
Newcastle upon the River of Tyne in the County of Northumberland, about which
was built the Town called Newcastle, the Town taking its name from the
Newcastle, and not the Castle from the Town, the said Northumberland being so
oppressed, that they fell upon Robert Son to the Conqueror, killed him, and his
whole Army; Upon which William the Conqueror sent another Army, who had command
to kill both men, women, and children, who did it, and wasted the whole County,
that for nine years there was not any food to be got: And such who had hid
themselves in Coal-pits, and other places, were constrained to eat Dogs and
Cats, dead Horses, and men's flesh, and many of them starved to death, all which
nine years time not any ground tilled.

Northumberland being recruted, and most shamefully abused by the Bishop of
Durham, who killed Levisus, was killed by them, for which William the Conqueror
sent down Odo, with an Army, who totally laid Northumberland to waste, cut off
the heads of all the people after they had dismembered them.

Little of Confession or Repentance was by King John, as was by William the
Conqueror, for he upon his Arrest at the Suit of Death, confessed he had
committed many outrages, and won England by the Sword, and not by Inheritance,
and was heartily sorry for the wrongs he had done, and required his body to be
buried at Cain in Normandy, when he was dead, they would not affoard him a
burial-place till such time as one of his relation was constrained to purchase
so much ground, but soon after they defaced his Tomb, took up his bones, and
brake them, and cast them away.

In the fifteenth year of King Richard the second, the Scots burnt all the
Towns of Northumberland, and the North, as far as York, except Rippon, who
redeemed themselves with a sum of money.

In the sixth year of King Edward the third, 1332. a great Battle was fought
between the English and the Scots near Barwick, where was killed eight Earls,
fifteen hundred Horse, and thirty five thousand Foot.

In the thirteenth year of King Edward the third, 1339. An inundation of water
surmounted the Wall of Newcastle, and broke down six pearches in length and
drowned one hundred and sixty persons near the Wark Knowl.

In the year 1345. William Douglas lead into Northumberland above thirty
thousand Scots, and fired many Towns, but was overcome by a stratagem with
Bishop Ogle.

The next year 1346. King David, King of the Scots, entered Northumberland with
a great Army, and fought at Nevils-Crosse, where he was overthrown, himself
taken prisoner by one Copland of Northumberland, who had five hundred pound per
Annum given to him, and to his heirs for ever.

In King Richard the seconds days 1379. the Scots entered England, and killed
all men, women and children in the North parts notwithstanding the plague was
sorely amongst them.

1383. The Scots entered England, and lead all the people away prisoners that
were in Northumberland, and laid that County to waste.

1384. They entered again, and did the like.

1389. The Scots again invaded England, where a great battle was fought at
O^terborn in Northumberland, where they were over-thrown, and eleven hundred
killed, and thirty thousand put to flight) who upon their flight killed men,
women, and sucking babes, and filled houses with people, two hundred in a
house, and then shut the doors, and fired the houses.

1399. King Richard the second, caused seventeen Counties to be indicted,
pretending they were all against him; with the Duke of Gloucester, Arundel, and
Warwick, and commanded them all to give it under their hands, and seals, that
they were Traitors, though indeed they never were: And then he makes them pay
some a thousand pound, some more, some less.

King Henry the fourth; Great fights were between Doughlas and Piercy in the
North.

And in the years 1639. and 1643. and 1648. It being well known to all, the
misery they brought upon the North, and heavy Impositions both upon the North
and South parts, as appears in the close of the Epistle to the Reader, etc.

It is no small mercy that we now live so in peace, here being none of those
bloody times, and our Ancestors would willingly have enjoyed this mercy, and we
hunger after blood which they wallowed in, what bloody minded men are these? I
wish them in better minds, and to be contented with that which in former times
could not be obtained.

Many have admired the poverty of Northumberland, as well they may, for what
with the bloody Tyrants, the Scots on the North of that poor County, and
oppressive Corporation of Newcastle on the South thereof, bounded in with the
High-lands on the West, and the Sea on the East, that it can get nothing but
strokes, and worried out of what they have, and not being tolerated to make
use of their own, and cold blasts from the Sea; but it would be otherwise if
such Gentlemen might be re-imbursed for such sums of money as they would expend
to vend Coals out of Hartly, Blithe, and Bedlington Rivers, which be convenient
places to vend them at, after some charge, which would be done, by having
either their money again, or Custom free, for some years to re-imburse them,
which would not only make that poor County as rich as any is, but reduce the
excessive rates of Coals and Salt, and bring in many thousands per Annum into
the public revenew, etc. enable the people to be serviceable, and abundantly
increase Trade and Navigation, as also there being as good Coals as possibly
can be burnt, which now lies, etc. and others not knowing their right is stripped
of it.

But if one thing they look after, which is to examine some Records, they may
perceive what is their Rights, and which was, especially in a book lodged in
the Exchequor, made in the year 1080. it being called Domus Dei, or Dooms day,
being a perfect Survey of all the Lands in England, the Rent, Value, Quantity
etc. by which William the Conqueror taxed the whole Nation, and it goes by the
name of the Role of Winton, being ordered to be kept in Winchester, and recites
the Earldomes, Hundreds, Tythings, Woods, Parks, and Farms, in every Territory
and Precinct, with Plowlands, Meadows, Marshes, Acres, etc. what Tenements, and
Tenants, then the Corporation of Newcastle, might be as glad to keep what is
their own, as they are to take from others, etc.

CHAP. LVII.
THe reason of my Collecting these few Statutes is, to show how they are
entrenched upon by an illegal Charter, and pressing upon a remedy shall, cite
Poulton, which is, that seeing we have all received, and allow it for truth,
that the ignorance of the Law, does excuse none of offense; and also that the
Law does help the watchful, and not the sloathful man.

Therefore it behooves each person first to seek the knowledge of those Laws,
under which he does live, and whereby he is to receive benefit, or to sustain
peril, and next with all industry to frame his obedience unto them, or humbly
to submit himself to the censure of them.

And though we find by experience that some men by the sluggishnesse of their
natures, others by the carelessness of their own welfares; And a third sort
wholly given over to pleasures and vanities do little respect to know, and
less to obey our criminal and capital Laws, being things of great moment and
importance, and therefore do oftentimes taste the smart of them, and repent of
their follies when it is too late.

Many there be that by reading, desires to conceive them, others for increase
of their knowledge, others in their actions, to be directed by them; therefore
to content such as knows not as yet, these heads that they may know what they
condemn, and do tend to the breach of the peace of the Realm, and to the
dislike of all the good members thereof; and what punishments she has imposed
upon the Transgressors therein, and by whom, and in what manner to be inflicted
especially upon Murder, Robbery, Riots, Forgery, Perjury, Extortion, and
Oppression, in any of which cases, any person makes it his own cause, and does
in a sort take it to be done to himself, and ought to reduce the Transgressor;
Nay his Highness by his Oath, and all people else are bound to punish them as
being Transgressors of his Laws and disquieters of the Peace, therefore ought
to be rooted out, as the Husbandman the thistle from the good corn, and the
Gardner his nettles from his sweet flowers, wherefore seeing a guilty person in
any of the offenses aforesaid is persecuted in deed, or consent by all, wishing
well to the Weal-publick, or their own private estate.

It is requisite that good men which eschew to offend for the love of virtue,
and evil men, which fear to offend for the dread of punishment, should both
know those Laws, which they are to make use of, and the penalties which be
threatened to the infringers thereof, to the intent the good man having a will
to stand, may trust to his feet, remain firm, and continue his integrity, and
the evil man beginning to stagger, may bend his endeavor to stay and slide no
further (this labor) being to the intent that the well-meaning man being made
the better, and he or they that before were lewdly disposed, the less hurtful,
may all at the last meet and join in seeking and ^urtherance of that peace
which will be comfortable to the Lord Protector, and Nation, and pleasing both
to God and man.

These Laws are preservers of the peace, and lays heavy punishments, upon the
withstanders, or deniers thereof they are his Highness Privy Counselors
incessantly, respecting the preservation of his Person, and Dignity; they be as
his Gentlemen Pentioners attending daily his presence to do him all Honor and
Service, being as the Yeomen of his Guard, waiting day and night to protect
him, for his protecting the Nation and them, and from all forcible assaults,
and other perils. Also they be as his great and goodly Ships, which has
purchased Freedom on the Seas, and now lies hovering up and down as his
Castles, and strong Forts of defense as well as they which stand upon the land,
wherewith he does prevent foreign Hostility, repress inward tumults, and so
keep himself and the people in peace and safety: Likewise as his Judges,
Justices, Sheriffs, Constables, and other Officers, watching every hour and
moment, in all Shires and Counties, places, and corners of the Nation, to
repress outrages, and to maintain peace.

To maintain these Laws, every good member has the like benefit as himself
has, for in fear of them, every person does enjoy his life and limbs in peace,
and is defended from the bloody-minded Murderer, and Man-queller, and the rage
of the furious Quarreller and Fighter, and in fear of them, the housekeeper
rests in peace with his wife and family under his own roof, the terror hereof
does often restrain godless people from committing perjuries, frauds, and
deceits, and impudent and shameless men to wrest from others by Bribery,
Extortion or Oppression.

And diverse there be who neither by the Laws of God, of Nature, or Reason, will
be bridled and reduced to virtue, yet by the penalties, and fear of our Capital
and Criminal Laws, do yield to be curbed.

And we should now observe with what care our Forefathers had from one Age to
another, and what Ordinances they established in Parliament, that several
Penal, Criminal and Capital Laws and Statutes, should be read, or proclaimed in
Churches, in Fairs, in Markets, at the General Assizes, and Quarter Sessions of
every County, at Leets and Law-dayes, and in every Inns of Court, and Chancery,
and how the same is continued and put in practice, to the intent that the same
Laws, and the penalties thereof, should be heard, learned, known, and
understood by all sorts of persons, willing to perceive, and apprehend the same.

Charter-Law is not so, but like the foul Spirit in the Air, still ranging,
never at rest, nor will let others take any, never seen, but heard in every
corner, striking at the pure Law, to advance it self, it forces people to a
kind of an Order in a Town, and the whole Nation to a disorder.

The chiefest reason, why I give a recital of the Penal-Laws, is, that the
ignorant may see how well they are provided for, and not to be left blind, and
only being instructed by the Extortioner himself, what they must pay for Fees,
etc. (but that they may know themselves) and to remedy themselves when
offended, for such Oppressors would discover no more, for safety of their
purses, or bodies, then care was taken formerly for others souls, when it was
ordained that the Bibles should be in Latin, and not in English, as appears by
Statute the 34. of Henry 8. several persons restrained from reading the Bible
in English, etc. to keep them in ignorance, etc.

CHAP. LVIII.
The Oath of an Attorney at Law.
(A) YOu shall do no Falsehood, nor consent to any to be done in the Court, and
if you know of any to be done, you shall give knowledge thereof unto my Lord
Chief Justice, or other his brethren, that it may be reformed; You shall delay
no man for lucre or malice; You shall increase no Fees, but shall be contented
with the old Fees, accustomed; You shall plead no foreign Plea, nor suffer no
foreign Suits unlawfully, to hurt any man, but such as shall stand with order
of the Law, and your Conscience; You shall seal all such Proses as you shall
sue out of the Court with the Seal thereof, and so the Kings Majesty, and my
Lord Chief Justice discharge for the same; Ye shall not wittingly, nor
willingly Sue, nor procure to be sued any false Suits, nor give aid, nor
consent to the same, in pain to be expulsed from the Court for ever. And
furthermore; You shall use your self in the Office of an Attorney within the
Court according to your learning and discretion. So help you God. See Stat. 3.
K. James 7.

The Oath of an Vnder-Sheriffe, Bayliffe of Franchises, Deputies, and Clerks of
Sheriffs, and Vnder-Sheriffes. Stat. 27. Eliz. 12.
(B) I (A. B.) shall not use or exercise the Office of Under-Sheriffe corruptly
during the time, I shall remain therein.

Neither shall or will except; rejoice, or take by any color, means, or device
whatsoever. Or consent to the taking of any manner of Fee or Reward of any
manner of person or persons for the impanielling or returning of any Inquest
Jury, or Tales in any Court of Record, for the Queen * or between party and
party above two shillings, or the value thereof, or such Fees as are allowed
and appointed for the same by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

But will according to my power, truly and indifferently with convenient speed,
impanel all Jurors, and return all such Writ or Writs *, touching the same, as
shall appertain to be done by my duty or Office during the time I shall remain
in the said Office, So help me Gd, and by the Contents of this Book.

The reason I write these Oaths is, that perjury may the better appear to be
punished in Officers as well as others.

The Oath of a Jury.
(C) You shall truly enquire, and due presentment make, of all such things as
you are charged withal, on the Lord Protectors behalf, the Lord Protectors
Council, your own, and your fellows, you shall well and truly keep, and in all
other things the truth present. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of those that give evidence to a Jury upon an Indictment.
(D) The Evidence you shall give to the enquest upon this Bill, shall be the
truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the truth; and you shall not let so to
do for malice, hatred or evil will; nor for meed, dread, favor, or affection.
So help you God, and the holy Contents of this Book.

CHAP. LIX.
King Charles his Oath at his Coronation, with his hand upon the Bible at the
Altar.
(A) SIR, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of
England their Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your
lawful and Religious Predecessors, and namely, the Laws, Customs and
Franchizes granted to the Clergy and to the people by the King St. Edward your
predecessor, according, and conformable to the Laws of God, and profession of
the Gospel established in this Kingdom, and agreeing to the Prerogatives of the
Kings thereof, and to the ancient Customs of this Realm?

Respons. I grant, and promise to keep.

SIR, Will you keep peace and agreement entirely according to your power, both
to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the people?

Respons. I will keep it.

SIR, Will you to your power, cause Law, Justice and Mercy, in discretion and
truth, to be executed in all your Judgments?

Respon. I will.

SIR, Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws, and rightful Customs *, which
the Commonalty of your Kingdom have, and to defend and uphold them to the honor
of God, so much as in you lies?

Respons. I grant and promise so to do, and shall observe and keep. So God me
help and the Contents of this book.

King John's Oath and fealty to the Pope Innocentius, An. Dom. 1213.
(B) JOhn by the Grace of God, King of England, France and Ireland, from this
hour forward shall be faithful to God It was time.
and to St. Peter, and to the Church of Rome, and to my Lord Pope Innocentius
and to his Successors lawfully entering, I shall not be in word and deed, in
consent or counsel, that they should loose Life or Member, or be apprehended in
evil manner; their loss if I may know it, I shall impeach and stay so far as I
shall be able, or else so shortly as I can, I shall signify unto them and
declare the same unto you the Council, which they shall commit unto me, by
themselves, their Messengers, and their Letters; I shall keep secretly and not
utter to any man to their hurt to my knowledge, the Patrimony of St. Peter, and
especially the Kingdom of England and Ireland. And I shall endeavor my self to
defend against all men to my power. So help me God, and the holy Evangelist,
Amen. See his reassignation of the Liberties after this Oath to the Barons of
the Liberties of England in chapter 1. (K)

CHAP. LX.
The Oath of a Mayor of a Corporation.
(A) YOu shall swear that you well and truly shall serve the Keepers of the
Liberties of England by authority of Parliament, and the Commonwealth in the
Office of a Mayor, and as Mayor of this Town and Borough of Newcastle, for and
during the space of one whole year now next coming; and you shall minister
equal Justice as well to the poor as rich *, to the best of your cunning, wit
and power, and you shall procure such things to be done as may honestly and
justly be to the profit and commodity of the Corporation of this Town. And also
shall endeavor your self to the utmost of your power to see all Heresies,
Treasons, Fellonies, and all other Trespasses, Misdemeanors *, and Offenses
whatsoever to be committed * within this Town and Borough, during the time of
your Office to be repressed, reformed and amended *, and the Offenders duly
punished according to the Law *. And finally, you shall support, uphold and
maintain the Commonwealth, within this Town prescribed, Customs, Rights,
Liberties, Jurisdictions, Franchizes, Compositions and all lawful Ordinances of
this Town and Borough *. And as concerning all other things appertaining to
your Office, you shall therein faithfully, and uprightly behave your self for
the most quietness *, benefit, worship, honesty, and credit of this Town, and
of the Inhabitants thereof. So help you God.

The Oath of Burgesses of Corporation.
(B) YOu shall swear that you well and truly shall serve the Keepers of the
Liberties of England by authority of Parliament, and the Inhabitants of this
Town, and Borough of this Town, as one of the Burgesses of this Town, and shall
minister equal Justice to poor and rich, after the best of your cunning, wit,
and power. And also shall well and truly observe, perform, fulfill and keep all
such good Orders, Rules and Compositions as are or shall be made, ordered, or
established by the Common Council of this Town, for the good Government
thereof, in all things to you appertaining. And you shall not utter or disclose
any counsel, or secret thing, or matter touching the Fellowship or Corporation
of this Town, whereby any prejudice, loss, hinderance, or slander, shall or may
arise, grow or be to the same Corporation: But you shall in things belonging to
the Fellowship or Corporation of this Town, faithfully, honestly *, and
indifferently behave your self for the most benefit, and honesty of this Town
and the Inhabitants thereof. So help you God.

The same Oath is for the Aldermen.

Where the Stars are in the Lines there will appear breaches.

CHAP. LXI.
The Oath of a Sheriff.
(A) YOu shall swear that you shall well and truly serve the Keepers of the
Liberties of England by authority of Parliament in the Office of a Sheriff of
the County of N. And do the Keepers of the Liberties of England profits in all
that belongs you to do by way of your Office, as far forth as you may or can.

Ye shall truly keep the Keepers, etc. and all that belongs to them. Ye
shall not assent to decrease, to lessen, nor to concealment, of any of their
Rights or Franchizes, and whenever ye shall have knowledge that their Rights
be concealed or withdrawn, be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, or any
other thing; ye shall do your true power to make them be restored to them
again; And if ye may not do it, ye shall certify them thereof, such as you
know for certain will say unto them, ye shall not respect their debts for any
gift or favor, when ye may raise them without grievance to the Debtor. Ye
shall truly and righteously treat the people of your Sheriffwick, and do right
well to poor as to rich, in all that belongs to your Office.

Ye shall do no wrong to any man for any gift or other behest, or promise of
goods, for favor nor hate, ye shall disturb no man's right, ye shall acquit at
the Exchequer all those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the Keepers, etc.
debts; ye shall nothing take whereby the Keepers etc. may loose, or that Right
may be letten or disturbed, or the Keepers, etc. debt delaid. Ye shall truly
receive, and truly serve the Keepers, etc. Writs as far forth as it shall be in
your cunning; ye shall not have to be your Undersheriff, any of the Sheriffs
Clerks of the last years passed; ye shall take no Bailiff into your service but
such as you will answer for; ye shall make each of your Bailiffs make such Oath
as you make your self in that that belongs to their occupation; ye shall
receive no Writs by you nor any of yours unsealed, nor any sealed under the
seal of any Justice, save of Justices of Air, or Justices assigned in the same
Shire, where you be Sheriff in, or other Justices having power or authority to
make any Writs unto you by the Law of the Land.

You shall make your Bailiffs of the true and sufficient men in the Country; ye
shall be dwelling in your own proper person within your Bayliwick for the time;
you shall be in the same Office except you shall be licenced by the Keepers,
etc. you shall not let your Sheriffwick, nor any Bayliwick thereof to farm to
any man; ye shall truly set and return reasonable and due luses of them that be
within your Bayliwick after their estate and behavior, and make your panel
your self of such persons as be most meet, most sufficient, and not suspect nor
procured, as it is ordained in the Statute, and over this in eschewing and
restraining of the Robberies, Manslaughters, and other manifold grievous
offenses, that be done daily by such as name themselves Soldiers, and by other
Vagrants, by which increase in multitude and number, so that the good people
may not safely ride nor go to do such things as they have to do, to their
intolerable hurt and hinderance; Ye shall truly and effectually with all
diligence possible, to your power execute the Statute of Winchester for
Vaggabonds. All these things ye shall well and truly observe and keep. So help
you God.

It is the judgment of learned Council, that Sheriffs may be indicted for
perjury by wilful neglect of their duty, as other persons wilfully or
procuringly perjures themselves, etc.

King Hen. 3.
King Henry the 3. Was Crouned at the age of 9 Years the 28 october 1216 he
Reigned 56 Years and 20 dai^s. dyed the 16 of november 1272 tyeth buried at
Westminster.



None to be condemned but by the judgment of the Law.
SStat. ninth year of his Reign, chap. 29. in Parliament, enacts, that no
Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or be disseazed of his Freehold,
Liberties; or free Customs, or pass upon him or condemn him but by lawful
Judgment of his Equals, or by the Law of the Land; we will not sell to no man,
we will not defer to any man either Justice or Right. Reg. fo. 186. Coke Pla.
456. Dyer fo. 104. Coke lib. 5. fo. 64. lib. 10. fo. 74. lib. 11. fo. 99. Stat.
2. Edw. 3. 8. 5. Edw. 3. 9. 14. Edw. 3. 14. 28. Edw. 3. 3. 11. Rich. 2. 10. 3.
Carol. Pet. of Right. See chapter 38. (A. C.)

Bakers and Brewers, faulty, to be punished.
Stat. 51. year of his reign 1266 Enacts, That if any Baker or Brewer be
convict, because he has not observed the Assize of Bread, and Ale, for the
first, second and third time he shall be amerced according to his offense, but
if he amend not, then to suffer punishment of body, the Baker to the Pillory,
and Brewer to the Tumbrel, which shall not be remitted for Gold nor Silver; and
Impowres Ale Cunners in every Town, etc. every Baker to set his own mark on his
Bread. See chapter 49. (C)

King Hen. 4.
HENRY the 4. borne at Bollingbroke in the County of Lincoln. began his
Reign the 26. of September. 1399. Reigned 13. years and 6. months and died
in A^: D: 1413. Of the age of 46. Years. buried at Canterbury



Justice shall be done in England.
STat. first year of his Reign Chapter the first, Enacts the confirmation of
the Liberties of England, and all Statutes not repealed, Peace shall be
maintained, and Justice shall be done to all men.

Sheriffs shall not let their County to Farm.
Stat. the fourth year of his Reign Chapter the fifth, Enacted that every
Sheriff in England shall abide in proper person within his Bayliwick for the
time he shall be such Officer; And that he shall not let his Bayliwick to Farm
to any man for the time that he occupies such Office, and that the said
Sheriff be sworn from time to time to do the same in special, amongst other
Articles comprised in the Oath of Sheriffs. Stat. 23. Hen. 6. 10.

King Henry the Fifth.
Henry the 5. began his Reign. the 20. of March. Was Croun^d At Westminster.
the 9 of April* 1413. He Reigned 9 Years. 2. months. died in the caste^ of
Boys nere paris the 13 of Aug^st 1422. buried at Westminster.



Coals to pay two pence per Chaldron Custom, and Keels to be measured.
(A) STat. the ninth year of his Reign, Chap. 9. 10. It was Enacted the King
should have two pence of every Chalder of Coals of Unfranchized men, in the
River and Port at Newcastle upon Tyne, as Customs; And for the better
knowledge of such Customs, ordains that all Keels or Boats, which carried
Coals to ships should be of the just burden of twenty Chaldron of Coals,
notwithstanding this Act, the Newcastle men made the Keels to carry some two,
and some three and twenty to wrong the King of his Customs, which great Cheat
was proved in Parliament, where they Enacted to prevent such like, for the
future that sworn Commissioners should mark all Keels and other Vessels
carrying Coals to ships upon pain of forfeiture, of Keel and Coals. See Chap.
9. (A) 11. Chap. (1)

King Henry the Sixth.
Henry the 6 of the age of 8 months Began his Reign. (...) of September. 1422
Crowned at Westminster. the 6 of November 1429 Afterward Crowned at Paris 7
September 14^^. Reigned 38 years 6 months 4 days Buried at Winsore.



Punishments of Customers for not clearing Ships.
(A) STat. the eleventh year of his Reign, Chap. 15. Enacted, That for as much
as the Customers and Controlers in the Kings Ports, do not write any Warrants
in discharge of Merchants of their Merchandises by them showed, and duly
customed, Transported, or Imported, the same Customers, and Controlers do
imbezel the Kings Customs, and the Merchants be greatly hindered, because that
the Warrants might plainly show, and declare their due custom when they be
often and unduly impeached in the Kings Exchequor in consideration of the said
deceits, it was Enacted that the said Customers, and Controlers shall write,
and deliver sufficient Warrants sealed with the Seal of their Office, to that
end ordained, to the said Merchants not anything to begiven for the same, but
their due Custom; And that in case any Customer or Controler do the contrary,
then the Merchant may have an action by virtue of this Ordinance to pursue
every Customer or Controler that does the contrary in every Court of Record,
and being thereof attainted shall forfeit to the King for every default ten
pounds, and to the Merchant grieved that sueth, five pound. 11. Hen. 6. 15.)
See Chap. 45. (E.)

The great danger occasioned by small Riots.
(B) In the 37. year of his Reign, began such Riots, Routs, and unlawful
Assemblies, that it produced a worse effect then in King Richard the seconds
daye^, which was occasioned between a Yeoman of the Guard, and a Servingman of
the Earl of Warwick, which so far increased, not being timely prevented, that
it proved the root of many a woeful Tragedy; brought to death the Duke of York,
who was proclaimed Successor to the Crown, the King, Prince Edward his Son,
all, or most of the Peers of the land destroyed by sidings, and at least six
and thirty thousand of the common people cut off at one battle at Toughton in
Yorkshire, the King, Queen, and Prince put to flight to Barwick. See Richard
the second, what was done. See Chapter 37. (A.) 3. Hen. 6. See Rich. 2. (E.)

Sheriffs Fees, none of his Officers shall be returned upon Inquests, letting
to Bayl, etc.
(C) Stat. 23. Hen. the sixth, Chapter 10. The King considering the
great-Perjury, Extortion, and Oppression, which be, and have been in his Realm
by his Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, and their Clerks, Coroners, Stewards of
Franchizes, Bailiffs, and keepers of prisons, and other Officers in diverse
Counties of this Realm, have ordained by the Authority aforesaid in eschewing
of all such Perjury, Extortion, and Oppression; and that because the Sheriff
of every County, is a great and necessary Officer in the Commonwealth, and used
as a special instrument to the furtherance of Justice in all Suits pursued at
the Common Law, and his service is employed in the beginning, prosecuting, and
ending of the most of them, therefore as the Law has always had a special
regard of him, and foreseen that he shall be a man of wisdom, of worth, of
credit, countenance and ability (this is not William Fenwick of North Riding in
Northumberland, for he derogates from them all) and that he shall be allowed a
convenient stipend, and sallary for his pains in most cases; so does she carry
a vigilent and watchful eye upon him, and his inferior Officers, or
Substitutes, knowing what grievous Oppressions might ensue, if she should leave
a man of his Authority, and necessary employment at liberty, to dive at his
pleasure into other men's purse, and to take what he would (as William Fenwick
does) therefore she has restrained him, his Undersheriff, Bayliffe of
Franchizes, and other Bayliffes (most of which are forsworn) within certain
Lists, and assigned them what they shall take for Arrests, Attachments,
Mainprizes, letting to Bail, and serving of Executions, which if any of them do
exceed, he shall forfeit forty pound a time, and shall be adjudged an
extortioner, in which said Statute it is Enacted, that no Sheriff,
Under-Sheriffe, or any Bayliffe, by occasion, or under color of his Office
shall take any other thing by themselves, or any other person to their use, or
to their profit of any person by any of them Arrested or Attached, nor of any
other for them, for the omitting of any Arrest or Attachment to be made by
their bodies, or of any person by any of them by force or color of their
Office, Arrested or Attached for Fine, Fee, Mainprize, letting to Bail, or for
showing any ease or favor to any such person so Arrested for their reward or
profit, but such as follows; the Sheriff twenty pence; the Bayliffe, which
makes the Arrest or Attachment four pence, the Jailer if the prisoner be
committed to his Ward four pence; for making of a Return or Paniel, and for the
copy of a Paniel four pence; no Bond to be made by them under color of their
Office, but only to themselves, for the appearance of any prisoner at the day
prescribed, and what Bond is otherwise is void; and he shall take no more for
making such Obligation, Warrant, or Precept by him to be made but four pence;
And all Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffes, Clerks, Bayliffes, Gaolers, Coroners,
Stewards, Bayliffes of Franchizes, or any other Officer or Ministers, which
does contrary to the aforesaid Ordinances in any point of the same, shall lose
to the party in this behalf endamaged or grieved, his treble damages, and shall
forfeit forty pounds, at every time that any do the contrary in any point of
the same, whereof the King shall have the one half, to be employed only to the
use of his house, and the other to the party that will sue for the same, by
Bill, Plaint, etc.

I shall lay open the excessive Fees extorted by the Sheriffs of Northumberland
against the Law, viz.
Return a tales 6 s. For allowance of a pony 9 s. 2 d. For allowance of a Writ,
false judgment 16 s. 6 d. Upon Execution granting out 15 s. And all upon the
Defendant after Execution 1 l. 11 s. 6 d. For breaking open an original Process
2 s. 6 d. For the Warrant thereof 6 d. Bailiffs for the Arrest from the
Plaintiff 1 s. From the party Arrested 1 s. 8 d. To file Bayl above and taking
the Declaration 8 s.
This is costly Law.

This Justice is both bought and sold, etc.

A Bill of Indictment before a Judge would reduce these, etc.

The Form of an Indictment for Sheriffs.
(D) London ss. The Juros for the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. Upon their Oaths, do present, That John
Butler of London Sheriff, the 20. day of August in the year of our Lord God,
1652. being then Sheriff, and Keeper of the Prison of the Newgate in London
the day and year aforesaid, did by force or color of his said Office, as
Sheriff and Keeper of the said Prison, unlawfully and extortionously exact and
take of one John Cuthberton, then and there being arrested and imprisoned in
the said Prison under the custody of the said Sheriff, at the Suit of John Roe,
the sum of six shillings and eight pence, for the Fee of the said Sheriff, and
Keeper, for the custody of the said John in the said Prison from the 20. day of
the Month of May in the year aforesaid, until the 20. day of August then next
following, to the great damage of the said John, and to the evil example of
others in the like case offending, and contrary to the Form of the Statute in
such case made and provided, and against the public peace. See Cha. 58. (C)
(D) (B) Stat. 23. Hen. 8. 3.

King Henry the Seventh.
Henry the 7. began his Raig^e the 22. of June 1485. And was Crowned at
westminster the 30 of october: He Reigned 25. years and 8. months. and died the
22. of April. lies buried at westminster.



STat. three of Henry the seventh Chapter 1. * It is Enacted if any Coroner be
remiss, and makes not Inquisition upon the view of the body dead, and
certify not according to his Office, It is ordained that he shall for every
default forfeit five pounds. See Chapter 10. (O. P.) Chap. 48. ^9. 49.

Weights and Measures, etc.
Stat. 11. Hen. 7. chap 4. For as much as many grievances have been set forth
unto this present Parliament of the great fraud and deceit in Measures and
Weights, for remedy whereof it is ordained and enacted, that to the Knights and
Citizens of every Shire and City, assembled in this present Parliament, Barons
of the Five Ports, and certain Burgesses of Borough Towns, ere they depart
from this present Parliament be delivered one of every Weight and Measure which
now is made of brass for the good of the Subject, according to the Kings
Standard of his Exchequer of Weights and Measures, and that they shall cause
all common Weights and Measures to be as abovesaid, and all such as prove
defective then such weights and measures, shall be broken and burnt, and the
party pay twenty shillings, and be set in the Pillory; the Quarter of Corn to
be eight bushels raised and struck, and fourteen pound to the Stone of Wool,
etc. and water measure to be five pecks on shipboard, according to the
Standard. etc. See chap. 49, (C)

No Ordinance to be made by Corporations, etc.
By Act of Parliament 19. Hen. 7. 7. That Masters, Wardens and people of Guilds,
Fraternities and of other Companies Corporate, oftentimes by coulor of Rule and
Governance to them granted by Charter, and Letters Pattents, made amongst
themselves many unlawful and unwarrantable Ordinances, as well in prizes of
wages as other things, for their own singular profit, and to the common hurt
and damage of the people, Be it enacted, and it is hereby Enacted, that no such
Master, Wardens, nor Companies *, make nor use any Ordinance, in disheritance,
nor diminition of the Prerogative of the King, nor of others *, nor against the
common profit of the people, nor none other Ordinance of charge, except it were
first discust, used, and proved by good advice of the Justices of Peace, or the
chief Governors of Cities, and before them entered upon Record, and that upon
pain to loose and forfeit the force and effect of all the Articles in their
said Letters Pattents, and Charters contained concerning the same, and over
that to pay ten pounds to the King for every Ordinance that any of them made or
used to the contrary; the same Ordinance to in^ure at the Kings pleasure, which
Act was then expired, and since the expiration of the same, many Ordinances
have been made by many private Bodies within diverse Cities, Towns, and
Buroughs, contrary to the Kings Prerogative, his Laws, and the common weal of
his Subjects. Be it therefore enacted that no Masters, Wardens and Fellowship
of Crafts or Mysteries, nor of any Rulers of Guilds or Fraternities *, take
upon them to make any Acts or Ordinances, nor to execute any by them heretofore
made in dishertion or diminition of the Prerogative of the King, nor of other,
nor against the common profit of the people, except the said Acts and
Ordinances be examined and approved by the Chancellor, Treasurer of England, or
Chief Justices of either Benches, or three of them, or before both the Justices
of Assizes in their Circuit in the Shire where such Acts or Ordinances be made,
upon pain of forfeiture of forty pounds for every time they do to the
contrary; And over that it is Enacted that none of the same Bodies Corporate
take upon them to make any Acts or Ordinances to restrain * any person or
persons to sue to the King or any of his Courts for due remedy to be had in
their causes, nor put, nor execute any penalty or punishment upon any of them
for any such suit to be made, upon pain of forfeiture of forty pounds for every
time that they do to the contrary, See chap. 39. (A) 30. (D) 43. (D) and chap.
10. (G).

This Statute will prove offensive to the free Hoast-men, and the Charter of
the Admiralty, if well prosecuted, and pay them for all the wrongs done.

King Henry the Eighth.
Henry the 8 was borne at Grenwich Entered his Reign being 18 years of age the
22. of April 1509. was Crouned at Westminster the 25. of June following. He
Reigned 37. years and 9 months died the 28. of June. buried at Winsor.



(A) SStat. 21. Hen. 8. chapter 18. In the vacancy of the Sea of Durham, Cardinal
Wolsey being dead, and no Knights nor Burgesses in Parliament for Durham and
Northumberland, then the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, knowing there could
be no opposition, petitioned the King and Parliament, for that whereas the
Mayor, Burgesses, and Commonalty of that Town having been faithful Subjects
and held in Fee, from his Progenitors, that Town, Port and Haven of the River
of Tine thereunto belonging, and of all ground *, which the water covered
within the said River of Tine from the Month of the said River called
Sparhawke, and to Headwin streams, in their demean as of fee in right of the
Crown, and that all Merchandises, carried by any ship or vessel into that
Port, or carried out, used to be discharged and laden only at that Town, by
which means the Customs, Subsidies and Tole, were received there for his
Majesty's use 500 l. per annum. And that by reason of those Liberties and
Franchizes that Town has been well replenished, and maintained, and able to
furnish his Majesty with four hundred Mariners for the War, and by reason of
several great personages as well spiritual as temporal, having Lands adjoining
to the said River, have laden and unloaden ships with several Merchandises and
paid no Customs, to the utter undoing of the Town, and the great dishertion of
your Highness, and minishment to your Customs, and that diverse Weyers and
Fish-gates were erected in the said River, by means whereof great Sand-beds and
Gravel heaps be grown and cast up in the said River, that within few years to
come, no ship of good burden or weight * shall be able to come up to the Town,
to the inestimable hurt of the Countries thereunto adjoining, and to the damage
of your Realm *, especially to all persons needing Sea-Coals, which be only
conveyed from the said Port, and no where else to be shipped or had but there.

In consideration whereof, may it please your Majesty out of your bounden
Grace, with the assent of your Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in
Parliament, to enact, ordain and establish, that from henceforth any Merchant or
Merchants, or any other person or persons, shall not ship, load, or unload any
Merchandise or other Wares of Goods to be sold here between the said place
called Sparhawke and Headwin streams (being fourteen miles in length) but only
at Newcastle, upon pain of forfeiture of all such Goods and Wares and
Merchandises to the King.

And for the Mayor and Burgesses to pull down all Weires Goares and Engines,
which was granted by the said Statute; provided always, this Act be not
prejudicial to any person or persons being the Kings Subjects, for building
shipping, loading or unloading any Salt or Fish within the said River and Port,
or to any of them; or to any other persons repairing to the said Port with
ships and Merchandises, for selling or buying of any Merchandises or Wares
needful for victualing and amending of the said ships *, at the time of their
being in the said Port, this Act or any thing comprised in the same
notwithstanding. See chapter 50. (C)

A Table of Fees for Customs, Toles, etc. in Towns.
(B) Stat. 22. Hen. 8. chapter 8. Be it Enacted that every City, Borough, and Town
Corporate, their Officer shall set up, or cause a Table in open place, of and
for the certainty of all such and every duty, of every such Custom, Tole, and
duty, or sum of money, of such Wares and Merchandises to be demanded or
required, as above rehearsed, shall and may plainly appear to be declared, to
the intent that nothing be exacted otherwise than in old time has been used
and accustomed, upon pain of each City five pound, and every Corporation forty
shillings for every month that the said Table shall fail to be set up, the
moiety to the King, and the other to the party that will sue for the same by
Writ, Bil, Plaint, or Information, in which the Defendant shall have no assoyn,
Wager of Law, nor protection of Law allowed, See chap. 44. (E)

A Commission of Sewers, etc.
(C) Stat. 23. Hen. 8. chap. 5. The King considering the absolute necessity of
granting a general Act for Commissioners of Sewers to be directed in all parts
of his Realm for the advancing of the Commonwealth, and commodity of this his
Realm. And likewise considering the daily great damages and losses which have
happened in many parts of the Nation, in the decay and spoil of Rivers, to the
inestimable damages of the Commonwealth which do daily increase, for remedy
whereof it is enacted, that there be Commissioners of Suers, and other premises
directed in all parts from time to time, where and when need shall require to
such substantial and indifferent persons as shall be named by the Lord
Chancellor, and Lord Treasurer of England, and the two Chief Justices for the
time being, or by three of them, whereof the Lord Chancellor to be one.

The Commissioners to be residing in the respective County, where the
Commission is directed (which said Commissioners will preserve the said River)
having power given them, to constitute and ordain Laws, Ordinances, and
Decrees, and to repeal, reform, and amend as need shall require, any defects.

Also to pull down any Newsances, encroachments, or the like, erected in the
said Rivers, and to cause buildings of Wharfs, for the good of the same, and
power to Rate and Tax any person whatsoever toward the charge for the good of
the said Rivers, or having spoiled the same, to seize his or their Lands,
Tenements, Goods, and Chattels for the said Taxes, and to dispose of the same
by Sail, Lease, or otherwise, six Commissioners being present, and every
Commissioner is to have four shillings a day when they ^it, and the Clerk two
shillings a day out of the Taxes; I refer the rest of this power to the
relation of these Statutes following. 3. Edward 6. 9. 13. Eliz. 9. See 34.
Chap. (C) 35. (A. B.)

An Attaint against a Jury.
(D) Stat. 23. Hen. 8. Chap. 3. The Law having first used all good devices to
cause Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, Bailiffs of Liberties, Coroners, and all others
authorized to return and impannel Juries, to be indifferent, and to return the
said Jurors, and Juries without all partiallity, and that they shall be no
Furtherers, Maintainers, nor Assisters to perjury, subordination or embracery,
and also having provided, that all those Jurors, which be so returned upon
Inquests, and to try Inquests, and to try Issues between party and party, may
again one by one be sifted, tried, and examined, whether they standing unsworn
be indifferent, or not, she does then expect from those Jurors veridictum a
true Tale, that is to say a true Verdict, or Presentment of such things as be
given them in charge according to their evidence; but if the same Jurors will
decline from truth, and make a false presentment contrary to their evidence *
then it is not to be termed veredictum but perjurium, and it will be returned
to them as maledictum, for by the Common Law they being Attainted by the
Verdict of four and twenty other Jurors shall receive a cursed and villainous
judgment therefore, viz.

The said Jurors shall lose the freedom of the Law, their Wives and Children
shall be thrust out of their houses, their houses shall be pulled down to the
ground, their Orchards and Gardens shall be subplanted, their Trees shall be
dug up by the roots, their Meadows shall be eyred up, all their Goods and
Chattels, which they have at the time of the Attaint brought, or at any time
after, shall be forfeited to the King, the King shall have all the profit of
their forfeited lands during their lives, and they shall be committed to
perpetual prison, which judgment was devised, and many years put in execution
to the intent it might be known how much the Common Law did detest and punish
wilful perjury, and falsehood in those who she trusted in place of justice, and
from whom she accounted to receive truth. See Poulton Perjury (16) See Chap.
58. (B. C. D.) Stat. 23. Hen. 6. 10. (D.)

To prevent spoil in Rivers by Ballast.
(C) Stat. 34. Hen. 8. 9. The King for the good and preservation of Rivers,
Enacted that what person or persons do cast or unlade any Ballast, Rubbish,
Gravel, or other wreck out of any Ship, Crayer, or other Vessels, being within
any Haven-road, Channel, or River to any Port, Town, or other City or Borough
within this Realm, but only upon the land above the full Sea-mark upon pain of
forfitude of five pound a time, the one half to the King, the other to the
party discovering, that will sue for the same by Bill, Plaint, or otherwise, no
wager of Law, admitted or any Essoyn or protection allowed.

This is a legal course, but Newcastle acts not hereby, as you may see in Chap.
34. (C) 35. (A. B.) 12. Chap. (6.) 14. (B.)

King Edward the First.


Sheriffs punished for refusing Bail.
(A) STat. 3. Ed. 1. 15. King Edward the first, for as much as Sheriffs and
others, which have taken and kept in prison persons detected of Felony and
Incontinent, have let out by Plevyn such as were not replevisable, and kept in
persons such as were replevisable, because they would win of the one party, and
grieve the other, It is ordained, That if any Sheriff, or any other, which
has the keeping of prisons, let any go at large by Surety, that is not
replevisable, and thereof be attainted, he shall lose his Fee and Office for
ever: And if the Under-Sheriffe, Constable or Bailiff of such who have Fees for
keeping of prisons do it contrary to the will of his Lord, or any other
Bayliffe being not of Fee, they shall have three years imprisonment, and make
Fine at the Kings pleasure: And if any man withhold a prisoner replevisable
after that they have offered sufficient surety, he shall pay a grievous
Amerciament to the King; and if he take any reward for the deliverance of such,
he shall pay it double to the prisoner, and also shall pay a grievous
Amerciament to the King, See Stat. 27. Edw. 1. 3. Stat. 3. Hen. 7. 2. the first
and second Philip and Mary 13. See 30. Chap. (B) 37. Chap. (A.) 41. Chap. (A.)

Extortion in Officers.
(B) Stat. 3. Ed. 1. 26. The King ordains that none of his Officers shall
commit extortion, neither Sheriff, nor other, shall take reward to do his
Office, but shall be paid of that which they take of the King, and he that so
does shall pay or yield two times as much, and shall be punished at the Kings
pleasure. See Stat. 23. Hen. 6. 10.

Outrageous Tole.
(C) Stat. 3. Edw. 1. 30. The King Ordains that such who takes outrageous Tole
contrary to the common custom of the Realm in Market Towns, by the Lord, then
the Franchizes of the said Market to be seized into the Kings hand, and if it
be in the Kings Town, which is let in the Farm, the Franchizes to be seized in
the Kings hand; And if it be done by a Bayliffe, without consent of his Lord he
shall restore double, and shall have forty days imprisonment; touching
Citizens, and Burgesses to whom the King granted Murrage to enclose their Towns
* which takes such Murrage otherwise then it was granted unto them, and thereof
be attainted, it is provided that they shall lose their Charter or Grant for
ever, and shall be grievously amerced unto the King. (See 44, Edw. 3. fo. 20.)
43. Edw. 3. fol. 29. (fit. N. B. fo. 94.) See 11. Chap. ( H.) 44. (I.) 49. (C)
48. (A.)

Persons attached out of their liberty.
(D) Stat. 3. Ed. 1. 34. For as much as great men, and the Bailiffs, and
others, the Kings Officers only excepted, unto whom special Authority is
given, which at the complaint of some, are by their own authority attached,
others passing through their Jurisdictions, with their goods, compelling them
to answer before them, * upon Contract, Covenants, and Trespasses, out of their
jurisdiction, where indeed they hold nothing of them, or within their
Franchizes where their power is, in prejudice of the King and his Crown, and to
the damage of the people, it is provided that none from henceforth so do, and
if any do he shall pay to him, that by his occasion shall be attached his
damage double, and shall be grievously amerced to the King. 3. Ed. 1. 16. See
Chap. 30. (B.)

The Penalties for procuring Writs.
(E) Stat. 13. Edw. 1. 36. For as much as Lords of Courts, and others that
keeps Courts, and Stewards, intending to grieve their inferiors, where they
have no lawful means so to do, procures others to move matters against them,
and to put in sureties and other pledges, or to purchase Writs, and at the suit
of such Plaintiffes compels them to follow the County, Hundred, Wapentake, and
other like Courts until they have made fine with them at their will; it is
Ordained that it shall not be so used hereafter; And if any be attached upon
such false complaints, he shall replevy his distress so taken, and shall cause
the matter to be brought before the Justice before whom, if the Sheriff,
Bailiff, or other Lord after that the party distrained has framed his
complaint, will advow the distress lawful, by reason of such complaints made
unto them; And it be replied that such complaints were moved maliciously
against the party by the solicitation, or procurement of the Sheriff, or other
Bailiff, or Lord, the same replication shall be admitted, and if they be
convicted hereupon, they shall make Fine to the King, and treble damages to the
party grieved. See Stat. 8. Eliz. 2.

No Tax to be levied but by Parliament, etc.
(F) Stat. 25. Edw. 1. 6. Be it Enacted that none shall be charged by any
Charge or Imposition, nor be compelled to contribute to any Tax, Talledge, Aid,
or other like charge, not set by common consent in Parliament.

A Writ called, Ad quoddamum to purchase Fairs, Markets, etc.
(G) Stat. 27. Ed. 1. 1299. The King ordains that if any person, or persons
having a mind to obtain any Liberties, Fairs, Markets, or the like, may have
this Writ out of Chancery, called Ad quoddamum, if the Inquest pass for them,
they shall have it, for remembrance of which thing, there is an Indenture made,
and divided into three parts, whereof one part remains in the Chancery, another
in the Exchequor, and the third in the Wardrop, Regist. Fo. 247. Fitz. N. B,
fo. 221. Rast. Pla. fo. 25. 32. See Chap. 48. (A. B.) 44. (I.) 49. (A. G) 50.
(A) 29. (A) 47. (A) 51. (A) 50. (C) and Chap. 11. (I. K.)

This Writ called a Quo Warranto, will dash any Charter a pieces exceeded.
(H) Stat. 30. Ed. 1. 1301. The King and his Parliament, provided well for the
weal of the Nation against any indirect course prosecuted under color of
Charter, Grants; etc. either by not putting in execution what is granted to
Corporations, or exceeding their powers, ordains this Writ, whereby all men may
have right, if they look after it, viz. The King to the Sheriff, Greeting,
Summon by good Summons, etc. that they be before us at etc. in out next coming
in to the County aforesaid, or before our Justices of Assize, when they shall
come into those parts, to show by what warrant they claim such Liberties, and
hold a view of Frank pledge in their Manor of etc. or by what warrant they
have to hold Tholonium (tollis) for them and their Heirs, and by what warrant
they do such wrongs, etc.

This Writ, is like twenty of the violentest Mastiffs, upon a small Bear,
tearing her all in pieces, they being unmuzled, there is a great want of such
bayting.

(I) Doctor Lamb, who was killed by a rude multitude in London, and soon after
buried, but by reason a Coroner did not view his dead body etc. this Writ was
brought by Attorney General Noy, who voided their Charter, and they were fined
many thousand pounds, and paid, etc.

(K) Londonderry, only for exceeding their power in their Charter, were
served the very like, etc.

This Writ would do the like to Newcastle, if acted, for exceeding their
powers, and not burying Mr. Snapes son, one Gray, and William Rea, who were
drowned in that River, as they are tied to do by Charter. See Chap. 10. (O. P.)
And see Chap. 29. (A) 48. (B) 49. (Y)

No distress without Warrant.
(L) Stat. 34 Ed. 1, 2. The King ordains that no officer of his, or his Heirs
shall take any Corn, Cattle, or any other goods whatever, from any person,
without the good will and assent of the party to whom the goods belonged. See
Chap. 47. (A) 30. (B)

King Edward the Second.
King Edward the 2. surnamed Carnaruen was crouned at Westminster at the 22.
Year of his age the 24. of febru 1308. he Reigned 19 Year. 6 months was
deposed the 25 of Iani^arius 1326. he was slain in the Castle of barkley in
the 43 year of his age.



Breaking of Prisons.
(A) STat. 1. Ed. 2. 1307. By the Common Law of England, if a man had been
imprisoned, and broke the prison, he should have been hanged, for what cause
soever he had been imprisoned, yea although it had been but for Trespass, which
great enormity was redressed by this Statute of 1 Edw. 2. entitled, De
frangentibus pris^nam, the words where be these, Touching Prisoners breaking of
Prison, our Lord the King does will and command, that none which from
henceforth do break prison, shall have Judgment of life and member, for the
breaking of prison only, except the cause for the which he was taken and
imprisoned does require such Judgment, if he should have been convicted
thereof according to the Law and Custom of the Realm, though in times past it
has been otherwise used, and therefore it is to be considered, who is a
prisoner, and what is breaking of prison according to the meaning of the
aforesaid Statute, every person who is under arrest for Felony, is a prisoner
as well being out of the Goal, as within, so that if he be but in the Stocks in
the Street, or out of the Stocks in the possession of any that has arrested
him, and does make an escape, that is a breaking of prison in the prisoner, for
imprisonment is none other but a restraint of liberty. Rast. pla. fo. 247. 340.
Kill: fo. 87. Dyer fo. 99. Fitz. Coron. 134. Bro. Coron. 79.

Unsufficient Sheriffs.
(B) Stat. 9. Edw. 2. 1315. The King receiving great complaints from the great
men and people in Parliament, throughout the whole Realm; perceived great
damage done to him, and great oppression and disheritances to his people, by
reason of unsufficient Sheriffs and Bailiffs, the King resolved to prevent such
evil oppressions and disheritances by the assent of his Prelates, Barons, etc.
Enacted that the Sheriffs shall have sufficient Land within the same Shire, to
answer the King and his people, and to attend his Office, and if any Sheriffs
or Hundreders be unsufficient shall be removed *, and others more convenient
put in their place, that none shall farm his Land. That Writs sent to the
Sheriffs shall be executed by the Hundreders sworn and known, they to be such
-- as have Land to answer and not by others so that the people may know to whom
to sue such Execution saving always the Returns of the Writs, to them that have
them or ought to have them,

The King by his Prerogative shall have the Wreck of the Sea.
(C) Stat. 17. Edw. 2. 11. It is Enacted that the King shall have the Wreck of
the Sea throughout the Realm, Whales, and great Sturgion taken in the Sea, or
elsewhere within the Realm, except in certain places privileged by the King.
See Stat. 3. Edw. 1. 4. Rast. pla. fo. 611. Co. lib. fo. 106, 108. 1. Hen. 7.
fo. 23. 11. Hen. 4. fo. 16. 9. Hen. 7. fo. 20. 35. Hen. 6. fo. 27. See chapter 10.
(S) 30. (A) 29. (D) 30. (C)

The King shall have all Felons goods.
(D) Stat. 17. Ed. 2. 17. Be it Enacted the King shall have the goods of all
Felons attainted and Fugitives wheresoever they be found, and if they have
Freehold, then it shall be forthwith taken into the Kings hands, and the King
shall have all profits of the same by one year and one day, and the Land shall
be wasted and destroyed, the Houses, Woods and Gardens, and all manner of
things belonging to the same, excepting men of certain places privileged by the
King therefore; and after he has had the year and the day, and the waste; then
the Land shall be restored to the chief Lord of the same fee, unless that he
fine before with the King for the year and the day, and the waste: Nevertheless
it is used in the County of Gloucester by custom that after one year and a day,
the Lands and Tenements of Fellons shall revert, and be restored to the next
Heir to whom it ought to have descended, if the felony had not been done. And
in Kent, the custom is Gavel kind* the Father to the Bow, and the Son to the
Plow; All Heirs Male shall divide their Inheritance, and likewise women; but
women shall not make partition with men, and a woman after the death of her
Husband shall be endowed of the moiety, and if she commit fornication in her
Widowhood, or take an Husband after shall loose her Dower, Fitz: N. B. fo. 144.
Regist. fo. 165. V. N. B. fo. 99. V. N. B. fo. 5. See chap. 10. (S) 53. (A)

King Edward the Third.
Eduard the 3. borne at wins^r* was Crowned at westminster the 2. of feb: 1327.
being 15. Years old Reigned. 50. years 4 months 24 dais. Dyed the 21 of June
1377 lies buired in west.



Enquiry of Goalor^ which shall procure Prisoners to become Appealers.
(A) STat. 1. Edw. 3. 7. Be it Enacted for the eschewing the damages and
destruction that often does happen by Sheriffs, Goalors, and keepers of
Prisons, within Franchizes, and without, which have pained their prisoners, and
by such evil means compel and procure them to become appealers, and to appeal
harmless and guiltless people, to the intent to have ransom of such appealed
person for fear of imprisonment or other cause, the Justices of the one Bench
and of the other, and Justices of Assizes and Goal delivery, shall by force of
this Statute enquire of such compulsive punishments, and procurements, and hear
the complaints of all them that will complain in such cases by Bill, and shall
hear and determine such plaints, as well at the Suit of the party, as at the
Kings Suit. Stat. 13. Edw. 1. 12. 14. Ed. 3. 10. Rast. pl. fo. 56.

None to ride armed except. etc.
(B) Stat. 2. Edw. 3. 3. Be it Enacted that none shall ride or go armed but
such as are the Kings Servants, or being licenced, nor his Officers to do their
Office by force of Arms, nor bring any force in an affray of the peace; neither
to be armed by day not night in any place upon pain of forfeiture of their
Arms, and imprisonment during the pleasure of the King, all Officers whatever
is required to put this Act in force, See chapter 37. (A)

(C) 2. Edw. 3. 6. 2. Ed. 4. 5. Every Justice of peace upon his discretion may
bind to the Peace or Good Behavior such as are common Barrators, A common
Barrator is he which is either a common moover and stirrer up or maintainer of
Suits in Law in any Courts of Record, or else of quarrels or parts in the
Country; as if any Court of Record, County Court, Hundred, or other inferior
Courts, any person by fraud and malice under color of Law shall themselves
maintain, or stir up others unto multiplicity of unjust and feigned Suits, or
Informations upon penal Laws, or shall maliciously purchase a special
Supplicavit of the Peace, to force the other party to yield to him composition,
all such as are Barrators in the Country, and these are three sorts.

First, Disturbers of the Peace *, such are either common qua^rellers or
fighters in their own cause, or common moovers or maintainers of quarrels and
affraies between others.

Secondly, Common takers or detainers by force or subtlety of the possessions
of Houses, Lands or Goods, which have been in question or controversy.

Thirdly, Inventers, and Sowers of false reports where^ by di^cords arises, or
may arise between Neighbors; Yea, if one be communis seminator litium he is a
Barrator, or if any man of himself be communis oppresor vicinorum, a common
oppressor of, or wrangler with his Neighbors either by unjust or wrangling
Suits, or other oppressions or deceits, he is a Barrator, or if one Communis
pacis perturbater calumniator and mal^ factor, he is a Barrator, but all such
persons must be common Barrators, not in one or two, but in many causes. See
Lamb. 79. Co. 8. 36. Co. l. 338. Co. 8. 36. Cromp. 257. C^. 8. 37.

(D) Stat. 2. Edw. 3. 8. It is accorded and established, This will break the
n^ck of all Charters in England, that be unjust, etc.
that it shall not be commanded by the great Seal, nor the little Seal, to
disturb or delay common Right, and though such commandments do come, the
Justices shall not therefore leave to do right in any point, Stat. 9. Hen. 3.
29. 5. Ed. 3. 9. 14. Edw. 3. 14.

Gold and Silver prohibited, etc.
(E) Stat. 9. Edw. 3. 1. No person shall carry Gold or Silver out of the Realm
without the Kings license, who so does, shall forfeit all such as is carrying,
with ship, etc. Stat. 5. Rich. 2. 2. Stat. 2. Hen. 6. 6. 19. Hen. 7. 5.

Rates on Victuals.
(F) Sat. 23. Edw. 3. 6. The King Ordains all persons whatever which sels any
kind of Victuals, shall be bound to sell their victual at a reasonable rate or
price, having respect to the price, that such Victual be sold at, in the
places adjoining, so that the seller may have a moderate gain and not excessive
*, And if the seller do sell otherwise, shall pay double back, the Mayor and
Bailiffs of the City, Market Towns, and other corporate Towns, and the ports of
the Sea, shall have power to enquire of all offenders in the same. And to levy
the said pain (upon themselves) for their use who sueth for the same, and in
case the Mayor and Bailiffs be negligent in putting in execution any of the
premises, and thereof be convicted, before Justices assigned, then the said
Mayor and Bailiffs shall be compelled by the said Justices to pay the treble of
the things so sold to the party damnified, and also shall be grievously
punished by the King, 23. Edw. 3. 4. See chap. 50. (A) 44. (E) 48. (A) 51. (A)
29. (A)

None to be condemned without his Answer. etc.
(G) Stat. 28. Edw. 3. 3. The King ordains that no man of what estate or
condition he be, shall be put out of his Land nor Tenements, nor taken, nor
imprisoned, nor dis-inherited, nor put to death without being brought to Answer
by due process of Law. Stat. 9. Hen. 3. 29. 5. Edw. 3. 9. 25. Ed. 3. 4. See
chap. 10. (X) 38. (C) 41. (A) 43. (D) 38. (A)

Penalty of a Mayor, Sheriff and Aldermen for not redressing grievances.
(H) Stat. 28. Edw. 3. 10. Because of the Errors, Defaults, and Misprisions,
which be notoriously used in Cities, Boroughs and Corporations for default of
good governance, of the Mayor, Sheriff and Aldermen, cannot be inquired nor
found by people of the same Town; it is Ordained and established that the said
Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen, which have the Governance of the said Town or
City, shall cause to be redressed and corrected, the Defaults, Errors, and
Misprisions above named, and the same duly punish from time to time, upon a
certain pain, that is to say, at the first default a thousand Marks to the
King. The second default two thousand Marks; And at the third default, that the
Franchizes and Liberties of the said Town be taken into the Kings hand, it
shall be enquired of by foraign Inquests of foraign Counties, namely, the City
of London, but all other Cities, Boroughs and Corporations to be tried by
forain Inquests in the same Town, which may be done by the punishment of Judges
thereunto assigned by Inquest or Indictment, and called to answer the same out
of their Town, which fine is to be leavyed by Attachment, and distress, and by
exigent if need be, upon any Land or Tenements out of their Town, belonging to
any of them.

King Edward the Sixth.
Edward borne at Ham^o^^ Court at the age of 9 years began his* reign the 31
of Janu^ ^^46 Crowned at wes^m. the 2^ of februa* following he reigned 6 years
5 months died the 6 of Julie buried at westminster



Murder, etc.
(A) STat. 1. Edw. 6. 12. It is Murder to strike with either blunt or sharp
weapon, if the party dye within a year and a day* and the blows given upon
malice, neither shall Clergy be allowed. See Chap. 36. (A.)

Victuallers, and Handicrafts-men.
(B) Stat. 2. Edw. 6. 15. For as much as Artificers Handicrafts men, and
Laborers have made Confederacies, and mutually sworn, not only that they
should sell their victuals at a certain rate, and not to meddle with one
another work, and finish that which others have begun, but also to appoint how
much work they shall do in the day; and what hours, and times they shall work,
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and to the hurt and great
impoverishment of the Kings subjects; For reformation whereof, the King
ordains, That if any Victuallers or Artificers aforesaid, shall at any time
combine, conspire, or make any Oaths that they shall not sell their victuals at
certain prices, or that Artificers shall not work, but as abovesaid, being
convicted, shall pay in six days ten pounds to the King, or twenty days
imprisonment, and fed only with bread and water, if he have not sufficient to
pay the said Fine; For the second offense the Pillory, or twenty pound; And for
the third offense, shall forfeit forty pounds, or else be set in the Pillory,
and lose one of his ears, and shall be taken as an infamous man, and his
sayings, and oath not to be credited in matter of judgment; And if any such
Conspiracy, C^venant, or Promise be had, or made by any Society, Brotherhood,
or Company of Craft-mystery, or occupation of the Mysteries aforementioned
with the presence or consent of the most of them, that then immediately upon
such act of conspiracy Covenant, or Promise, had, or made, over and besides the
particular punishment before in this Act appointed for the offender, their
Corporation shall be dissolved, to all intents, constructions, and purposes; and
that none do presume to hinder any Free-Mason, Rough Mason, Carpenter,
Bricklayer, Plasterer, Joyner, Ha^d-hewer, Sawyer, Tyler, Pavier, Glasier,
Lymebu^ner, Brick-maker, Tyle-maker, Plummer, or Laborer born in this Realm, or
made denison, to work in the said Crafts in any City, Borough, or Town
Corporate, with any person or persons that will retain him, albeit the said
persons so retained, or any of them do not inhabit, or live in the said Town,
etc. nor be free of the same City, etc. any Statute, Law, Ordinance, or other
thing to the contrary, upon forfeiture of five pound a time, half to the King,
and half to the party suing, to be recovered by Bill, etc. no wager of Law, or
protection allowed, etc. See Chap. 29. (E) 30. (F.) 36. (A.)

Robbing within a Market of a Fair, Booth, Tent, etc.
(C) Stat. 5. 6 Ed. 6. 14. Be it Enacted that no person or persons which shall
happen to be found guilty after the Laws of this Realm of, and for robbing any
person or persons in any Booth or Tent, in any Fair or Market, the Owner, his
wife, children, or servant then being within the same Booth, or Tent, shall not
be admitted the benefit of his, or their Clergy, but excluded thereof, and
suffer death without consideration, whether the said persons within, shall be
sleeping, or waking. See Chap. 47. (B) 49. (D) 51. (A) 11. (N.)

Fore-stalling, Regrators, Ingr^cers.
(D) Stat. 5. 6. Edw. 6. 14. The Law being so good against these offenders,
that I shall give Poultons Exposition thereof, viz. They deserve to be reckoned
amongst the number of Oppressors of the common good, and public weal of the
Nation, for they do endeavor to enrich themselves, by the impoverishing of
others, and respect not how many loses, so they may gain.

They have been exclaimed of, and condemned in Parliament from one Generation
to another, as appears by many Statutes, at least fourteen Statutes, especially
Fore-stallers, as apppears by 34 Ed. 1. when it was ordained, that no
Forestaller should be suffered to dwell in any Town, for he is a manifest
oppressor of the poor, and deceiver of the rich, a public enemy of the
Country, a canker, a moth, and a gnawing worm that daily wastes the
Commonwealth. And the name, and act of a Forestaller was so odious, that it was
moved in Parliament to Enact that a Forestaller should be bated out of the Town
where he dwelt, by Dogs, and whipped forth with Whips ( Newcastle would have
been empty) and by this Statute it declares who are offenders, and what
punishment to be inflicted.

That whatsoever person or persons, shall buy, or cause to be bought any
Merchandise, Victual, or other thing coming by land, or water, toward any Fair
or Market to be sold in the same, or coming toward any City, Port, or Haven,
Creek, or Road of this Nation, from any part beyond the Seas to be sold.

Or make any Bargain, Contract, or Promise for the having or buying of the
same, or any part of the same, so coming as aforesaid, before the same
Merchandise, Victual, or other things shall be in the Market, Fair, City, Port,
Haven, Creek, or Road, ready to be sold; Or shall make any motion by word,
letter, message, or otherwise to any person or persons for the inhansing of the
price, or dear selling of any of the other things above mentioned; Or else
dissuade, move, or stir any person coming to the Market, or Fair to forbear to
bring any of the things above mentioned to any Fair, or Market, City, Port,
etc. to be sold as aforesaid, shall be adjudged a Fore-staller, 13. Eliz.
excepts Oils, Sugars, Spices, Currants, or other foreign Victuals brought from
beyond the Sea, Fish, and Salt only excepted.

A Regrator defined, what person or persons shall by any means regrate, obtain,
or get into his, or their hands or possessions in any Fair or Market within
this Nation to be sold, any dead Victual whatsoever brought thither for that
purpose, and do sell the same again in any Fair or Market holden, or kept in
the same places, or within any Market or Fair within four miles thereof, shall
be reputed and taken for a Regrator, or Regrators.

An Engrosser is, he, or they which shall engrosse, or get into his, or their
hands by buying, contracting by promise taking, other then by Demise, Grant, or
Lease of Land, or Tithe any Corn growing in the Fields, or any other Corn or
Grain, Butter, Cheese, Fish, or other dead Victuals whatsoever within the
Nation, to the intent to sell the same again, shall be reputed and taken an
unlawful Engrosser, or Engrossers.

If any person or persons shall offend in any of the things before recited, and
being thereof duly convicted or attainted thereof by the Laws of this Nation,
for the first offense shall suffer two months imprisonment without Bayl or
Mainprize, and forfeit the value of the goods; For the second offense six
months imprisonment, without Bayl or Mainprize, and lose double the value of
the goods; and upon conviction of the third offense shall be set in the Pillory
where he dwells in the same Town, and lose all the goods he, or they have, which
was to their own use, and be committed to prison during the Kings pleasure, it
is but Mutatis, Mutandis.

Every Justices of every County, is to enquire and determine of the offenses in
their Quarter Sessions upon Inquisition, Presentment, Bill, or Information,
exhibited, and proved by two Witnesses, the one half of the Fine to the King,
the other to the party discoverer.

What Justice can be expected or had in Newcastle, the May^rs, Justices and
Burgesses being the offenders, Judges, (P) ^^rors in their own causes, and must
be tried in the same ^^unty (T) themselves to have the Fines, as by Charter
appears (...) See Stat. 21. K. James, 4. (T) See 10. Chap. (L) (P) Chap. 10.
(R) (*) See Stat. 5. Eliz. 12.

The Town of Gates-head, and all Liberties given to Newcastle, etc.
(E) Stat. 7. Edw. 6. 10. There being Bishop of Durham elected, nor any Member
of Parliament for that County, which the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle
perceiving, petitioned the King, that the Town of Gates-head in the County of
Durham, adjoining to their Corporation, only the River of Tyne, between, being
populous, and without Government, and often committing many outrages in their
Town, and then got over the water into the Town of Gates-head unpunished, and
that often they cast Rubbish into the River, and also that the Bridge went to
decay very much, which belonged to that Town, humbly beseeching that his
Majesty would be graciously pleased to incorporate that Town with them under
their Government, with all its members, and Salt-meadows, and Park, and that it
may be quite taken from the County of Durham, and all the people therein to
become subordinate to their Laws.

Be it Enacted that the whole Town of Gates-head, with the Salt-meadows, the
whole Water, and Bridge, with all the Liberties thereunto belonging, except the
Common, which shall still remain to the inhabitants, be incorporated with
Newcastle, and dis-joyned from the County of Durham, as Newcastle was from
Northumberland by Charter.

King Richard The Second.
RICHARD the 2. borne at Bordeaux Son to Edward Prince of Wales, begann his
Reign the 21 of June Ano: Dni 1377. he Raig^ed 22. Years, was Deposed: and
died the 14. of February 1399. First buried at Langley in Hartf^dshire, and
afterward of Westmister.



A Free Trade in all England.
(A) STat. 11. Richard 2. 7. and the 14. Richard 2. 9. Be it Enacted that all
Merchants, Aliens, and Denisons, and all other, and every of them, of what
estate or condition they b^ which will buy, or sell Corn, Wine, Averdepoize,
Flesh, Fish, and all other Victual, or other Merchandises, and all other things
vendible, from whencesoever they come, in whatsoever place they please, be it
City, Borough, Town, Port of the Sea, Fair, Market, or other place within this
Realm, within Franchizes, or without, may freely, or without disturbance sell
the same to whom they please, as well to Foreigners, as to Denizons, except to
the enemies of the King, and of his Realm.

And if any disturbance be done to any such Merchant, etc. upon his sail of the
same in any of the places aforesaid, the Mayor and Bailiffs of such Fanchizes
shall make remedy, but if they do not, and being thereof convicted, the
Franchizes shall be taken into the Kings hand, and the party grieving shall
make to the Merchant grieved, double damages.

And if such disturbance be out of the Franchized Towns, then the Steward or
Bayliffe of such Lord, who is Lord of the Manor, shall give right, or pay
double damages, the party offending shall be imprisoned for one whole year, and
that none such shall be disturbed, but shall freely buy and sell for his own
use, or to the Kings, etc. except that the Merchant, Aliens, shall carry no
Wines out of the Realm, as it is contained in their Charters.

And that the said things be holden, kept, and performed in every City,
Borough, Town, Port of the Sea, or any other place notwithstanding any Charter
of Franchize to them granted to the contrary, nor Usage, Custom, nor
Judgment, given upon their Charters, Usages, nor Customs which they may
allege, which Charters, Usages, and Customs, the said King, the
Grandfathers, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and great men, and Commons in
Parliament aforesaid Holds, these said Charters, etc. of no force, and as being
things, granted, used, and accustomed to the damage of the King, the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and great men of his Realm, and great oppression of the Commons,
saving to the King, and to other the Customs due of the said Merchandises.

And the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Justices, assigned to hold the Pleas of the
King in places where they come, shall enquire of such disturbances and
grievances, and do punishment according as is before ordained.

And by a Statute made the 25. Edw. 3. 2. It was Ordained and Established, That
the said Statutes made in the ninth year Chapter 1. in all Points and Articles
contained in the same should be holden, kept, and maintained, etc.

And if any Charter, Letters Pattents, Proclamations, or Commandments, Usage,
Allowance, or Judgment were made to the contrary, the same should be utterly
repealed, avoided, and holden for none.

And that it is free for any whatever, that brings any provisions whatever, to
sell the same, or other Merchandises, by Gross or retail, either in the City
of London, or any other Port, City, Borough, or Town-Corporate in England,
without challenge, or impeachment, and to sell them freely to any that will buy
the same, notwithstanding any grant whatever to the contrary notwithstanding,
any Franchize, Custom used, since such Franchizes, and Customs, Usages, be in
common prejudice to the King, and all people, etc.

And that no Mayor, Bailiff, Catch-pole, Minister, nor other shall meddle in
the sail of any manner of Victuals vendible, brought to the places aforesaid.

And all men that will sue, may have a Writ out of the Chancery to attach him
by his body that offends herein, as a disturber of the common profit, etc.

The King seeing clearly if the said Statutes were duly put in execution, would
much extend to the profits and wealth of the whole Nation, do Ordain, and
Establish, by assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, great men, Nobles,
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That the said Statutes, shall
be firmly holden, kept, maintained, and fully executed in all Points and
Articles of the same, notwithstanding any Ordinance, Statute, Charter, Letters
Pattents, Franchizes, Proclamations, Commandments, Usage, Allowance, or
Judgment be made or used to the contrary, it shall be utterly repealed,
avoided, and holden for none.

This Statute was obtained by a Petition (worth reading) from all the Nobles
and Commons of England, as you may read in the ninth of Edward the third,
Chapter the first, it laying open the great grievance of the whole Nation in
Parliament, of Provisions, and other Merchandises, being engrossed into private
hands, and restraining all others from trading, but themselves, etc. See Chap.
29. (C) 30. (D) 32. (D) 35. (A) 38. (A) 51. (B. C.) This Statute revived, would
make England as happy as Venice, for Riches, etc.

Merchant-strangers shall be well used.
(B) Stat. 14. Rich. 2. 9. Be it Enacted that Merchant-strangers, repairing
into the Realm of England, shall be well and courteously, and rightfully
entreated, and governed in the said Realm, to the intent that they shall have
the courage to repair into the same. See Chap. 30. (B) 41. (A.)

The Duke of Venice by tollerating a free Trade, all the Nobility and Gentry
trades in Merchandizings, which does so improve his revenew, that it maintains
his Wars without other Impositions, he being able to wage war with the most
potentest Prince that is, etc.

No Customers to be Traders, nor to have parts of Ships.
(C) Stat. 14. Rich. 2. 10. The King ordains that no Customers, nor Controlers
have any ships of their own, nor meddle with the fraught of ships, and to
eschew as well the damage of the King, of his Customs, as the loss of the
Merchants repairing to the Port, as well Aliens as Denizons; And that no
Customer, Controler, Searcher, Waiter, or Finder have any such Office for term
of life, but only as long as shall please the King, notwithstanding any
Pattent or Grant to any to the contrary, but such Pattents or Grants be
repealed, and of no force, nor value. Stat. 17. Rich. 2. See Chap. (35)

Statute of Mortmain.
(D) Stat. 15. Rich. 2. 5. Be it Enacted what Mayors Bailiffs, and Commons of
Cities, Boroughs, and other Towns which have perpetual Commonalty, and others
which have officers, that from henceforth they shall not purchase to them, and
their Commons any Lands, etc. nor no religious, or other person what ever he be
*, do buy or sell, or under color of gift or term, or any other manner of
title, any Lands, Tenements, upon pain of forfeiture of the same, whereby the
said Lands, and Tenements, might have come to Mortmain.

Riots, Routs, etc.
(E) The 4. year, King Rich. 2. Riots, Routs, and unlawful assemblies, have
been so many times pernicious, and fatal enemies to the peace and tranquillity
of the Nation, that it did shake the foundation and form of State-Government,
as that of a Collector of a Subsidy at Dartford in Kent in his days, in
requiring but a Groat of a Tailor and his wife, grew to such a head of
coffeehouse, and not being timely queld, became such a Rebellion, that it
put the King in great hazard of his life, the burning of the City of London,
the Nobles and Gentry, with the learned of the Law beheaded, and others in
hazard of their lives and families overthrown, and the Records of Law burnt.
Wat. Tyler was Captain. See Hen. 6. (B) See Chap. 37. (A.)

Queen Mary. Maria nata Grenouici in Febru: 1505 Incipit regnare 6 Iuli 1553
Regnauit 5 annos et 4 mensis Obyt annos nata 45 et 9 mensis


The Town of Gates-head taken from Newcastle.
(A) STat. 1. Mary Chap. 3. So soon as Bishop Tunstall was created Bishop of
Durham, laid open to the Queen and Parliament the Illegallity of Gates-heads
being taken from the County of Durham, and Incorporated with Newcastle, and how
surreptitiously they got it past by Act of Parliament, and humbly beseeched
that the Town and Liberties of Gates-head might be restored to the County of
Durham again, which could not well be done without that Statute of the 7. Edw.
6. 10. were repealed; After a great debate in Parliament, it was found only a
covetous disposition in the Corporation of Newcastle to require that from King
Edward the sixth, and in no ways for the good of any, in any particular sense,
who Enacted that the Statute of the seventh of Edward the sixth, Chapter the
tenth, should be repealed, and of no force to all intents and purposes, and the
Town of Gates-head should be free from the Corporation of Newcastle, etc. See
Chap. 7. and Chap. 8.

Sweet Queen.

Queen Elizabeth.
The most excellent Princes Elizabeth. Queen of England, France, and Ireland.
Defender of the Faith etc. She reigned 44 years, died the 24 of March, 1602
aged 69, 6 months: and lies buried at Westminster Compton Holland (...)



How long Apprentices should serve.
(A) STat. 5. Eliz. 4. Be it Enacted that all Apprentices in every Corporate
Town through England, shall serve after the Custom and Order of London, the
full term of seven years at least, so as the term and years of such
Apprentices do not expire or determine before such Apprentices be of the age of
four and twenty years at least; And if an Apprentice be mis-used by the
nonconformity of the Master, then the next officer upon complaint shall bind
the Master to answer the Sessions, and the cause appearing, the Bench may
discharge the Apprentice from his Master. See Chap. 55. (C.)

The Punishment of Perjury, etc.
(B) Stat. 5. Eliz. 9. Be it Enacted that if any person or persons at any time
shall unlawfully and corruptly procure any Witness or Witnesses by letters,
rewards, or any other promises to commit any wilful and corrupt perjury in any
matter or cause whatsoever now depending, or which hereafter shall depend in
suit or variance, by any Writ, Action, Bill, Complaint, or Information upon any
matter or cause whatever, and being thereof convicted, shall forfeit forty
pound; and if he have not so much, then to be imprisoned for half a year,
without Bail or Mainprize, and to stand in the Pillory one hour in a Market day
in the open Market, and never to be received as a Witness in any Courts of
Record, and if judgment be given upon his testimony, it shall be void, and the
party grieved have his damages.

And if any person shall wilfully perjure himself by committing wilful perjury
by his deposition in any Courts, or being examined Ad perpetuam rei memoriam,
for which offense he shall forfeit twenty pound, and imprisonment for six months
without Bail or Mainprize, and never to be as a witness in any Court, and that
the Oath shall be void, and party grieved to recover his damages; and if he be
not able to pay his Fine, then to be set in the Pillory having both his ears
nailed thereunto, and never to be credited again in any Court, the one half of
the Fine to the Queen, and the other to the party grieved, that will sue for
the same, by Bill of Indictment, etc. wherein there shall be no wager of Law,
etc.

And all Witnesses are required upon summons to appear, to give evidence,
reasonable charges allowed, and upon default to forfeit ten pound, and all the
damages sustained to be recovered in any Court of Record, by Action, Bill, etc.
no Wager of Law etc. See Stat. 21. K. James 28. made perpetual. See Chap. 31.
(A) 34. (A. B) 42. (A.)

Fore-stallers of Corn, etc.
(C) Stat. 5. Eliz. 12. Be it Enacted that no person, or persons shall buy any
Corn, out of open Fair or Market to sell again, unless such persons shall have
special and express words in a license, that he or they may so do, upon pain of
the forfeiture of five pounds for so doing, which forfeiture to come to the
Queen the one half, and the other half to the party that will sue for the same
by Bill, etc. See Stat. 5. 6. Ed. 6. 14. See Chap. 50. (A) 51. (C.)

Arrestings in other men's names, and delays, etc.
(D) Stat. 8. Eliz. 2. Be it Enacted by this present Parliament that if any
person or persons shall by any means cause, or procure any other person to be
Arrested or Attached at the suit, or in the name of any person where indeed no
such person is known, or without the assent, consent, or agreement of such
persons, at whose suit, or in whose name such Arrest or Attachment is, or shall
be so had and procured; That then every such person and persons, that shall so
cause or procure any such Arrest, or Attachment of any other person to be had
or made for vexation or trouble, and shall thereof be convicted or lawfully
accused by Indictment, presentment, or by the testimony of two sufficient
Witnesses or more, or other due proof, shall for every such offense by him or
them committed, done, or procured, have, and suffer imprisonment of his or
their body six months without Bail or Mainprize, and before a deliverance out
of prison, shall pay unto the party so Arrested or Attached treble the costs,
and charges, damages, and expenses that he or they shall be put unto by reason
or occasion of such Arrest or Attachment so had, and shall also forfeit and pay
unto such person, or persons, in whose name, or at whose Suit, he, or they
shall so procure such Arrest or Attachment to be had or made, if then there be
any such person known, the sum of ten pounds for every such offense; and that
all such persons damnified thereby shall (...) their remedy in any Court of
Record by Bill, Plaint, or Action of Debt, for all damages, etc. wherein there
shall not be any Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of Law allowed the Defendant. See
Stat. 13. Ed. 1. 36.

The Penalty of cutting of Purses
(E) Stat. 8. Eliz. 4. Whereas there are a certain people of a Fraternity or
Brotherhood, that puts in practice that art or mystery of cutting of Purses,
and that do combine secretly to spoil the true subjects of this Realm; Be it
therefore Enacted, that whosoever be found guilty of taking away moneys, etc.
in such sort from any person or persons, shall not have the benefit of Clergy.
See Chap. 12. (5) 39. (A.)

Sheriffs Fees for executing Executions, etc.
(F) Stat. 29. Eliz. 4. Be it Enacted by this present Parliament, That it shall
not be lawful for any Sheriff, or Bailiff of Franchizes, or Liberties, or any
of the Officers, or Deputies, nor any of them, by color or reason of their, or
either of their Office, or Offices, to have, receive, or take of any person
whatever directly, or indirectly, for the serving, and executing of any extent,
or execution upon the body, lands, goods, or chattels of any person, or persons
whatsoever, more, or other consideration, or recompense than as in this present
Act shall be limited and appointed, which shall be lawful to be had, received,
and taken, that is to say, twelve pence of, and for every twenty shillings
where the sum exceeds not one hundred pounds; and six pence of, and for
every twenty shillings being over and above the said sum of one hundred
pounds, that he or they shall levy, or extend, and deliver in execution, or
take the body in execution for, by virtue and force of such extent, or
execution whatsoever, upon pain and penalty, that all and every Sheriff, etc.
that do the contrary, shall lose and forfeit to the party grieved, his treble
damages, and shall forfeit forty pound for every time so offending, the half
thereof to the Queen, and the other to the party suing, by Bill, Plaint,
Action, or Information, wherein no Essoyn, Wager of Law, or Protection shall be
allowed. This Statute not to extend to any City, or Town Corporate.

The poor to be set on work.
(G) Stat. 43. Eliz. 2. Be it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the
Authority thereof, that all poor be set on work by the Churchwardens or
Overseers, and such as will not work, being able, shall be sent to the house of
Correction. See Chap. 38. (A. C.)

Sheriffs punishable for false Arrests, etc.
(H) Stat. 43. Eliz. 6. For the avoiding many Suits commenced, according to the
due course of the Laws of this Realm, to the intolerable vexation and charge
of her Highness subjects; Be it Enacted by Authority of this Parliament, if
any Sheriff, or other person, having Authority, or taking upon him to break
Writs, or make any Warrant for the summoning of any person upon any Writ,
Process, Suit, or for Arrest, or Attaching of any person or persons by his, or
their body, or goods to appear in any of her Majesty's Courts at Westminster,
or elsewhere, not having before, that original Writ or Processes warranting
the same, that then upon complaint made to the Justices of Assize of the County
where the same offense shall be committed, or to the Judges of the Court, out
of which the Process issued, not only the party that made such Warrant, but all
those that were the procurers thereof, shall be sent for before the said Judges
or Justices by Attachment, or otherwise, as the same Judges or Justices shall
think good, and allow of, and be examined thereof upon their Oaths; and if the
same offense be confessed by the same offenders, or proved by sufficient
witnesses to the satisfaction of the same Judges or Justices, that then the
same Judges or Justices that shall so examine the same, shall forthwith by
force of this Act commit every of the same to the Jail, and there shall
remain, without Bayl or Mainprize, until such time as they amongst them have
fully satisfied, and paid unto the party grieved, by such Warrant not only the
sum of ten pounds, but also all costs and damages, as the same Judges or
Justices shall set down, that the same party has sustained thereby, and
withal twenty pound a piece for their offense to her Majesty 21. King James
Chap. 16. 3. King Charles Chap. 4. Dyer, fo. 244.

King James.
(A) UPon the seventh day of May in the first year of K. James a Proclamation
was proclaimed throughout London, for to cease all exactions, all Monopolies,
and all Protections whatever, that was against the common good, and that
hindered men's Suits at Law also forbidding oppression.

Stabbing or Thrusting.
(B) Stat. 1. King James 8. It is Enacted that if any person or persons shall
Stab or Thrust any person or persons, that has not then any weapon drawn, or
that has not then first stricken the party, which shall so stab or thrust, so
as the person or persons so stabbed or thrust, shall thereof dye within the
space of six months then next following, although it cannot be proved that the
same was done of malice forethought; yet the party so offending, and being
thereof convict by the verdict of twelve men, confession, or otherwise
according to the Laws of this Realm, shall be excluded from the benefit of his,
or their Clergy, and shall suffer death as in case of wilful Murder. Stat.
Homicide (24.)

Attorneys abuses remedied, etc.
(C) Stat. 3. King James Chap. 7. Be it Enacted for redress of sundry abuses
committed by Attorneys, and Solicitors, by charging their Clients with
excessive Fees, and other unnecessary demands to the great prejudice of the
Sergeant and Councellor at Law, who is greatly slandered, and to work the
private gain of such Attorneys, and Solicitors, the Client is often
extraordinarily delayed; Be it Enacted that for the future, that no Attorney,
Solicitor, or servant to any shall be allowed from his Clyent or Master, of, or
for any* Fee given to any Sergeant or Councellor at Law, or of, or for any
sum or sums of money given for copies to any Clerk or Clerks or Officers, in
any Court of Record at Westminster, unless he have a Ticket subscribed with
the hand and name of the same Sergeant, Counselor, Clerk, or Clerks, or
Officers aforesaid, testifying how much he has received for his Fee, or paid,
or given for copies, and at what time, and how often; And that all Attorneys
and Solicitors shall give a true bill unto their Masters or Clyents, or their
Assigns, of all other charges concerning their Suits, which they have for them,
subscribed, with their own hand and name, before such time, as they, or any of
them shall charge their Clyents with any of the same Fees or Charges; And that
if any Attorney, or Solicitor do, or shall willingly delay his Clyents Suits to
work his own gain, or demand by his Bill any other sum of money, or allowance
upon his account of any moneys which he has not laid out, or disbursed, that
in every such case the party grieved shall have his action against such
Attorney or Solicitor, and shall recover therein costs and treble damage; and
the said Attorney or Solicitor shall be discharged from thenceforth from being
an Attorney or Solicitor any more. See Chap. 58. (A)

All Monopolies and Dispensations, with penal Laws shall be void.
(D) Stat. 21. K. James Chap. 3. For as much as your most Excellent Majesty,
in your Royal judgment, and of your blessed disposition to the weal and quiet
of your subjects, did in the year of our Lord God, 1610. publish in Print to
the whole Realm, and to all posterity, that all Grants, and Monopolies, and of
the benefit of any penal Laws, or of poor to dispense with the Law, or to
compound for the forfeiture, are contrary to your Majesty's Laws, with your
Majesty's Declaration, which is truly consonant and agreeable to the ancient
and fundamental Laws of this your Realm; And whereas your Majesty was further
graciously pleased, expressly to command, that no Suitor should presume to move
your Majesty for matters of that nature; yet nevertheless upon
Misinformation, and untrue pretenses of public good, many such Grants have
been unduly obtained and unlawfully put in execution, to the great grievance,
and inconvenience of your Majesty's subjects, contrary to the Laws of this your
Realm, and contrary to your Majesty's Royal and blessed intention so published
as aforesaid; for avoiding whereof, and preventing the like for the time to
come; May it please your most Excellent Majesty at the humble Suit of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, that it may be declared, and enacted; And be it declared and enacted
by Authority of this present Parliament, That all Monopolies, and all
Commissions, Grants, Licenses, Charters, and Letters Pattents heretofore made,
or granted to any person or persons, bodies Politic, or Corporate whatsoever,
of, or for the sole buying, selling, making, working, or using of any thing
within this Realm, or of any other Monopolies, or of Power, Liberty or faculty
to dispense with any other, to give license or toleration to do, use, or
exercise any thing against the tenure, or purport of any Law or Statute, or to
give, or make any Warrant for any such Dispensation, License, or Toleration to
be had or made, etc. And all Proclamations, Inhibitions, Restraints, Warrants
of assistance, and all other matters or things whatsoever, any way tending to
the instituting, erecting, strengthening, furthering, or countenancing of the
same, or any of them are contrary to the Laws of this Realm, and so are, and
shall be utterly void, and of none effect, and in no ways to be put in use or
execution, etc.

Be it further Enacted, etc. that all person and persons bodies Politic and
Corporate whatsoever, which now are, or hereafter shall be, shall stand, and be
dis-abled and incapable to have, use, exercise or put in eure any Monopoly, or
any such Commission, Grant, License, Charter, Letters Pattents, Proclamations,
Inhibition, Restraint, Warrant of assistance, or other matter or thing tending
as aforesaid, or any liberty, power, or faculty grounded, or pretended to be
grounded upon them, or any of them.

The party grieved by pretext of any Monopoly, etc. shall recover his or their
treble damages, and double costs, etc. and he that delayeth an action grounded
upon Statute, incurs a praemunire, which is expressed in the 16. Rich. 2. 5. shall
be put out of the Kings Protection, and their Lands and Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels forfeit to our Lord the King, and their bodies to be attached to
answer the King, etc. (Charters granted to Corporations saved) Letters Pattents
to use new Manufactures saved.) Grants confirmed by Acts of Parliament saved.)
Warrants granted to Justices saved.) Letters Pattents that concern Printing,
Saltpeter, Gunpowder, great Ordnance shot, or Offices saved.) Nor shall this
Statute extend to void Commssions for Allum-Mines, nor to the Licenses of
keeping Taverns, making glass, transportation of Calves-skins, nor for making
Smalt, nor for melting Iron evre, with Sea-Coal, etc. Provided also, and be it
Enacted, That this Act or any Declaration, proviso, penalty, forfeiture, or
other thing before mentioned, shall not extend, or be prejudicial to any use,
custom, Prescription, Franchize, Freedom, Jurisdiction, Immunity, Liberty, or
Privilege heretofore claimed, used, or enjoyed by the Governors, and
Stewards, and Brethren of the Fellowship of the Hoast-men of the Town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, or by the ancient Fellow-ship, Guild, or Fraternity
commonly called Hoast-men, for, or concerning the selling, carrying, lading,
disposing, shipping, venting, or trading of, or for any Sea-coals, Stone-coals,
or Pit-coals, forth, or out of the Haven, and River of Tyne, or to a Grant made
by the said Governor, and Stewards, and Brethren of the fellowship of the said
Hoast-men to the late Queen Elizabeth, * of any duty or sums of money to be
paid for, This is the Grant of is per Ch^ldr^n, that they make the Nation pay,
etc.
or in respect of any such Coals, as aforesaid. Here the Reader may see that
all these excepted, except to the Justices, are allowed to be Monopolies, and
this last the greatest that ever was. See Chap. 11. Chap. 8. (A) Chap. 21. (A)
Parliament 1640.

Informations upon penal Statutes shall be prosecuted in the Counties where the
offenses are committed.
(E) Stat. 21. K. James Chap. 3. Be it Enacted that all informations upon p^nal
Statutes shall be prosecuted in the Counties where the offenses were committed,
etc. upon default of proving that the offense was committed in the same County,
the Defendant shall be found not guilty, etc. the Informer shall make oath,
that the offense was committed in the same County, where the Suit is commenced,
etc. The Defendant in an information upon a penal Statute may plead the general
issue, that they are not guilty, etc. Certain offenses there be excepted, but
may be tried elsewhere, etc.

This Statute was made in favor and ease of the people from coming to London,
but it is the worst Statute that ever was made, and much in favor of the
offender, for the offender in Corporations and Sheriffs, are Judges, and Jurors
in their own cases, and the Informer cast into prison, when the Judges are
coming to Assizes, etc. so the Judges cannot come to the knowledge of such
offenses, and the offenders not punished.

If that clause of the Statute were repealed (which ties all informations to be
tried only, and to be prosecuted in the same County, and this put in, that any
may as well prosecute at Westminster, as elsewhere would bring into the public
Revenew above a hundred thousand pound per annum.

Limitations of certain Actions for avoiding Suits in Law.
(F) Stat. 21. K. James, Chap. 16. Be it Enacted, That all Actions upon the
case (other then for slander) Actions for Account, Actions for Treaspass, Debt,
Detriment, and Replevi for Goods or Chattel, and the said Action of Trespass,
Quare clausum fregit, within six years next after the cause of such Action, and
not after.

Action of Trespass of Assault, Battery, Wounding, Imprisonment, or any of them
within four years next after the cause of such Action, or Suit, and not after.

And Actions upon the case for words within two years next after the words
spoken, and not after.

That no person do enter into any lands, but within twenty years next after his
Right or Title, which shall hereafter first descend or accrue to the same, and
in default thereof such persons so not entering, and their heirs, shall be
utterly excluded and dis-abled from such entry after to be made, etc.

Provided that if any person or persons be at the time of such cause of action
given or accrued, fallen or come within the age of one and twenty years seem
covert, non compos mentis, imprisoned, or be beyond the Seas, that then such
person or persons shall be at liberty to bring the same Actions, so as they
take the same within such time as are before limited after their coming to, or
being of full age, discovert, of sound memory, at large, and returned from
beyond the Sea, as other persons having no such impediments should be done,
Stat. 20. Hen. 3. 8. 3. Ed. 1. 38. 32. Hen. 8. 2. 1. M. 5.

The punishment of Drunkards.
(G) Stat. 21. K. James 7. etc. for preventing of that loathsome sin of
Drunkenness, Enacted that for every time any was drunk, should within one week
after conviction by the Oath of one Witness pay five shillings to the Church
wardens of the Parish for the use of the poor, and for want thereof in moneys,
to be set in the Stocks six hours; And for the second offense to be bound to
the Good Behavior. (See Chap. 55. (B.)

The Alehouse keeper, which does not sell by a full measure of a Quart shall,
etc. and that shall keep any person, tippling above one hour, shall forfeit ten
shillings, and all Brewers that shall deliver Beer, to houses unlicenced, shall
pay six shillings eight pence for every Barrel, etc.

King Charles.
The Petition of Right.
(A) STat. 3 year of K. Charles upon the second day of March 1627. The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons assembled in Parliament read the
Petition unto the King, the effect thereof was, That his Majesty would declare
and grant in open Parliament, that none might be compelled to make or yield any
gift, loan, or benevolence, tax, or such like charge, without common consent by
Act of Parliament.

That none be compelled to make answer, or take such oath, or to give
attendance, or be confined, molested or disquieted for refusal of that.

Nor Freemen be imprisoned or detained, it being the right and liberty of the
subject, according to the Laws and Statutes of England, and to declare your
Royal will and pleasure, which the King did in these words ( Soit Droit fait
come est desire) Let Right be done as is desired) See 28. Chap. 30. (B) 38. (C)
41. (A) 51. (C) 43. (D.)

The Star Chamber and High Commission Courts voted down.
(B) Act. 17. King Charles, The Parliament dissolved the High Commission, and
Star Chamber Courts, with the President, and Council of the North, to the end
to abandon all Arbitrary pressures, conceiving them to be the greatest of
evils, the proceedings, censures, and decrease of those Courts, have by
experience been found to be an intolerable burden to the people, and the means
to introduce an arbitrary power and government, being contrary to the Laws and
Liberties of the Land, etc. All which Courts and proceedings shall sease after
the first of August, 1641. being absolutely dissolved and taken away, etc. But
it further Enacted and Declared, that neither his Majesty nor Council have, nor
ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power or Authority by English Bill, Petition,
Articles, Libel, or any other Arbitrary way whatsoever, to examine, or draw
into question, determine, or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Goods, or Chattels of any of the subjects of this Kingdom, but that the same
ought to be tried and determined in the ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the
ordinary course of the Law, etc. And that from henceforth, no Court, Council,
or place of Judicature, shall be erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed
within this Realm of England, etc. which shall have, use, or exercise the same,
or the like * Jurisdiction, as is or has been used, practiced in the said
Court of Star Chamber. And be it Enacted, that if any who ever they be, shall
put in practice any of the Courts above named practices, shall for such offense
forfeit five hundred pound for the first offense to the party grieved, one
thousand for the second offense; and for the third offense, shall be from
thenceforth incapable Ipso facto, to bear office, and disabled to make any
Gift, Grant, Conveyance, etc. of any of his Lands, etc. nor to have any benefit
of them, etc. and shall pay to the party grieved treble damages, to be
recovered, etc. in any Court of Record at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill,
^laint, or Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid,
Prayer, Privilege, Injunction, or order of restraint shall be in any wise
prayed, granted, or allowed, nor any more then one Imparlence, etc.

It will do the Masters of ships no harm to get five hundred pounds for every
oath they are forced to swear against themselves, to cut purses, to be
imprisoned without judgment of the Law, arbitrarily fined, etc. all being done
by the Magistrates of Newcastle, etc. See Chap. 29. Chap. 26.

The Parliament.
Monopolies voted down, etc.
(A) 1640. The Parliament were then so zealous for the Nations weal, that
seeing what heavy yokes of bondage the people sat under by Monopolies, they
fell to work on them, and voted down, the Pattents of Tyn, Soap, Lether, Salt,
etc. as being infringers of the common right of the Freeborn, And the
pre-emption of Coals would have been the like, if any public spirit had
appeared and presented that grand grievance, which more concerns the life of
man then any of the other, but I hope God will do it in due time. See Stat. 21.
King James 3. See Chap. 44. (E.)

All Trade prohibited to Newcastle upon Tyne, etc.
(B) 9. Jan. 1642. Ordained that all Trade to Newcastle upon Tyne for Coals,
Salt, etc. be prohibited upon pain of forfeiture, and confiscation of ship and
goods, by reason that Town is conceived to be the principal inlet of all
foreign Aid and Forces for strengthening themselves against the Parliament,
tending to the destruction of the Laws and Liberties of England.

An Ordinance for a low price of Coals, etc.
(C) Feb. and June 42. and 43. Two Ordinances were made for setting a rate upon
Coals at London, being so scarce, and enhansed to such a great rate, that all
the poor were in a very sad condition.

Propositions to reduce Newcastle, etc.
(D) 5. June 1643. An Ordinance for reducing Newcastle to the obedience of the
Parliament, being garrisoned and kept by Papists, and other ill-affected
persons, whereby the whole Land suffers for want of Coals, so absolutely
necessary to the maintenance and support of Life, which falls heavy upon the
meaner sort.

Upon the 20. of June the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, and Common Council
of the City of London, met at Guild Hall, and undertook the reducing of that
Town of Newcastle from their Malignancy upon the Propositions of Parliament,
whereby they were to be repaid, both principle and use of all charges, out of
the Gentlemen's estates of Northumberland, and County of Durham (it was summa
injuria that these Gentlemen should be destroyed for the offense and
wickedness of that Corporation, who never yet suffered for the same, etc.)

Ordinances of Parliament.
(E) 12. May 1643. Ordained that there be a free and open Trade in the Ports of
Sunderland in the County of Durham, and Blithe in the County of Northumberland,
to relieve the poor inhabitants thereabouts by reason of the rapines, and
spoils those enemies of Newcastle have brought upon them in those two Counties,
they all being in great want and extremity.

(F) 14. Novem. 1644. Ordained that a free and open Trade be had to Newcastle
for Coals, Salt, etc. that Corporation being won by the sword with the Scots,
etc. These are breviated in the Epistle to the Reader, etc.

Notwithstanding all these sad Events which that Corporation brought upon the
people in those Northern Counties, but the Mayor and Burgesses, most of which
were the transgressors not in the least sorry, but still does with the highest
hand of Arrogance, and Pride tyrannize over the people in those Counties, not
admitting them to improve their estates, but casts them into prison, etc. The
oppressed cries for relief, and could never be heard.

(G) 17. June, 1649. And Act of Parliament passed for sail of Kings Lands, and
Queens, etc. by virtue whereof was surveyed in Lands, Mils, and Tenements to
the value of two thousand pounds per annum, and returned to Worcester house, I
leave the rest to the Examiner, etc. the particulars, I have etc.

(H) (...) 1650. An Act of Parliament constituting a Council for regulating of
Trade throughout England, etc. and were to sit at White Hall, where there was a
Legal Trial had against Newcastle, and were overthrown, as by the report which
was drawn up by the said Council to be reported to the Parliament, as appears,
etc.

(I) Anno 1653. The Parliament empowered a Committee for regulating of Trade and
Corporations through England, etc. when more charge was brought in against the
evil practice of the said Corporation, appears, etc.

All that is desired is a free Trade in the River of Tyne, according to the
purport and true meaning of that Stat. 11 Rich. 2. 7. The taking away what is
bad in that Corporations Charter, the River preserved, and men from being
imprisoned without judgment of Law.

Now to give some Reasons against this Arbitrary Power.
AS Sir Walter Raleigh, being to give a Character of Henry the Eighth,
prefaceth his Description with this Introduction, If all the Pictures and
Patterns of a merciless Prince were lost in the World, they might all again be
painted to the life out of the Story of that King.

So having given the world an account of the most unchristian, illegal,
oppressive practices of the Magistrates of Newcastle upon the people of this
Nation, whose either Neighborhood, or calling, or condition of life,
necessitate them to an intercourse with them, either by way of Traffic or any
other way, though forced into that Port and Harbor, by distress of weather,
tempest or any other accident incident to those that go down to the Seas in
Ships, and occupy their businesses in the waters; Reflecting on their Actions,
I may safely say of them as that Noble Knight did of that King, If all the
Pictures and Patterns of a cruel and merciless people were utterly lost in the
world, they might be all painted to the life out of this Narrative, setting out
the illegal Oppressions, arbitrary Exactions, barbarous Murders practiced and
committed by the Magistrates of Newcastle, both on their Neighbors, and the
free people of this Nation.

There are two Rules or Canons in Scripture upon which all the Commandments of
the second Table (and consequently, all the duty of man to his Neighbor) do
depend.

The First is, Quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris, What thou would not
have another do unto thee, that thou ought not do unto another. This Rule
well observed prevents all injury and wrong: for while a man frames his own
actions toward his Neighbor, according to that pattern which in his own breast
he shapes to his Neighbor to perform unto himself, he will do no injury,
because he would receive no injury; and this is the ground of that Command or
Precept of our Savior, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

The second Rule is, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even do
ye unto them, Mat. 7. 12. and this rule stirs us up to all beneficence, and
doing good to our Neighbor: for as to prevent injuring another man, a man
should ask himself, would I that another man should do to me, as I am about to
do unto him? and so, love to himself will prevent hatred to another; So to
confer favors, and to do good unto another, a man should ask himself, would I
require this boon, this favor, this good turn from another, if I stood in need
of it as my Neighbor does, and I were in his condition? and would the granting,
or doing this favor, be most acceptable to me, and lay an eternal obligation
upon me? Hence love to a man's Self, will kindle his bowels of compassion to his
Brother, and will dispose him willingly to do that good unto another, which, if
occasion served, he would willingly receive from another.

These men of Newcastle regulate themselves in all their actions here charged
upon them, and fully proved by oath of men of undoubted integrity, neither by
the one Rule nor by the other; for they do not only do those injuries and
wrongs which they would not take, but they deny those favors which they would,
if occasion served, willingly receive; Nay, they do not only deny to do those
favors themselves, which not only by the Law of Christian Charity, but even by
the Dictate of Nature, and common Humanity they are bound to perform, but they
binder and deter those that would do them, and violently prosecute, fine and
imprison those who have releived them, and without their present help, had
ship-wracked in the very Haven, and perished under the expectation of a delayed
assistance.

I shall not accuse all Incorporations as established Monopolies, but
certainly, It would not be amiss for the honest Burgesses to protest against
the dishonest, to the end, the innocent may not suffer for the ^^cent; their
Oath is not to uphold such act^^gs.
the Corporation of Newcastle, as it is managed by those men, is of all
Monopolies the most oppressive, and consequently the most odi^us Monopoly,
rendered so by those injurious, destructive, illegal privileges, which against
all Law of God and man, they have made and indulged to themselves, and
accordingly are rigorously practiced by them: But that their monstrous
practices may more clearly appear to all the world, what has been scattered
and divided by necessary interweaving of Proofs, and Depositions, Statutes and
Laws, and other Supplements, I shall here contract into a narrow compass, and
present them Brevi quasi Tabella, unto the view of the world. Their Tyranny and
Oppression may be reduced to these heads.

First, False Imprisonments without any trial of Law, or offense committed;
(page 72. 89. 58. 76. 84. 87. 93. 85. 103. 59. 81. 106. 90.) When the Chief
Priest and Elders of the Jews desired Festus on their Information barely to
pass sentence upon St. Paul (though a Heathen Judge) he returns them this
answer, It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before
that he which is accused have the accusers face to face, and have license to
answer for himself, Act. 25. 16. On the unjustice, and unreasonableness of this
course does Nicodemus oppose the Chief Priests and Pharisee^ in the behalf of
Christ, Does our Law (says he) judge any man before it hear him, and know what
he has done, John 7. 51. (p. 163. G.) This way of proceeding in Judicatory is
most repugnant both to the Law of Nature, as you see in the Romans Law, and
also to the Law of God, which positively determines, One witness shall not rise
up against a man for any iniquity, or any sin that he sins, At the mouth of
two or three witnesses shall the matter be established, Deuteronomy. 19. 15. And if
God would not have any man to be condemned in any Judicatory by the testimony
of one witness, but by the joint attestation of two or three at least, as is
evident by this Text of Scripture, and by many concurrent places of divine
Writ, as Numb. 35. 30. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Mat. 18. 16. John 8. 17. Heb. 10. 28. 2
Cor. 13. 1. How much less would God approve of such tyrannical proceedings to
condemn a man without any witness at all, or ever permitting the person accused
to take up an Apology or just defense for himself.

Secondly, Forcing men to swear against themselves, (page 60. 72. 86. 87. 88.
91. 92. 103.) How highly were the hearts of this Nation inflamed? what
indignation did they conceive against the practices both of the Star Chamber,
and High Commission, heretofore (page 87.) as laying an unsupportable yoke upon
the necks of the people by the tender of the Oath ex Officio? Has all the
Nation freed themselves from this bondage by a good Law, so that elsewhere no
man is compelled to testify against himself, or where other witnesses fail;
enforced to accuse himself? And must they only that come under the
Jurisdiction of the Magistrates of Newcastle remain inslaved under the same
bondage? Is this Tyranny lawful at Newcastle, that is exploded and cast off
every where else?

Nay, that which infinitely heightens their oppression and wickedness, is this,
That those Reasons which were alleged to justify this practice,
(page 188 88. 87. 86. 103.) both in the Star Chamber, and High Commission,
have no place of pretension here. There the zeal of Justice, to let no sin go
unpunished; and the Glory of God, in the sinners Confession, and accusing of
himself, as Joshua abjured Achan, My Son, give I pray thee glory to the Lord
God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now what thou have
done, hide it not from me, Josh. 7. 19. was alleged as an instance to justify
their proceedings, where otherwise the Offender could not be discovered, either
by evidence of the Fact, or testimony of witnesses. But here by an Oath they
compel men to reveal the secrets of their hearts to rise up in Judgment
against themselves, for no other end, but by their own confession, to make them
guilty, and then invade their fortunes. First, They make themselves Masters of
their Consciences, (page 86. 107. 99.) And by that make themselves Masters of
their Estates. Covetousness, and not zeal of Justice, or Gods Glory, is the
principle from whence they act.

Thirdly. Imposing Fines Arbitrarily (p. 23. (^) 31. (R) 44. 60. 84. 87. 90.
91. 93. 117. 24. 109. 110 92. 16.) and then no wonder if they be excessive,
exceeding both the Merit of the crime pretended, or the ability of the
Offender. How great a temptation is it to Justice, to be severe and ridged in
its sentence, when the punishment of the Offender is the enriching of them that
pass the sentence? (nay the Judges themselves are the grand Offenders and go
unpunished, (p. 77. 78. 79) and so it is here at Newcastle. (p. 81.
(Q) p. 91. (C) p. 90. (H) p. 103. (D) p. 110.) One reason that induced some
sages of the Law to affirm that the latter Kings of England had evested
themselves of their power to sit Personally in their Courts of Justice, and
deligated it to, and invested the Judges of the respective Benches therewith,
was, because in Imposing of Fines the King was both a Judge and party
interested, not only as the fountain of Justice to be administered unto the
people, but as the person into whose exchequers and treasury, the laws of
England paid their Fines. But the Magistrates of Newcastle enjoy those
privileges, which were thought unbeseeming the Kings of England. They are both
Judges and Parties. They estimate the offense, and receive the fine, and then
how frequently covetousness and self-interest, sit on the Bench in the place
of Justice, (p. 35.) the world may easily Judge; as appears in the case of
Lewis Frost, and unjust Judge Bonner, he having two pence halfpenny of all
ballast,
and the other Catchpole Bonner to arrest the refusers.

Fourthly. Page 70, 99, 101, 102, 104, 106, 155, 166.
Obstructing all endeavors for grant of a Market at North-sheilds, six miles
from Newcastle, and in another County, and 12 miles from any other Market in
the same County, and then robbing people of their commodities, in their own
markets, and seizing on goods carried through their Town, alleging Foreign
bought and Foreign sold. Markets were for conveniences, and not for
engrossing all provisions and peoples lives (p. 87.)

Fifthly, For imprisoning poor Artificers (p. 84. 85. 80.) for working in their
own Trades, at the Town of Sheilds, though in another County, and detaining
them until they enter into bond never to work there again, which is to engage
themselves to abandon and renounce that calling wherein they were brought up,
to expose themselves, their Wives and Children to want and beggary, or else to
turn vagabons, (p. 181.) and desert the place of their habitations, being by
these men's tyranny, necessitated to leave their Callings or their Dwellings;
what sad fate hangs over the poor Inhabitants of this Town, to be deprived of
the Common privileges of English men, shall I say? nay despoyled of the Common
privileges of mankind, In the sweat of their brows to eat their own bread,
Genesis 3. 19. and to yield obedience to that precept of St. Paul. Let him
labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to
give to him that needs, Ephesians 4. 28. Or that of the same Apostle 1. These:
4. 11. and 2. These. 3. 10, 11, 12. The Character of Newcastle, or rather indeed
the usurped power of the Magistrates there, supercedes the Commandments of
God, Let every man, says St. Paul, abide in the same Calling wherein he is
called, 1. Cor. 7. 20. If he does, say the Magistrates of Newcastle, he shall
not abide in sheilds, nor in the Neighborhood of our Corporation: as if they
were a limb of the Beast; so that no man may work, (p. 72. 165.) or buy, or
sell, save he that has their mark. Revel. 13. 17. That is, unless he be a
Member of that freedom, which ingrosseth so much freedom to themselves, that
they leave no freedom at all to their poor Neighbors. (p. 104.)

Sixthly, (p. 69. 70. 76. (A) 84. 85. 73.) Imprisoning all that are not free of
their Corporation that shall endeavor to save ships in distress, from
perishing in the River, and when they are sunk for want of help, seizing the
goods of the Masters, and also imprisoning their persons (72) many months. Let
the world, wheresoever it is most savage, most barbarous, show such an instance
of such an aggregation of injustice, oppression and cruelty as this, and (as
we say, let them carry their coals) If not to save life be to kill, and if
not to do good when an opportunity is offered unto us, is to do evil, as in
our Saviors Doctrine certainly it is, Mark 3. 4. Then not to save a ship (p.
165.) I and perhaps the Mariners and passengers lives too (72) when they have
an opportunity, nay when they are earnestly entreated, and their help implored,
is in Gods account all one as if they had sunk the ship and drowned the men,
(p. 80.) He that does not prevent a mischief when it is in his power to do
it, is in Gods account the contriver and the Author of it; but that which is
the great aggravation of their oppression in this kind, and heightneth it
beyond any parallel is, they deny all help to ships in distress (p. 71.) that
so making shipwreck (p. 18. 19. 70. 71. 72. 81. 73. 75. 84.) That which in
this is usually alleged to take off from the horridness of their Tyranny is
(viz.) That they must send for help from Newcastle, signifies nothing,
Newcastle being 7 miles from that Harbor of Sheilds. Whilst the grass grows
the steed starves, as the proverb tells us, and while help is expected the ship
is lost.

If these men could command the wind and Seas, not to rage and swell, but be
hushed into a calm, and the River kept from friezing (p. 59. 78. 102. 105. 72.
74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79.) until they sent down help from Newcastle, their reply
might be admitted; but since the Wind, Sea and Ice, are not controllable by
their charter, What abominable Tyranny: what savage inhumanity, is it to deny
ships in distress, such help as is at hand, to preserve themselves? Cases of
necessity make void proprieties, that which without the case of necessity is
theft; In the case of necessity is not theft.

Men do not despise a theif, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is
hungry, Proverb: 6. 30. and the Law says, when thou come into thy Neigbours
vineyard, thou may eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure, Deuteronomy: 23. 24.
In case of extreme necessity, that all things are Common, is the joint opinion
of all Divines. This is the Law of Nature, and therefore not to be overruled
by any positive Law, of any Kingdom or Commonwealth; for in these cases of
extreme necessity, the person in this condition, taking that which is another,
is not guilty of theft, for Jure suo uti^ur, as the Casuists determine, he
does but make use of his own right; nor does it come under the definition of
theft, which is, taking away that which is another man's, without his consent:
for as necessity alters the property, and makes it his own, so while he makes
use of his own right, the other tenetur consentire, is bound to give his
consent, and to acquiesce in the others enjoyment of it. And therefore in all
positive Laws whereby property is distinguished, there is none of them, which
hold in case of extreme Necessity: and shall extreme Necessity entitle a man to
a part of another man's real possession, by which there is Damnum emergens,
some damage or diminution of the goods and possession of the owner, and yet
free the invador from all imputation of injustice or usurpation?

And shall not a poor Master of a ship in case of extreme Necessity, (p. 72. 71.
102. 73. 69. 74.) dispense with the Privileges, and Charter of Newcastle, which
at most, can be but lucrum cessans, a suspension of their Privileges and
gaine^; and make use of such helps for his preservation as providence affords,
without running the danger of sending for, and waiting the help from Newcastle;
without the ruin of those that save him? shall not extreme Necessity, which is
an Apology for all the world, be his just Apology, to plead his excuse in this
case, and free him and his helpers from the tyranny and persecution of the
Magistrates?

3. The prophet Isaiah, tells us of some Magistrates that were companions of
thieves, Isaiah 1. 23. Ezekiel tells us of others, that were like evening
Wolves, ravening for their prey, Ezekiel 22. 27. and Zephany, of others, that
were, like roaring Lions Zeph: 3. 3. if any man doubt, whether these Characters
of oppressive Magistrates, be applicable to these of Newcastle, I shall say no
more to them, than our Savior did to Nathaniel in an other case, come and see.
Joh. 1. 46.

Seventhly. Prohibiting Gentlemen and others in the Counties both of
Northumberland and Durham, to sell their Coals to ships to be transported to
London, compelling all owners of Colleries, to sell their Coals to themselves
first, if any shall presume to sell their Coals immediately to the ships,
without taking them in the way, they seize upon such Coals, upon pretense that
the owners of the Coals are not free of their Corporation, (page 20. 94. 92.
93. 95. 96.
97. 45. 78. 76. 75. 37. 190 162. D.) And if this be not a Monopoly, of as high
a nature, and producing as ill effects, and those of as large extent, as any,
that (to the great content and satisfaction of the Nation) has been abolished,
let the * world judge. A Welsh Pedigree, does not descend by more steps and
degrees, than the propriety of their coals is varied, while it is derived from
the Owner of the Collery, unto him that at last buys the commodity to spend
it, as well Trades as others. The Owners of Colleries, must first sell the
Coals to the Magistrates of Newcastle, the Magistrates to the Masters of ships,
the Master of ships to the Woodmongers or Wharfingers, and they to those that
spend them: Every change of the propriety adding to, and enhancing the price of
the Coals, thus interchangeably bought and sold; which course, as it picks some
money out of the purses of every man that buys Coals, besides bad Which now as
the case stands the City is cheated in buying of Slats as well as Coals p. 45.
Coals being thereby vented, so it grinds the faces of the poor, who in these
latter years, by reason mainly of this Monopolizing of them, have found it as
hard a matter to fortify themselves against cold, as against hunger, (p. 104.)
Whereas, if the owners of every Collery had free liberty to sell (p. 118.) his
Coals to ships immediately, Tinmouth Haven would afford Two hundred thousand
Chaldrons of Coals in the year more than now are vented, which would reduce the
late exorbitant excessive rates of Coals in the City of London (p. 60. 75.) to
under twenty shillings a Chalder all the year, Winter as well as Summer, and
bring into the common Treasury above Forty thousand pounds per annum, (p. 57.
94. 96.) Some owners of Coal-pits will rather let their pits be fired, like
those at Benwell, and consume, than let their Coals to the Magistrates of
Newcastle. If the Coal-owners in each County from whence all Coals come should
be as refractory to the Magistrates in denying their Coals, as the Magistrates
are to the Masters (page 97. 93. 92.) few or none would be brought to London,
or any Revenue raised.

Eighthly, Forcing all ships up the River six miles, amongst dangerous Sands,
Shelves, and the bulks of sunk ships (p. 69, 70, 71. 72, 78, 93) that so they
may cast out their Ballast upon their Shoars, and all for the greediness of
receiving eight pence for every Tun of Ballast, which has occasioned the spoil
and loss of many ships, to the utter undoing of the Masters and Owners of the
ships, and the destruction of the lives of many poor Seaman, and Mariners,
whose blood will be required at their hands who put them on those dangers in
which they perished. Besides their choking up the most part of that River, by
forcing the Ballast up their Sandy hills near the said Town of Newcastle, many
thousand Tuns whereof is blown and washed down into that River, (page 78.) They
will neither preserve the River, nor let Doctor Swinbourn Vice Admiral for the
County of Durham do it, who has fined some of the Magistrates hundreds of
pounds for Damages, etc.

Lastly, Countenancing their Officers in their oppressions, nay, in their very
murders, as in the case of Thomas R^tter with others, who having forfeited
their lives to Justice for killing Ann the wise of Th^mas Cliff of
North-Shields, was by their power and favor rescued from that death, which they
justly deserved (p. 80.) God would not suffer his Altar to be a Sanctuary to a
wilful Murderer, neither would King John their Patron, (page 34.) If a man
come presumptuously upon his Neighbor to slay him, thou shall take him from
mine Altar, that he may die, Exo. 21. 14. The Law of England d^fines what
murder is, pa. 165. Blood defiles the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed
of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it, Numb.
35. 33. When therefore God shall make inquisition, they that staid him that
offered ^iolence to the blood of his N^ighbor, and should have gone to the pit,
Prove. 20. 17. will be found to communicate in this murder, and involved in the
same guilt with him that committed it, but the good God be merciful to them
that have not approved or consented to this wickedness; For though our eyes did
see this blood, yet our hands did not shed it; and therefore let every one that
would wash his hands clean from that blood, pray, as God prescribed, Be
merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not
innocent blood unto thy people Isreal's charge, Deuteronomy. 21. 7, 8.

Thus have I given you a short view of the tyrannical oppressive practices of
the Magistrates of Newcastle, whose sin receives no small aggravation from their
Office and Calling, in that they are Magistrates, whom God has furnished with
Authority to that end, that they might prevent and redress Injuries done by
others, and execute wrath upon evil doers, Romans 13. So that in their
oppressions, they sin against the very end of their Calling, they transform the
very Image of Gods Power and Justice, which they sustain, into the Image of
Gods enemy, Satan, whom herein they resemble, and become after a sort
wickednesses in high places, as the Devils are; for amongst them, as much as
any where, is that of Solomon verified, I saw under the Sun the place of
Judgment, that wickedness was there, and the place of righteousness, that
iniquity was there, Eccles. 3. 16. And although attempts hitherto, and all
endeavors for redress of these oppressive courses, have proved abortive and
fruitless, No man compassionating the people with Saul, so much as to ask,
What ayleth this people that they weep, 1 Samuel 11. 5. No, after many addresses,
Petitions, Remonstrances, and Suits at Law, being stifled by the instigation of
corrupt persons then in power, and obstructed by the mutability and changes, we
have too just reason to complain with Solomon, Behold the tears of such as were
oppressed, and they had no comforters, and on the sides of their Oppressors
there was power, but they, the oppressed, had no comforter, Eccles. 4. 1. Yet
at this time we are not without good hopes, but that the cries of the poor and
the oppressed will enter into the ears and hearts of this present Power, That
they will be as a hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest,
as Rivers of waters in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary
Land, Isa. 32. 2.

But if our hopes now fail us, we must sit down and sigh-out that of Solomon,
If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Judgment
and Justice in a Province, marvail not at the matter, for he that is higher
than the Highest regards, and there he Higher than they, Eccles. 5. 8.

THE TABLE.
A
ATcheson Page. 85 Arresting in others names Page. 76 Arresting out of a
Liberty, Page. 154 Arresting by false Writs, Page. 181 Attorney Page. 127, 182
Admiralty River, Page. 15, 17, 45, 115 Aldermen Page. 22, 136 Articles for the
river, Page. 37 to 41 Army at Batlet Page. 118 Armed men disarmed, Page. 161
Artificers Page. 167, 84, 165 Acton Burnel Page. 27 Andronicus Page. 69 Attaint
against a Jury, Page. 150 Ad quod damnum Page. 155 Act for free Trade, Page.
114, 170 Alehouses Page. 187
B
Bounders of Newcastle, Page. 8. 9, 11, 16 Bigs Page. 76 Bows Page. 85 Bonner
Page. 51, 73, 84 Beets Page. 71 Buckingham Page. 15 Bishop and Justice Page. 36
Bribery Page. 10 Ballast, Page. 40, 43, 44, 73, 77, 79, 87, 89, 103, 116, 151,
74, 92, 93, 48, 49, 53, 78, 94. Bonds, Page. 43, 84, 85, 103, Bayl denied,
Page. 82, 89, 153, 140 Bread and water fed, Page. 83 Bread nor Beer at Shields,
Page. 102, 57, 106, 117. Beasts blood Page. 104 Blewet Page. 135 Bidleston
Page. 110 Burgesses Page. 29, 130 Bailiffs oath Page. 127 Belman Page. 107
Barrator Page. 161 Butler Page. 92 Bradford Page. 87 Bracton Page. 84
C
Charters, Page. 7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 20, 30, 52, 111, 117, 118, 119, 154, 156,
126, 171, 43. Corporation Page. 113, 170 Corroner, Page. 18, 22, 24, 7, 101,
144, 156 Customs on Coals, Page. 98, 26, 34, 75, 94, 95, 96, 97. Court Page. 23
Conservators peace. Page. 23 And River Page. 37 Commissioners River, Page. 43,
115, 37 Combination Page. 72, 73, 93 Coals, Page. 97, 8, 9, 45, 25, 190, 119,
58, 78, 92, 93, 94, 117, 52, 182, 138, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 95, 185, 20, 24, 29,
31, 70, 71. Conspiracies in Art. Page. 165 Cartwright Page. 94 Cudworth Page.
93 Customers Page. 139, 173 Twelve Companies Page. 20 Councils names, Page. 41,
42, 49, 55 Crosier Page. 48 Cliffs trial Page. 57, 76, 81 Committee Page. 61
Carpenters Page. 84 Castle of Darrel Page. 44 Commission Sewers Page. 149
Condemned by Law Page. 134 Confiscations, Page. 117, 105, 28, 99, 102 Corn
Page. 101, 104 Cason Page. 75, 71
D
Dudly and Empson Page. 34 Drowning, Page. 59, 70, 101, 102, 112 Dogs and Cats
eaten, Page. 104, 120 Debts Page. 27 Duties on Coals Page. 97 Distress Page.
156 Damage to ships Page. 75 Drunkenness, Page. 34, 111, 187 Deanes claim Page.
119 Duke Venice Page. 173 Dawson Page. 95, 97, 100 Darrel Page. 44
E
K. Edw. 1. Page. 153 Edw. 2. Page. 157 Edw. 3. Page. 160 Edw. 6. Page. 164 Q.
Elizab. Page. 12, 13, 14, 16, 20, 117 Extortion, Page. 115, 123, 153, 180
Evidence Page. 128, 109 Expositions Page. 123 Executions Page. 180
F
Fleta Page. 83, 84 Forestallers, Page. 17, 166, 179, 104 Fines, Page. 16, 18,
19, 23, 31, 60, 84, 87, 81, 91, 92, 93, 117. 163. Fishermen Page. 44 Felons,
Page. 23, 24, 110, 159 Fees by Corporation Page. 149 Fenwick Page. 141 Farrow
Page. 103 Feefarm Page. 7, 10, 11 Fish royal Page. 19
G
Gates locked Page. 39 Grounds fenced, Page. 40, 51, 76, 112, 113 Gardiners
Page. 59, 62, 104 Goods Page. 60, 117 Grenaway Page. 105 Gateshead Page. 169,
175 Gold and Silver, Page. 162 Green Page. 91 Grievances to be redressed, Page.
163 Gallows Page. 19, 24 Gaolers Page. 160 Grammar School Page. 29 Governor
Page. 39 Government Page. 34 Gosnal Page. 71
H
K. Hen. 3. Charter Page. 8, 13 Hoast-mens Charter, Page. 13, 25, 26, 30, 49,
52, 92, 93 Horth Page. 52, 77 K. Hen. 4. Page. 12 L. Haward Page. 14 Sir Heath
Page. 48, 112 Hilton Page. 53, 102 Hanging Page. 24, 106 Heads cut off Page.
121 Heathens practice Page. 87 Hume Page. 70, 101 Sir Hasterigge, Page. 100,
101, 106 Hesilwood Page. 72, 79, 86 Harrison Page. 80, 88 Hall Page. 85 Habeas
Corpus Page. 83 Horn Page. 84 K. Herrold battle Page. 118 K. Hen. 3. Page. 134
K. Hen. 4. Page. 136 K. Hen. 5. Page. 137 K. Hen. 6. Page. 139 K. Hen. 7. Page.
144 K. Hen. 8. Page. 147
I
K. John, Page. 1, 3, 129, 34, 7, 2, 6 K. James Page. 35, 34 Indictments Page.
81, 186, 143 Imprisoning, Page. 16, 31, 76, 82, 84 Justices, Page. 17, 19, 23,
24, 119, 136, 161 Judges and Jurors, Page. 18, 90, 103, 110, 106, 117
Ingrossers, Page. 17, 101, 104, 105 166. Jarrow Page. 50, 57, 90, 119 Jury
Page. 128, 151 Information of penal Statutes Page. 186, 168
K
Keelef-men Page. 40, 98, 138 Katherines Liberties Page. 42 Kents land Page.
119 Keeble Page. 75 Kings Oath Page. 119, 128
L
Limitation of Actions, Page. 187 Laws, Page. 17, 31, 33, 82, 90, 109, 111,
119, 123, 134, 16, 21 Liberties forfeited, Page. 42, 118 163 Lamb Page. 156
Lease grand Collery Page. 24 Lever Page. 93 Low Page. 74 Lines Page. 76 Lambert
Page. 85 Lyng Page. 89 Lumsdall Page. 99 Lands purchase, Page. 174, 15, 11, 30
Letters counterfeited Page. 88
M
Morpeth burnt Page. 4 Mayor chosen, Page. 21, 23, 36, 113, 163, 130, 82
Mortmain Page. 24, 174 Murder, Page. 34, 80, 170, 165 Markets, Page. 21, 27,
59, 70, 99, 101, 102, 105, 106, 118, 155, 166. Merchants Page. 117 Mariners
Page. 26 Mallen Page. 71, 75 Mors^ Page. 75 Midford Page. 76 Mirriton Page. 96
Measures, Coals Page. 78 Miseries Page. 120 Q. Mary Page. 175
N
Newcastle, Page. 15, 20, 62, 67, 112, 115, 116, 138, 121 Northumberland, Page.
120, 122, 123 Navigation Page. 115 Normans Page. 119
O
Oliver Lord Protector, Page. 114 Officers, Page. 18, 22, 27, 30, 36, 81, 153,
163 Outlawed Page. 22 Oath, Page. 22, 36, 39, 72, 86, 88, 91, 119, 127, 128,
129, 130, 141, 165. Ordinances Page. 145, 190 Orde wife Page. 96 Objections
Page. 112
P
Parliament Page. 5, 53, 81 Punishments Page. 16, 43, 58 Petition Right Page.
188 Pleading, Page. 30, 27, 62, 67, 115 Penalties Page. 31, 28 Profits Page. 33
Purse cutting Page. 87, 180 Prisons, Page. 23, 59, 72, 83, 87, 93, 155 Peach
Page. 91 Prisoners Page. 160, 84 Pots Page. 74 Pilots Page. 117 Phillips Page.
74, 78, 97 Perjury Page. 73, 76, 87, 178 Pie Page. 92 Poor Page. 181 Provision,
Page. 59, 94, 102, 103 Prentice Page. 111, 177 Pardon Page. 29 Prerogative
Page. 118 Pope Page. 129
Q
Quo warranto, Page. 29, 34, 113, 156
R
K. Rich. 2. Page. 12, 170 Ryots Page. 174, 82, 140 Regrators Page. 17, 166
Rates Page. 81, 99, 101, 162 Robbing Page. 167 Recorder Page. 22 Recognizans
Page. 27 River, Page. 78, 102, 105, 36, 43, 58, 93, 149, 50 56, 60, 74, 75, 77,
79. 103, 112 Rewards Page. 44 Read Page. 101, 92 Reavely Page. 102 Revenue
Page. 75, 93, 94 Readhead Page. 84 Rawling Page. 92 Rebels. Page. 26
S
Sheriff, Page. 12. 23. 137. 141. 143. 153. 158. 180. Sneing, Page. 16. 45. 46.
92. 100. 102 Seele Page. 16. 27. 31. 162 Sparhawke Page. 17. 147 School Page.
29 Steward Page. 31 Servants Page. 103 Ships unload, Page. 31. 40. 57. 60. 117.
106. 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 80. 92. 103. 104. 134. 102. Star Chamber Page.
45, 87, 188 Ship-Carpenters Page. 117. 58 Strafford Page. 35 Sands Patent Page.
53 Spanish Inquisition Page. 87 Straw-Mat Page. 91 Seamen Custom free Page. 105
Symonds Page. 105 Scoulds Page. 111 Stock Commonwealth, Page. 115 Salt works
Page. 117 Scots burning people Page. 122 S^lkeild Page. 82 Sergeants Page. 107
Srabbing Page. 182 Survey Page. 191
T
Talbot Page. 91 Toule, Page. 28. 94. 101. 103, 104. 149. 153 Trades, Page. 21.
51. 75. 78. 112^ 115. 167. 170. 173 Tyrants Law Page. 70 Tie Page. 72 Tickets
Page. 44 Tailor Page. 84, 104 Trinity house London, Page. 112 Tyn Page. 94
Tobacco Page. 99 Thorp Judge Page. 100 Table of Fees Page. 149 Tax only by
Parliament, Page. 155 Tempest Patent Page. 52
V
Victuals, Page. 77. 105. 162. 165. 28 Voyages lost, Page. 74. 75. 93 94. 97.
104 Voyages gained, Page. 75, 79. 93. 98 Usher Page. 29 Usurped power pardoned,
Page. 29
W
Wall Page. 9 Wreck, Page. 18. 19. 70. 71. 72. 159 Workmen Page. 181, 84 Wages
Page. 81. 73 Watching Page. 43. 103 Willy Page. 75, 110 Witchfinder Page. 109
Wheeler Page. 107 Wyard Page. 92 Warrants, Page. 103. 82. 97. 156 William
Conqueror Page. 119 Water Page. 102. 103 West Page. 106 Williamson Page. 99
Weights and measures Page. 102
Y
Yaxly Page. 74 Yelverton Page. 55
ERRATA.
Page 9. (A) line 7. for Shelves, r. streams. p. 36. (B) l. 2. for confirmancy,
r. conservancy. p. 75. (C) l. 4. for worses, r. Mo^se. p. 117. (M) l. 3. for
Princes, r. premises. p. 197. l. 12 for evested, r. divested. p. 73. (F) l. 7.
read for 6. s. 8. d.

FINIS.
THE RIVER OF TYNE leading from the Sea on the east, to Newcastle on the West,
being bounded in on both sides, by the County of Northumberland on the North,
and the County Durham on the South.
London printed and sold by Peter Stent at the White Horse in Giltspurr
Street, betwix Newgate and Pie Corner.

A. Town Shore B. St Ridalls Shore^ C. Ballast Shore D. Bill Shore E. Pace
Sand F South road Sand G North road Sand H Iarro Sand I Iarro middle around K
Iarro Slike L. Dirtwi^ Sand M Coble Deane N (...) Sand O Another Balla^t Shore
P Bill Sand





