THE ARCHBISHOPS CRVELTIE, Made known in a true Story of one Mr. Edward Rood,
Who was Minister at Saint HELENS in ABINGDON, AND Dismissed of this means and
Ministry by him: And in process of time, after he had been from his means
eleven years, he was lately again restored. As also, How he was ca(...) in
prison, what miseries he there sustained, and his deliverance from all. By
GILES GULT^R, Batchelour in Arts.

Printed Anno 1641.

THE ARCHBISHOPS CRVELTY.
IN the County of Berkes, at a place called Abingdon there dwelt one Master
Edward Rood, a man of a very civil and godly behavior, which was such a
heart-burning to the wicked, that they sought by all means they could
possibly, to undo this honest, religious, and well-meaning man. To this intent
therefore they came oftener to Church then they would have done, only to entrap
him. Now it happened one time that he had some object to raise a point after this
manner, it was concerning the equality and inequality between a Minister and a
King: A King (said he) may take a man and bind him hand and foot, and cast him
in prison, nay he may take away his life, but there his power ends, it extends
no further; but what the Minister binds on earth shall be bound in heaven, and
therein a Minister outstrips a King.

When they heard these words to come from him, they thought that they were well
enough now, for surely he was ensnared, and as they ordered the matter, it was
so indeed.

Now you must understand that they had gotten a man as fit for such a
mischievous purpose as possibly can be: he was called by a nickname Nuncle
Nob, but his right name is Robert Mayot the elder, as far in folly and
knavery outstripping the other, as the light of the Sun the light of the
Moon.

This Nuncle Nob was presently furnished with all things fit for a journey, and
hyes to London as fast as he can, and then to the Archbishops Palace at Lambeth
he goes, where he makes a most heavy complaint against this Master Edward
Rood, that was Minister of the Parish of St. Helens in Abingdon, that he should
speak treason in the Pulpit, and say that a Minister was above a King. Forth
with now a Pursevant was sent for this Master Edward Rood, where he was
examined in the High Commission Court, and upon this Nuncle Nobs complaint he
was committed to prison, where he endured a great deal of misery, which to
relate at full would be more then my pen could write, or paper hold; he was
kept so close that no body could have access to speak with him; thinking, I
persuade my self, there to starve him; for he called for diet, and their
answer was still, By and by, Master Rood; a pox by and by such unlucky knaves:
insomuch that for the space of three or four days he was without; then he
remembered himself he had a pound of diet broad which was to be sent to his
wife, that he made a shift to make serve him a week, and then again when that
was gone, they kept him a week again without diet: at last his friends missed
him, and ^ought from prison to prison, till at last they heard where he was,
and caused a posset to be made; and it was carried by his daughter, her name
was Dorcas, and to the prison they came, and they were men of such note, that
the Keeper durst not deny them the sight of him for fear of hearing of it
hereafter.

When they came there they found the poor gentleman, poor master, Rood in
bed, which when he saw his daughter, and the rest of his friends, his heart
began to leap for joy, in so much that joyful tears bedewed his face: well,
they were merry with him for a while, and he poor man fed heartily, having
been kept so long from diet, and then began to open his cause unto them, how
close he was kept, and that he was afraid that their intentions were fully
bent to starve him. They heard him, but said but (...), but they went down to
the Keeper, and did for school him, wishing him to take heed, for if they
heard that he was misused again, the best in the kingdom should quickly know
of it: and so they departed. But after that time he was sure to have diet
brought unto him three or four times each day, in so much, that that penury
was over, which he suffered before by hunger.

This is but a proaemium to his troubles, for now they began to enact such
cruelty upon him that would be almost incredible to relate. There was one now
came against him to swear that the words that Nob had related were true, he
swear very franckly that he should say that a Minister was above a King, which
if Nuncle Nob would also have been so wicked to have sworn to, surely poor
Master Rood had lost his life, but God overlooked their deeds, and he will be
sure to pay them home at last. Well, this man took his oath against him; upon
which he was dismissed of his Ministerial function, and so sent abroad to shift
in the wide world. Now this poor man was feign to turn Physician to maintain
himself and his family which was great, and so he was turned from post to
pillar, from one place to another, that he could scarce get any long abiding
any where; at length he came to live in a place in Oxfordshire, called Tame,
where he was arrested for debts, and carried to Oxford Castle, as cursed a
place for poor prisoners to lie in as any is in this Kingdom; for there is
one Thorpe which is Keeper, a man of a haughty, and proud spirit, tyrannizing
over poor men abominably, and his Brother Gabriel is tapster, and he has
gotten the true art of cheating, I know it for mine own part to be true what I
write. Well, there he lay a great while in great want, and more he had suffered
if his friends in Abingdon had not stuck very close to him. At last it pleased
God to deliver him thence, from that hell of misery, and miserable usage, and
he was abroad again to shift for himself and his poor family. At last it
pleased God to call a Parliament to settle things concerning his glory in this
Kingdom; and upon heinous complaints and misdemeanors, my Lord of Canterbury
was committed to the tower; and fearing that this business being so foul, (as
you may perceive by the story) he desired to stop the business, that it might
not come to the ears of the Parliament. And thus it happened.

There was one Mr. Newsteed who was Minister all this wile in Mr. Roods place,
a man whom I know very well, but not for any dishonesty, for he behaved
himself very honestly, and like a gentleman all the time of his abode in
Abingdon, now he hearing that this Mr. Rood was resolved to petition the
Parliament to have his wrongs redressed, came unto two frinds of Mr. Roods
(whose names were Mr. William Castle, and Mr. Benjamin Tesdall) and told them
his mind after this manner; Gentlemen I here that Mr. Rood which was your
ancient Vicar, does now intend to petition the Parliament for his Vicarage
again; I protest I am not willing to eat any man's bread, if Mr. Rood please
we will come to some honest and lawful composition, I desire you that you
would be pleased somewhat to busy your selves in this charitable office.

These two loving Mr. Rood so well would do any thing that might tend to his
good, wherefore they sought him out, and brought Mr. Newsteed, and Mr. Rood
together, and after some talk between them they presently agreed to go to
counsel, and ask what might be done in this business, and so it was ordered
that Mr. Rood should have his Vicarage again, whereupon Mr. Newsteed resigned.
Thus may you see how many troubles this poor Mr. Rood has undergone, but I
persuade my self had he stood it out to the end, and put it into the
Parliaments hands he had had reward for his troubles eleven hundred pounds, for
he was without his Vicarage eleven years, which is worth an hundred pound a
year.

This have I writ that the world might see and know that all my Lord Lauds
faults are not known; for as you may see this thing has lien smothered to
this day.

FINIS.

