A Thanksgiving-Sermon FOR THE PEACE: PREACHED AT St Michael Crookedlane,
DECEMBER the 2d, 1697.

By JAMES GARDENER, M. A. Rector of the said Parish.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. MDCXCVII.

ACTS XXIV. 2, 3. -- Seeing that by Thee we enjoy great Quietness, and that
very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy Providence,

We accept it always, and in all places (most noble Felix) with all
Thankfulness.


I Cannot but with Tertullian, Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem. Tert, lib. cont.
Hermog.
adore the exquisite and complete Fullness of the Scriptures, for this one thing
amongst many others, That let the Occasion be what it will, of calling a Solemn
Assembly, whether for Prayer or Praise, to receive Instructions, Directions, or
Encouragement to any Duty, general or particular; whatever the Case be, you
cannot dip into the Sacred Leaves, but you shall presently meet with some
Passage or other, that will be pertinent to the Business in hand.

Such are these Words that I have pitched upon to entertain you, as an Helper
of your Joy upon this Thanksgiving; (for such Festivals as these, come not
within the Censure of our Nicer Spirits; those who have quarreled with the
rest, the Festivals of Christ and his Apostles, and his Virgin Mother, do yet
allow of Feriae repentinae, and ex re nata institutae, as they please to phrase
it; such as are instituted and ordained upon New Emergencies)

Taken by themselves, they look as if they had been Penned for the very
purpose, as if they had been addressed and fitted only to this Occasion,
exactly circumstantiated and proportioned to the Time. Seeing that by Thee we
enjoy great Quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by
thy Providence; We accept it always, and in all places (most Dread Sovereign)
with all Thankfulness.

It Is worth observing, That we are sometimes commanded to honor Bad Princes,
but never to rejoice in them, as we ought to do in Good. Then, Sing, O heavens,
Isa. 49.7, 13.
and be joyful, O earth; break forth into singing, O mountains. Few Virtuous
Men, but fewer Virtuous Princes; many a righteous man in Sheep skins and
Goat Skins, but few in Ermins.

But if ever Subjects had Cause to glory in a Prince, We are the Men. The
Peoples Argument to the Centurion was but a petty Topic to this; they tell him
that He was worthy for whom he should do this; Luke 7.5.
for he loved their nation, and built them a synagogue: Whereas our Sovereign
not only loved, but saved our Nation; and not only saved our Nation, but
crowned it at once; (We have Him in the Throne before our Hopes, though later
than our Wishes:) Nay, saved and crowned Three Nations at once, and blessed them
with Peace; and merits to govern much larger Territories than he yet possesses.

We have a Sovereign that is a Sovereign indeed, in the sense of Medicine as
well as Majesty; of an healing Virtue; Majestas and Amor; Majesty and Mercy
lodged in his Royal Breast; a Sovereign like our Savior, that can be touched
with the feeling of our Infirmities: A Prince that takes Delight and Pleasure
in all Generous Actions; whom Foreign Crowned Heads admire for his Wisdom,
Closeness, Prowess, and Activity, and court for his Friendship; and yet is
endued with that Steddiness of Mind, that does not grow giddy with its own
Height. A Prince, whose August Majesty has not only Enobled the Nation, and
recovered its lost Reputation; but who Stands the World's Triumphant Vmpire,
maintains the Balance, and has Even Now given Check (as a Noble Ancestor of his
from whom he is descended did before to the Swelling Monarchy of Spain, when
she thought to have grasped all the Liberties of Europe;) to One whose Ambition
and Acquists grew too big for the common Safety of our Neighboring Nations,
and obliged him to come bending unto Him; Isa. 60.14. Luke 14.32.
to send an Embassage, and desire conditions of Peace.

For which Things, amongst the rest, I question not in the least but the very
Hearts of his Enemies admire him in Secret; and that the very disaffected Party
of the Nation themselves, if they look round about, could not name any One King
now reigning in Christendom whom they would have to rule over them than Himself
under whose Government at present they are so uneasy. Whose Virtues shall
outlive himself, and many Generations shall fare the better for him. Thus
Solomon the Father, and Rehoboam the Son, and many more were preserved from
Ruin for David's sake; and in the days of Hezekiah (above 300 Years after)
Jerusalem her self, in great distress, was defended by GOD for his own sake,
and for his Servant David's sake. Religious Princes and Potentates are an
Extraordinary Blessing. Isa. 1.26 I will restore thy Judges, as at the first,
etc. a Mercy representative of all the good GOD has in his Thoughts to bestow
upon Judah. He makes choice of this as the fittest Interpreter of his large
Heart, as that which might best assure them of his Love. The Queen of Sheba,
without a Spirit of Prophecy, was able to see happy days coming upon the Jews,
from the Piety and Wisdom She observed in their Prince. 2 Chronicles. 9.8. Because
thy GOD loved Israel to establish them for ever, therefore made he Thee King
over them to do Judgment, and Justice.

I know (My Brethren) it is a Sin to flatter Kings; and let it be Treason if you
will; but a good One ought daily to be praised. Ps 72.15.
But lest I should be challenged for so bold an attempt as the giving any
Character of His Most Sacred Majesty, (for Every Pencil is not permitted to
draw a King's Picture;) and believing that Great Things and Greater Persons are
not to be treated, or so much as treated of, but with the greatest Deference,
Caution, and with the most profound Submissions; instead of inditing so good a
Matter, I shall at present only speak of the Things that are fairly laid down
in the Text, viz.

(1.) The very worthy deeds done unto this Nation by his Providence, or
Prudence.

(2.) The great Quietness, or Peace, which, by his Conduct, and Management, we
now enjoy. The First of which came to pass when he was our glorious Deliverer;
the Second now He is Our Lawful and Rightful King. And then

(3.) I shall wind up the Discourse with some Practical Deductions. And

(1.) The very worthy Deeds done unto this Nation by his Providence. Such,
which our Childrens Children shall Sing the Story of, whilst their pleased
Parents smile themselves into Tears of Joy that they lived to see the truth of
the Strange Revolution; which to After ages may possibly wear the Face of a
Romance, and either the Thing it self concluded to be only the extravagant
Sallies of some Historians; or else the Person, whom Providence has Selected
out of the Mass of Mankind, to be an Instance what Wonders the Almighty can do
for those he has a Strange Kindness for.

I need not tell you in what a dreadful Posture our Affairs both Civil, and
Ecclesiastic, stood at that Juncture when our almost unpresidented Deliverance
was wrought for us. They were (as One speaks of the State of the Empire in his
Time) (...), upon the Edge of the Razor. The Nation, such were its agonies and
convulsions, seemed like the Roll, Ezekiel. 2.10. written within and without,
Lamentation and Weeping and Woe.

What Invasions upon our Rights were we long and sad Spectators of! The
Character of England at that Time we might find in Isa. 59.14. Judgment was
turned backward, and Justice stood afar off; Truth was fallen in the Streets, and
Equity could not enter. Our Foundations were out of course, and, like the
Earth, our Government seemed to hang without any hold.

Our Laws (the common Inheritance and Patrimony of every Freeborn Subject, the
Security of all that can be valuable in this World) professedly run down; and
Justice and Trials were only become the Words of Form to be made use of for
destroying us by Rule and Method; and were only the Solemnities. and Ceremonies
of our Ruin. No Man's Fence was Strong enough to resist precarious Judges, and
suborned Juries. Prerogative (which is only a Power to preserve People on
extraordinary Occasions) was made the great Engine of their Destruction. Men by
Law unqualify'd for any Trust, were thrust into all Offices of Trust; and those
who were Traitors in the Eye of the Law, had the chief Management of Affairs.

The Nurseries of the Clergy were assigned over to Papists; and the Ministers
of Religion were enjoined, contrary to the Laws in force, to proclaim Liberty
to their Parishioners to go to Mass, or where they pleased; and threatened with
a Severe Prosecution for their Noncompliance, which in part was Executed by
imprisoning the Fathers of our Church.

Public Mass-houses, and Schools for the corrupting of Youth, were set up in
several parts of the Kingdom. The Wolves, and professed Adversaries of our
Church, were entrusted for the providing Pastors for it; the Jesuits, and other
Popish Priests, having the Choice of our Bishops, and the disposal of all such
Ecclesiastical Preferments as belonged to the Crown.

A Standing Army was kept up in the Time of Peace, merely to over awe the
People, and deter them from asserting their Rights; to bring us into Hobbs's
State of Nature, that they should all have a Right to every thing of ours, nor
leave us any other way to help our selves, and ease our sad Complaints, but our
private Prayers, and our dry Patience.

Such as would not comply to promote their Popish Designs, were turned out of
the Court, Corporations, and Commissions of Peace, and Lieutenancy: Not a Few
debarred of their way of Livelihood; and a Resolution taken to suffer none to
exercise any such Employment as required a License, unless they would make the
like Engagement.

The Parliament, which should Redress our Grievances, was no longer allowed the
Liberty of Voting; but the Lords, and all others who were likely to be Members,
were Closetted; and all Arts used to induce them to betray their Liberties.

The Nation no longer permitted the free Choice of their Representatives; but
Threatenings, and Menaces, and all Methods made use of to determine them to such
Tools as the Romanists should think fit to Nominate to them.

And at last, (to omit other Public Grievances, too tedious to enumerate on
such a Day as this, for their Name was Legion) a Prince of Wales was introduced
into the World; the ill Management of which Business the very Papists
themselves complained of. The Business of the Prince of Wales ( says One of
them under the Mask of a Protestant, in a virulent Paper against his present
Majesty, Entitled England's Crisis, or The World well amended, printed in
Ireland) I cannot but confess some people managed, as if they designed either
that we should not believe at all, or if we did, our Belief should be as
implicit as to Successions and Inheritances here, as that of the Romanist is in
the Expectation of the Kingdom of Heaven.


In short, We were dealt withal as Thieves do by them they Rob; we were bound
and gagged tha we might not stir to help our selves, nor cry out for the help
of Others. We were pressed out of Measure, above Strength; insomuch that our
Heart died within us, and we despaired even of Life, and had the Sentence of
Death in our selves. We were just Sinking under the Waves, upon which we had
walked so long not without a Miracle; when lo! the Savior of Israel Stretched
forth his Arm, and saved Us, and delivered us from so great a Death. He raised
up a Man that scorned Ease and Pleasure, and Dangers; Acts 16.11.
and inspired his Royal Breast with a vigorous and an active Fire, to come over
and help oppressed Innocence; which was no sooner done, but in a Moment, in the
twinkling of an Eye, this great Complication of dangers was broken, dissipated,
and utterly destroyed; and we were Surpised with Salvation. It shall come to
pass, says Zachary, that at Even-time it shall be Light. When we were
expecting nothing but darkness (for what is the Evening but a Sepulcher
prepared for the Light?) behold then it was Light, perfect day. The Matter was
brought about by His Conduct and Providence, without undergoing the Mischiefs
of having our Country made the Seat of War: The Persons of Power and Interest
(what by guilty Fears, and Cowardice; what by a Spirit of Infatuation that
seized them) without Power and Might (like Great Oaks pulled up by an Hair)
were removed; and an End was put to our Miseries, and almost to our Fears, by a
dry Victory; and our Redemption was not purchased by Fields of Blood either of
our Friends, or Enemies. All things were unaccountably reduced into that firm
State out of which they were distorted, and we are once again the Honor and
the Envy of Christendom. We are secured of our Ancient Laws, and Immunities by
which we may live the Lives of reasonable Creatures, and not of Machines or
mere Bodies; (as (...).
Slaves are rendered, Apoc. 18.13.) and our Religion is regnant, by which we may
live the Lives of Christians and Saints. We may truly say, the Bible triumphs
in this Deliverance; and the Northern Heresy, as they reproachfully called it,
has got a glorious Victory over human Inventions, and their Catholic
Religion. The Maintenance and Preservation of which, we need not in the least
be solicitous about, since the Representative of a GOD of Infinite Truth,
cannot but be faithful when he has promised.

Thus have I ventured to open the Book; and with all possible Brevity have
given you a transient View of the very worthy deeds done to this Nation when
His Majesty was our Deliverer; Services they were so brave, but withal so very
desperate, that nothing but the adventuring into the Mouth of a Cannon to save
a Friend, (and greater danger has no Man;) can give any just Idea of them.

Speak Ireland (for He was thy Savior also), when a Sound of Battle, and of
great destruction was in thy Land; Speak, how He gave thy Enemies as the Dust
to his Sword; and as driven Stubble to his Bow; Say, what hardness he endured
as a good Soldier; what dangers he exposed himself to in the High Places of the
Field; how he gave no Sleep to his Eyes, nor Slumber to his Eyelids, till he
caused their Swords to fall out of their Hands, turning to Flight the Armies of
the Aliens, and made Thee at last to dwell in Safety.

But still his Care and Travel is not over; for now he must cross the
Tempestuous Ocean, to plead the Cause, and contend for the Common Safety of
this Side of the World; with an Adversary whose Hand was against every Man, and
every Man's hand against him; and what the Success and Conclusion of the whole
Matter has been, ask this very Day, and it will tell thee. For,

(2) By Him, this Man of Rest, We (and they both) enjoy great Quietness (or
(...).
Peace); Rest on every side, So that there is neither Adversary, nor Evil
Occurrent. The 2d Thing to be Spoken to.

Thus Peace is the Intention and End as well as the Ground of Lawful War.
Desired and Embraced by the Most Valiant, devoted to Martial Achievements as
the height of his Honor, and the utmost of his Ambition, as not to be
purchased by the Excellencies of Nature, or all the Riches in the World. In
respect to which the Poet sings of the Warlike Medes and Thracians; Ocium Bello
furiosa Thrace, (suband. rogat.
Ocium Medi Pharetra decori:
Grosphe, non Gemmis neque Purpura venale, nec Auro. Hor. lib. 2. Od. 16.



The Soldiers of Fortune, that make a Trade of War, (I hope that Trade that
has broke all others, will break it self at last) are content, like the
Estridg, to eat Iron, and live upon the Sword: Yet They that take up the Sword
only upon an Honorable Necessity, will be glad to think an honest Convenience
a Cogent Necessity to lay it down again: and afterward look upon it to be as
great an Honor and Happiness to live by their Head piece as their Sword.

The Disciples of our Lord and Savior, weread, were once afraid of their own
Master as if they had seen a Spirit. Mat. 14.27.
Thus many when they see Peace coming, are afraid, and think it is an
Apparition: but what Christ said to Them, His Majesty has been pleased to say
to us, Be not afraid, it is I that bring you the glad Tidings of Peace. Thus
after a weary Week comes a Sabbath of Rest. God has not only delivered us, not
only raised us from the Grave, and comforted us with the Hopes that we shall
not fall back into the same Grave again; (which comfort at the height of
Affliction is like Mercy at the Block;) but after a Sore and Tedious War has
given us the invaluable Blessing of Peace. We have, like Jonathan, received our
Honey at the End of a Rod; and out of the Eater, has come forth Sweetness.

Who thought of this Twelve Months ago? There was such small or no appearance
of such a Thing, that we might say, If the Lord would make Windows in Heaven,
or say, Drop down ye Heavens from above, and let the Skies pour down Peace,
might this thing be? Almighty GOD does often sow his Blessings whilst Men
Sleep. Whilst our Faith sleeps as to the Belief, (and so indeed he has been
more gracious to us than Christ was to his own Country, Matt. 13.58.) and Our
Hopes sleep as to the Expectation of so great a Mercy, he comes privily, as it
were, and lays it down by us upon our Pillows. Jer. 29.11. For I know the
Thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord; thoughts of Peace, and not
of evil, to give you an expected End. And thus after all our Tossings, has he
brought us to that fair Haven of Quiet where we would be. Insomuch that the
Trumpets sound nothing but the welcome joys of our Common Safety; and the armed
Troops in our Streets, march only as our Defense and Guard.

It was once, you know, said of Claudian, That he wanted Matter suitable to the
Excellency of his Wit; but where is Wit and Eloquence worthy of this Subject?
Such a Comprehensive Blessing is Peace, such a Circle of Blessings, that who
can show forth all its Praise? So that (my Brethren) you must even pardon me,
if I am forced (like the Geographers) to set down a Line for a River, and a
Spot for a whole Country.

As GOD has delivered us from as dreadful a Judgment as we could fear, so
Peace is as great a Blessing as we can desire. It is one of GOD's good and
perfect Gifts; when the Psalmist could say no more, he ends all with, The Lord
will bless his People with Peace, Psalm 29.11. As Bread in the Lord's Prayer,
comprehends all Necessaries that conduce to the preservation of our Natural
Lives; so Peace includes whatsoever is necessary to make Church and State
happy, It is every way excellent. If we speak of Goodness, lo! this is Good; if
of Delight, lo! this is Pleasant. Utile Dulci.
Among all the prodigious Paradoxes held in England, I think this is none, That
Peace is not Good. It is so incomparably Good, that we cannot receive any due
and adequate Thoughts of it, from any thing else but our own Experience. Psalm
133.1. Behold how good and pleasant a Thing it is! An Excessive kind of Praise;
and the highest Style of Praise is to profess our Inability of Expression; even
as the Psalmist uses to speak of GOD, O how excel nt is thy Name! and, How
great is thy Goodness! He could not comprehend the One, nor express the Other.
Thus, since we cannot sufficiently set out the Praises of Peace, we will only
ask, How good it is? And Praise it, by saying Nothing of it. We can only ask
the Question, How Good? and, How Pleasant? But cannot answer it: However, He
would try at it, and tells us, It Is like the precious Ointment, etc. What has a
Fragrant Smell we all admire, and draw near to. Because of the savor of thy
good Ointments, Cant. 1.
we will run after thee. Peace has an Attractive Power; for though Men
naturally Love their own Country best, yet every Man likes best to live where
there is Peace and Quiet. Isaac left Gerar when they Strove with him, Gen
26.17, etc.
and went to Sitnah for Peace; and when they Strove with him there, he went to
Rehoboth, and Beersheba, for Peace. And England can tell what a Conflux of
French, etc. have come over, and still continue amongst us for the shadow of
our Peace; insomuch that we have been like Nebuchadnezzar's Tree, a Shade, and
a Refuge to all the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field; and not only
the House of our Church and Nation, but the great House of the World ((...))
has been filled with the sweet Savor of this our good Ointment. And as it is
indeed like Ointment, so it is like the Dew; thus compared to show its
fertility, according to the known Nature of it in fructifying the Earth; not to
Rain, which sometimes falling with Violence, does more hurt than good; but to a
distilling Dew, frequently called the Dew of Heaven. Thus Peace is of Celestial
Extraction; the Ointment is poured on by the Hand of a Man; and our Peace is
well promoted by Inferior Means; but the Dew comes from Heaven; and it is GOD
that sends the Blessing of Peace; and as the Influences of Heaven fatten the
Earth, so does this a Church and Nation. Nay, It Is as the dew of Hermon, The
Original reads it, As the Dew of Hermon that descended upon the mountains of
Zion; And so the Greek Version Renders it as the Vulgar Latin. Now in regard
these Two seemed to be far distant, the One in Jerusalem, the Other beyond
Jordan; and so impossible that the Dew of One should run down to the Other;
diverse late Translations, with Ours, have added, And as the Dew; as if (...),
it were to be repeated. But there are some Learned Interpreters that think it
not necessary, in regard there was a Zion also near Jordan, adjoining to
Hermon. Deuteronomy. 4.48. Unto Mount Sion which is Hermon. And howsoever in the
Hebrew there is some Literal difference between Sion and Zion, here and in the
Psalm; yet they take it not to be of any Consequence, in regard there may be
given diverse Instances of such Variations, and greater in the Names of the same
Persons and Places.
which was one of the richest Soils in all Israel, to denote the greatness of
the Benefit that will redound hereby. It is so profitable, that if you were
possessed of all things besides, and this was wanting, they could profit you
nothing: And therefore, How good is it? Is as if nothing was good without it,
according to the Greek Version, (...), etc. What is good, but for Brethren to
dwell in Peace? There is no real Blessing without it; take this away, and you
destroy a Kingdom. As the Artificer Carved his own Name into the Buckler of
Minerva so exactly, that whosoever should undertake to pick it out, must of
necessity spoil the Buckler; so it is with Peace; which is so woven with the
Prosperity of a Kingdom, that whosoever destroys Peace, destroys a Kingdom. The
Hebrews comprehended all manner of Prosperity under its Name; an Observation as
common as their Vulgar Salutation, Peace be unto you; which is equivolent with
that of Ours, I wish you all Happinss; and hereupon they used the word at every
turn, and upon every occasion; insomuch that it is sometimes put, by a
Catechresis, to signify the Prosperous Success even of War it self; 2 Samuel
11.7. David Commanded of Vriah, how Joab did, and how the people did, and
concerning the Peace of the War, that is (as our Translators Render it) how the
War prospered?

And now since I have mentioned that unlucky Word War, let your fancy lead you
for a while into some Kingdom where the Weapons of War (the Weapons of the
Lord's indignation) are brought forth. You need no other Foil to set off the
Luster and Beauty of this Jewel of Peace.

Imagine then that you see War Riding upon a Red Horse, and he Unbridled; with
his Sword wearied and blunted by Destruction, and made fat with fatness: Isa.
34.16.
How dismal is the sight! How dreadful is the Place! it is no other than the
Gate of Hell. Joel 2.1, 2. 2 Kings 8.12.
Joel calls the Day of War, a Day of Gloominess and thick pitchy Darkness.
Elisha wept to think of it. So that David was much in the right when the
Prophet put him to his Trilemma, to choose the Plague rather than the other Two;
and earnestly to beseech, Let me not fall into the Hand of Man, whose very
Mercies are Cruelty. Which may be one Reason why Nebuchadnezzar Sealed the Den
of Lions wherein Daniel was, because he thought it safer to trust him with the
Lions than with his implacable Enemies.

War is a Colluvies of all Evil both of Sin and Misery; then behold a Troop
comes; (...); if they called it the Father of all, you may well add Mischief to
make up the Sense. It Is the very Abomination of Desolation; abominable for the
Outrages committed in it; and making Desolate in the sad and woeful Effects of
it.

He was an Ingenious Limner, who most Lively Represented a Dying Piece in this
manner: A Goodly Matron Mortally Wounded at the Storming of a City; as she lay
Bleeding and Expiring of her Wound, behold her helpless hungry Infant comes
crawling toward her Breasts, whilst the Dying Mother looks Wistly and
Carefully upon it; Ne Sanguis metuens pro Lacte bibatur; fearing lest the
Hungry Babe should suck down Blood instead of Milk.

No respect then to Persons: Birth and Family do but at that Time make the
Condition the more deplorable; for the higher they stand, the more open and
exposed are they to the Storm and Envy of Others. Riches are then but gilded
Thorns, and Honor but an higher Misery. No Reverence then to Gray Hairs, no
Tenderness for Children, or those that suck the Breasts; no Compassion for the
most Lovely and Charming Flowers of Beautiful Youth it self. The Bed does not
protect the Sick Person; nor the Woman the Burden that she carries; nor the
Seat of Justice the Magistrate; nor the House of Prayer the Priest, which is
made in the most literal Sense a Den of Thieves; So that there can be no coming
to Church, no public Devotion, without the danger of the Galileans Fate, to
have their Blood mingled with their Sacrifices; and for fear of being Numbered
with the Dead, that (Cruel Wretches as they are) cannot rest from their
Labors, or Sleep in quiet for them. What Burning of Cities and Villages! What
Slaughter and Havoc of Human Flesh and Blood! Isa. 34.3.
the Mountains being melted with it, and the Fields become a dismal Golgatha,
groaning under the Weight of the Slain, and the Half-slain that beg for the
Mercy to be quite Knocked of the Head.

What Cries and Ejulations! What wringing the Hands, and tearing the Hair, of
poor Widows and Orphans! What Rapes mingled with Murders, and Murders with
Rapes; Soldiers Killing Soldiers in the very moments of their ungoverned Lusts,
to perpetrate the same Villainies themselves!

Whole Families stripped naked of all their Enjoyments, how do they sit Solitary
and Forlorn! aggravating their Misery, by viewing over the Records of their
former Prosperity, and pleasant Things; of which, alas! they have been
plundered over and over, by one Party or another; so that what the Palmer-worm
has left, Joel 1.4.
the Locusts, Canker worm, and the Caterpillar has eaten; and they whose Goods,
etc. escape the Sword of Hazael, are yet devoured by Jehu's; till they have
sucked the very marrow out of those Bones which others had broken; and should
any thing chance to have been left, yet that very little is so embittered by
frights and alarms of Fire, and Sword, the Caldeans and the Sabeans, that it
cannot possibly be enjoyed with any Satisfaction, but the Morsel is Eat with a
trembling hand, and the Cup is drunk out of with a perpetual shaking.

How are the Rivers and Ponds died again with Purple Gore! by tumbling in
Carcasses, and Men headlong into them, that endeavoring to crawl out, are
knocked down again, and so perish in the Waters; whilst Others are fain to sly
for their Lives; the Woods and Mountains wanting Caves and hiding-places for
them; being never likely to meet their dear Relations again in this World; Some
of them leading a tedious life in a far Country; Others perishing by the way;
and the Rest, it is to be feared, taken Captive, to be Slaves, it may be, to
Slaves; a Case so very pitiable, that it made the Prophet forbid to weep for
the dead, but bid weep sorely for them that are going away, Jer. 22.10.

As those Three Commandments, Thoushalt not Kill, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, Thou shall not Steal, are ranked together in the Law; so are they
usually violated in the Lawless Violence of War; and so you find them threatened
together, Isa. 13.16. Their children shall be dashed in pieces before their
eyes, their houses spoiled, and their wives ravished.

That of Erasmus is a short, ^^as. in Querim. Fa^^s.
but a smart and pithy Examination of the Soldiers Pater Noster; by which, with
some little Alteration of it, you may give a guess at the deplorable Condition
of that Country which is wounded with the wound of an enemy, Jer. 30.14.
and the chastisement of a cruel one. Quid quaeso Orat Miles? etc. What, I
beseech you (says he) or How does the Soldier Pray?

Do thou say, Our Father? Impudent Mouth! How dare thou call GOD Father,
that art slying at thy Brother's Throat, or the next thou meetest, to cut or
tear it out?

Do thou say, Hallowed be thy Name; when GOD's Name is by none more
Blasphemed and Dishonored than by thy unhallowed Lips, and thy Fellow Soldiers
rending the very Heavens by their Oaths and Execrations?

Do thou say, Thy Kingdom come; when none is a greater Enemy to the Kingdom
of Grace, than thy wicked self?

Do thou say, Thy will be done on Farth as it is in Heaven; and yet when GOD
tells thee it is his will thou should follow Peace with all men, thou
delightest to put the Blood of War upon thy Girdle that is about thy Loins; and
sleep not except thou have done Mischief, except thou causest some to fall,
thou Enemy of all Righteousness?

Do thou say, Give us this day our daily Bread; and yet take away by
Violence and Rapine all the Necessaries of Life thy Neighbor has labored for
in the Sweat of his Brows, and leavest nothing that pertains to him by the
Morning Light?

Thou beseechest the Lord to forgive thee thy Trespasses, but certainly thou
dare go no farther, but must make a Full Stop where Christ made but a Comma;
For how can thou add, As thou Forgivest them that Trespass against thee, when
nothing but thy Brother's Blood will satisfy thee, and his too who never did
nor would have offended thee, had thou not first out of Measure provoked him?

Do thou Pray, Not to be led into Temptation, and yet accountest it
Pusillanimity not to venture upon any Thing that thy Ravenous Appetite or Lusts
Tempt thee unto?

Lastly, Do thou Supplicate to be Delivered from all Evil, and yet are not
ashamed, nor do thou blush to commit Abominations, (Seven Abominations are in
thy Heart) and to appoint whatever thou come near to utter destruction, and
make it thy Trade to live all thy days in that Evil of Evils, Bloody War,
that makes a Land which is before an Army, as the Garden of Eden to be behind
it, a desolate Wilderness; more desolate than the Wilderness toward Diblath?

Such, Nah. 2.3. Hos. 2.18.
in Truth, is the Nature and uncontrouled Practice of the Men that are in
Scarlet; such their Calamitous Circumstances that are oppressed with the Bow,
the Sword, and the Battle.

And as by War in the Great, so by War in the Little World, the Body of Man, we
may know and see what an Evil thing it is, and bitter to be deprived of this
Blessing of Peace; and consequently what a Value and Regard to put upon it.

If that General League and Union, that great Instrumentum Pacis, the just
Temperament of the Body, be not preserved and kept entire, How doleful are the
Consequences! How are all Proceedings in all the Courts of Nature stopped; and
all Actions, Natural, Vital, and Animal, very much hindered and retarded, if not
let fall! How is all Trade and Commerce forbidden, though the several Parts of
Nature are Nourished from and by each other! How is Nature shut up, and all the
Passages stopped, Judge 5.6.
and the high ways are unoccupied, and the travelers (the Spirits, the Blood,
and the other necessary Humors preternaturally) walk through bypath! and
there is no coming in of usual and necessary Supplies, nor going out for those
(Excrementitious) Humors, which are such a Burden and Weakening to Nature's
Garrison, that it cannot hold out. In a word; The Seditious within are at such
Contests one with another, that there is nothing but complaining in its
Streets. The Keepers of the House (the Arms) Tremble; and the Strong Men (those
Supporters of the House, the Legs) bow themselves; and the sound of the
grinding is low, and those that look out at the Windows (the Eyes) are darkened;
and the Doors (the Mouth, Ears, etc) are shut in the Streets, and the Voice of
a little chirping Bird awakens, and all the Daughters of Music are brought low
(low as to his Power and Capacity to use them, for his Voice fails; and low as
to any Esteem he has of them, for he regards them not;) fear also possesses
him, and the Grasshopper is a Burden to him, and his desire fails. Thus lies he
on his Bed of Languishing; which though never so soft, can afford him no Ease,
unless GOD be pleased to make it; so that he would willingly exchange his Bed
of Down for one of Dust; and his Soul chooses strangling and death rather than
Life.

And now (My Brethren) put what I have said together, from considerations taken
from both Worlds, supposed to be in a State of War; and it must needs be that
you will presently fall in Love, and pay your Court to this Beauty of Peace,
which is the perfect Reverse of all that has been spoken. And therefore since
it is at last returned to us from afar, let us lay hold of it; as the Patriarchs
did apprehend the Promises. Heb. 11.13. (...), they Saluted them, they hugged
them, they embraced them.

Peace like the Vernal Sun gives new Life and Vigor to the World, and makes its
Inhabitants, like the Hills of Sion, to laugh and sing. It whets men's Diligence
and Industry in their several Callings; giving them hopes that their lawful
Undertakings shall return Crowned with their desired Effects. It is the Spring
of all Participation; and gives a free Communication from One End of the World
to the Other, that we share in the good things entrusted by GOD and Nature with
other Nations, and Persons. It is so Excellent, that the Orator Dulce est Nomen
Pacis; res tam jucunda, and salutaris, qud non modo ii quibus sensum Natura
dedit, sea ettam Tecta atque agri laetari videntur. Cic.
tells us, not only such as have Sense and Discretion, but the very Fields and
Houses rejoice in it.

Peace, it is the Soul of the Universe, the Chain of the World, and the Cement
of Nature. Peace, it is the Beauty of Providence, the Bond of Governments, and
the Mother of Order. Peace, the Life of the Law, the Guardian of Learning, and
the Encouragement of Virtue. Peace, the Health of the People, the Sojourner's
Safety, and the Enemies Terror.

Further yet, for the better half has not been told you. Peace, it is the great
design of the Ever-blessed TRINITY. The Promise of the Father; who has done
this Virtue the Honor to style himself from it, The GOD of Peace, Romans 15.33.
2 Thessalonians. 3.16. The Purchase of the Son who is the Prince of Peace, Isa. 6.9.
and the Product of the Spirit, who is set forth to us by the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. At the Birth of Our Savior the Angels
chanted it forth, -- On Earth Peace. The Excellency of his Sufferings is
couched in this, that They were the Chastisements of his Peace, Isa. 53.5. and
He himself Published it at his Resurrection -- Peace be with you. And, by the
way, it may not here be improper to make one Remark.

Our dear Lord, though content to be Crucified on Mount Calvary; yet, whilst he
was living, he was most delighted to be in the Mount of Olives. He loses his
Life in a place of Skulls, an Emblem of War; (where truly he is still
Crucified;) but he leads his Life most commonly in a place of Olives, an Emblem
of Peace; there he prays, there he preaches, there he walks, contemplates, and
watches; does every thing but die; that was reserved for Mount Calvary: Yea,
thence he ascends into Heaven; and as Peace was one of the last Legacies his
Lips bequeathed us when he died, so Mount Olives (the dewlling place of Peace)
was the last piece of Earth his blessed Foot touched when he ascended. But to
return, and I shall only speak this Once. Peace, it is the Reconciliation of
Sinners, the Consolation of the Saints, and the Crown of the Blessed. Peace, at
which the Scriptures aim, Faith intends, Hope aspires to, and it is complete
Beatitude to attain it. And therefore happy must that People needs be, that are
in such a Case, whom GOD has prevented with such a Temporal and Spiritual
Blessing It is our own Case, blessed be the Lord, Ps. 68.19. Ps. 92.17.
who daily loads us with his Benesits: The Beauty of the Lord our GOD is upon
Us; and we have lived to see the Dove and the Olivebranch of Mercy and Peace
lighting upon the Head of the Nation.

Perhaps, we may think we have deserved as much at GODs hand. It may be it has
been our Strictness and Exactness of Conversation before him; our Care of his
Worship, and Vindication of his Truth; our Observation of his Sabbaths, etc.
perhaps it has been our Charity, our Hamility and Sobriety, which so far have
prevailed upon him; Surely it is because he has not spied in Us those Lusts
and horrible Abominations which he has beheld in some other Times and Places.

O Profane I magination! Let not such vain Thoughts lodge within us. Should
GOD have gone by this Rule, we had long, long since been in Ruins. Let us
rather say, it is the free Grace of that GOD who is good, and does good. Who
has Showed favor to this Kingdom, because he would show Favor, (as though he
would be called the GOD of the English;) insomuch that We of all others have
comprehended (or rather been comprehended by) the Breadth, and Length, and
Depth, and Height of GOD's Love. The Philosophers tell us but of Three
Dimensions, the Apostle has sound out Four in GOD's Mercy, Ephesians. 3.18. Let us
rather think that we enjoy the Benefit of the Graces of Martyrs, and other Holy
Persons, who, by their Prayers, and Votes whilst they were here below, reserved
a special Blessing for Us in these Succeeding Times. And this will engage our
Hearts to the practice of those Duties which the Kindness that has been done
unto us, so justly deserves at our hands. The 3d and the last Thing to be
spoken to. And

1. Deuteronomy Nob^s (...) O^ta.
Let us ascribe this Mercy to GOD with all Thankfulness. We must not look upon
this Peace as a Matter of Chance and Fortune; as the sole product of humane
Wisdom, and Courage. It is true, Men are (...) GOD's hands, as Herbalists call
Plants: And these Hands of GOD we may kiss; Acts 14 11.
but let us be careful not to take the Crowns and Garlands which we should lay
at GOD's Feet, to set upon Man's Head. It is no diminution in the least to His
Majesty that we ascribe it to GOD. For what can so much dignify any Mortal Man,
as to be an Instrument in GOD's hand, one whom he chooses to bring about
glorious Things by, and to convey Blessings to a Kingdom?

To bring Peace out of War, is a Work worthy of GOD. Psalm. 46.9. He makes Wars
to cease; he breaks the Bow, and knappeth the Spear in sunder, and burns
the Chariots in the Fire. And therefore that great Promise of Peace runs thus,
They shall beat their Swords into Ploughshares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks. Soldiers shall turn Vine dressers, and Husbandmen; the Bees
shall hive in their Helmets. Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation;
That shall once for all be put up into its place, Non solum cum Rhodus sed cum
Artibus ger^tur Bellum.
and never be drawn again; Neither shall they learn War any more.

Blessed days! when the Art Ta^lic or Military shall be out of date, and (being
it self the greatest Interrupter of Learning) shall be learned no more. Thus
again, Isa 45.7. I form the Light (Civil as well as Natural); -- I make Peace
(Temporal as well as Spiritual); I the Lord do all these things.

We praise Thee therefore, O GOD, we acknowledge Thee who art the Lover, to be
the Lord and Author of our Peace and Concord. This is the day that the Lord
has made, we will rejoice, and be glad in it, even in the presence of all
those that have an Evil Will at our Sion: That would have Peace, but not yet;
that would have Peace, but they would proclaim it themselves; and then I
question not but it would be just such an One as our Countryman Galgacus in
Tacitus speaks of, in Relation to the Romans, whom he calls there, Raptores
Orbis, the Robbers of the World, who when they have laid all Waste as a
Wilderness, that they call Peace. These are People that do err in their Hearts;
the way of Peace they have not known; but with Envy and Vengeance, and a raw,
sore Mind, stand muttering and murmuring without, whilst in our Father's House
there is Feasting and Music.

We read in Ps. 126. that when the Lord turned the Captivity of Zion, we were
like unto them that dream; Cajetan. in loc.
but the words should rather be translated, We are like unto those that are
restored to health; and it best suits with the following words, Then were our
Mouths filled with Laughter, and our Tongues with Praise; which can never be
said of a Man when he dreams; but to a Person that is restored to Health after
a tedious fit of Sickness it is very applicable. Since therefore the Lord has
turned Our Captivity as the Waters of the South, and we can truly say, Peace,
Peace, and our Health is restored, let us praise the Lord. If he expects
public Thanks for private Mercies, much more then for public. Ps. 103.1. When
therefore we hear such a joyful Sound; so that as Balaam said, Numb. 23.21. GOD
is with them, and the Shout of a King is amongst them, as either conquering his
Enemies, or giving them Rest and Peace, in his Name should we rejoice and boast
all the day long.

Almighty GOD expects that his several dispensations should be entertained with
suitable Deportments, Eccles. 7.14. In the day of Prosperity be joyful. Deuteronomy.
16.15. Thou shall surely rejoice. As it is said of the Jews upon the restoring
and settling Jerusalem in Peace, that they rejoiced, because GOD made them to
rejoice, Neh. 12.43. We should delight our Selves in the Abundance of Peace.
Psa. 37.11. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy GOD, O Sion; For He has
strengthened the Bars of thy Gates, He has blessed thy Children within thee;
He makes Peace in they Borders, Psalm. 147.12.

To be Chagrin, Sullen, and out of Humor at such a Time as this, is as
suitable as to put on Mourning at a Wedding, Quod examini expedit idem api.
or to Fast on a Sunday. We are all of Us now (since every Man is concerned in
the Benefit) to awaken all manner of decent Expedients whereby to express our
Thankfulness to GOD. Let the Horizon Echo our joyful Acclamations; Let the
Roofs of the Temple return the loud Voice of our common Praises. Let the whole
Kingdom build Altars to the Lord, and call them, Jehova-Shalom, saying, the
Lord has blessed his people with Peace. Let the Streets be filled with Melody,
and our Houses with Cheerfulness. Bring hither the Tabret, the merry Harp, and
the Lute. But after all, I would not be mistaken in the Point. It is not a
profane Mirth that I am pleading for; that is an horrid Sin, and to be
detested. The Public Joy of Christians is not to be expressed to the Public
disgrace both of their Joy and their Christianity. We are not to allow our
selves in any intemperate, unwarrantable Transports; in sensual Revellings, and
Baccanal Rites; indulging to Extravagancy, and offending GOD whilst we praise
him. It would have been high Indiscretion in Noah and his Family when in the
Ark, and perceiving the Dove approaching with an Olive Branch, to have made
such a Noise and Lumber as should have frighted her away. It behooves Us to walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise; not only as Men overjoyed at present,
but as circumspect Persons, Men careful to preserve what we rejoice in.
Otherwise it may befall us as it does some Young Heirs; who rejoice too much
when they first come to a rich Inheritance; and so in a few Years by their
profuseness and prodigality, their Revenues and their Joy are both brought to
an End.

Since we are called to rejoice, let it be with Trembling. May we rejoice in
GOD's goodness, Neh. 9.25. and yet fear him, and his goodness, Hos. 3.5. with
such a Systole and Diaslole ought we to breathe and live: To rejoice with
trembling, not out of distrust of GOD, but our selves; not for fear GOD will
not continue, but that we shall not deserve our Happiness. GOD forbid that the
Tree of Fortune (as it is called) should be so fairly Blown, that we might only
see how great Hopes Sin is able to blast. We ought to have an holy fear, and
trembling, of forseiting our Mercies by our Sins. Josh. 24.20. If you forsake
the Lord, then will he turn, and do you hurt after he has done you good. If we
abuse our Peace into Licentiousness, and commit folly with our Mercies, this
Dove will sly away to make room for a devouring Faulcon that will make a Stoop
like Lightning with nothing but Destruction and Ruin engraven upon her
Varvells. And then we may even thank our selves for being the Cause of our own
Misery: For no man is hurt but by Himself, (says the Moralist.) Great States,
as Buildings, are crushed by their own Weight, (say Politicians.) Persons and
Kingdoms are destroyed through their own Wickedness (says the Divine.) Thy
Destruction is of thy self, O Israel, Hos. 13.21. Propriis transfigimur alis.

But I Will tell you a Short, and a ready way how we may be safe and happy, and
continue a long Blessing upon our Selves, and Posterity. The way is, Am I out?
-- no sure; the way is -- Let the Time past of our Lives suffice to have lived
directly contrary to our Interest and Duty. Let the Vices that reigned in the
late Days of Unhappy Memory, and, I Am afraid, still continue to do so, not be
so much as once named amongst us as becomes Saints; and the thing is done: And
Peace shall be upon Israel.

(2.) Let us give unto Caesar the things that be Caesar's, who has made even
our Enemies to be at Peace with Us. (...) (all Superlatives.) We accept it
always, and in all Places, with all Thankfulness. It is what the King of Heaven
expects; returns of Gratitude not only to himself, but to the glorious
Instruments likewise which he is pleased to make use of. It is reproachfully
said of Israel, not only that they remembered not the Lord their GOD, who had
deliverd them out of the hands of all their Enemies on every side; but that
they showed no kindness to the House of Jerubb^al, namely Gideon (who had been
his Instrument in it) according to all the goodness which he had showed unto
Israel, Judges 8.34.

We might wish (My Brethren) that Israel had been the only People in the World
that had been guilty of such ill treatment of their best Friends, and
Benefactors. But that wish comes too late? We of this Nation abhor that Age
that shall pretend to outdo ours in any Crime whatever, not that of Ingratitude
excepted.

Very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation; We owe the correction of our Evil
Fate, our Quiet and Peaceable Lives to the King's Providence; at the peril of
his Life and Blood; which justly deserves the tribute of our most Thankful
Acknowledgments: But instead of reverencing him for his Work's sake; there are
risen up a Race of sinful Men that will never forgive him, but are mad they
have lost the happiness to be Papists and Slaves; and are resolved to be
peevish without Reason, rebellious without Cause, and troublesome without End.
The very Heathen World will rise up in Judgment against such a Generation, and
condemn it: For they not only paid their Wise and Gracious Princes their
Highest Honors during their Lives; but worshipped them too after their Deaths.
They could not imagine, that those who either by the Invention of Useful Arts,
or the Institution of an Excellent Government, or by many Noble Exploits and
Deliverances, had in an high degree obliged their Countries, died like other
men; they reckoned they became Divine, and were translated among the GODS; and
so changed their Allegiance into Adoration.

I confess to you this ought not to be done; but then neither must the other be
left undone: If it was but for this One Christian Reason, that we might
discover to the world the honor that we entertain for the Almighty himself,
who is the King of Kings. For in a proportion to that of 1 John 4.20. If we
render not the Dues to these GODS whom we do see, (a strain of Speech, that if
Divine Authority did not warrant it, Psalm 8^.^.
would pass for impudent, and blasphemous Flattery) how shall we to Him whom we
have not seen? How can we acknowledge the Supr am, that disown the Subordinate
Deities?

Since therefore GOD has settled us under such an Auspicious Monarch, who has
so signally recommended himself to us, as he has done long ago to all the World
beside; at all times let us Congratulate our own Happiness, and endeavor to
make him happy too. Let us Obey him humbly; if he be the Minister of GOD for
our good, we ought to be Servants to him for his good. Let us honor him
Conscienciously, be Loyal upon Principles, and for Conscience sake; not for
hopes of Preserment, not by Chance, or good Fortune, not because it may come
into the Fashion to be so, but because GOD has positively required it, and
made it one special part of his unchangeable Law. Let us Love him
Affectionately; that there be no Strise amongst his Subjects, but to outvy each
other in pious Loyalty; that the Hearts of his People may be his Throne.
Lastly, Let us Pray for him as we would do for our own Souls, That GOD would
add many Years to his Life, yea, take from ours, who would most gladly spare
them to add to his. That GOD would give (...) a Faithful Council, a Royal
People; (...) omit nothing in our Prayers, that (...) give him his Hearts
desire and not withhold the request of his Lips; that when be has reigned many
and many Years with all Prosperity and Honor, he may receive an Immortal
Crown, and leave Flourishing King, oms to his Successor, and Peaceful Times to
his Subjects.

(3.) Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.6. Jerusalem signifies the
Vision of Peace; at first it was only called Salem, Peace. Melchisedech King of
Salem, that is, King of Peace; but afterward when Abraham's J^ireh was prefixed
to Melchisedech's Salem, it became Jerusalem, a Vision of Peace; then pray for
the Peace of this Vision of Peace. Blessed be GOD Our Jerusalem is become a
Vision of Peace; then Pray for the Peace of this Vision of Peace; i. e. pray
for the Continuance of it. The effectual Fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man
avails much; engages the Almighty, and calls in an Omnipotent Arm to Settle,
Strengthen, and Secure our Peace. Such Pious Lips drop Balm upon the Countries
and Places where they live; and such healing Tongues, as Solomon calls them,
are a Tree of Life, Prove. 15.4. but as for those Tongues that cry concerning
Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground, may they cleave to
the Roof of all their Mouths, that at the Hour of Death, they may not so much
as say, Miserere Domine.

Lastly, As GOD has done great things for Us, so it is necessary we do
something again for Him; as he has Given to Us, so are we to Give to Him.
Alas! How can that be? Since our goods reach not to him: He needs them not;
true indeed, but His do: The Poor need, and by them our Goods reach even to Him
too. We relieve Him in the Poor, and cloathe Him in the Naked; Matthew. 25.45.
and no Time so seasonable to do it in, none fitter than this; it is a proper
Sacrifice for a Thanksgiving; let us make our Indigent Neighbors rejoice with
us: That which would feed our Gluttony, and prove a provocation, being put into
the Bellies of the Poor (and a Lazarus lies at every door) may plead our
Pardon, and procure Mercy for Mercy. Let us break off our Sins by
Righteousness, and our Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor, it may be the
lengthning of our Tranquillity. Therefore having Refreshed our selves, let us
Cheer others, and deliver them from Distress and Want; Those especially who
have suffered in the Battle; the Sick, Lame, Maimed; the desolate Widows and
Children of such as fell in the Service. Is there not all the reason in the
World we should Relieve them who with so much Alacrity have hazarded their
Lives to preserve ours? To whose Valor and Magnanimity we owe, in part, our
Liberties and Religion, nay, (and for ought we know) the Life of the KING.

I Conclude all (Mutato Nomine) with that Acclamation of Joy which the People
of Rome gave Charles the Great at his Coronation;

GULIELMO Tertio, a DEO Coronato, Magno and Pacifico Britannorum Imperatori
Vita and Victoria.

To WILLIAM the Third, Crowned of GOD, the Great and Peaceable Emperor of Great
Britain, be Life and Victory, and let the Three Nations say Amen.

FINIS.

