On the Happy ACCESSION Of Their Majesty's King WILLIAM AND Queen MARY, To the
Throne of ENGLAND, etc.

A PINDARIQUE ODE.

With a Preface showing the Occasion of the Publication at this time.

By JOHN GUY, Gent.

Aspirce convexo nutantem pondere mundum,
Terrasque, tractusque maris, Caelumque profundum:
Aspice, venturo laetentur ut omnia seclo.
O mihi tam longae maneat pars ultima vitae,
Spiritus and quantum fat erit tua dicere facta:
Non me carminibus vincet nec Thracius Orpheus,
Nec Linus. -- --
Virgil Ecl. 4th. LONDON, Printed by J. Mayos, for R. Harrison in New-Inn,
without Temple Bar, MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE.
THAT this Poem was really Written by me shortly after Their Majesty's Happy
Accession to the Throne, and therefore can be no Trick or Device to serve a
present Turn, several of my Friends that were privy to the Writing of it, and
others, among whom it was handed about in Manuscript, have done me the Justice
to attest. And indeed, the Concern I have been under, for being Questioned as a
Disafected Person to His Majesty, has made me incapable to Impose in such a way
upon the World. My Modesty and Difidence of the Performance, considering the
great deference that Subjects ought to pay to Princes, would not permit me then
to Print it; and the Reason why I do it now is too obvious. For though I was
assured, by very good Judges, that it was not Inferior to any that was
Published on that Occasion, when those that could have done better were silent;
yet I could not but be sensible how very short this, as well as the rest, were
of the Transcendent Subject, which I thought ought not to have been attempted
but by the Skilfuls't Hand. None but a Phidias should attempt a Jove, And for
little Poets to approach Majesty with their Muses, I feared might look
something like Familiar, and ought not to expect Acceptance. It seems
Pictoribus arque Poetis, etc. did not extend thus far, when Horace himself, who
had the Honor of Augustus's Friendship, thought that he should offend by a
long Epistle. Quum tot sustineas curas and tanta pericula solus,
Res Italas Armis tuteris, moribus ornes:
Legibus emendes: in Publica commoda peccem,
Si longo Sermon morer tua tempora, Caesar.
And Certainly there is as much Deference and good Manners due from us to King
William, upon all those accounts which Horace mentions, as was from him to
Augustus; For did Augustus undergo more or greater Cares and Perils for the
People of Rome, than His Majesty has for us and all Europe? Has not his Arms
Preserved us more Eminently than ever Augustus's did them? And for Reformation
of Manners, and Restoring the Laws to their due Administration, could Augustus
or any other Prince take more effectual care than His Majesty? And if the
Modesty of Horace would not permit him, but he thought himself Insufficient to
Sing Augustus's Praises, and that for him to offer at it, would look Officious,
and might be Unacceptable, as he tells Augustus afterward in the same Epistle,
Sed neque parvum
Carmen Majestas recipit tua, nec meus audet
Rem tentare pudor, quum vires far recusent.
Sedulitas Autem, stulte quem diligit, urget:
Peaecipue quum se numeris commendat and art.


What Construction can we think ought to be put on the best of our Performances?

Kings, like him whose Vicegerents they are, ought not to be Addressed, or even
thought of, but with Reverence, and if a Late Noble Wit judged right, that the
Supreme Being was not to be Worshipped by Tedious Familiar Addresses, but by
some short significant Hymn, expressing the profoundest Admiration; Poets would
do well to observe that measure in their Panegyricks on Princes? but then who
should Write that Hymn?

These Considerations, though unheeded by others, prevailed on me not to Publish
this Poem, tho I think it contrived so as may pretty well answer those
Objections, and have a better pretense than the rest for being Public, viz. By
making the Address not from the Poet, but from Britania: And the joint sense of
a whole Island may be Acceptable, when in the Person of a Poet, it would be
Insolent. Wherefore, and Considering withal that my Loyalty to His Majesty is
called in Question by False Accusations, and Malicious Informations, this Poem
is even Extorted from me in my Vindication, and as I hope, without Offense, or
else it had not further seen the Light.

There is abundant Evidence upon Oath from Gentlemen, Clergymen, Practisers of
the Law, and others of Unquestionable Reputation (and I take care to Converse
with none but are so) of my Loyalty, and good Affection to His Majesty; And I
am confident that every Honest unprejudiced Person that knows me is satisfied
of it; I have upon all Occasions shown it, and have given a great many
Instances of it, and amongst several others that I could mention, I do assert
that the Writing this Poem is One: For what ever defects it may have as a Poem,
I think there has not been any extant, that excells it in Loyalty, not Slight,
Artificial, and Poetical, but Real, Affectionate, and Substantial Loyalty, and
such as another might at that time perhaps have thought dangerous to expose.
The expressions are bold and high, even to Temerity, and such as indeed would
not be allowable in any other sort of Poem, than the Pindarique Ode; But how I
have performed in the Poetical part I do not at all concern my self, nor care
if there are some Flat or some Rough Lines in it; The Design of this
Publication being to show the World, not that I am a Poet but a Loyal Subject;
And for that, if the Sense be good; Tom. Sternhold's, or Tom. (...) -- l's
Rhimes will serve.

For I think it concerns me to give all the Evidence I can of my Loyalty, at
this time, when the Grand Accuser is so busy with his base Implements to
traduce me; but because I am under a prosecution by the Government for the
contrary, in submission to that, I shall say nothing of them; but do declare
solmnly, that there is not a Man that lives upon English Ground that loves and
honors His Majesty King William more than I do, and let me Perish, if after
the utmost Recollection of my Words and Actions, I know my self in the least
Guilty of what is charged against me.

The occasion of this malicious Accusation is generaly known; Before I happened
to disoblige the Person that set it on Foot, even in his Opinion, I was a very
Honest, Loyal and Good Man, and used and treated by him, with all the Kindness
and Respect imaginable by Letters and otherwise. Since, he has made it his
perfect Study and Business to contrive my Ruin, and by Words and Writing, upon
all occasions has declared as much; the Actions of my Life almost to my
Childhood, have been examined into, and now after almost twenty Years, with
Additions and Aggravations Falsely (as this whole Town knows) and Maliciously
exposed in Print, and dispersed through the Country, which shows the foul Rancour
of an Inveterate Enemy, but not the Justice of a fair one, and nothing of a
Loyal Subject, a Gentleman, or a Man, and of which notice shall be taken in due
time, and in due form.

A PINDARIQUE ODE.
I.
FAirest Britania Queen of Isles,
On whom Indulgent Nature smiles,
Over whom the Guardian Heavens wait,
To save thee from Impending Fate.
Appear, and all thy Native Charms put on,
NASSAW thy Great Deliverer is come,
And all thy Foes are hence in wild Confusion gone.
Well have thou Escaped their Violence,
And saved thy Innocence;
Strong their Designs, and Close, were laid
By those to have forced thee, and by these betrayed;
And forward steps were toward thy ruin made.
What means to save thee, then were found?
Beset with danger round,
Thy faithful Sons, that should thee aid,
Were all disarmed and bound:
Disarmed of all but Prayers and Tears,
And those unequal to their fears.
But lo NASSAW, NASSAW by Heaven
To their Desponding suit is given.
II.
Rise then Britania, raise thy Mournful Head,
Let all thy Sorrows with thy foes be fled;
Rise, and him thy humble Muse Address;
The rude her words and artless be her dress,
To mean to offer to his High Desert,
With true and well affected heart
The Pious HERO thank, that did thy Fate avert.
Let abler Pens to Fame Record
What Holland owes her Lord,
To him the Glory of her Fortune yield,
His Councils in the State, his Valor in the Field:
How he Intestine feuds to concord brought,
How at Seneffe, and how at Mons he Fought,
Where in the Youth, such Martial Force and Fire
Made Luxemburgh, and all the World, admire,
And which a Muse to Sing, would equal Flame require.
Whilst thine Attempts in humbler strains to show,
The Gratitude, these rescued Nations owe,
III.
To God, Great Prince and You,
Is our Deliverance due.
O, may never be
Rased from our Memory,
The Benefits we owe to God and Thee.
Hail Sacred Champion of our Churches Cause!
Hail True Defender of our Faith and Laws!
Joy of our Hearts, and Comfort of our Sight;
Romes Terror, and the Protestants delight:
And were the World reformed of one pure mind,
Woulds't be like Titus, Joy of Human kind.
Thee all the Land does bless, for Thee rejoice,
And the United Peoples Sacred Voice,
Proclaims, that God Anoints Thee as his Choice.
Our Moses Thou, that under Heavens high Hand
From more than Egipts vile Idolatry,
And worse than Brick-kil Slavery,
Leads't forth the Chosen Race to their Eorefathers Land.
IV.
Whether thy Courage, or thy Wisdom, may
Be more admired is hard to say:
'Twas bold and brave to land our Coasts,
And, with so few, thy self to expose
Against unequal standing foes,
Against Garrisons, and Forts, and Mercenary Hosts.
'Twas bold and brave; but the Success
Shows that thy Wisdom was not less;
The one, unless by the other rein'd,
Does headlong to it is ruin run,
The Glory does but blaze, and straight it is done.
So Princes, unrestrained,
By Laws or Conduct have been known.
Fired with Ambitious Aim
To do great things, and get a Name,
In furious have to mount a Throne;
But weighing not the Art and Force,
Required to carry on their Course,
After some bluster and some Fury shown,
In as great haft from thence have tumbled down.
V.
So the Boutefeu Phaeton
Hasty for Government,
Unskil'd and feeble for the vast Attempt,
Mounted the Chariot of the Sun:
And scorning reasons mild Control,
The unexperienced Charriotier,
In his Careere,
Drove blazing ruin on from Pole to Pole;
The Signs were frighted at the Carrs return,
And the freez'd Zones wondered what made them burn;
The Zodiac was no Barrier found,
He leaped the Tropics, and the Eccliptic Bound,
And fired the Orbs around;
And thence, with rapid fury, hurled
Destruction over this World:
"Till Angry Jove, did dreadful Thunder throw,
"And quenched the hot Brained Fiery Youth in Po.
But Phoebus well the Giddy Seat maintains,
He knows the menage of the reins;
Phoebus collects the scattered ray,
And forms again the day,
Which shall henceforth observe the Established Course,
With just and natural force;
And his kind Beams dispense
With Universal influence.
VI.
The great Progenitors of NASSAW,
Smile at their Glorious Offspring here below;
Thou worthy Cion of that noble Stem!
The Imperial Diadem
Adorned with meaner Honor them,
Than thy Heroic Virtues now
Have justly planted on thy Brow;
Nor can the Crown the Almighty there has set,
Bring new honor on with it;
But that by Thee does Shine more bright,
And from thy Glory takes a radiant light;
For had our Sanhedrin
To thy high Merit, so ungrateful been,
And fixed it on another Head,
Than his who Libertyes, Laws, Lives, Religion rescued;
Thy Virtue yet beyond a Crown had shone,
Sufficient in its self alone,
And every good man's heart had been thy Throne,
VII.
And thus in Spain, and Italy,
Flanders, and Germany,
And in the very Heart of France
Thou do thy Power advance:
Where er'e there is any sense of Native Right;
Or value for dear Liberty,
Where People court not Slavery,
Dote not on Tyrants, and Oppressors Might;
There do thou reign; thy Empire unconfined
But in the Circle of Mankind.
As far as Winds and Waves can bear, thy Name,
All Nations and all Languages proclaim.
In Thee the Injured hope, In Thee do trust
All worthy Patriots, all the Good and Just;
Securely blessed, relying on that hand
Which does over whelming Tyranny withstand;
And stops Ambition breaking over a Land.
This Godlike Power they all ascribe to Thee,
The next to that, which stops and bounds the raging Sea.
VIII.
May Everlasting Peace attend on those
Who, with Immortal Honor, lost their Blood,
Whilst bravely they withstood
The unjust Invaders of the Worlds Repose:
But may their Fates be never thine;
Pious alike, and brave was their design,
Though Crowned not with the like Event;
The Great Adolphus perished in the Attempt.
For whom all Europe grieved,
Where undefiled the Sacred Truth's believed,
And pure, unmixed with Legends is received.
Adolphus! whose Affrighting Name did make,
Rome and Vienna shake.
The Generous leader of a Holy War,
Renowned as that which Godfrey led so far.
The Persecuted Germans Prop,
In whom the afflicted and distres't did hope.
Whilst Ferdinand did tremble, and the Pope.
IX.
Gallant and Young, Adolphus knew no fear,
Caesar and Ammon's Son his great Examples were.
The General that would atcheive, said he,
A Name to late Posterity,
No dangerous Enterprise must, shun,
Where no danger is, no Honor's won.
The race through Wounds, and Blood, and Pain, and Toil is run;
Who reaches not the Goal has nothing done.
The General's Fame admits not of degree;
He must a Caesar, or must nothing be.
When Fate a Hero does decree to make,
To raise a Noble Instrument,
For the Worlds benefit, and Glory meant;
Into her Arms it does the Darling take,
Bears him through all the dangers of his way,
Till he attains, at last, his bright Triumphant day.
X.
Witness these Sons of Fame,
Who differently to Empire came;
Caesar, through all the Battles which he Fought,
Though dangers every where he sought,
In Towns, and Camps, and in the Field,
His Fortune still did shield,
And without Wound to Empire brought.
Whilst the Pellaean Youth adorned all over
With Wounds, with large Effusion of his Blood,
His Fate to Empire bore;
At the famed Passage of the Grannic Flood;
Where the swollen Rivers rapid Course,
And the steep Banks, and Persia's Force
His Enterprise withstood;
Though his Helmet through to his Head was cleav'd
Stunned, and almost of Life bereaved,
He lands and conquers on the Guarded Shore.
There Meager death Gluttons on Persian Gore,
There Spithridates and Rheesaces bleed,
Darius's falls decreed,
And his the Greecian Empire must succeed;
And thus, said he, if Destinyes ordain
My Righteous Arms should Glory gain,
Through Dangers infinite, they can me safe sustain.
But ah! too soon from all thy Glory's here,
Heaven Summons Thee, to those Immortal there,
Where clad with Robes of pure Caelestial white,
And Crowned with Rays of Light,
Brightest among the Blessed thou shine'st, who late
In Pity to the World, for WILLIAM there shall wait.
XI.
To WILLIAM Muse bring back thy wandering Song,
Thy strains to him belong;
Swear that in all the Regal Line
None yet so Gloriously did Shine,
Nor owned a Title truly so Divine.
No dull Succession sanctifies his Right,
Nor Conquest gained in Fight,
But over the Peoples minds, and there
Does Right Divine Triumphantly appear.
The mind, impassible and free,
No Power can Govern, but the Deity;
Hower'e over Persons, and over Fortunes, may
A bold Intruder sway;
The Right Divine is by the People given,
And it is their Suffrage speaks the mind of Heaven.
XII.
How S^nceless was Antiquity?
How little Virtue understood?
When the Tryumphant Wreath was always died in Blood;
When, for mere Butchery
Men were made Gods, translated to the Sky.
Unlike such Conquerors, NASSAW
To his Swords Edge does little owe.
The Sword in Judgment may be sent,
And a Cursed Hand the Instrument;
Here Heaven its Mercy Signally did show,
And with miraculous Success,
The Glorious Cause did Bless;
We saw the Almighty hand, and did its Power confess.
No Blood scarce spilt, the Sword was only drawn,
And straight 'twas Sheathed again,
Thus God a Kingdom turns as but one Man:
So his Sons Kingdom was established,
No Arm of Flesh the Gospel spread,
No Slaughtered Hosts the feilds made red;
But a resistless Power did Man convince,
Vanquished his Reason, and subdued his Sense.
An Unseen Spirit Divine made him submit,
To the great Truths it brought along with it.
XIII.
Mistaken some, who think wrong done
To him that lately filled the Throne,
Would blot the English Name with black Rebellion.
But if to seek redress,
When Greivances oppress,
And to assert our Rights, be that black Damning Sin,
Then are we sure the most forlorn of Men;
Then no Defense we have,
But Princes may us as they please Enslave.
The Laws which measure and ordain
Our mutual Rights, are vain;
Oaths may be canceled, Vows made void,
And Natures eldest Law destroyed;
When we behold the lifted hand,
Shall we defenseless stand?
And not provide to guard the coming stroke?
When we see Bonds, prepared to tie
A Freeborn Land in Slavery,
Must we submit our Passive Necks to the Yoke?
And dare profanely Heaven for Miracles invoke?
Doctrines absurd! and by our Church untaught,
Till holy Sycophants, of late,
Broached 'em at Court, where the best method known,
To gain a Mitre was by Preaching up the Crown.
XIV.
Ah James! Unhappy Prince! would thou submit
To Fate, retire in Peace and private sit;
As Dioclesian heretofore,
(Oh that I could thy Name but spare
And not it so Ingloriously compare)
After his Persecutions over
Withdrew and never thought of Crown or Empire more.
Thou might enjoy in thy recess,
More Solid happiness,
Than in thy Arbitrary Reign thou did possess;
The Subjects, whom thou sought'st to enslave,
Might then some pity have;
And though Allegiance must transfer,
Might yet their Honor bear.
But Thou, unwise, urgest thy doom still on,
And know not to survive thy Kingdoms gone;
Made up and formed of too much Fire,
Against Heaven, and Stars in vain thou will aspire,
Til in the haughty Flame thou do at last expire.
Why must we be, against our wills, thy Foes?
But ah! when Laws and Liberties, as here,
And Heaven it self, do interfere,
We must be Traitors to all those,
If with our utmost Force we do not thee oppose.
XV.
But cease my Muse, stoop thy Pindaric Wing,
And now learn softer Notes to Sing.
Transported far with Zeal,
For Williams Cause, and for the English Weal,
I fear too boldly thou do truths reveal.
Do thou consider what harsh Sounds they bear
To a Nephew, Son, and to a Daughters ear?
Blessed Pair! not Nature more with Justice strove,
When Junius Sentenced his conspiring Son,
Than Grief and Duty in your Breasts did move,
When James's Errors did himself Dethrone;
With sorrowing Eyes you viewed the profer'd Crown,
And thought it fallen too soon,
Till condescending pity took it on:
You saw our Mis'ries, and our Woes bewailed,
And that important thought prevailed.
Hail MARY, Glory of thy Sex! by Thee
Fallen Woman kind restored again shall be;
Who, when the Illustrious Pattern now they view,
Shall leave their Vanity, and follow you:
The only Match, the Sun in all his race,
Saw worthy of thy Royal Lords embrace:
Well are you paired in Virtue as in Love,
As tho one Soul both Breasts did move,
Happy the day! when MARY blessed our Shore,
The English shouts the News to Holland bore,
Nor was there need of any Envoy of it more:
The Guns and Bells were deafned by the Voice,
Scarce had been heard the Thunders loudest Noise.
The Fires above looked pale, ashamed to see,
Our Fires below more bright, and numberless as they.
XVI.
But who the vast transporting joy can guess?
That did the Royal Breasts possess,
When after various perils past,
And Englands doubts, and Hollands fears,
And WILLIAMS toyls, and MARYS tears,
With safety and success, thy met again at last.
Not the first Bridal day
Could be more joyful, or more gay,
For Bliss is raised by Dangers and delay:
No Dangers then before did fright,
Here was a stormy dismal Night;
Ere the Sun rose, and brought the Gladsom light.
O MARY! welcome to thy WILLIAMS Arms,
Welcome thy Heavenly Charms,
Welcome, as Noah's travailed Dove,
Bearing the Olive Branch of Peace and Love:
The Waves of trouble now shall quickly cease;
And the tossed Ark enjoy a resting place;
Behold the Hills arise, and show their heads of peace.
XVII.
Now plant the Vine under whose spreading shade,
With plenty all around, supinely laid,
No Cares hereafter shall our Joys invade:
Pluck the rich Fruit, press forth the Noble Juice,
With thankful Joy, let harmless pleasures loose.
And as you Quaff the Purple Grape,
Let not your Sovereigns Healths escape;
On each delicious Draught
Let your best wishes wait.
Long may they live a happy Royal Pair,
Free from Life's Maladies, Disease and Care.
May Subjects, blessed, vex with no Suits the State;
May their Crown easy be without the weight.
And, as we are happyer, Heaven make us better too;
May their Examples through their Realms renew
The sad decays of Piety,
And call Astraea from the Sky:
May we by them learn to reform our Lives;
May Husbands Faithful be, and Loyal Wives,
Then Ages shall with Blessings march a long,
And be the Subject of the Future Poets Song.
XVIII.
But hark! again the Trumpet sounds Allarms,
To Arms, to Arms;
Rise WILLIAM, rise,
And quit again thy loved MARIA's Charms;
Hear Irelands cries,
See their bent Knees, their upheld Hands, and streaming Eyes.
On, and thy drooping Subjects cheer,
Thy God that freed thee from the Lion here,
Will save thee too from the Hibernian Bear,
And every proud Uncircumsised Philistine there.
Behold, thy Pious Banners all Display
Religion, drawn by a Caelestial Ray;
An August Dame,
Of Heavenly Air, and Heavenly frame:
Her face like MARYS, and like hers her Mien,
Sweet yet Majestic, pleasant yet Divine;
Nothing that is loose, yet nothing stiff is there,
Tho cheerful yet not light, reserved yet not Austere;
No costly gaudy Robes her form Disguise,
No uncouth Habit to Amuse our Eyes.
Nor is She clad precisely mean,
But decently Adorned 'twixt each extreme.
Her Hand a Sacred Book does hold,
Wherein's denounced the Popish Doom,
And lo, in Shining Characters of Gold,
Behold a Motto thus, IN THIS THOU SHALL OVERCOME.
XIX.
But, what Divinity inspires me now?
And with what Spirit does my Laboring Bosom grow?
The Prophet, sure, is with the Poet joined;
I swell, and cannot bear the vast infusive Mind:
Babylon, the proud Town,
Babylon is fallen, Babylon goes down,
Antichrist is crushed, the Scarlet Whore
Lies weltring in her Gore,
Idolatry is now no more.
Then over the World the Halcyon Broods again,
And Hatches Peace to all Succeeding Sons of Men.
FINIS.

