A QUAERE Concerning Drinking Bath-Water, AT BATHE, RESOLVED.

BY EVGENIVS PHILANDER.

LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Bible on Ludgate Hill, 1673.

THE QUESTION. Whether the Bath-Water of the Bathes of Bath in Somersetshire,
may be safely used inwardly; and what Course is to be taken by those that would
use it so as to find benefit thereby.
THe Drinking of the Bath-Water at Bath, having lately met with great applause,
which may encourage some inconsiderately to use it, the many, or multitude,
being like those Animals that follow one another, and apt to go the broader
way, though it lead to ruin: On no other design than my own satisfaction, and
the benefit of those that shall commit themselves to my directions, I have
drawn up the following decision of this twofold Question, in as plain,
satisfactory, and significant a manner, as my present occasions, and
divertisements of another Nature, will permit me to do.

But before I give a positive and particular answer to the Question proposed, I
must crave leave, with the best Mineral and Metallic Fathers, to premise, That
all Mineral Waters are not alike admitted to an Internal Use; For first, all
such are justly excluded, that contain in them, or are impregnated with, any
noxious Ingredient, such as are Quicksilver, Lead, Gypsum, etc.

Quicksilver is no friend to the Nerves, and though it may, and has been
given inwardly, both liquid, and Solid, in a small proportion by Practitioners,
with good success in the Worms, and in greater quantity on other emergent
occasions; yet the constant use thereof is not warrantable, especially in
Mineral-Waters, that in so vast a proportion as they are usually prescribed,
must necessarily for some time lodge in the Stomach, pass through the
Intestines, and touch on many Nervous and Membranous parts of the Body, before
they come to the Ureters and Bladder for excretion. That all Waters supposed to
proceed from Quicksilver, are to be avoided, I know is contradicted by some
Authors of good Credit, and particularly the Waters of Serra Morena, and la
Nava in Spain, Almagra, Toletum, and others by the Rus Mimus, as the Learned
Doctor Jorden observes, are found to be wholesome; however, since many venomous
Springs are adjudged (how justly I say not) impregnated with this Mineral, and
many ill effects have been produced by no very great proportion taken into the
body; others more wary, have wholly excluded them from an Internal Use;
whereupon Paledinus has this Note; In universum excluduntur ab hoc usu quae
aliquid metallicum noxium in se habent; Amongst which he reckons Argentum Vivum.

Lead-Waters are also accounted unwholesome to be used in this manner; Caveatis
a potu talium aquarum quae habent in se Plumbum, says Fallopius; and he gives
this reason, quia periculum est, ne natura Plumbi conversa vel in Lithargyrum
vel in aliud simile, ut solet, hominem enecet: lest the nature of Lead be
converted into Litharge, or something like it, as it often is, and men die
thereupon. But perhaps there may be little need of this Caution, since, if we
believe others, there are no Waters observed that are impregnated with Lead; I
confess I have met with none but the Plumbeae, Plumbares, or Plumbariae, in
that part of Germany called Lorain, which yet may not have that name from their
being infected with Lead, but more probably, as John Bauhinus supposes, from
the scalding of Fowls, which they do by the Heat of those Waters, and ought to
be called Plumiers, as Pictorius writes it, from the French word Plumer, a
deplumando, as a Learned Physician of our own has observed.

Gypsum, or Plaister-waters, are accounted noxious in regard of their
over-cooling and refrigerating nature, which proves destructive, and therefore
no Physician has ever ordered the use of them in Drinks. The like may be said
of Arsenick, Auripigmentum, Risagalum, Sandaracha, Rusma, and Cadmia natural,
which being Venomous, and strongly Corrosive, are dangerous, and no way to be
used inwardly in the manner under debate.

But to come nearer our purpose; Neither are Waters that have in them Liquid
Bitumen, and especially Naphtha, esteemed fit to be drank, because they more
than ordinarily relax the Stomach and Guts, partly on the account of their
Fattiness, and partly by reason of too much Moisture, by which the Tone of the
parts is injured, and consequently the strength of the Stomach and Guts
enervated, to the great and inevitable detriment of the rest of the Body. Sed
and Bitumen liquidum habentes, quod praeter modum relaxant, inutiles sunt,
says Claudinus; And Fallopius more particularly, Addatis Aquas quae habent
Bitumen Liquidum, praecipue Naphtham, quae aquae noxiae sunt, quia relaxant
ventriculum and intestina, praeter modum, partim ratione Pinguedinis, partim
quia habent vim humectandi, relaxando autem dissipant omne robur Viscerum, and
ideo non convenient in Potu. I know the Testimony of the Ancients, Archigenes,
Galen, Paulus, and Vitruvius, are alleged in favor of Bituminous Waters; but
the answer is obvious, That they are to be understood of Waters passing through
veins of a solid and dry Bitumen, which were in use for purging heretofore, and
not of a Liquid. Claudinus; Quae per venas transeunt bituminis sicci possunt in
potu convenire; and de his intelligendi sunt Archigenes, Galenus, Paulus,
Vitruvius, cum eas pro Potu proponunt.

The like censure has passed on all Sulphurous Waters that have Brimstone
alone, and no other Mineral commixed with it; as appears from the Testimony of
Antyllus an ancient Physician in Oribasius, who gives this reason, that they
relax the Orifice, subvert, and effeminate the body of the Stomach; which is
also confirmed by the concurrent judgment of other Physicians, which, for
brevity sake, I must here omit; only observe this by the way, That whereas
Waters purely Sulphurous were condemned, those that had any other Mineral that
might correct the ill qualities of the Sulphur, were permitted; and Waters
Sulphurous, a praedominio, are accounted aptae ad potum, provided they have
Salt, Alume, Nitre, or any other Ingredient, that may give a check to the
relaxing and effeminating nature of the Brimstone. And of this sort of Compound
Sulphurous Waters are Galen and Alexander Trullianus to be understood,
according to the judgment of their best Interpreters. But here, like a wheel
within a wheel, this Question may arise, which will need a solution.

Q. How come Bituminous and Sulphurous Waters, to relax, and effeminate
inwardly; when we find by experience, that outwardly used in Baths, they
Strengthen and Corroborate?

A. The reason I conceive, must be chargeable on the mediate, or immediate
application of the Waters to the nervous parts; for being externally used, the
Skin and muscular parts are a sufficient defense against the relaxing quality,
and being likewise discussive, they dissipate any impacted matter lodged in or
about the Nerves, by which the free motion of the Animal Spirits is impeded,
and consequently Strength diminished; Whereas in the immediate application to
the Stomach and Intestines, they are least able to resist, and so in danger of
receiving greater prejudice. Thus if we keep a convenient distance from the
Fire, we receive its benefit, but approaching too near, without a very good
Skreen, we experience its rage.

Waters tincted with Brass are condemned by some, on the account that they are
very seldom free from Aerugo or Chrysocolla, which are dangerous; but others
allow the use of them if they participate but slightly of the Minera, as the
Viterbienses, which are judged praestantissimae.

The best Waters to be taken inwardly, by the unanimous consent of Judicious
Writers, are supposed to be Salt, Nitrous, Aluminous, and Iron; which, besides
their moderate heating quality, are very friendly to the Stomach, and parts
through which they pass; and, what is the main Thing to be observed in the
choice of Mineral Waters, pass freely through the Body, either by Siege or
Urine, without the addition of some helps, which other sluggish Waters must
have; which probably may somewhat alter their property, and render them less
effectual, than those that need not such Additions.

Also Gold, Silver, (if such are to be found) and Marble Waters, without
Gypsum, are esteemed wholesome, and may safely be used as a Drink.

These are the most considerable Waters, Good, and Bad, I find mentioned in
Mineral Writers; by which any indifferent person may sufficiently judge of the
first part of the Question propounded, provided he be assured of what Minerals
the Waters of Bathe do consist. If principally of Bitumen, with Nitre, and some
Sulphur, as was the Opinion of Doctor Jorden, and is yet my own; there are two
ingredients against one for the not using it as a Drink: yet in regard the
Nitre seems to be in a greater proportion than the Sulphur, and by that means,
may in some measure, qualify and allay the Inconveniences that may arise from
the two other Constituents, I judge, with some Cautions in the use thereof,
they may be potable, though not so advisable as some other Mineral Waters are.
And this is the most moderate Decision I can give of that part of the Question
that concerns the Security of the using the Bath-Water as a Drink.

As to the other, Viz. The Course to be taken by those that would use it so, as
to find benefit thereby; before I determine that, I must take the liberty to
declare, that I find many irregularities in the Course which is now followed,
which is so much different from a rational method, and the practice and
directions of intelligent Physicians in other places; that one may easily
conclude it a Brat, if not begot, yet fostered by a Quack, whose Motto may be,
Quocunque modo rem, and cares not what betides the Patient so the money be
received.

The first irregularity I take notice of is, the general drinking the Waters
without advice, or with advice as good as none; the prime thing to be
considered being, whether it be proper or not. This is incumbent on the
Physician to determine, and cannot well be done without an exact knowledge both
of the Waters, and the distempers the Patient labors under; Now, though,
perhaps, it may be thought a reflection on the Faculty, to say, that some
Physicians, or at least pretenders to that Noble Art, are no so intelligent,
who notwithstanding are very liberal in their advice for the taking the Waters;
yet I must needs conclude, that if they are so, they very much stifle their
knowledge, and thwart the known Rules of their Profession, in advising persons
of quite contrary Tempers, and distempers, to an equal use of what, if
beneficial to one, must be prejudicial to another. This was the old Quacking
Trick in Galen's time, of which an Honest Author gives this account; Dicimus
praeceptum istud ut Medicus diligenter observet, an Potus Aquae conveniat,
necne, esse sum necessarium, quia, sine ipso fieri nequit aliquid, and in hoc
praecepto multi tum recentiorum, tum antiquorum peccarunt, and tempore etiam
Galeni. Sunt enim inter medicos aliqui qui postquam valde defatigarint aegros,
and aliquando praeter rationem and institutum, viderint quod res sibi non
succedit statim, nulla alia consideratione habita, relegent miseros Patientes
ad Aquas Thermales, tanquam ad anchoram sacram, non considerantes antea, an
aquae illae conveniant, vel non conveniant; vel quia ignorent naturam Aquarum,
vel quia ignorent naturam morbi, vel utriusque simul, and ita casu quicquid
agunt, agunt. I hope I shall not be so grossly mistaken here, as to be thought
by any to write this to discourage a Resort, but rather to be a Monitor to the
Residents on the place, that, if Physicians abroad are not so circumspect (as
they may not be, on their confidence in them) they would so far discharge their
own Consciences, as well as evidence their skill, as to deal heartily and
ingenuously with their Patients; neither are those in any wise to be accounted
Apollo's, but rather Apollyon's, who, regarding their Patients no more than
poisoned Rats, care not what holes they dye in, provided they are secured
against this, that they stink not on the place.

The next thing I blame in the ordinary course, is, the drinking of the Waters,
and Bathing on the same day, nay oftentimes together, in the Bath it self. How
contrary this is, not only to the judgment of Rational Physicians, but Reason
it self, may appear from these words of a good Author. Sed neque Balneum
Thermarum, dum aquae sumuntur, administrandum est; quod hoc modo ratione
contrariorum motuum factorum a Balneo, quod ad Circumferentiam, and a Potu, qui
ad Centrum trahit, nimis aeger affligitur. And, that it may not be said to be
only one Doctors opinion, (which, if grounded on Reason, is sufficient, without
which an opinion is nothing) another gives the same advice. Nec quoad
infusionem Corpor is placet, quoniam qui ita agunt, asfligunt nimis aegrum
ratione contrarii motus, qui motus contrarius fit ab aqua in potum accepta, and
a Balneo. Nam aqua quae in corpore est, agit ducendo a Circumferentia ad
Centrum; Infusio vero e contra a Centro ad Circumferentiam, unde nisi
robustissimum fuerit Corpus non poterit perferre talem motum.

I confess this reason of a contrary motion lies chiefly against Cathartick
Waters, or those Waters that move by siege, which must have a motion contrary
to that of the Bath, which moves from the Center to the Circumference, or from
the more inward parts, to the habit of the Body; yet, in regard those Waters
that move by Urine, may, on the contrary, be too much accelerated, and sooner
than is fitting, precipitated to the Kidneys; by which, Nature, on so great a
strain, must likewise suffer some inconvenience inwardly, as well as an
affliction from the Bath without; The prohibition holds good, as to Diuretic
Waters too, though not on the same, yet as good a ground.

A third Irregularity, I find, is, the Drinking of the Waters without a due
preparation of the Body before; which ought not to be done so slightly, as with
a little Bath-water and Salt, but with such frequent and repeated Purgations,
as may be requisite sometimes. For the Waters must certainly first pass
through the Stomach and Guts, which, if they find foul, and not cleansed from
those impurities that will undeniably lodge there on many occasions, besides
that they taint the Water, and render it less beneficial, are with the current
carried farther into the body, whereby the intermediate passages are more
obstructed, and perhaps also the blood defiled. My Author therefore says very
well; Omnes and vulgares etiam dicunt Purgationem debere praecedere potum
aquarum medicatarum, and quamvis aliquibus successerit sanatio absque
purgatione praemissa per pharmacum, tamen raro hoc accidit; quare ante potum
corpora sunt diligentissime purganda, bis, ter, and pluries, si opus fuerit.

The fourth and last thing I shall take notice of as an Erratum, and so to be
corrected, is, the drinking other Liquors, keeping too much company, and
observing no regular Diet, in the taking of the Waters, which must of
necessity prejudice their operation; whereas if they were permitted to take
their own course, or had some encouragements by meat and drink, they would be
more apt to display what Virtues they have to a greater advantage. But many,
Gentlemen especially, are not contented with one good mornings draught, and in
too short a time after drinking the Waters, gratify their Appetite, which
they fancy is heightened by the use of the Waters, with variety of Meats; so
that the Stomach, though sometimes at a dull rate, concocting, and the Waters,
as they say, provoking, makes such work for the draught, that, were they useful
all the year, would prove more for the encouragement of the mystery of the
Gold-finders, than any thing I know in the world besides.

That I may not be tedious in what I at first intended to be very brief, I
shall now set down that course I think most convenient to be taken by those
that expect any benefit from the drinking of the Waters. After previous
preparation of the Body, which is the work of the Physician, what concerns the
Patient may be, To rise about five or six of the clock in the morning, and
having discharged Natures burden, if occasion require, and walked some few
turns to excite natural Heat, he may safely, if of an indifferent Constitution,
adventure on three pints of Water the first time, to be taken in manner
following; Viz. He, or she, may have as much Water as is necessary by them,
out of which may be filled a Glass or Cup, containing half a Pint, two of which
may be taken presently; then walking gently a Quarter of an Hour, two more; and
the like motion performed for another Quarter, the two last: The next day they
may advance one glass more, and so every day increase half a Pint, till six
Pints are completed at one time, which is the highest dose I judge convenient
for ordinary constitutions. When that dose is well received, I would not have
the Patient stay long at this pitch, not above a day, two, or three at most,
but descend again by the same steps he ascended before; so that this course may
hold twelve or fourteen days, without intermission, or Bathing in the mean
time, which will be a sufficient trial what the Waters will do. If it be judged
requisite, a longer course may be ordered, as the Physician shall think fit,
who is to be consulted in this case.

Those that are, if I may so speak, a size stronger in Constitution, larger
Bodies, and more violent distempers, may take a pottle at first in an hours
time, walking, as before directed, and so rise up by the steps before
mentioned, to a Gallon, which I judge sufficient for the middle sort.

And those that are of the largest size, and thought fit to bear the greatest
proportion, may begin with five pints, and come up to ten; above which, I would
not advise any person to go. This is the best Gage I can at present resolve on,
which yet may be somewhat varied according to the judgment of the Physician
that attends.

About twelve of the clock (by which time the Waters may have made a
considerable pass) a light dinner may be taken of Eggs, Broth, or a cut of
Veal, Mutton, Capon, Pullets, Chickens, and such like meats of easy digestion;
but toward night, at five of the clock at farthest, a freer meal may be made
on the meats before mentioned, that so the Stomach may be cleared against the
next morning again; if any Wines be used, I think Rhenish, White, and Claret
the best, and as little Beer or Ale as may be.

What relates to the distempers, it may be profitable for, and the Symptoms
arising sometimes in the use, notwithstanding all the Care and Circumspection
imaginable, I say nothing of here, as being part of the Physicians concern, but
leave the work of Physicians to Physicians themselves.

FINIS.

