A TREATISE OF RULING ELDERS AND DEACONS. In which, these things which belong
to the understanding of their Office and Duty, are clearly and shortly set down.

By a Minister of the Church of SCOTLAND.

1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor.

Tim. 3. ^3. They that have used the office of a Deacon well, purchase to
themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith, which is in Christ
Jesus.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's. Anno DOM. 1690.

The Preface.
THe LORD, whose fire is in Zion* and Isa. 31. 9*
whosefurnace is in Jerusalem, has in depths of his wisdom Psalm. 65 5.
spoken by terrible things in righteousness against this Nation, he has
brought us Lam. 1. 9.
down wonderfully, and has made our breach wide as the Lam. 2. 13.
Sea, who can heal us? our bruise is incurable, and our Jer. 30. 12. 1^.
wound is grievous, for the Lord hath*wounded us with the wound of an Enemy,
with the chastisement of a cruel one, because our sins Isa 19. 14*
were increased, he has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst of us, which
causes us to err in every work, as Isa. 9. 20.
a drunken man staggereth in his vomit, and we eat every man the flesh of his
own arm, for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still, the yoke Lam. 1. 14.
of our transgressions is bound by his hand, they are wreathed, and come up
upon our neck, and in the day of our Lam. 2. 1.
calamity, he has covered us with a cloud in his anger, Is. 59. 10.
that like blind men in the dark we grope for the wall, and cannot find either
our sin or our duty: some cry, that there be many of our Prophets Lam. 2 14.
who have not discovered our iniquity to turn away our captivity: others
complain, that not a few of them, have seen for us false burdens and causes of
banishment; what shall we do whilst it is thus with us? surely it is Job 10. 2.
meet to be said unto God, show me why thou contendest Job 34. 31, 32.
with me, I have born Chastisement, I will not offend any more, that which I
see not, teach thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no more; until the
Jer. 9. 12.
Lord shall reveal it unto us, and make us wise in heart to understand this,
and speak to us, that we may declare it, for what the Land mourns. It is fit
that in the things of the Lord's controversy, and of our duty whereto we have
already attained, we walk by the same rule, and mind the same things. I do
suppose that all of us are of one mind in this, that our corrupt mixture in
Church members, and Church Officers, are one main cause, why so much wrath is
gone forth from the Lord against us, and does abide upon us. The Lord's design
upon Scotland for a long time past seems to have been to purge Ezekiel. 24. 13.
Isa. 1. 25. Ezekiel, 20. 38. Zeph. 3 9.
his house, and as to have his ordinances pure, so to have his people and his
Officers also pure; I mean not of a higher pitch than the doctrine and policy
of our Church does reach, because ( I fear not to say it) the measuring line of
the Sanctuary has been stretched over these, ^o give unto them due Scripture
dimensions, concerning the qualification of Church members, and Church
Officers: If in these things our practice were agreeable to our rule, we needed
not be ashamed, but might speak with our Enemies in the gate, and answer him
that reproacheth us, our sin is, that being weighed in our own balance, we are
found too light; how many Churchmembers are there in Scotland, whom our Church
discipline (if conscientiously weilded) would cut off as rotten, How many
Church Officers, whom that discipline would cast out as unsavory salt? we have
rejoiced Zeph. 3, 11^
in our pride and been haughty because of the Lord's holy mountain, but have
not so zealously cared, that holiness to the Zech. 14. 20. 21.
Lord might be engraven in all the pots of his house. We have boasted of a
Reformation of the Ordinances, without seeking as really to reform
Church Officers, and Church Members, according to the Pattern thereof. Pure
Ordinances are indeed things precious and excellent, (and what soul among us
that has any measure of the true Zeal of the Lords house, can behold the
defacing of these, and not make it the matter of their lamentation) yet these
are but means subordinate to a more high and super-excellent end, to wit, that
we may thereby be brought with open face to behold 2 Cor. 3. 18.
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, and be changed unto the same Image from
glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord, that we may*all come unto
Ephesians. 4. 13.
the unity of the faith, unto the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. It is true, that
all the Members of the Church visible, will not be living and lively Mat. 20.
16.
stones in the Lords temple, neither does the rule of Churchconstitution, hold
out or cast out all who are not really such; but this is the great scope that
all of us ought to level at, that all the Lords people may be holy that all
who profess Psalm. 93. 5.
faith in Jesus Christ, may walk as becomes the Gospel Phil. 1. 27.
of Jesus Christ. And how shall this be attained, unless these who bears the
Vessels of the Lord, and to whom the charge of holy things be committed be
holy, the sons Mal. 3. 3, 4.
of Levi must be purified, and purged as gold and as silver, before they offer
unto the Lord an offering in righteousness, when that is done, then are the
offerings of Judah and Jerusalem pleasant unto the Lord. I acknowledge that we
were once upon a fair way for purging the House of God in this Land, they who
interrupted us shall bear their burden; but what was done in this thing, was
not more refreshing to gracious hearts, than it was sorely repined at, and
opposed by others (a sin that provoked the Lord to stop the current of so rich
a mercy) therefore do many now make haste again to intrude themselves upon the
Cangregations whence they were once justly cast out, and not a few amongst the
People love to have it so, as though there were a conspiracy to return to
Egypt, and to build again the walls of Jericho, and repair the ruins of Edom.
I do also acknowledge it with thank fullness unto the great Shepherd of Souls,
that there is a great company of gracious men amongst the Officers of his
Church, who walk in the ways of the Lord, and keep his charge, but there be
also many that neither do so, nor know how to do it; To say nothing of
Ministers: It is more than manifest, that there is a generation of ignorant,
slothful, earthly minded men, who bear the name of Elders and Deacons in many
Congregations, and where such bear rule, what can be expected, but that the
People should perish for want of knowledge, and holiness be despised, and ly in
the dust, and Congregations still abide in to swarthy a temper, If we might
find grace in the Lords sight, to be thoroughly convinced of this great
Church-evil, whence many Church evils flow, and be brought with some measure of
sincerity to endeavor the remedy thereof, what a branch of hope might it be,
that our reproach should be taken away, and we become a People instructed in
the way of the Lord, and walking to the Praise and Commendation of the Gospel,
which is now evil spoken of, because of the ignorance, and loose conversation
of many among us: Therefore am I bold as pressed in spirit (albeit one of the
weakest and most unworthy) to offer this little Treatise, with an eye upon this
end. And let me without offense, beseech all the Ministers, Elders, Deacons,
Congregations, Presbyteries, and Assemblies of this Church, in the bowels of
the Lord Jesus Christ: yea, let me ob^est them by the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, by their Zeal of the Lord's honor, by the credit of the Gospel, by
their love to Ezekiel. 24. 13
souls, and by the sury of the Lord, which he has caused to rest upon us,
because he purged us, and we would not be purged; and as they desire, the Lord
should bring us again, and cause us stand before him, and Ezra. 9. 8,
leave us a remnant, and give us a nail in his holy place; that they would each
of them in their stations, endeavor to take forth the precious Jer. 15. 19.
from the vile, and purge the Lord's house in this Land from corrupt Officers,
and corrupt members; Jer. 13. 27.
Oh, will we not be made clean? When will it once be?

To the CHRISTIAN READER.
THe inducements that persuaded me first to write, and then to publish this
little Treatise of Ruling Elders and Deacons, were chiefly these, 1. The
sensible Impression that the Lord has made upon my Spirit, as also (I know)
upon the spirits of the godly of the Land, of the great prejudice that comes to
this poor Church by a multitude of men in these offices, who neither know their
duty, nor make conscience to perform it. 2. The vindicating the Doctrine of our
Church concerning these Church-Offi^ers, that the mouths of such who speak evil
may be stopped, and others who stumble may be satisfied. 3. The pressing desire
of Brethren, Ministers, and Elders in the Presbytery and Congregation, where
the Lord has set me; all which did receive some spirit and life, when I found
my Name among those to whom the Genesis Assembly of this Church did commit and
recommend this work long ago.

I have endeavored to handle it with as much plainness and evidence of Truth,
and as shortly, without wronging of the matter as I could: It is not unlike
that some may think, that I have done no great business, because I have brought
no new thing. I acknowledge that it is so; what I have said, is for the matter
(I trust) and in many things for the words too, the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
and of Protestant Divines, and of our Church, in the Act*s and Policy thereof;
I have but put together in one, and digested into some Method what was lying
scattered of before, that these who either could not, or would not be at the
pains to search for such things, may now have them at their hand. Others may
look upon this Treatise as not plain enough, or as not so exact, full, and
perfect as it ought to be; with these I shall not contend; I have done what I
could, at least what I conceived best in order to the ends I propounded to my
self; If others shall find favor of the Lord to do better, I shall bless his
Name on their behalf, and receive and make use of their pains with
thankfulness. And some may happily think, that there is here too much laid upon
Ruling-Elders, more nor they shall be able or willing to undertake; yea, more
than the Lord does require of them, most of the things that are mentioned by us
being incumbent to Ministers rather than to Elders. It is true what is said of
the Elders duty, is also the duty of Ministers, for what soever the Elder ought
to do by virtue of his Calling, that also ought the Minister to do, and
somewhat more, but so far as we know, nothing is spoken here of the Elder, that
does not belong to him; if through ignorance or want of ability, or neglect,
or custom, Elders have not done these things, it is that which ought to be
helped, it is now high time for them to awake, and to know and own, and follow
their duty; and for the Church of God in Scotland, to know how much she has
smarted under the hands of ignorant and slothful, yea and scandalous men; we
would not always satisfy our selves with disguised and histrionical Iunius
Eccles. 1, 2, c. 3.
men, puffed up with Titles or with Idols, dead in sins to be Elders; but would
seek after holy men, who being endued with faith in God, and walking in his
obedience, God authorizing them, and the Church his Spouse choosing them, and
calling them, undertake the Government thereof, that they may labor to the
conservation and Edification of the same in Christ; Neither needs the
qualification, or multitude, or difficulties of the particulars here spoken of,
discourage or scarr any: It is not so much the measure as the truth of the
thing that is to be looked at. We have set down what a Ruling Elder ought to
be, in regard of the whole extent of his Charge, sundry particulars whereof the
most part of Ruling Elders are seldom called to exercise, and if they be in
some measure fitted for these parts of the charge which God calls them to
exercise, and follow the same with singleness of heart, they may believe that
they shall be assisted, and accepted of God in Jesus Christ; the Employment is
not theirs, but the Lords, from whom they may expect both their furniture, and
also their reward; let them arise and be doing, and the Lord shall be with them.

A Short TREATISE OF Ruling Elders.
CHAP. I.
Of their Names.

WHat is necessary to be understood concerning Ruling Elders may be taken up in
the explication of these four, 1. Their name. 2. Their institution. 3. Their
Calling. 4. Their Qualification and Duty. The word Elder in the Scripture does
signify diverse The 2 book of Disc. c. 6. Si. Assert: of the Government of the
Chapter of Scotland. 1. part. cap: 1. 1 Timothy 5. 1.
things, 1. It signifies old men, or men come to age* 1 Timothy 5. 1. Rebuke not
an-Elder, but entreat him as a father, and the younger men as brethren. 2. It
signifies those who have lived in the times of old. Mat. 15. 2. Why do thy Mat.
15. 2.
Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders. 3. It is taken for
honorable and worthy men, Isa. 3. 2. The Lord of Hosts does take away from
Jerusalem and Judah the Prudent and the Ancient. 4. It is the name of a
Spiritual Officer in the house of God.

Acts 14. 23. And when Acts. 14. 23.
they had ordained them Elders in every city. In this last signification it is
taken in this place, for these who bear Rule in the House of God, who are
called Elders because of the Knowledge, Gifts, Experience, Prudence and
Gravity, wherewith they ought to be endued.

The Officers in the The 2. book of Discipline chapter 6. sect. 1.
House of God, who in the Scriptures are called by the name of Elders, are of
several soits, Preaching Elders or Ministers, Teaching Elders or Doctors, and
Ruling or Governing Elders, all these three are often times in the N. T.
comprised under the general name of Elder, Act. 15 6, 22. and 20. Acts 15. 6.
22. and 20 17. 1 Pet. 5. The 2. book of De^ 6. 8. 3.
17. 1. Pet. 5 It is the Ruling Elder whom we have now to do with, who is so
called, not because the power of ruling and governing the Church belongs to him
alone, for it also belongs to the Preaching and Teaching Elders, or to the
Ministers and Doctors: But because to rule and govern is the principal and
chief part of his Charge and Employment, it is the highest Act of his Office;
It is not competent for him to Preach, that belongs to the Pastor or Minister,
nor to teach, that belongs to the Doctor; but his Office is comprised within
the compass of Ruling and Governing the Church; and therefore he is called the
Governing or Ruling Elder; The Apostle in the Epistle to the Rom: Romans 12. 8
chapter 1^. 8. calls him, him that rules, and 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
12. 28* he calls them Governments putting the abstract for the concret,
Governments for Governors. Thus then we have the proper or right name of these
Church Officers, which serves to correct a twofold mistake. The 1. is, of these
who either out of ignorance, or disdain, do call them Lay Elders, as if they
were a part of the People only, and not to be reckoned amongst the Officers of
the Lords House, whom the Popish Church in their pride, and others following
them calls the Clergy, that is, the Lords Inheritance, in opposition to the
Laity or People, whom they look upon, as base and much inferior to the other in
worth and Excellency, whereas all the Lords People are his portion, and the lot
of his in heritance, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. 1. Pet. 5. 3. The second mistake is, of these
who do call these only Ruling-Elders, who sit in Presbyteries, Synods, and
General Assemblies, allowing to others the name of Elders, but not of
Ruling-Elders: But every Elder in the Lords House is a Ruling-Elder, because
the power and exercise of rule and Government belongs to every Elder, though
some of them upon special occasions be called to a more eminent Exercise of it
than others.

CHAP. II.
Of the Institution of Ruling-Elders.

THE Institution of The 2 book of Discip. Chapter 6. sect. 2.
the Office of Ruling Elder, is divine, it is not an ordinance of man, but of
God. The Lord Jesus, upon whose shoulder the Government is, and who is
faithful in all his House, has in his Eternal Wisdom thought fit to appoint
such an Officer in his House, for the right and orderly Governing thereof. It
is true, that by the sloth, or rather by the pride of Teachers, whilst they
alone would seem to be somewhat, and by the policy of Satan, and inadvertance
of the Church, these Officers were for many Ages together, out of use in the
Christian Church. But certain it is, that both the Jewish Synagogue, and after,
the Christian Church had Seniores, or Elders, without whose counsel nothing was
done in the Church; That the Jewish Church had such, appears from 2 Chro. 19.
8. Jer. 29. 1. Mat. 16* 21, 22, 23, 26, 57, 59. Act. 4. 5. And that the
Christian Ambros Com. on 1. Tim. 5. 1. Tert. in his 34 Chapter of Apol. Basil. Mag.
Com. on Isay 3. 2. Hier. on that same place. Aug Ep. 137. Greg. con. Cells. lib.
3. Aug. ^. 3. contra Cresoen. Cap. 56.
Church also had them in the primitive and purest times thereof, appears from
the testimony of ancient Writers, as may be found by these who will take pains
to search into these things But we have a more sure word for the Divine
Institution of Elders in the Christian Church, then any testimony of man, to
wit, the Testimony of God, in the Scriptures of the New Testament. The first
place of Scripture is Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. Having then gifts, differing according
to the grace that is given us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to
the proportion of faith, or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering, or he
that teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on exhortation; he that gives,
let him do it wih simplicity: he that rules, with diligence* he that shows
mercy, with cheerfulness. In which Text, the Apostle does first comprehend all
the several kinds of ordinary standing Officers in the Church of God, under
two general Heads, to wit, Prophecy, whereby is meaned the ordinary faculty
of right understanding and expounding the Scriptures, and Ministry, under
which is comprehended all other ChurchOfficers and Employments: To each of
these the Apostle adds their general duties, to wit, that he who
prophesies, should do it according to the proportion of faith, h. e. according
to the measure, of the measure of knowledge of the word of faith, that he has
received of God; And he that ministers, let him wait on his ministering, h. e.
let him not do it negligently or slothfully, but faithfully and diligently.
Then he sub-divides these two Generals, into the special Offices contained
under them; He divides him that prophesies, into him that teaches, and him
that exhorts, or into the Doctor, to whom the word of teaching or Instruction
belongs, and the Pastor, to whom the Word of Exhortation is competent. Under
him that ministereth, he comprehends, first him that gives, by whom is meant
the Deacon, who is appointed for the supply of the poor* Secondly, him that
rules, by whom can be meant no other then the Ruling Elder, seeing an ordinary
ruling Officer in the Church, who is different from the Pastor and Teacher is
here spoken of by the Apostle.

The second place of Scripture that proves the Office of Ruling Elders is, 1
Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, afterward miracles, then gifts of healing, helps,
governments, kinds of tongues. Some of the Bibles of the late English
Translation read helps in governments, but cross to the Text in the first
Language, that bears helps, governments, as two distinct things, and therefore
in other Editions of that Translation, this is helped. In this Text the Apostle
reckons several Officers of the Church, some extraordinary, which were to
continue but for a season, such as Apostles, Prophets, Powers or Miracles,
gifts of healing, kinds of tongues: Some Ordinary, which were to continue in
the Church to the end of the World, and these are Teachers, or the ordinary
Church*Officers, who are exercised in the Word: Helps, h. e. the Deacons, who
are appointed for the help and relief of the poor; and governments, h. e. the
Governing and Ruling Elders; for it is clear from the words, that the Apostle
by Governments, does mean a Church Officer, whom God has set in his Church,
for Ruling and Governing thereof, now this cannot be any other of the
Church Officers, for these he has named besides, and therefore it remains that
it is the Ruling Elder.

The third place of Scripture is, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well,
be counted worthy of double honor, specially they that labor in the word and
doctrine. Which Text does hold forth and distinguish two sorts of Elders in the
Church, to whom the Lord Jesus has committed the power of Ruling; One sort who
do also labor in the Word and Doctrine, to wit, Pastors and Teachers: Another
sort who do only Rule, and doing it well, are accounted worthy of double
honor, and these are the Ruling Elders of whom we speak.

From this that the Office of the 2. Book of Discipl. c. 3. sect. 13, 14, 15,
16. Assert: of the government of the Church of Scotland, part 1. c. 2. page 11.
and 17.
Ruling Elder is of Divine Institution, we gather these conclusions, First,
that it is not a thing arbitrary and indifferent for such to wait upon their
charge, yea or not, as they please, or as their attendance may contribute for
their own or their friends particular, which is the custom of too too many
Elders; but that they are bound in conscience diligently to attend and follow
the duties thereof, whether they be such as they ought, to the several Members
of the Congregation, or the keeping of Session, or Presbytery, and other
Assemblies of the Church, when they are called and desired thereto.

Secondly, that Elders ought to do their Office, not formally and
hypocritically, for the fashion only, but sincerely and honestly, as in the
sight of God, by whom they are called unto this holy Calling, and to whom they
must render an account of their discharge of this great trust.

Thirdly, they ought not to domineer over their fellow Brethren and Elders, but
carry themselves humbly and serviceably, as these who are appointed of the Lord
Jesus for ministering unto, and edifying of his Body the Church.

Fourthly, that they ought to carry themselves with that authority, holiness,
gravity and prudence, that becomes these who are called of God to bear Rule in
his House.

Fifthly, that Elders once lawfully called to the Office, and having gifts from
God meet to exexcise the same, (unless they be removed therefrom, because of
miscarriages) are still Elders, though happily in Congregations where many
qualified men may be found, 2. Book of Discip. chapter 6. sect. 3.
some may be permitted for a time to surcease from the exercise of the charge,
and others be put in their room, as was among the Levites under the Law, in
serving in the Temple by courses.

Sixthly, that people ought to obey such as these who have the rule over them,
and to submit themselves, because they wait for their souls, as they that must
give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, Heb. 13. 17.
Yea, they would know them as these who are over them in the Lord, and do
admonish them, and esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, 1
These. 5. 12, 13.

CHAP. III.
Of the Vocation or Calling of Ruling Elders.

AS no man is to intrude in any employment 2 Book of dis. cap. 3.
without a lawful Calling, so much less ought any man to intrude himself
without a Calling, into any sacred Function in the House of God: Heb. 5. 2 Book
of dis. cap. 3.
4. Therefore before any take upon him to exercise the Office of Ruling Elder,
he ought to be lawfully called thereunto. This Calling is inward or outward;
the inward Calling is the Testimony of a good Conscience, concerning some
measure of ability and gifts for the Charge, and a sincere, and honest
inclination and purpose to employ these gifts, for the honor of God, the
advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the good of souls.

The outward Calling is to be after the same manner with that of other
Church Officers, and it stands in their Election, and in the trial of their
carriage, gifts, and admission to the Charge. The Election is to be made by the
Congregation wherein they are to bear charge, Acts 6. 3. 5* and 14. 23.

That it may be gone about in the more 1. Book of discip. 8. heads touching the
Election of Elders and Deacons.
orderly way, it is fit that a nomination be made by the Minister and Eldership
of the Congregation of the persons fittest, and best qualified for the
employment, and that the names of the persons nominated by them, be publicly
intimated to the Congregation, and they desired, in case of their not being
satisfied, as having exception, or knowing others better qualified, to
represent the same to the Minister and Eldership. If there be no Eldership in
the Congregation, a nomination may be made either by the Presbytery, or by the
most judicious and godly Members of the Congregation; particularly Masters of
Families, together with the Minister, or one or more Ministers of the
Presbytery, in case of the Congregations want of a Minister.

The trial is to be by the Minister and Eldership 1. Book of discipline 8 head
of the Congregation, or in case of the want of these, by the Presbytery: And
they are to be tried both in regard of their conversation, that it be blameless
and holy, and also in regard of their knowledge and experience in the things of
God, and of the Affairs of his House, and of their ability and prudence for
Government; It is true that the trial of Elders in their knowledge and gifts
required for their Charge, has not been much in use in this Church; It being
taken for granted, that conscience would be made of making choice of such as
had knowledge, and were able and fit, or that if any ignorant, or not able and
sitted, were nominat, that some of the Congregation upon the intimation of
their names, would except against them; but by this means it has come to pass,
that many ignorant and unqualified men have been admitted Elders in many
Congregations, to the great detriment of Religion, and no small reproach of our
Church: The Apostle 1 Timothy 3. 10. speaking of Deacons, which is the lowest rank
of the Officers of the Church, requires that these also first be proved, then
let them use the Office of a Deacon, being found blameless: And the same
reasons and grounds that plead for the trial of a Minister, pleads also for the
trial of Elders, in a way suitable to the qualifications required in them.

Their Admission is to be by the Minister See the manner of Electing and
admitting Ministers and Elders, prefixed to the old Psalm Book.
of the Congregation, or one appointed by the Presbytery, in the presence of
the whole Congregation, with the Preaching of the Word, concerning their duty,
and with Prayer and Humiliation, concerning the spirit of their Calling to be
poured out upon them, and that the pleasure of the Lord may prosper in their
hands: At which time they are solemnly to engage themselves before the Lord, to
be faithful, and diligent, and watchful over the flock committed to their
charge, and in all the duties of that holy and honorable employment; and the
People are also to engage themselves to obey them, and to submit themselves to
them in the Lord, and to honor them, and highly to esteem them in love for
their works sake.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Duties of a Ruling Elder.

THe Duties of a Ruling Elder be of two sorts, some that are personal, and
relate to his conversation as a Christian, others that are Official, and relate
to his Ruling, as an Office-bearer in the House of God.

His personal qualifications, 1. Book of Discipline, 8. head. 2. Book of
Discipline, chap. 6.
or the duties of his conversation, are the same with these which the Apostle
requires in the conversation of a Minister, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 6.
11. Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8. In which Scriptures under the The manner of Electing
Ministers and Elders. Jun. Eccles. lib. 2. chapter 2. chapter 3.
name of (...), or an Overseer, he comprehends all these Officers who have the
Oversight and Charge of Souls, and sets down what manner of persons he would
have them to be in regard of their conversation and carriage: I shall speak of
these things with Application to the Ruling Elder. That the Ruling Elder ought
to be of a blameless and Christian Conversation, is above question, but that it
may be more distinctly known what the Holy Ghost requires of such in regard of
their conversation: I shall from these Scriptures show, First, what the Apostle
would have them not to be. Secondly, what he would have them to be. The things
of the first sort are these: 1. A Ruling Elder must not be given to Wine, they
must not be lovers nor followers of strong drink, nor debord in riot and
excess, nor tipple away time in Alehouses and Taverns. 2. He must not be a
striker nor a brawler, nor given to quarrelling and contentions. 3. He must not
be covetous, nor greedy of filthy lucre; for, the love of money is the root of
all evil, which while some covet after, they err from the faith, and pierce
themselves through with many sorrows. 4. He must not be a novice; or one newly
come to the faith, lest he bepuffed up with pride, and fall into the
condemnation of the Devil, the spirits of Novices are not yet well ballasted,
nor brought low enough by frequent exercises of the Cross, and so come to be
more easily puffed up, therefore there is need that he be an exercised Soldier
of Jesus Christ, and one who by Experience is taught to know the wiles of the
Devil, and is able to endure hardness. 5. He must not be self-willed, adhering
pertinaciously, and without reason to his own judgment, and refusing to hearken
to the judgment of his Brethren, though sound and wholesome. 6. He must not be
soon angry, whether upon real or conceived causes of provocation.

The things of the second sort be these, 1, He must be blameless. h. e. One who
walks without offense toward God and men. 2. If married, he must be the
husband of one Wife; such a one who shuns all unlawful lusts, satisfying
himself with, and keeping himself within the bounds of the Remedy provided of
God. 3. He must be vigilant, watchful over his own soul, that no temptation
prevail upon him, watchful unto every good duty, and to take hold of every
opportunity of weldoing. 4. He must be sober, and temperat, of a sound and
humble mind, moderating his own appetite and affections, and satisfying
himself with a moderat use of the Creatures, and of the things of this world.
5. He must be of a good behavior or modest, of a grave and staid, yet of an
effable and courteous carriage, neither light and vain, to the loosing of his
Authority, and rendering himself contemptible, nor sullen, and selfpleasing, to
the discouraging and scaring away of the flock, by his needless distance and
austerity. 6. Given to hospitality, ready to receive strangers to his House,
especially the poor, and those who are of the household of Faith. 7, Apt to
teach, h. e. A man of knowledge, and able to instruct others, one who has a
ready and willing mind to teach others, which is not so meant, as if it were
requisite for the Ruling Elder to be endued with the Gifts of Exhortation and
instruction competent to the Pastor and Teacher, or that he may and ought to
employ himself therein, but of that fitness and ability to Teach that is
competent to his Calling, which he must be ready and willing to exercise so far
as belongs thereto. 8. Moderate, in the first Language, (...)* ^endered
patient, 1 Timothy 3. Not rigorous nor exacting the hight of the Law in his
dealing, but in his own particular of a condescending nature, and remitting
something of strict justice. 9. Patient, one who without wearying, waits on his
duty notwithstanding of difficulties, and does bear the delays,
untractableness, and injuries of others. 10. One who rules well his own house,
having his Children in subjection with all gravity, to which the Apostle adds
this reason, if a man know not how to rule his own house how shall he take a
care of the Church of God. 1 Timothy 3. 5. The Church of God is of larger extent
than one Family, and the duties to be performed in it, be of greater eminency
and difficulty, and require more skill, wisdom, and courage, then these that
are to be performed in a Family. The ruling well of his own house, does import
not only ability for doing of it, but also that he make conscience of, and
actually perform these duties that are required for the right and well ordering
of a Christian Family, to teach and instruct his Children, and Servants in the
knowledge of God, to take care of their sanctifying the Lord's day, of their
profi^ing in Godliness, of their seeking of God, and of their ordering their
conversation aright, to read the Scriptures, sing Psalms, pray in the Family,
and to exhort, admonish, rebuke and comfort all that are of his household, as
their condition does require; for if these duties ly upon all Masters of
Families who profess the Gospel, then in a special way upon Elders, who are
appointed to stir up, and go before others in the performance thereof. 11. A
lover of good men, one whose soul cleaves to those who fear God, having such in
estimation above all others, cherishing them, and conversing ordinarily and
familiarly with them. 12. He must be just, one who is straight and upright in
all his dealings among men, deceiving no man, defrauding no man, withholding
nothing from any man that is due to him, but giving to every man his own. 13.
Holy, careful to express the life of Religion, and power of Godliness in a^ his
conversation. 14. He must b^ one who holds fast the faithful Wor^ that he has
been taught, one wh^ is stable in the ^aith holding fa^ the truth of God,
without wave^ing or turning aside to error. Lastly, he must be one who has
good report of these who are without lest he fall into reproach and snare of
the devil, (...) he must be such a one, whose blameless conversation* and sober
and Christian walking does extort a testimony even from these who know not God,
and who does by well-doing put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, that if
any speak evil of him as of an evildoer, they may be ashamed who speak falsely
against his good conversation in Christ. The Apostle comprehends all these
summarly in two sentences, [1 Timothy 4. 12. Be thou an example of the believers
in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Timothy 6.
11. But thou O man of God, flee these things, and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.

CHAP. V.
Of the duties of their Calling which are more private.

THe duties of 1 Book of discip. 8. head. 2. Book discip. 6. chap.
their Calling are these that belong to their watching over, and ruling of the
flock, and they be of two sorts; some that they are to perform by themselves
alone, and so may Asser. of the Government of the Church of Scotland. 1. part.
chapter 2. 1 part. p. 15.
be called More private duties; others that they are to perform jointly with
the rest of the Over seers of the Jun. Eecles. lib. 2. cap. 3. p. 107.
House of God, and may be called more public. The duties of their Calling,
that be more private, are all these that private Christians are bound to
perform each of them unto another by the Law of charity and love, and these
are, first; to instruct one another, Joh. 4. 29. Acts 18. 26. Secondly, to
exhort and stir up one another, to provoke unto love and good works, Heb. 10.
24, 25. Thirdly, to admonish and rebuke one another, Levit. 19. 17. First,
privately, and if they will not hearken, then before Witnesses, and if yet they
will not hearken, then to tell the Church, and if they will not hear the
Church, then to tell the Church; and if they will not hear the Church, then let
them be unto us as Heathens and Publicans, Math. 18. 15, 16, 17. Fourthly, to
comfort the afflicted, and to support the weak, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. Fifthly, to
restore those who are fallen, Gal. 6. 1. Sixthly; To reconcile these who are at
variance, Math. 5. 9. Seventhly, To pray one for another, Jude 20. Eighthly, To
visit the sick, and those who are in bonds and distress, Math, 25. 36. All
these duties Elders are to perform to the several Members of the Congregation,
by virtue of their Calling. The Scriptures do expressly mention some of them, as
incumbent unto them, to wit, admonishing these over whom God has set them, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. visiting and praying over the sick, Jam. 5. 14. feeding the flock
by Instruction, Exhortation, Rebuke and Comfort in such a way as is competent
to their station. Act 20. 28. The rest we may warrantably gather by analogy
and proportion from these; If private Christians be obliged thereto, much more
are Christian Elders, who have the charge of Souls, in a special way obliged
thereto. These things are well expressed in the sixth Chap. of the second Book
of Discipline. 2 Book of Dis. cip. 6. chapter
[As the Pastors and Doctors ( say they) should be diligent in teaching and
sowing the ^eed of the Word; so the Elders should be careful in seeking of the
fruit of the same of the People. It appertains to them to assist the Pastor, in
Examination of them that come to the Lords Table* Item in visiting the sick,
they should cause the Acts of the Assemblies as well particular as general, to
be put in execution carefully* they should be diligent to admonish all men of
their duty, according to the rule of the Evangel; things that they cannot
correct by private admonition, they should bring to the Eldership.

From what has been said concerning these duties of Ruling Elders these three
things follow; First, that they ought to be men of such ability, as are in some
measure able to instruct, exhort admonish, rebuke, comfort, pray, and do these
duties now mentioned. Secondly, That it is needful for them, not only to have
some measure of ability for these things, but also to have some measure of
dexterity, wisdom, experience, tenderness in following the same. Thirdly, That
they be well acquainted with the condition of the Congregation, and the Members
thereof, and therefore be careful to observe their carriage, and frequently to
visit and take inspection of Families, that they may instruct the ignorant,
exhort the negligent, admonish the sloathful, and rebuke those who walk
disorderly, comfort the afflicted, establish those who waver, visit the sick,
encourage these who do well, and see piety and godliness promoted in Families,
and every one edifying another in love, walking in the fear of the Lord, and
comfort of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. VI.
Of these duties which are more public, and which they are ^o perform jointly
with others.

THe duties of Elders which 1 Book of disc. 8. head. 2 Book 6. chapter The office
and duties of Elders prefixed to the Ps.
are more public, and which they are to perform jointly with others, are these
which ly upon them in the Assemblies or Courts of the Church, which are made up
of Preaching Elders, Teaching Elders, and Ruling Elders: These Assemblies are
in our Church of four sorts; either they are of the Elders of particular
Congregations, which is the Church Session, or of the Elders of more
Congregations than one lying near together, which is the Presbytery, or of the
Elders of more Presbyteries then one, which is the Provincial Synod, or of the
Elders Commissioners from all the Presbyteries in the Land, which is the
General or National Assembly: To these we may add a fifth sort, to wit, that
which is made up of Elders, from all or diverse Nations professing the Faith of
Jesus Christ.

Whilst we speak of Elders, of which the Assemblies of the Church are made up,
we mean all sorts of Elders: Ministers, Doctors, and Ruling Elders. It is true,
that in the Congregations of our Church, because of the want of maintenance,
there be few, or no Doctors, or Teaching Elders distinct from Pastors or
Ministers, who perform the duties both of the Preaching Elder, and of the
Teaching Elder, only in the Schools of Divinity are such.

In all Assemblies of the Church, Ruling 2 Book of Discipline chapter 6. and chap.
7.
Elders being thereto rightly called, have power to sit, write, debate, vote,
and conclude in all matters that are handled therein, Acts 15. 2. and 6. 22, 23.

The things which be handled in the Assemblies 1. Book of Discipline chapter 7.
of the Church, be either matters of Faith, matters of Order, matters of
Discipline, or that which concerns the sending of Church Officers, according
to which they have a fourfold power: 1. That which is called Dogmatick, whereby
they judge of Truth and Error, in points of Doctrine, according to the Word of
God only. 2. That which is callee Diatactick, by which they discern and judge
of the circumstances of these things that belong to the worship of God, as
Times, Places, Persons, and all such particulars in Ecclesiastic Affairs as
are not determined in the Word, according to the general Rules thereof,
concerning order and decency, avoiding of scandal, doing all to the glory of
God* and to the edifying of the Church. 3. That which is Critic or Corrective,
by which Censures are exercised upon the scandalous and obstinate, and such as
are penitent again admitted to the Ordinances, Fellowship and Society of the
Church. 4. That which is called Exousiastick, by virtue of which they send,
authorize and give power to Church officers to serve in the house of God All
these Assemblies are not to exer* cise all these powers, but to keep themselves
within their due bounds, the Inferior leaving these things that are of more
common concernment to the Superior; but in all these Powers, Ruling Elders
have a share, and do put forth the same in exercise, according to the measure
that belongs to the Assembly whereof they are Members, Acts 15. 6. 22, 23.
Howbeit the execution of some decrees of the Church Assemblies; such as the
Imposition of hands, the pronouncing the Sentence of excommunication, the
receiving of Penitents, the Intimation of the Deposition of Ministers, and such
like, do belong to Ministers alone.

These being the Duties and Powers of Ruling Elders in the Assemblies of the
Church, its requisite that they be endued with such abilities and
qualifications as are needful for the exercising thereof; but because all
Ruling Elders are not always called to sit in all these Assemblies: But one
from every Session suffices to the Presbytery and Provincial Synods, and a few
from every Presbytery, and from greater Congregations, or Burghs therein to the
General Assembly, as also a few from the whole Church throughout a Land, to a
more universal Assembly; Therefore, though it is to be wished and endeavored,
that all Elders may have due qualifications for all these things; and though
special care is to be taken every where to choose the most qualified, yet in
particular Congregations men may be chosen Elders, who have not such a measure
of all these qualifications; they being otherwise men of a blameless and
Christian Conversation, and having such a measure of knowledge, and prudence,
as is fit for Governing that Congregation, and judging of the things that are
handled in the Session thereof, which for the most part are matters of scandal,
and trying and admitting of Penitents; but if there be any who are not of a
blameless and Christian conversation, and have not some measure of these
qualifications required by the Word of God in a Ruling Elder, no Congregation
ought to choose any such, nor any Session or Presbytery to admit them to the
charge, for it is not seemly that the servants of corruption should have
authority to judge in the Kirk of God, and if any such have been admitted, they
are to endeavor the removal of them, as they would not partake of their sin,
and be found guilty before the Lord of the blood of souls, which cannot but
suffer prejudice through negligence or ill guiding of such men.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Duty of Elders in censuring scandals and scandalous persons, and
receiving of penitents.

BEcause the Government and Duty of Elders in Congregations, lies for most part
in censuring scandals and scandalous persons, and trying and admitting of
penitents; Therefore it is fit to speak somewhat of their right way of
following their Duty in these things.

1. For the Persons about whom their 1. Book of Discip. concerning Persons
subject to discipline 2. Book of Discip. chapter 1. and 7.
censures are to be exercised, it is all the Members of the Congregation
indifferently and impartially, without respect of persons, the rich as well as
the poor, the high as well as the low, their friends, kinsmen, alliance,
neighbors and acquaintance, as well as others. Ja. 2. sharply reproves these
who have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory with respect of
persons, by preferring the rich to the poor; and Solomon says, that diverse
weights, and diverse measures are an abomination to the Lord, must it not then
be worthy of rebuke to have the censures of our Lord Jesus with respect of
persons, and to weigh the rich and the poor, the high and the low in diverse
balances, by taking notice of the one, and passing by the other. 2. It is
incumbent to them to exercise their power, not only over the people of the
Congregation, but also over these of their 1. Book of Discip. 8. head. The
weekly Assem. of Ministers, elders and Deacons prefixed to the old Ps.
own number, as all Christians, so so they in a special way who are
yoke-fellows in the work of the Lord, ought to consider and admonish one
another, and if any of them be found negligent, or insufficient, or do in any
thing miscarry, to the offense of the Gospel, and blaming of the eldership, he
is to be censured by the Minister, or Ministers, and the rest of the Elders, as
the degree of his offense does require, the Apostle Paul, Acts 20. 28. gives
charge to all Elders to take heed to themselves, as well as to the flock over
which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers. 3. As all sorts of scandalous
persons, whether in the Congregation, or amongst themselves: so all sorts of
scandals and offenses are to be taken notice of by them* The Apostle 2 These. 3.
6. commands that we withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly, and
amongst disorderly walkers, he does verse. 11. reckon idle persons, who do not
work at all, but are busy bodies; intimating to us, that even these scandals
and disorders, which are by many little taken notice of and looked upon as no
faults, ought to be taken notice of by the Church, that all her members may
walk honestly; and as it becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Acts of our
Church does appoint, that whatsoever it be that might spot that Christian
Congregation, ought not to escape either admonition or censures: So in the
order of Ecclesiastic Discipline, 1567. Two great neglects there be that by
ignorance or custom have crept in among Elders in many Congregations. 1. That
they do not take notice of the omission of Duties, as well as of the commission
of faults; as for instance, If there be any member of the* Congregation who
lives idly, and waits not upon his Calling, who is not given to Prayer, who
is not charitable to the poor, who waits not upon the public Ordinances; if
there be any Master of a Family who prays not in his Family, who does not bring
up his Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; or 2. Thar they do
not take notice of the commission of faults, and scandals of all sorts, but of
some few only; such as fornication, adultery, and profaning of the Lords Day,
and suffering many others, such as tippling, drunkenness, filthy communication,
lying, cursing, swearing, oppression, reproaching of Piety, and Godliness, etc.
to pass without 1* Book of Discip. chap. 7. sect. 6.
observation.

4. Elders are to take heed, that they bring in no civil questions and Debates
before the Assemblies of the Church, and that they do not use nor inflict any
civil mulct, or punishment, upon persons convict of scandal, these being proper
to the Civil Magistrate; The Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the Censures thereof
being Spiritual, and not of this world, John 18. 36.

5. In the taking notice of offenses, The Order of Ecclesiastic Discipline,
appointed by the Assembly 1567. And in the Order of Excommunication, commanded
to be Printed by the Assembly 1571.
they are to observe this Order: If the Offense be private, and known to but a
few, then are they in the first place to admonish the offender privately, and if
he hearken to the admonition and amend it, needs go no further, nor be dilated
to the Church; If he do not hearken nor amend, then is the Elder to take with
him some of his Brethren, and to admonish the offender before witnesses, and if
he hearken, the Church needs not be acquainted therewith, but if he despise
this second admonition, then is ^e to be dilated by the Elder to the Church,
that he may be called before the Session, and convicted and censured by them;
This is the Order commanded and prescribed by Jesus Christ, Mat. 18 2. Book of
Discipline, Chapter 6. sect. 12.
15, 16, 17. if the offense be Public and open, then is the offender without
such previous admonition to be dilated to the Session, that according to the
Apostles Rule, 1 Timothy 5* 20. They that sin (meaning openly) may be rebuked
before all, that others may fear.

6. In these dilations, they are to take heed that they do not* upon every
rumor or jealousy, or suspicion, bring men to be questioned Publicly, as
scandalous walkers, but first to be careful to make diligent and prudent
enquiry about the truth of the matter, and to see if it can be proven by
Witnesses, or that the scandal thereof be common and flagrant, or attended
with pregnant likely-hoods, and presumptions of truth, before they bring it in
public, that so it may appear to the Congregation, and to the party
themselves, that they are not questioned and challenged without cause.

7. In the matter of dilation and censure, they are in the fear of God, and in
the simplicity and sincerity of of their hearts, to take heed that fear or
favor, or solistations, or threatenings, or gifts, or bribes, make them not
pass by, or wink at the fault of any, and that passion, or malice, or private
quarrels, and particulars make them not to dilate, or rip up, or censure the
miscarriage of any, and that they carry with all tenderness and compassion,
and moderation, toward the offender, that they may aprove themselves to his
conscience; that nothing puts them one to dilate him, and proceed against him,
but the conscience of duty, and a desire to gain his soul, and to purge the
Church of scandals, Gal. 6. 1 2 Cor. 4. 2. Its a high provocation before the
Lord, for a Chu^ch-Officer to abuse the power given him of God, for edifying
his Body the Church, unto the satisfying his own passions and corrupt
affections.

8. They are to take heed, that they do not use the Censures of the Church as a
bodily punishment or penance to satisfy for sin, but a spiritual medicine, for
humbling and gaining of the soul; all Church censures, even Excommunication it
self, which is the most terrible and destroying-like censure, being ordained of
God for this end, 1 Cor. 5. The Apostle commands to deliver the incestuous
person to Satan, not that he may satisfy for his sin, but that the spirit may
be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. The word Satisfaction may admit
of a tolerable construction in Church Censures, in order to the removing of the
scandal before men; but this being so much abused in the Popish Church, and the
hearts of men, being so prone to true Gospel repentance, to a mere legal
penance, and to conceive, that by mere outward submission and obedience to the
censures of the Church, that the guilt of their sin is done away before God,
Therefore Elders would carefully shun every thing that may give occasion to the
fostering this pernicious opinion, and take pains to instruct offenders in the
true nature and ends of the censures of the Kirk.

9. A great part of Elders work, is, to The form and order of public
repentance perfixed to the old Ps.
travel and take pains with scandalous persons who are now convict, to bring
them to repentance, by seasonable and frequent conference, instructing,
exhorting and admonishing them, until they they perceive some measure of true
and earnest humiliation wrought in them for their sin, and them fitted to
evidence and declare the same in public before the Congregation, that so the
scandal may be removed.

10. They are not to desire or appoint any to profess repentance before the
Congregation, until the signs of repentance appear in them. The Incestuous
Corinthian sorrowed exceedingly before the Apostle did any thing concerning the
receiving of him; And the Discipline of our Church appoints Ministers and
Elders sharply to examine these who offer themselves to repentance, what fear
and terror they have of Gods judgments, what hatred of sin, and sorrow for
the same, and what sense and feeling they have of Gods mercies? In which if
they be ignorant, they ought diligently to be instructed; for it is (say they)
but a mocking to put such to public repentance, who neither understand what
sin is, what repentance is, what grace is, nor by whom Gods mercies and favors
are purchased? And that after he is instructed in these things, and brought to
have some taste of Gods judgments, especially of his mercies in Jesus Christ,
he may be presented before the public Church; These things are set down in the
form and order of Public Repentance, appointed by the Assembly 1567.

Lastly, when the signs and evidences of true and unfeigned Repentance do
appear in these who have offended, Elders would show themselves ready and
willing to receive them with all tenderness and compassion, and to forgive and
comfort them, and confirm their love toward them, 2. Cor. 2. 7, 8.

The number of Elders in every Congregation 1 Book of discip. chapter 6. Sect. 4.
cannot be well limited or determined, but it is to be more or less, according
to the quantity of the Congregation, and necessities and condition of the
people, and as men qualified and fit for the Charge can be found. It has been
an evil custom in some Congregations, that rather than they would want any of
their wonted number, they would choose unqualified men, and that in several
Congregations, the office of Elder has been given to those of the richer and
higher sort, as due to such (though happily of no experience in the things of
Jesus Christ, and in many things of an untender and blameworthy conversation)
because of their condition in the world, or conceiving that their secular power
and credit was the best means to promote the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and men
qualified with knowledge and experience in the things pertaining to souls, and
of a Christian and godly carriage have been passed by, because of a mean
condition in the World. Better it is that the number be few, before we choose
the ignorant and scandalous; and that they be of a low degree, if godly, than
of a high degree, if otherwise.

That Elders may the more conveniently Acts of the Ass. 1646.
discharge their duty; It is convenient that the Congregation be divided into
so many parts, and that some competent part be assigned to the more peculiar
care and inspection of every Elder; yet so, as he neglect not to take heed to
all the flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost has made him an over-seer.

CHAP. I.
Of Deacons. Of their Names.

THat we may also understand what does belong unto Deacons, we shall speak of
them shortly, after the same order. 1. Of their Name. 2. Of their Institution.
3. Of their Calling. 4. Of their duty and qualificacion.

The word Deacon, largely taken, signifies 1. Book of discip. chapter 8.
any servant or Minister, Matthew. 23. 11. Therefore in the New Testament, it
does sometimes comprehend all Church Officers, even the Apostles themselves, 1
Cor. 3. 5. Because every Church Officer is appointed of God, for perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, (...), Ephesians. 4. 12.
and edifying the Body of Christ. When we speak of Deacons in the Kirk, 1. Book
of Discipline ch* 8.
it is not taken in this large sense, for any Church Officer of whatsoever
sort, but for a certain kind of Church Officers distinct from Pastors, Teachers
and Elders, to whom the collection and distribution of the Goods of the Church
does belong, for the supply of the necessities of the poor.

CHAP. II.
Of the Institution of Deacons.

THe Institution of the Office of Deacon in the Church of Christ, is Divine;
it is a special Ordinance and Appointment of Jesus Christ, that there should be
Deacons in his House, Act* 6. 3. The Apostle gives command to the Disciples to
choose out among themselves men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and
of Wisdom, whom they might appoint over the business of the poor, which was
accordingly done, as may be seen in the 5 and 6 verses of that Chapter: Neither
was this a temporary institution upon this particular occasion, for the Church
of Jerusalem only, but for all the Churches 1. Book of Discipline 8. chap.
of Christ to the end of the world; Therefore the Apostle Paul in several of
his Epistles to the Churches, does mention them, Romans 12. 8. He exhorts him
that gives or imparts, ( h. e. the Deacon, to whom the care of giving and
distributing is committed) to do it with simplicity, 1 Cor. 12. 28. he reckons
helps, ( h. e. Deacons who are appointed for helping the poor) among these
Officers whom God has set in his Church; and writing to the Philippians, he
directs his Epistle to all the Saints in Christ, with the Bishops (or
Overseers, under whom he comprehends Ministers, Teachers and Elders) and to the
Deacons, 1* Tim. wherein he gives Rules concerning the qualification and
carriage of all Church Officers, he treats of the Deacon at large, chap. 3. 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

From the Divine Institution of Deacons, 1. Book of Dis. chapter 2. p. 74.
we gather 1. That the Deacon is a distinct Officer from the Elder; it is a
defect and fault in some Congregations, that they put no difference betwixt
those two, but so confounds and mingles them together, as if they were both
one, either appointing none for the Office of Deacon, but leaving that charge
also upon the Elders, or else giving the Deacons the same power and employment
with the Elders. It Is true, whatsoever the Deacon may do by virtue of his
Office, that same may be done by an Elder, as whatsoever is done by an Elder,
may be done by a Minister: because the higher and more eminent offices in the
Church, does include the powers of the lower.

It Is also true, that the Deacons may assist in 1 Book of Discipline p. 57.
judgment with the Minister and Elders, and be helping to them in these things
that concerns the oversight of the Congregation, by information and advice; Yet
it is necessary that Congregations should so far regard the Ordinance, and
reverence the Wisdom of God, in appointing these Officers, as to have both
Elders and Deacons, and to preserve them distinct in their actings and
operations, not giving to the Deacon, or suffering him to assume the Elders
office. 2. That Deacons are not to count light of this employment, or any
others to esteem lightly of them, because they are called thereunto, and do
exercise the same; but that they themselves, and all others ought to look upon
it as one of these holy and honorable Employments, which the wisdom of God
has thought fit to appoint in his house, for supplying the necessities of the
Saints. The Lord Jesus himself did not disdain to wash his Disciples feet;
Angels are all of them ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for their
sakes who are appointed to be heirs of Salvation; why then should any think it
below them to serve the Church of Christ, and to minister to the Saints in this
Employment? 1 Timothy 3. 13.

CHAP. III.
Of the Calling of Deacons.

NOne is to step into this Office, 2. Book of Discip. chap. 8.
but he that is lawfully called thereto; Unto their Calling its needful, First,
That they have abilities and gifts fit for the charge, together with an honest
purpose of heart to serve the Lord faithfully in the discharge of the same, by
seeking his honor, and the good of the Church. 2. That they be chosen by the
Congregation in which they are to serve, which choice is to be made after the
same manner, as that of Ruling Elder. 3. That trial be taken by the Minister
and Elders, concerning their conversation, that it be blameless and holy: And
concerning their gifts, that they have that tenderness, discretion, dexterity
and prudence, that is fit for that Employment, and that they be admitted to
their Charge with Prayer and Supplication, and opening of the Word concerning
their duty publicly in the Congregation, where they are solemnly to engage
themselves to be faithful in the trust committed to them of God, Act. 6. 3, 5,
6. 1 Timothy 3. 10.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Duty. First of their Conversation.

THeir Duty is either that which concerns their Conversation, or their office
and calling; for their conversation, the Apostle shows what it must be, 1 Timothy
3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. They must not be double tongued, nor liars, nor
dissemblers, nor deceivers. 2. They must not be given to much wine, nor
tiplers, nor drunkards, nor lovers, nor followers of strong drink. 3. They must
not be greedy of filthy lucre, nor such as are covetous, and whose hearts run
after the things of the world. 4. They must be grave men, of a posed and stayed
carriage, and not of a light and vain behavior. 5. They must be such as hold
fast the mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, h. e. Who do not only know the
Doctrine of the Gospel, but do hold fast the Faith thereof without wavering,
and study to have a good conscience, in walking answerably thereto. 6. They
must be the husband of one wife, such as abstain from all unlawful lusts,
satisfying themselves with the Remedy allowed of God. 7. They must be such as
rule their own houses and their children well, such as command and instruct
their children and household to keep the way of the Lord, going before them in
the practice of piety and godliness, and all holy and religious duties.

CHAP. V.
Of the Duties of their Calling.

THe Duties that Deacons are 2. Book of Discipline chap. 8.
bound to perform in their calling, may be reduced to these heads: 1. That they
be careful to take exact notice of such as are poor in the Congregation, and
have not wherewith to maintain themselves* 2. That they be careful from time to
time to collect and receive from the several Members of the Congregation, and
strangers that come among them, what the Lord shall incline their hearts to
give for a supply of the necessities of the poor; and in a seasonable and
Christian way, to stir up and exhort to Charity and Liberality, that the more
may be given. 3. That what is received and collected by them, be faithfully
delivered, that it may be put in the Treasury of the Congregation. 4. That they
do timously make known the several conditions and necessities of the several
poor within the Congregation, to the Church Session, that provision may be
appointed accordingly for each of them, that so the poor may not be put to
begging, to the grief of their spirits, and reproach of the Gospel. 5. That
they be careful, honestly and in simplicity, without respect of persons, to
distribute and deliver to the poor what is appointed for supply of their
necessities; and if they be Orphans, and young ones, or such who have no
knowledge or understanding, nor ability to dispose and order the things that
concern their food and raiment: That the Deacons honestly employ and bestow
what is given for their use, that they may be supplied in these things. 6. That
they be careful that what belongs to the poor be not dilapidated, nor applied
to any other use; and if that there be any stock in the Church Treasure, it be
improven to the best advantage, for the benefit and use of the poor; Yet so
that the poor be rather always supplied, than Moneys treasured up for a vain
show. 7. That they be careful to take notice of these who are sick, that they
may acquaint the Ministers and Elders therewith, for visiting of them; and if
that they be poor, their necessities may be supplied.

That Deacons may the more conveniently discharge their Duty, Its fit that some
part of the Congregation be assigned to every one of them for the better
inspection of the poor thereof, and that the Diets of collecting for the poor
be divided amongst them.

The number of Deacons in every Congregation is to be according to the
proportion of the Congregation, and of the poor therein; and though there be no
necessity of an equal number of Elders and Deacons, yet it is fit that each
Elder have some Deacon to be assisting to him in the bounds of which he has
more peculiar inspection, that so both the one and the other may discharge
their duty, with the greater facility to themselves, and with the greater
benefit and advantage of the Congregation.

FINIS.

