LICENSED,

Apr. 1. 1676. To. L'Estrange.

THE ADMIRABLE VIRTUES, And Wonderful EFFECTS OF THE True and Genuine Tincture
OF CORAL, In PHYSIC; Grounded upon Reason, established by Experience, and
confirmed by Authentical Authors in all Ages.

Never found out plainly till now.

By Theophilus Garencieres, Doctor in Physic, Colleg. Land.

Io suon Medico non di Parole ma d'Effecto.

Cardan. London, Printed by W. R. for Samuel Sprint at the Sign of the Bell in
Little Britain. 1676.

Collegium Sancti Johannis Evangelistae in Academia Cantabrigiensi



To the Honorable Sr WALTER LONG, BARONET.
SIR,
I Hope not to incur your blame, when I prefix your Name to this small
Treatise. The Matter is new, though long sought after; the scope is the public
good, and my private aim is to show my gratitude for so many obligations you
have been pleased to lay upon me, besides my hopes, that the design of the
Subject may perhaps be approved by experiment, and the smalness of the Volume
pass among those things that are not illusory. And to say truth, under whose
Wings could I have sheltered it better than yours? Whose Affability and Candor
is open to the greatest Strangers, and particularly my Self, with your never
enough to be commended, generous Hospitality.

But my intention here, being not to make your Panegyric, I supersede and
spare your Modesty, it being sufficient to me, if the Author and the Work can
deserve your Protection, and the favorable Looks of your worthy Brother, Master
Robert Long, and so engage me to remain the rest of my days

Your most humble and affectionate Servant Garencieres.

Ad Authorem De Extracta CORALII Tinctura Dodecastichon.
A Multis quaesita diu Tinctura Rubentis
Coralii, nobis ecce reperta patet.
Quod veluti rigidum durescit in aere marmor,
Cardiacus mira jam datur art Liquor.
Lethiferi poto coguntur cedere morbi;
Aufugiunt pestis dira, maligna febris.
Cedit and infantum convulsio; foemina Laesae
Matricis rabido laeta dolor vacat.
Ista sub ingenti crescentia pharmaca ponto,
Hippocratis dicant munera digna manu.
Filum Parca secet; non te vixisse pigebit:
Si tua tam rarum tempora finit opus.
Petrus Cottereau.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
CHap. 1. Of Coral, and of the diverse kinds thereof.

Chap. 2. Of the Nature, Faculties, and Virtues of Coral.

Chap. 3. Of the Tincture of Coral, and what is Tincture.

Chap. 4. Why in the Curing of Diseases, we choose rather to make use of the
Tincture of Coral, than of the whole Body in substance, however prepared.

Chap. 5. How the Tincture of Coral works upon Diseases.

Chap. 6. Of the Virtues of the Tincture of Coral, in the Curing of all
Malignant Fevers.

Chap. 7. Of the dangerous and poisonous quality and use of Blistering
Plasters, and that they ought to be exterminated out of the Family of Remedies.

Chap. 8. Of the Virtues of the Tincture of Coral, in all Fevers and Agues.

Chap. 9. How the Tincture of Coral works upon all those other Diseases, we
have said it was fit for.

Chap. 10. How and in what Vehicles the Tincture of Coral is to be administered.

CHAP. I.
Of Coral, and of the diverse kinds thereof.
COral is a Shrub, growing in the bottom of the Sea, which becomes Stony when
exposed to the Air.

Sic and Coralium, quo primum contigit auras
Tempore, durescit; mollis fuit herba sub undis.
Ovid. 4 Metamor. Therefore is it called by the Greeks (...) and (...), that
is, The Stony Tree, in Latin Coralium.

There is diverse sorts of it according to their several colors; for there is a
Red, a White, a Black, a Green, a Yellowish, of an Ash Color and of mixed
colors. The Red, which is called the Male, is preferred above all the rest,
and is the subject of this our Treatise. Anselmus de Booth, Physician to the
Emperor Rodolphus the Second, affirms, To have seen in the said Emperors
Cabinet, Branches of Coral of several colors upon the same Body; so that the
Body of it was Coral and Stony, and the Branches Ligneous and Woody, which is
not improbable to me; for I have seen in the North of Ireland a Lake called
Lake Neaugh, wherein, if a piece of Wood that grows thereabout be planted,
that part which is in the Ground shall be turned into Iron, that which is in
the Water into Stone, and what is above Water shall remain Wood. But let us
come to Coral again, whose generation is not much unlike; for when that Juice
that is in it, called by the Latins, Succus Lapidescens, runs thorough the
Body of the Vegetable, it alters it, and turns it into a stony substance.
Whence we may g^ess, That Coral, under Water, is not altogether soft and
flexible, though it grows stony, when exposed to the Air; which cannot be
wondered at, seeing there be many Stones, both in France and England, which
being newly dug out of the Ground, are in a manner as soft as Cheese: But
having been a while exposed to the Air, grow to a considerable hardness, the
Sun and the Air having exhausted the waterish part of them. Now whether Coral
grows out of the Petrifying Juice, or being engendered as other Plants, is at
last altered by the said Petrifying Juice, is a question. For my part, I
believe that it does not grow without that Petrifying Juice, no more then the
Sea-fan, called Corallina, the Alga, and other Herbs which grow in the Sea, and
that it does not petrifie till it dies: By dying, I mean, that when by the
ordinary course of Nature, or by the violent action of the Stony Juice,
penetrating the inmost parts, the Plant is petrified. Now it is certain, that
Nature makes use sometimes of the Petrifying Juice for the producing of the
Plant; for it has been observed by many, that Coral has grown out of the
pieces and fragments of Earthen Pots. And in the Island called Tobacco, near
Africa, which is half swallowed up by the Sea, much Coral is found, having its
Roots in pieces of Earthen Pots. Now the reason why Coral should petrifie, and
other Plants not, is because of its peculiar disposition: As also, because
naturally there is a Petrifying Juice in it, which forces the Plant to receive
a stony form; besides the peculiar disposition, and preparation of it to
receive such a form. No reason can be given for its color, no more then for
that of a Rose; for it cannot be referred to the first or second qualities, no
more than the sight of the eye. God has been pleased to adorn things with such
colors, and has so inserted them into their Seeds, as their Archaeus can
produce none other; Coral sometimes grows to the height of a man before it be
ripe and turned Red, it seems of several colors; for as many Plants as I
have seen that were not wholly petrified, were all of a Dusky, Green, or such
color as we see in other Trees; and those only begun to be Red, that had
nothing woody in them, as we see that in Pears and Apples, the Red color is a
sign of their ripeness and maturity. When Coral is newly taken out of the Sea,
many impure things stick to it outwardly, which being taken of, the true color
shows it self. There are several sorts of Coral in respect of their matter,
for some is soft, other hard, some solid, some hollow, some rough, some
polished, some porous.

When Coral is taken out of the Sea, it is for the most part rough, and then is
made smooth and polished by the Artists: There is a Black Coral found in
Gallicia, a Province of Spain, and such another sort of course one, called
Savalia, is brought from Mauritany, having the inside woody, and the outside
horny, and stony, of a Black, Yellow, and Green color. There is also a sort of
White Coral found in Catalonia, and called by the Spaniards Polo: This has no
Bark, and grows in the bottom of the Sea, and not upon Rocks, as the Red
does. The best Coral is now found upon the Coasts of Tunis and Tripoli.
Theophrastus in his Book (...) reckons Coral among the precious Stones; and
Orpheus in his Book (...) speaks very much of Coral. Before I end this
Chapter, and speak of the Virtues of Coral, I will here, in favor of the
curious, clear a doubt, and show an error concerning its Nature that has
reigned a great while (because Pliny writes, that Coral while it is in the
Sea, is as soft as Wax, but as soon as it comes to the Air it grows hard) by
an History, taken out of. Beguinus own words in his Tyrocinium Chymicum.

Upon this Controversy, John Baptist of Nicole, Squire of the City of
Marseilles, chief Commander for the Fishing of Coral in the Kingdom of Tunis,
has assured me, That in the year One thousand five hundred eighty four, being
upon the Sea of Biserty, belonging to the said Tunis, where the said Fishing of
Coral was, and being curious to know the Nature of Coral, and how it grows in
the bottom of the Sea, caused a young Man to dive into the Sea a hundred fathom
deep, being tied to a rope of a sufficient length, with a weight of five and
twenty pounds in each hand, to go to the bottom, charging him to bring some
Coral from the bottom, and to observe, whether it was hard or soft. Being come
above Water, he brought a Branch of Coral in each hand, affirming, That it was
as hard in the bottom of the Sea, as out of it, and that being about eight or
nine fathoms near the bottom, he felt an excessive cold. The same Nicole not
contented therewith, as the Nets were coming up, and before they could be in
the Air, cast himself into the Sea about one fathom deep, and took some Coral
sticking to the Nets, which he found as hard as when it is in the Air. The same
has been confirmed to be me by the Lord of La Piotier, a Gentleman of Lion,
who within these two years returned from the said Fishing of Coral. Besides
this, the said Squire Nicole assured me, that in the Spring when the Coral is
plucked up, in the breaking of it, there issues out a liquor like unto Milk,
which falling upon any Stone, Wood, Iron, or some other matter, produces
Coral; and that he had seen in the Cabinet of the great Duke at Pisa, the Skull
of a dead Man, upon which was grown in the Sea, a great Branch of Coral; and an
Anchor taken out of the Sea, upon which were several Branches of Coral,
produced by the Juice of Coral that fell upon it.

Here we must rectify a kind of seeming contradiction, which is, when we have
cited Ovid and Mathiolus, and said, That Coral was soft under Water, and grew
hard when it came into the Air; and in another place, That by the experiment of
Squire Nicole, it was found to be hard under Water; therefore understand this
only to be Secundum magis and minus, as of those Stones which we have said to
be as soft as Cheese in the Earth, and then to harden in the Air when dug
up, for the Reasons before alleged. For though Coral may be hard in the bottom
of the Sea, yet it is nothing so hard as when it has been exposed a while to
the Air; and so we perceive it to be in all kind of Trees which dry and harden
to the Air, when once weaned and separated from their natural sap or moisture,
and growing place.

CHAP. II.
Of the Nature, Faculties, and virtues of Coral.
ACcording to the Famous Dioscorides and his Learned Commentator Mathiolus,
Coral in his manifest qualities is moderately astringent and cooling; but his
specific qualities, are so many and wonderful, that I should show my self too
prolix and tedious, if I would treat of them one by one. Therefore I shall
content my self to lay down the chiefest, and to back them with the Authority
of several Learned and Famous Men, and shall begin with Anselmus de Booth,
Physician to the Emperor Rodolphus the Second, in his Book De Gemmis and
Lapidibus, wherein he says, That the tincture of Coral stops the immoderate
Courses of Women, both Red and White; the Running of the Reins; the Spitting of
Blood; and cures all Bloody Fluxes, and Gripings of the Guts; expels all
kind of Gravel and Stones, and consumes the over-growing of the Spleen. I can
testify of my self (says he) that being extremely sick of a Pestilential
Fever, and fainting every moment, and having been without sleep four days and
four nights; insomuch, that all those about me, despaired of my life, by taking
in a Spoon six drops of the said Tincture, with the decoction of Violets, upon
an instant, and as it were miraculously, I was cured. For as soon as I had taken
two Spoonfuls of the said Tincture, I felt my Vital Spirits so refreshed, and
my Intrals so comforted by the gratefulness and efficacy of the said Remedy;
that as if the Light had expelled Darkness, I found manifestly the strength of
the disease abated, and fell into a critical Sweat (of which before there was
no sign.) So that Nature did thrust to the skin abundance of Purple Spots,
which presently being obliterated and carried away by the Sweat, in a little
time I recovered my former health. That Tincture (says he) has the faculty to
bring the Body to a right temper by a certain Celestial Power, and eradicateth
all Diseases out of the Internal Parts, by reason of the Analogy it has with
the Vital Spirits, and the natural heat which it augmenteth and strenghtneth,
and therefore overcomes easily the contrary Diseases. It cures the Falling
Sickness in few weeks, though one has had it from his youth. It is commended
above all against the immoderate Fluxes of Women, either White or Red; for it
does stay them so, that the Women cannot fall into any inconveniency by it. It
does also stop all Fluxes of the Belly, and of the Blood from whatsoever part
it flows. It also stops the old Runnings of the Reins. It is given in the
Plague with admirable success: Likewise in the Flux and Small Pox, chiefly when
they do not come out kindly. It is also excellent against Melancholy and the
Tympany. It appeaseth the Pains of the Eyes, stays the Rheum, and takes away
the Spots that grow in the Eyes.

In a word, Coral strengthens the Heart, and therefore is a sovereign Remedy
against the Plague, and all venomous, contagious, and malignant Diseases. It is
a certain Antidote in the Plague time, if one takes of the said Tincture in a
Morning fasting, the quantity of half a dram. It has the same power against
the poison of Vitriol, which is analogal to that of Fevers and Agues, causing
Gripings in the Stomach, and the Guts, Vomiting, Looseness, thickness and
blackness of the Tongue, Short-breath, and other dangerous Symptoms, which is
confirmed by Forestus, Lib. 30. Observat. Med. Observatione 7. in Scholio.
Arnaldus Villanovanus relates, That if ten grains of the Tincture of Coral be
given to a Child newly born, mixed with some of the Mothers Milk, before the
Child has taken any other Meat or Drink, that the said Child shall never be
troubled with the Falling Sickness; which is also affirmed by Camillus
Leonardus, Lib. 2. Speculi Lapidum, Litera, c. Thus far Anselmus de Booth.

Our second Author shall be Crollius, the Prince of Chemists, who says this.
As Coral does wonderfully grow, so the Secrets that are in it, are altogether
admirable, and its Faculties beyond expression. The virtue of its Tincture is
such, that it is able to cleanse and renew the Blood in such sort, as to cure
all Diseases that comes from the corruption thereof, and to restore health,
strength, and alacrity. It stops all immoderate Fluxes in Women, being taken
in Plantain Water; as also all Lasks and Fluxes of the Belly, as Bloody Fluxes,
Dysenteries, Diarrhoea's, taken in the decoction of the Roots of Tormentil; all
Haemorrhagies, Spitting of Blood, and Haemorrhoides, taken in Plantain Water;
cleanses and renews the Blood, taken in the Water of Fumitory or Cichory.
Resists Putrefaction, strengthens the Heart, and the Vital Spirits, and
preserves them from Poison, in Water of Borrage or Buglosse. Comforeth and
strengthens the Stomach, and the Natural heat in Mint or Penniroyal Water.
Removes all obstructions, chiefly from the Lungs, Liver, and Kidneys, in Water
of Sorrel, Grass, Little Centaury, Spleenwort, Liverwort. Dissolveth congealed
Blood in Water of Chervil or Daisie. It cures absolutely the Fits of the
Mother, and the immoderate Fluxes of Women, in the Water of Motherwort, Balm,
Penniroyal. It cures the Dropsy, Convulsion, Palsy, Falling Sickness, in
Cinnamon Water, continuing for a while. It expels the Stone and Gravel in
Saxifrage Water, or that of Rest-Harrow. The dose is from six grains or ten, to
a scruple or two, according to the age of the Patient, and the greatness of the
distemper. It cures Ulcers being applied to them, or mixed with Plasters
proper for them.

The third Author shall be Joannes Petrus Faber, a famous Physician of
Monpelier, who in his Book called Myrothecium Spagiricum, in the Chapter of
Coral, speaks thus. The virtues and force of this Secret for the mund^^ying,
and purifying the Blood in all the Body, is such as it may be given in all
sick^^^^^^ and diseases, which proceed from the (...) of the Blood, in so much
that it (...) excellent in the Leprosy. It stays (...) Fluxes in Women being
taken in Plantain Water; as also all kinds of Loosenesses, and other Bloody
Fluxes against Nature. It comfort and strengthens the Heart wonderfully, as
also the Stomach. Restores the Natural heat, by reason of its radical
moisture, which is almost equal to ours. It dissolveth all Congealed Blood and
Scorbutical Concretions, therefore also most profitable to those that have the
Stone and Gravel, being drunk in the Water of Rest-Harrow. It is wonderfully
efficacious in all venomous Ulcers, and others, if it be mixed with some proper
Balsam, because it mundifieth the Blood, and procures Cicatrization.

The fourth Author shall be our worthy Countreyman, Roger Bacon, who in his
Learned Treatise De Retardanda Senectute, commends Coral in these words. That
Remedy which lies in the bottom of the Sea, is of a wonderful virtue against
the infirmities of old age, as experience teaches us. It is hot and dry in the
second degree, as Isaac affirms. It does corroborate the Stomach, the Senses,
and all the internal parts.

The fifth Author shall be the most renowned Fernelius, who speaking of Coral,
says thus; Coral being cold and dry in the second degree, by his Astringent
quality strengthens the Stomach, and efficaciously stops all Bloody Fluxes,
preserves the strength of the Heart, and fenceth it against all malignant and
pestilent Diseases. Being taken inwardly, it stays the monthly Courses of
Women, and strengthens the Conception. It hinders Excrescences of Flesh,
fills up the cavity of Ulcers, and wears out the Scars in the Eyes. It
cools the heat of Choler, and stays the eruptions of it, whether upward or
downward. It strengthens the substance of the Liver, let it never be so loose.

I could in confirmation of the Premises, bring the authority of all the best
Physicians in all Ages that have made mention of Coral, but that I am an Enemy
to Prolixity and Repetitions. These will serve to satisfy any reasonable
person, or else nothing will.

In a word, the Virtues of Coral are so great and wonderful, that many grave
and authentical Authors did not stick to say, That it was an Amulet or Charm
against Fearfulness, Bewitchings, Sorceries, Poisons, Falling Sickness,
Assaults of the Devil, Lightnings, Seastorms, and other dangers whatsoever.
Therefore in ancient time it was dedicated to Jupiter and Apollo. But of these
last qualities, let every one believe as much as he thinks fitting: Certain
it is, by the testimony of Pliny, and others, that anciently it was among the
Indians almost of an equal value with Pearls of the same bigness. It is also
certain, that Red Coral, if worn by a Man, has, and preserves its color
better than that which is worn by a Woman; perhaps, because the heat of a Man
is greater than that of a Woman; and the vapors that exhale out of his Body are
purer.

Moreover, it is an undoubted truth, That Red Coral will grow pale, bluish,
and maculated with several spots* when it is worn by one that is nigh death, or
dangerously sick, and will foretell Diseases by the changing of its color. This
I found true by a sad experience of my own; for having once a Girl about Twelve
Months old that wore a Bracelet of Coral, she fell into a Pestilential Fever:
So that when I came home and spied the Coral quite altered, I began presently
to despair of her recovery, which I would not have done, if I had known then
the Tincture of Coral, as I do now. She lived but two days in that case. After
her death I would have taken the Bracelet from her, and tried whether I could
have brought it to its former color again; but the Mother would never suffer
it, but would have it buried with her, lest the sight of it should bring her
into remembrance of her loss, and so deprived me of so just a curiosity. Here
by the By, Let us consider what affliction it is to Parents to see their young
Children sick, without any Remedy, and not able to express their own
grievances, whereas now a spoonful of this Tincture, which is pleasant to the
taste, and can be no ways hurtful, may preserve them alive to the honor and
glory of God, and the satisfaction, and joy of their Parents and Relations.

CHAP. III.
Of the Tincture of Coral; and what is Tincture.
TIncture is an Extract of the Colors adhering to mixed Bodies, and of the
formal qualities thereof. Whence comes it, that Tinctures are sometimes called
Oils, sometimes Spirits, and sometimes Quintescence. In the Extraction of
Tinctures, the Chemical Artists do chiefly labor, that they may separate the
formal Virtue of the mixed Bodies, in which lies the faculty of curing
Diseases from its proper Matter or Feculent Body, which is unprofitable,
Terrestrial or Waterish; for they draw by Extraction and Means of a
determinated Menstruum (for the same Menstruum is not fit to draw all kinds of
Tinctures) the Tincture or Essence of it, which is the most secret and internal
substance that Nature had enclosed and concealed in the Intrals of it, to
preserve it from all external injuries and accidents. And after that, they draw
or abstract the Menstruum from it; and the Tincture or Essence remains in the
bottom of the Vessel, in the consistence of Honey or Pap, and then it is
properly called Extract. But if it be in a Liquid form joined with its
Menstruum, and representing the color out of which it is drawn, then it is
properly called Tincture. Therefore observe that by the word Tincture, the
Chemists understand the colors sticking to the Essence of the mixed Bodies,
and to the formal qualities drawn out of them.

Here we must make an exact distinction, between a Dissolution and an
Extraction of the Tincture; for in a true Tincture we extract only the formal
Virtue of the subject, the mass and lump of the Body remaining whole; but in a
dissolution, the whole compound is reduced into minute parts. Hence comes it,
that the dose of the Tincture is small, but that of the dissolution must be in
a greater quantity, because it is not so efficacious.

Observe also, That there is no true Tincture, but that which remains of the
same color as the mixed Body was, after the Menstruum is extracted from it. If
by this rule many Tinctures be examined, it will be easily known that they are
no true Tinctures, but that their color proceeds from the mixture of the
Menstruum with the Body dissolved.

For example, Let any body take of the Vulgar Tinctures of Coral, if you exhale
or distill the Menstruum from them, it will go away pure and clear, and that
which remains shall not be Red, but shall look either like Lime or Salt;
whereas, if it were a true Tincture, and a Red Substance extracted from the
Body, it should remain so, though the Menstruum were abstracted from it. But
that Tinctures are not always true, but vary according to their Menstruums, is
evident in that several colors may be extracted out of one and the same thing
by several Menstruums. For example, if you put upon Silver calcined with
Mercury sublimate, the Spirit of Salt; you shall have a Green color like an
Emerald, but if you put upon it the Spirit of Urine impregnated with the Salt
of Urine, it will be of a Blew color. These contradictions did persuade once
Crollius, an excellent Chemist, when he wrote his Book called Basilica Chymica,
That the true Tincture of Coral was impossible to be had, or at least, that it
was not his fortune ever to see any. But we shall convince him sufficiently of
the contrary, and as many as shall be of his opinion.

Here I cannot wonder enough at many Chemists and Physicians of good note, who
through ignorance, or by hearsay, for the obtaining the Tincture of Coral,
advise to calcine it, that the Tincture may be drawn out of it, without
considering that in the Calcination the fire burns and consumes the
Tincture, and that Calcination is good for nothing but to Extract the Salt of
it, which also has several Faculties in Physic of which we shall speak in its
proper place. For Calcination is the Reduction of a mixed Body into a Calx or
Lime made by fire, which depriveth the said mixed Body of the humor or moisture
that united the parts together.

Now it is time to come to the true Tincture of Coral. Take therefore (for an
experiment) half an ounce of the best Coral in Powder, put it in a Viol of
about half a pint, pour upon it six ounces of our Menstruum, and stop the Viol
close with a Cork, you shall perceive, that within four hours the said
Menstruum will be colored Red, then pour it out, and put new upon the same
Coral, and so do, so often till you shall see the Coral white in the bottom of
the Glass, then abstract the Menstruum in Balneo, in the bottom shall remain
the true Tincture of Coral as Red as Blood, and the Body shall remain in the
Viol as white as Snow: Edulcorate, that is, Wash the said Tincture from its
Menstruum with some Cordial Water, which you shall afterward Abstract from the
Tincture in Balneo, till it be almost dry, then shall thou have the true
Tincture of Coral, most efficacious for the aforementioned Diseases, being
given in some appropriated Vehiculum, and fit for the distemper. The dose is
from ten drops to twenty, or thirty, in two ounces of an appropriated Liquor.

When you have Extracted the Tincture of Coral, do not slight or throw away the
Body of Coral which remains in the Viol, for out of it may, by Chemical Art,
be Extracted the Salt of Coral; which in all respects emulateth and comes very
near the Tincture, except in the curing of malignant and pestilential Diseases.

I am here much surprised at the contradictory opinion of Philibert Guibert, a
famous Physician of Paris, who in several places of his Book, called The
Charitable Physician, having highly commended the use of Venice Treacle against
the Plague, and other ven^mous Diseases, according to the doctrine of the best
Physicians, does at last in his Treatise of the Plague, exclaim against it as
against an infamous Remedy, contrary to the authority of the best Physicians,
and the constant experience of all Ages, as I have showed in my Treatise of the
last Plague Anno 1665. and instead of it, substituteth two Antidotes of his
own, which are something Comical. The first is, The use of good Wine; the
second is that which he calls Electuarium de tribus Adverbiis. Cito, long,
tarde. That is, to be gone quickly out of the infected place, to go far from
it, and to come back as late as one can, according to this old Distich.

Haec tria tabificam pellunt Adverbia Pestem,
Mox, long, tarde, cede, recede, redi.
But as we do not deny that Wine is a noble Aliment, and a great Cordial, so do
we think it too weak alone to cure the Plague, as is seen in many places where
people drink nothing but Wine, and that of the best: No more than his Antidote
of the three Adverbs, many having met with the Plague in the Country, which
they might have avoided, if they had stayed in the City, as I did all the
while: For I do undertake (with the Grace of God) to cure the fiercest Plague
with Venice Treacle, and my Tincture of Coral. Add to this, that many people
are not able to go out of Town, either want of means or relations, or being
encumbered with a numerous Fam^ly.

Before we finish this Chapter, it will be worth the curiosity of the Reader to
know how to Extract the Salt of Coral, which we have said to emulate the
Virtues of the Tincture, except in the curing of the Plague, and malignant
Fevers.

Take therefore that white Body of Coral which remains in the Viol, after the
Extraction of the Tincture, wash it very well with fair water, dry it gently
upon a soft fire, and then pour upon it by degrees Vinegar, that has been
distilled three times, as much as will cover it four Fingers above, then digest
and dissolve that together, and after the solution, Abstract the Vinegar till
the Coral be dry; then wash the Coral with distilled water, to take away the
acrimony of the Vinegar; after that, evaporate the Water till there remains a
Salt as white as Snow, and free from all acrimony, which must be kept in a
Glass close stopped.

Its virtues are most excellent, for it purifieth the Blood in all the Body,
which it restores to its former strength. It stops all Fluxes of the Womb,
of the Belly, and of the Haemorrhoides. It strengthens the Heart, and the
Stomach; it opens all the obstructions of the internal parts; it dissolveth
congealed Blood. It is most excellent in the Dropsy, Palsy, Convulsion, the
Stone, Fits of the Mother. Crollius is of the same opinion; for he says, That
it purifieth the Blood, and cures in a short time all Diseases that proceed
from the corruption of it, if it be taken in Cichory or Fumitory Water. To stop
all excessive Fluxes and loss of Blood, as well by Dysenteries and
Haemorrhoides, and such like; as Hepatical Fluxes, Lienterical, Menstrual,
Spermatical, Bleeding at the Nose, Spitting of Blood, being taken in Plantain
Water, or such like; to resist putrefaction, to strengthen the Brains, the
Stomach, the Natural heat, and the Vital Spirits, and to preserve the Heart
against all poison; to remove all obstructions from the noble parts, to wit,
The Lungs, the Liver, and the Kidneys; to dissolve congealed Blood, and to cure
the most stubborn Fits of the Mother, and superfluities of the Monthly
Courses, being taken in the Water of Motherwort, Balm, or Pennyroyal. See
Crollius in Basilica Chymica, and Anselmus de Booth, cap. 154. Lib. 3. de
Gemmis.

In the Dropsy, Palsy, Falling Sickness, and Convulsion, this Salt is taken
with admirable success in Cinnamon Water; and for the Stone, in the Water of
Rest-Harrow. It may also be put in Lozenges, and be taken in stead of common
Salt in a boiled Egg, or in Broth, or in White Wine.

CHAP. IV.
Why in the Curing of Diseases, we choose rather to make use of the Tincture of
Coral, then of the whole Body in Substance however prepared.
DIseases never come upon mankind, but by a Segregation and Heterogeneity of
humors; for while the Crasis or Temperament of the Humors, remains whole,
Nature constantly performs her Functions, the Spirits play their part, and
the economy of the Body remains entire; but as soon as the Humors begin to
separate themselves, and to jar one against another, the Spirits are scattered,
the Humors putrify; and if there be any malignity in the Air, it introduces
itself immediately into that Chaos.

Now these Indications teach Physicians, first, to expel the malignity as the
most pressing; secondly, to settle the Spirits; thirdly, to unite again the
Humors. Now the malignity being aerial, cannot be expelled, but by formal
Qualities, neither can the Spirits be settled but by the same; which both being
done, the third, which is the union of the Humors, will of necessity follow;
for the Cause being removed, the Effect insueth. These things cannot easily be
done by a Body in Substance, (suppose Coral in Powder) for in that Body the
three Principles of Nature, to wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, remain united
together, and so adhere one to another; that although nature may digest them,
yet will they not separate themselves to do the Body any determinate good, but
will either undigested or digested, go all along and keep company together;
whereas, when they are separated one from the other, they work determinately by
the help of a proper Vehiculum, upon the disease aimed at. For though all the
parts (for example of Coral) be friendly to an Humane Body, yet are they more
friendly one to another, and will not separate themselves to do a Body good,
but will rather stick close and perish together, to the illusion of the
Physician, and the delusion of the Patient. The second Reason is, That when the
Remedy is given in Substance, Nature is put to the work and task of digesting
it, and in the mean time the disease (chiefly if it be aerial) gets footing,
the strength declineth, and so many times the Scales weigh down; whereas, if it
be given separate (suppose the Tincture of Coral) Nature presently lays hold
on it, cheareth up the heart with it, who presently as the Sun of the Microcosm
sends it, by way of irradiation, to the part affected, and so relieveth the
Patient.

Another inconveniency arises from giving Remedies in Substance, which is,
that when the thinnest part of the Remedy, is dissolved in the Body, the
thickest, which the Latins call Faere or Crassamentum, remains in the way, and
many times causes stubborn obstructions, and other accidents, whose Causes
being unknown to the Physician, because unsuspected, produce many times several
accidents worse than the Disease that was intended at first to be cured. This
is to be daily observed in those that use gross and f;aeculent Means, and by
the Reason we have alleged before, fall into stoppages and obstructions, and
consequently into diverse Diseases hard to be cured.

From this Reason it is, that Spirits and Essences separated and sublimated,
work more powerfully and efficaciously, than when they are wrapped and involved
in their whole Bodies, (...) whom they cannot easily extricate themselves, and
show forth their power and virtue, as you may observe in Spirit of Wine well
rectified, one spoonful of which shall work more effect then a quart of the
common one, out of which it is extracted. The same is of Vinegar, which, if it
be pure and good, shall in the quantity of a spoonful, in Sawces, Salets, or
other condiments, do more effect than a quart of the common one, and with less
charge and more gratefulness; because its efficacy and virtue before was
dulled, allayed, and made inefficacious by the faeces, phlegm, and other
impurities that adhered to it. Upon this Reason, the Remedies that are to be
administered to Humane Bodies, are to be pure, rectified and exalted: If you
well consider the effect you expect from them, and the dignity of the subject
with whom you have to do. Therefore the best Chemists in all Ages have
endeavored and labored to make their Remedies as pure and defaecated as
possibly they could, that the effect aimed at, might follow, and the Humane
Bodies excellency should not be violated, as it is not, when in the preparation
of the Remedies, the pure is separated from the impure, the useful from the
unprofitable, the spiritual from the corporeal, and the cordial from the
poison: And thus they do not lie heavy upon the Stomach, they beget no
impurities, cause no new obstructions, but immediately fight against the
Diseases, and overcome them. Thus, Beer well settled is wholesomer than new;
thus Wine separated from its Tartar, is better for the taste, and for the
health, then when it is newly extracted from the Grape; thus the Meats we eat,
being separated by Nature from their Excrements, after many light concoctions
and separations of Excrements in the Liver, and in the Veins, are at last made
fitter for the nourishment of the parts. Thus, Cinnamon Water shall sooner and
more efficaciously comfort the Heart, than Cinnamon it self in Substance; thus,
a few drops of Oil of Anniseed shall work more effectually then many Seeds, and
thus of the rest. Whereby you may see that Remedies well prepared and purified,
are extraordinary efficacious for the cure of the worse Diseases; as the
Fallingsickness, the Convulsion, the Dropsy, the ^uartan Ague, the Gout, and
other Diseases commonly deemed incurable; and that with all safety diligence,
and alacrity, imitating Nature in this, which does not send to the parts for
their nourishment the Meats as they are raw and whole, but alters them in the
Stomach, digesteth and destroys them, and in the Liver separateth the purest
from the Excrements.

Now concerning the penetration of the Virtue of the Tincture of Coral, to the
remotest parts, for the Curing of those desperate Diseases, we have mentioned,
as Fallingsickness, Convulsion, Gout, Pox, Bleeding out of any part of the
Body, etc. Consider how the Milk of a Nurse that has taken Rheubarb, is able
to purge a Suckling-Infant, etc.

How the Tincture of Coral works upon Diseases.
BUt that we may make this obvious to the meanest capacities, we will lay here
open the most secret Foundations of Physic, to wit, The Actinobolism of
Natural things, which is no where else so clearly to be seen as in Medicinal
ones; and this is twofold, either to life or to death. Which that you may
understand, you must observe, That as all things were created for Man's sake,
even so there was given to every one a particular virtue by which Man might be
preserved: For he that intends the End, intends also the Means to attain
it, as are the Virtues of Natural things. Seeing then that there is no Member
in an Humane Body, but has its proper and peculiar infirmities, the most High
has provided Remedies against all them; seeing also that there be Members
hidden and concealed in the most retired places of the Body, where there was no
access for Herbs and Plants to come to. He has given them like as it were
Beams of Light, spreding themselves round like those of the Sun, which passing
through all the Body, do by their Actinobolism or Irradiation, penetrate to
that Member which is correspondent to them, and has need of their Faculties
and Virtues. Hence comes, that the Remedies having spread the Beams of their
Virtues, go directly to that Member which is analogal and correspondent with
them, and strengthen and comfort it. Thus all Cordials by their Actinobolism,
do not meddle with the Liver, Brains, or Spleen; but with the Heart.

The Hepatical Remedies by their Actinobolism, do not comfort the Kidneys or
the Lungs, but the Liver: Thus, the Diuretics meddle not with the Liver,
Heart, or Brains, but with the emulgent Veins, and the Bladder. Thus, the
Actinobolism of the Catharticks and Diaphoreticks, gather together into the
Intrals, all the Choler lurking in the Body, and from thence carry it away as a
superfluous and noxious thing.

Hence it is manifest, by what Reason the compounded Medicines, endowed with
diverse qualities, work upon the Body unconfusedly, and are no hinderance one to
another, no more than the Suns Beams are among themselves, as it is
demonstrable in Mathematics. For seeing that the Specific Virtues of each
Medicines which enter into the Composition, remain in it after the loss of
their first qualities, when they are received in the Stomach, as in a Natural
place, every kind, without mixing one with another, and confounding their
Beams, tends to that part to which it is affected, and has correspondency
with, and with their Actinobolism, do wonderfully strengthen and comfort it.
Whence comes, that all the Members being comforted, the Natural heat must also
of necessity be strengthened; and the more it is, the less power will the
Disease have; insomuch, that we may imagine in Physic as many Centers of
Virtues as there be Individuals that compound it; and if there be many Cordials
mixed together, they all shall cast their Beams upon the Heart: Those Herbs
that have relation to the Lungs, shall work that way, and the Hepatical ones,
shall all tend to comfort the Liver. And thus by the Aggregation of so many
Virtues, the Body must of necessity prevail against the Disease: So
contrariwise, that Antipathetical Actinobolism which proceeds from poisons,
and poisonous things, as soon as it is got down into the Stomach, does first
attack the Heart, as the fortress of the Body. Thus the Mineral Poisons, as,
Arsenick, Orpine, Ochra, and the Poisons of Serpents, by their radiation,
infect the next Blood, and that the next, and so consequently, till it has
reached to the Heart. Whence if it be not expelled by the Antactinobolism of
some counterpoyson it brings destruction to the party: Besides that, every
Member has its peculiar Poisons; for some do not attack the Heart immediately,
but the Lungs. As, that Zoophyte, called Pulmo Marinus, which being eaten,
ulcerateth the Lungs, and brings the party into a slow Consumption. The
Sardonian Smallage, as also that Insect called Tarantola, invading the S^ats of
the Spirits, and the Arteries and Muscles, provokes a Man to laughing and
dancing. The biting of the Serpent called Dypsas, as soon as it begins to
diffuse, does by its Radiation bring the Liver into Putrefraction. The biting
of a Mad-Dog gives to a Man the Dogs manners; for he continually barketh,
biteth, and fears Water. The biting of a Mad-Cat, imparteth the Cats manners.
Skenkius relates of a Maid that had eaten of a Cats Brains, and did perfectly
imitate a Cats manners, expressing its voice, and hunting after Mice with her
crooked Fingers and Nails. The Poison of an Asp being an enemy to the Nerves,
does by its Radiation cause a sudden lack of Sense in all the Limbs which it
corrupts. The biting of the Serpent (called for that reason Haemorrhois) by
its Radiation turns all the Humors of the Body into Blood, as Gesnerus
witnesses, Lib. 5. Hist. Anim. Which is confirmed by Lucretius in his Ninth
Book, by these excellent Verses.

Impressit dentes Haemorrhois aspera Tullo,
Magnanimo juveni miratorique Catonis:
Vtque solet pariter totis se effundere venis
Corycii pressura croci: Sic omnia membra
Emisere simul rutilum pro sanguine virus.
Sanguis erant lachrymae: Quaecumque foraminanovit
Humor, ab iis largus manat cruor: Ora redundant
Et patulae nares, sudor rubet, omnia plenis,
Membra fluunt venis: Totum est pro vulnere corpus.
We may see by these and several other Experiments, which I omit for brevities
sake, that the several Members and Parts of the Body have their several
Substances, which do not work by their proper Poisons, but by the Diffusion of
their Radiant Virtues; which cannot be remedied, but by the Radiation of
contrary Substances which destroy those venomous qualities, even as the shadows
and darknesses cannot be destroyed but by the Radiation of Light. From all
these things it is evident, that there is nothing in Nature without that virtue
of Radiation, inserted by the Author of Nature, for those ends best known to
himself, and in imitation of the Light, insomuch, that the Judicious Reader, by
this Doctrine of Actinobolisms, and that of Magnetisms, may as with two Wings
soar to the highest knowledge of Natural things. He that will be further
satisfied in examples of that nature, let him read Skenkius de Venenis.

To these must be added what we have said before, to wit, That the Specific
Virtues of each Medicine that enters into a composition, remain in it after the
loss of their first qualities which may be proved by this Experiment.

Take Nettles, dry them, and burn them to ashes, make Lees of those ashes;
expose the Lees in the night to the Air, till it be covered with an Icy thin
Skin, and you shall see in that Skin the perfect figure of a Nettle, with the
stretching of its fibers and jagged Leaves, as if it were a Natural one; and if
you look upon it with a Magnifying Glass, you shall perceive with admiration
all the ^igure of the Nettle, grown out of small and ^lmost infinite number of
small Cellules. Th same will happen in any other Plant, to show that no Seed
can be so exactly mixed with other things, but it will retain and affect still
its own Nature. All this that we have said, tends to show how Coral brings
to pass all those wonderful Virtues we have attributed to it. Those that shall
desire to be better satisfied in this Doctrine of Actinobolism and Radiation,
let them seriously meditate the Plastical Virtue of all Seeds, in which, being
seated in the abstrusest parts of the Body, does without any tools or noise,
produce a work so wonderful in variety and comeliness of Parts, and that, out of
a rough and inform matter, in which there is no distinction of parts, nor
variety that may be observed by the Senses. For we see that in the Seed,
without any appearance lies and lurketh the whole Tree, with the Roots, the
Body, the Boughs, the Leaves, and the Fruits. Out of one Corn of Wheat,
proceeds the Root, the Stalk, the Ear, and the Corn. In an Egg, which is the
Seed of Birds, lurketh the whole Bird, with all, and every one of its Limbs,
and all the differences of its colors. In the Seed lies the Body of the
Animals with all its Limbs, the Heart, the Brains, the Lungs, the Liver, the
Spleen, the Stomach, the Kidneys, the Bladder, the Nerves, Tendons, Muscles,
Veins, Arteries, etc. Every one of which has its proper and certain figure,
its color, and proprieties. Who severeth so many various things hidden in an
Homogeneal Body, who separateth an uniform Matter into Bones, Humors, Flesh,
Gristles? etc. None other certainly, but that Plastical Virtue which the
Almighty has inserted into all things that were to be propagated by
Generation. This Virtue gives to every Limb its due situation, color,
figure, proportion, and quality: By its workmanship the Body is hollowed into
so many Pipes, Channels, Passages, and Meanders. Therefore, we suppose, that the
same Plastical Virtue, is diffused in all the parts of the Seed: So that it is
all in all, and all in every part of the Seed.

The reason is, That the Productions are sometimes but one, and sometimes many;
and that the Production that comes from one part of the Seed, is no less
perfect than that which comes from the whole: And finally, that there is no
confusion nor inordination of parts, which of necessity should happen, if it
were not uniform with the Subject; for if one part of the Seed were taken away,
one part of the Production should also be wanting. And thus should happen a
Confusion in the Figure by the transposition of the parts: And although the
Seed, in order to the Senses, seem to have no distinct and heterogeneal parts;
nevertheless, being considered in it self, it has: Seeing that it is not a
single, but a Body compounded of many; for that part of the Plastic Virtue
which frames the Brains, shall not frame the Heart or the Liver; and that part
which has framed the Bones, shall not stretch the Membranes, or dispose the
Guts into a winding compass. The only difficulty is, Why that Plastic Virtue,
which is so confusedly mixed, yet, works without confusion, and disposes of
all things with an admirable order, and as the Greeks call it (...).

But this concerning not our Subject at present, we pass it over, being
contented to have stirred up the curious Reader to the Meditation and Study of
the Magnetisms and Actinobolisms, in which he shall find matter enough to
satisfy himself in the process of Nature, and in the admiration and love of
the Creator. But this digression has passed a little already the bounds of our
Subject, let us go back from whence we came.

We conclude then, That the Tincture of Coral being sep^rated from the Body of
it; the pure from the impure; the formal from the material; the Celestial from
the Terrestrial, it works by its A^^inobolism or Radiation, and its
Magnetism; by which it is Analogal to the Heart, the Fountain of Life, those
wonderful Effects we have made mention of, we will descend to some particular
Instances.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Virtues of the Tincture of Coral, in the Curing of all Malignant and
Pestilential Fevers.
WE give this instance first, as the most considerable, and of greatest
concernment. These Fevers under the notion and name of a Cold, having
destroyed so many of late, that a Body cannot without grief, and a certain
horror, read the increase of the Bill of Mortality upon this particular point,
while the Patients flatter themselves that it is nothing but a Cold; and the
Physicians, either by ignorance, wilfulness, or mutual Envy, prescribe
Bleeding, Purging, Blistering, and such other dangerous and preposterous means;
which though they may sometimes be used in other Fevers, yet in this are they
Mortal.

As first for Bleeding, it has always been condemned by the most judicious in
Malignant and Pestilential Diseases, by reason that it weakneth Nature, by
exhausting the Blood wherein the Life consists, by diminishing the Spirits
which are the tie of the Soul with the Body, and by suffering the venomous
quality to rage the more by substracting that sweet and Natural Juice, which
was rather to be encouraged for the taming and allaying of it.

Purging is neither to be admitted, unless there be an extraordinary fullness of
Humors, it being sufficient to keep the Body soluble; as also, because in those
Fevers there is commonly a perturbation of Humors, which Purging cannot
segregate, till they be perfectly concocted, and appear so by the Urines, and
the slacking of the bad Symptoms. Concocta medicari oportet non cruda, says
Hippocrates.

As little significant as these, is the new way they go about by Blistering;
for whereas this Pestilential Fever has its seat in the Spirits, what
communion is there between their Malignity and Blisters, which do not reach
beyond the skin, set the whole frame of Nature in torture and anguish, and cut
the troath of the Patient before the Wounds can be cicratrized? This practice
seeming only invented to beget Apothecaries practice and Physicians somewhat to
say, when they are at their wits end.

Now nothing remains to overcome so powerful an enemy but Cordials, so
called, because, without doing any violence to Nature, or weakening her
strength, they directly go to the Heart, cheer it up, fight against the
malignity; and as a Light disperseth darkness, so do these, any thing that is
enemy to Man's life. Which being done, that wholesome temper, in which consists
Life and Health, takes place again, and the Patient is restored to his former
state.

Under that name of Cordials, every one almost obtrudeth what his own fancy and
imagination thinks, or has heard to be so, though it be but a simple
Distilled Water, colored with some Sirrup; and thus trifle away the most
precious thing of the World, which is time (as C^esiphon says) while the
malignity gets footing, and never cease till it has destroyed the Patient.

Now, as we do not deny that there is abundance of those Remedies called
Cordials, in Nature; so we deny that it is every ones Talent to know them, or
the use of them, or the preparation of them. As for example, What good can be
expected from the Water of a Plant Distilled in a Mettallick Furnace, having
been first irrorated or steeped in common Water, that the greater quantity may
be drawn, as it is now commonly practiced. Besides the inconveniency of the
Metallic quality of the Limbeck which communicates it self to the Water, as
it is evidently seen, and have often tried my self: For having occasion several
times to prescribe Mineral Waters, as that of Epsom, Tunbridge, etc. to several
Patients, and among them, to my own Daughter. It fell out, that the Water which
was brought from the Wells in Bottles, did agree very well with them, and
wrought effectually without any violence; but when, by the want of that, I was
forced to make use of that which they fell in Town, and keep in Leaden
Cisterns, I found a contrary effect; for it wrought so untowardly, that it
frighted me every time; which I could attribute to nothing else, but to the
poisonous quality of the Lead, of which the Cisterns were made, and in which
the Waters were kept. By this we see what a necessary thing it is, in such
cases, and many others, That a Physician should be his own Apothecary; and this
I speak merely for the interest of the truth, being not ignorant how many
interessed persons will contradict it.

Having set down all these Notions, it is also requisite we should set down the
use of our Tincture of Coral; therefore as soon as one falls into that
Malignant or Pestilential Fever, which is known chiefly by the smalness,
quickness, and intermittency of the Pulse, let him go to Bed in a warm Room,
and being well covered to sweat, let him drink one dose of our Tincture of
Coral, sweating after, as long as he is a able; and let him follow exactly the
method we have set down in our Book of the last great Plague, Anno 1665. The
particulars of which concerning this, we shall repeat here, because the Book is
hard to be had, there having been three Impressions dispersed in six weeks
time, and none to be had at present, that I know: Therefore I shall repeat to
this purpose, only the XXX. XXXI. XXXII. XXXIII. XXXIV. XXXV. XXXVI. Aphorisms
mutatis mutandis.

XXX.
As Soon as any one finds himself stricken with any of these Symptoms, to wit,
a Headake, Vomiting, Faintness, Looseness, and a small quick and intermitting
Pulse, without any prejacent or evident cause, let him presently repair to a
clean and warm Room, and let a light fire of Wood be kindled in the Chimney, to
consume and destroy all the infectious vapors that proceed both from the Air,
and the infected party. Let the Patient be presently put into a warm Bed
himself, wrapped in a Sheet and Blanket, having first put off his Shirt, that
when he comes to be dried, you may not be put to the trouble of pulling off
his wet Shirt, then give him one dose of our Tincture of Coral, and covering
him with Clothes very warm all over, leaving only his respiration free, and
putting a warm Brick to the Soles of his Feet, and another to his Knees; let
him sweat as long as he is able, or at least, for the space of three or four
hours, and be not afraid he should faint, if he has breath enough.

XXXI.
If it should happen, as it does commonly to those that are first taken with a
vomiting, that the Patient should cast up the Cordial, you must give him
another dose; and if he should cast up this also, give him a third, and so
continue still till he keeps it once, for he will never cast it up
afterward; and though he should, yet by having taken it so often, some of the
qualities of it will remain behind, that will work their effect.

XXXII.
Children that cannot or will not take the Remedy, must be compelled to it by
pouring it into their Throat with an Instrument, called by the Greeks (...),
which is a kind of Spoon with a cover, having a spout to put into the Mouth,
and so to pour it down.

XXXIII.
The Patient having sweated three or four hours, the more the better, you must
give him a little more breath, and began to take off the Clothes by degrees;
and when you have dried him very well with warm Clothes (which all this while
must hang by the fire with his Shirt) then pull away the wet Sheet and Blanket
from under him, then give him his Shirt, and after that, dry his Head, and take
heed, by all means, that any cold Air should come into the Room. After you have
dried his Head sufficiently, and that the party begins to be cool, give him
to drink leisurely, two ounces of our Cordial Water, described in the said Book
of the Plague, which is of an admirable virtue in this case, and also in
Faintnesses, Surfeittings, and Poisons, This will refresh him so speedily and
wonderfully, that he will presently forget the tiresomness of his sweating.

XXXIV.
When he is quite cold, give him to eat any thing he has a mind to; so that it
be of good Juice, and easy digestion: Let his drink be strong Beer, lukewarm,
or some Generous Claret Wine; for, as we have said before, this Fever
differs from all others. And whereas in others we substract Meat, and strong
Drink, as much as we can, we must in this allow them, it being only a malignant
quality, in which, good Meat and Drink cannot hurt, but rather allay it, as
also because the Patient would not be able to sweat twice a day in this manner
(which of necessity he must do, if he will save his life) unless his strength
be repaired with good nutriment.

XXXV.
This course of Sweating twice a day, must be continued for four days together
or five at the most, in which space of time, all the Malignity and Pestilential
Poison will expire; and, if this be carefully done, and attended, there is no
Malignant or Pestilential Fever so stubborn of any kind whatsoever, but must
yield.

XXXVI.
Although the danger be over in four days, yet will it not be amiss to make use
still of Cordials now and then; for it is not only necessary to dive away the
Pestilential Poyon, but also to strengthen the noble parts, upon which it may
have made an impression, the malignity of a thing being not only in the Cause,
but also in the parts to whom the cause did adhere.

Thus much have I transcribed out of my Book of the Plague, for the ease and
convenience of the Reader, and for the advancing the use of so noble a Remedy,
as the Tincture of Coral.

Now seeing that this Tincture is to be administered with our admirable Water
against the Plague, and Malignant Fevers, and that the Substance of both is
more formal then material, not lasting long in the Body; therefore the dose is
to be renewed every day, allowing about three hours of Interval between every
dose, besides one dose in the night, if the Patient awakes. If this be
carefully done, there is no Malignant Disease but may be cured.

But as a Gardner that will carefully bring up a Plant, takes care to weed it
often, lest it should be choked or want nourishment. So that I may show the
beauty of this Remedy, I must extirpate several Weeds that have crept in of
late into the Family of Remedies, to the delusion of the Patients, and the
irrision of ignorant Physicians.

CHAP. VII.
Of the dangerous and poisonous quality and use of Blistering Playsters, and
that they ought to be exterminated out of the Number and Family of Remedies.
MAny times when a Physician is at his wits end, and has nothing to say more
concerning the Disease in hand, he prescribes Blistering, not knowing nor
distinguishing whether it will be fitting or not. And there is some policy in
that too; for besides the obligation, he lays upon h^s Friend the Apothecary,
himself is not without hope of benefit, and of being sent for, the more often
whiles the wounds are green; but what good this can do, or which way, chiefly
in a Malignant Fever, you must not ask, for himself cannot tell, but only,
that it is the common practice of the Town. Which, if it be a satisfactory
answer, let every body judge. If this abuse had been harmless, I would have
passed over it, as I do over many others that I know, and do only range among
the Vulgar Errors. But seeing it tends to the destruction of mankind, as I
have seen by many sad and woeful experiences, and shall prove by many grave and
Authentical Authors, I should sin against my Conscience, Reason, Knowledge, and
Experience, if I did not lay open the cheat thereof, in favor of a gallant
Nation, among which I live and am so humanely protected.

Be it known therefore, that there is a Remedy now practiced in Physic called
by the Greeks (...) from the Verb (...), which in Latin signifies Attraho, in
English, to draw or attract, which was invented by the Ancients, chiefly to
comfort the weakness of those parts which come by cold, or too much moisture,
whence it is evident, that all those Remedies are exceeding hot, dry, and
sharp. Of these sorts are Mustard Seed, Thapsia, Goats Dung, Cresses-Seed,
Eliampanes Roots, the Sea Onion, Pigeons Dung, Mice Dung, Lice-Bean,
Cantharides, and such like; of which, at present the Modern Physicians, and
namely the Dispensatory of London, have framed a Plaster for that purpose,
called Emplastrum Epispasticon, of which, here is the description.

Emplastrum Epispasticum.
R. Sinapeas.

Eupborbii.

Piperis longi ana drachmam unam semis:

Staphisagriae.

Pyrethri, ana drachmas duas.

Gummi Ammoniaci.

Galbani.

Bdellii.

Sagapeni, ana drachmas tres.

Cantharidum integrarum drachmas quinque.

Picis navalis.

Resinae.

Cerae citrinae ana drachmas sex.

Terebinthinae, quantum sufficit, fiat Emplastrum usui reponendum.

Now, as I will not deny but that Plaster may be useful in some cases, if it
be judiciously applied; so I affirm, that it is of a dangerous efficacy, if it
be misapplied, and chiefly upon tender Bodies, extenuated by Sickness, Fasting,
Watching, and Pains; the Reason is, That the Cantharides or Spanish Flies,
which are the Basis of it, are a most deadly Poison, and a particular enemy to
the Bladder and Genital Parts, which is so much the more prevalent, in that
some Apothecaries of their own accord to make the Plaster of a more quick
working, have augmented the dose of the Cantharides. So that when this Plaster
is applied to one sick of a Malignant Fever, and already extenuated with the
disease of Fasting and Watching, he has good luck if he escape with life.
Those that are for it, may chance to urge their own experience, against which I
shall oppose mine, which is of forty years standing; but because neither they
or I should be believed, as being Partial, I shall cite here some memorable
observations made by several learned, honest, and famous Authors, to clear this
point, which is of so great a consequence.

I shall not speak here of the dangers and cruel Symptoms that follow the
taking of Cantharides inwardly, because they are so generally known, that no
body can be ignorant thereof, but those that are altogether ignorant of
Physic, I shall only mention the pernicious effects, and sad consequences they
cause, being applied outwardly. The first Observation shall be taken out of
Guilielmus Fabricius Hildanus, a late Author, and excellent Physician and
Surgeon in Switzerland, in his Ninety and eighth Observation.

A certain Gentleman of the Town of Villeneuve, by the Lake of Geneva, having a
cold Tumor in one of his Knees, caused by a cold, and tough Humor, did ask a
Barbers advice, who without taking notice of the Antecedent Cause, went about
to cure him only with Topical Remedies; therefore he applied first Cupping
Glasses, after that a Cautery on the side of the Kneepan, thinking to empty the
Matter that was gathered. When these did not succeed, he applied a Pultess made
with Leaven and Cantharides, and did exulcerate all the Knee, then followed an
excessive pain about the Knee, restlesness, a Fever, and several other fearful
Symptoms; among which, was a grievous pain of the Reins, and of all the Belly,
and presently after such a heat in his Urine, that he could not make one drop
(for it came only drop by drop, and that Bloody) without the greatest torture
imaginable. The Pultess being removed, he was something the better, because it
had drawn the most subtle part of the Humor: Which when the Barber saw, he
applied again the same Pultess of Cantharides, upon which all the said Symptoms
became worse than before, and chiefly the heat of Urine, which the Patient
feeling would admit no more of the said Pultess, but dismissed his Barber, and
after came to me to Lausanna* where having prepared first his Body with opening
Apozemes, I purged him several times with the aggregative Pills, and those of
Her modacts; and after that, gave him the decoction of Guaiacum, Sassafrass,
and China, causing him to sweat gently, that the Matter about the Knee might
melt and evaporate, after that I applied this Pultess of Vigo.

. Farinae Fabarum.
Farinae hordei, an. iv.

Furfuris been triturati M. ij.

Stercoris Caprini triturati lb. ss.

Meliloti an. m. 1. cum Lixivio and Sapa sufficienti de omnibus fiat Emplastrum
solidum addendo olei Camomelini and Anethini ana ij, applicetur calide bis in
die.

When he had used this Pultess a whole month together, he recovered his
health. You shall find the like example in Joh. Langius, Lib. 1. Epist. 47.

The third Observation shall be taken out of Baccius, in Prolegomenis Venenorum
and Antidotorum, where he says, We find by Experience, that Cantharides being
mixed in Blistering Plasters, and applied, do most violently corrode the
Stomach and the Belly; but above all, to be by its property a peculiar enemy to
the Bladder, and to tear it in pieces with its Bloody Urine, and so to kill the
Patients. For we have observed many times, that when Cantharides have been
applied to the Head in a Lethargy, and to the Brawns of the Arms and Legs; they
have caused an extreme pain, with an inflammation and difficulty of Bloody
Urine, and so have killed the Patients. Which danger deserves a serious
consideration.

The fourth Observation is out of Brassavolus, Comm. ad Aphor. 17. Lib. 2. who
says, That one Vincentinus Grema, a famous Surgeon in his time, took once a
Medicine, the Powders of which had been stamped in a Mortar, where Cantharides,
had been stamped before: Whereupon, though he did not actually eat any
Cantharides, yet was he excoriated from the Mouth to the Fundament, and could
not get his health again in less then eighteen Months space; yet were there no
Cantharides in the case, but a kind of quality proceeding from them that stuck
about the Mortar.

The fifth Observation is out of Bartholomeus Montagnana, a famous Physician of
Italy, who relates, That one Francis Brac, a Citizen of Padua, having applied
some Cantharides to his Knee, did avoid by Urine above Five pounds of Blood;
and that the same did happen to one who applied them to his great Toe, to take
away the roughness and unevenness of his Nails. Langius, Tom. 1. Epist. 47.

But what is more incredible then this is, That a certain Surgeon of Milan,
made twice Bloody water, for carrying in his Pocket a Vesicatory made of
Cantharides. Thus affirms, Joan. Michael Paschalius, Method. Curand. Morb.
cap. 44.

The sixth Observation is of a certain Man who carrying by chance Cantharides
in his Pocket, as the fashion is of some Surgeons, did make Bloody Urine;
and complaining to me of it, I bid him he should not meddle with them, no not
so much as to touch them, or carry them in his Pocket. Such another accident, I
was told by Helidaeus de Paduinis, a famous Physician of Bolonia, with whom I
used to visit sick people, when I was at Bolonia. The most famous Physician
Adolphus Occo in his Observations.

The seventh Observation is of a Noble Woman who having her Face full of red,
burning, and ugly Pimples, was so deformed therewith, that every Body avoided
her as a Leper, and the Magistrates were ready to sequester her from the common
society of Mankind. She came to Paris, where having called for two Doctors of
Physic, to wit, Hollerius and Grealmus, and two Surgeons Mr. Cabal, and my
self, she inquired with great care and diligence, if there was no remedy
against such a deformity. Having considered diligently the disease, we
unanimously concluded that it was no Leprosy, but that it was fitting that a
Vesicatory made of Cantharides should be applied all the Face over, three or
four hours after her Bladder began to ache, and to burn vehemently, and the Neck
of the Womb, to swell with gripings, a continual vomiting, and making of water,
a raving carriage of all her Limbs, and a Burning Fever. I called for the
Physicians again presently; the conclusion was, That we should give her much
Milk to drink, and inject some in the Guts by the Fundament, and into the Womb
and Bladder by the Vrethra; that she should go into a lukewarm Bath, wherein
should have been boiled Linseeds, the Roots and Leaves of Mallows and
Marshmallows, of Violets, Hemlock, Pursleine, and Lettice; and so to continue,
from time to time, till the pain was quite ceased. That the Reins and Genital
Parts should be anointed with Vnguentum Rosatum and Populeon, dissolved and
mixed with Oxycrat. By these means all the Symptoms vanished away, in the mean
time the Face was full of Blisters, which being broke, a great deal of Matter
issued out, and the deformity was cured, insomuch, that a little while after
she was married, and had many Children. Ambrosius Paraeus, Lib. 5. cap. 17.

For my own part I can certify, that my youngest Daughter Elizabeth, being
about thirteen or fourteen years old, and very subject to sore eyes; after I
had purged her, and let her blood in the foot, I applied a Vesicatory of
Cantharides, at the bottom of her neck, thinking to make a diversion of the
Humor, but within three or four hour after she fell stark lame of her right
hip, so that I was forced presently to remove the Vesicatory; and for all that,
the lameness continued three or four weeks after. By what I have said, it is
apparent what a dangerous thing Cantharides is, not only inwardly given, in
which case they are a deadly poison, but also outwardly applied; as is seen by
the several Observations I have made here, and many more may be taken out of
Forestus, Cabrolius, etc.

I could also here relate some fatal Observations of my own, and of which, I
have been a sad eyewitness; but that I do not love to renew the grief of the
living Relations, nor to insult on the miscarriage of Physicians, knowing that
we are all faulty, and that against death we have no power but forgetfulness.

From these things we may perceive the truth of what Mathiolus says upon the
Sixth Book of Dioscorides, where he has these words.

Cantharides are hurtful chiefly to the Bladder, and to all the parts that
serve for the evacuation of Urine, not only being taken inwardly, but also
being applied outwardly where there is occasion to Blister, chiefly when they
are mixed with large Pultesses, and are applied to places near the Bladder, to
wit, the Hips, the Privy Parts, the Kidneys, or the Stones. Thus far Mathiolus.

Therefore if any Body will make use of them, it is necessary he should do it
prudently and circumspectly, chiefly let the young Physicians take heed, least
in prescribing Remedies which admit of Cantharides, they do not err in
quantity; for because Cantharides are so light, that fifty of them weigh scarce
one dram, the Error is easy to be committed. Nay, the most ingenuous of the
Apothecaries have confessed to me, that in the Dispensation of their Emplastrum
Epispasticon, they double the dose of Cantharides to make it of a quicker
working. Who shall be so bold after this, to make use of so pernicious a
Remedy, and chiefly in Malignant Fevers, where the Poison is inward, the
Vitals dejected, the Natural strength abated, and no good can be alleged to
come out of this Remedy? All the excuse being, that it is a common practice
about the Town, that is, a common and a pernicious Vulgar Error. Away then with
those dangerous things, more pestilent many times then the disease it self; and
let us turn our practice to a safer and nobler way, that is, our Tincture of
Coral, which without danger, but rather with a great deal of pleasure,
performs in Malignant Fevers, and other diseases, we have or shall mention,
the three so much required Indications, for the relief of the Patient, and the
honor of the Physician, to wit, Cito, tuto, jucunde.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Virtue of the Tincture of Coral, in all Fevers and Agues.
I Have ranged these two Diseases under one Head, because they are of the same
Nature, except that Fevers are continual, and Agues intermittent, but both to
be cured the same way.

I am not here to express the Nature of all Fevers, which belongs to the
general knowledge of Physic, and would swell this little Treatise into a
Volume, but to touch as much of them as will serve our own intention, and to
show how the Tincture of Coral is, and may be a Sovereign Remedy for them:
Therefore leaving asides their several Definitions, Divisions, and
Controversies, we shall only mark the chief Grounds of their Nature, and the
Analogy that is between it and their Remedy, to wit, The Tincture of Coral.

First then let it be established, that a Fever is a hot intempery proceeding
from a Preternatural heat kindled in the Heart; and from thence dispersed into
all the Body, by the means of the Veins and Arteries, and hurting the Natural
Actions. The chief Indication for the curing of them, is to take away that
Preternatural heat, and to reduce the Body into its former temper, as we see,
that all things after they have left their boiling and fermenting, and are
cooled, become purer then they were before. Wherein it is to be observed, that
the Natural heat, and the Preternatural, differ chiefly in this, That the
Natural heat is a Substance, and the Preternatural only a Quality. The
ignorance of this difference is the cause, that so many miscarry in Fevers;
for when Physicians go about that Preternatural heat (suppose by Bleeding) they
altogether quench the Natural one, which by all means ought to be preserved,
and so hasten the Dissolution of the Patient, by taking away the Basis, upon
which, Life is founded: For what need is it, if one desires to take away the
Preternatural heat, and so to cure a Fever, that he should also take with it
the Natural one, in which consists a Man's life; for the Preternatural heat
being once removed, the other remains free for the exercising harmonically
the Functions of the Body. The only easy, and sure way therefore to cure
Fevers, is to extinguish the Preternatural heat, without doing prejudice to
the Natural one, but rather comforting and strengthening it.

Now I affirm, that this cannot be done safely but by separating the
Preternatural heat from the Natural; and so expelling the Preternatural, while
the Natural remains in liberty, to perform the Functions of Nature; which
being helped by noble and harmless Remedies, will quickly and safely disburden
her self of what is noxious and spurious, as we have showed before in the
example of Anselmus de Booth: And this by an Universal Evacuation thorough the
Pores, because the disease is universally dispersed thorough the whole Body;
which by this means is not only lightened of its burden, but comforted and
strengthened by the virtue and efficacy of this noble Remedy.

It is also to be observed, That the Natural heat is Celestial, as flowing from
the Sun, Sol and homo generant hominem, and the Preternatural, is Elementary;
and therefore easily separable from the other: But some Body will object
perhaps, that besides the Preternatural heat which makes a Fever, there may be
mixed with it a Latent Malignity, and ask what shall become of it? I answer,
That the Preternatural heat, and the Malignity go away together in the
Evacuation; for the way way through the Pores, being free and open, and this
Remedy being one of the most powerful Cordials in the World, drives away from
the Heart, that is, from the Center to the Circumference, whatsoever is an
Enemy to the Humane Body, and that with a great deal of ease and security.

Now concerning those Fevers called Intermittent, or as the vulgar terms
them, Agues, the Method and Remedy is the same, except that the Salt of Coral
must be mixed with the Tincture, because these Agues have their foundation in a
toughter matter then the Fevers, to wit, in the Humors; as the Tertian in
Choler, the Quotidian in Phlegm, the Quartan in Melancholy, wherein they
harbor, as in their proper Ferment, which they will hardly forsake till it be
destroyed. Now the Tincture of Coral alone, being too Formal and Spiritual to
destroy and disperse those earthly drosses, we in this case join with it the
Salt, which cutteth and inciseth the toughness of the matter and density, and
prepares it to expulsion, when the Tincture comes to radiate upon it.

I have thus a little enlarged my self upon this subject of Fevers, because
there is no disease more vulgar and frequent; for seeing that most of other
diseases do not seize upon Humane Bodies equally, but are more or less familiar
to some Ages, Regions, and Constitutions of Bodies then others; there is no
Age, Region, and Constitution of Body, that can promise to it self a freedom
from Fever; and, as it is a frequent disease, so is it most dangerous, and not
without cause: For it occupies the Storehouse of the Natural and Vivifying
heat, wastes and destroys it, and unless that Fiery and Preternatural heat
be timely prevented, it scatters and devoureth the Natural one; which being
the Treasure of Life, Death is presently at the door, insomuch, that most
people die of that disease; or rather, as Galen says, Nemo sine febre moritur,
No Body dies without a Fever; which is the reason, that the Ancient Romans
having a mind to court it, and to render it propitious unto themselves, did
build it a Temple and Worshipped it superstitiously as a Goddess; as Plinius
affirms, Lib. 2. cap. 24. August. de Civit. Dei, Lib. 2. cap. 14. And Val.
Max. Lib. 2. cap. 5.

CHAP. IX.
How the Tincture of Coral works upon all those other Diseases, we have said
it was fit for.
WE have here and there mentioned several Diseases; in which we affirm the
Tincture of Coral to be a most Sovereign Remedy; and that not only out of our
own experience, but out of the Authority of famous and learned Men in all Ages,
as Dioscorides. Mathiolus. Anselmus de Booth. Oswaldus Crollius. Joannes Petrus
Faber. Arnoldus Villanovanus. Forrestus. Fernelius. Cardanus. Rogerius Baco.


And as many others as have written of the Nature and Virtues of Coral, who
agree all in one, and by that means have made it an undeniable truth. It will
not be amiss now by way of Recapitulation to mention all those Diseases again,
and to illustrate as much as in us lies, the way and manner how the Tincture
of Coral works upon them.

The Diseases against which the Tincture of Coral is a Sovereign Remedy.
The Plague. All sorts of Fevers. All sorts of Agues. Flux, Small Pox,
Measles. All immoderate Fluxes in Women, whether Red or White. All Bloody
Fluxes, Gripings, and Lasks. Spitting of Blood, and the Piles. Fits of the
Mother. Dropsies. Convulsion. Palsy. Falling Sickness. The Stone and Gravel.
Ulcers. Pleurisy. Barrenness in Women. Running of the Reins. Intemperies of
the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys. Venereal Diseases. Faintings. Surfeitings.
Vomitings.
Against the Plague.
It works both by its Elementary and Specific qualiies; for while by its
excellent temper it brings all the Humors into a perfect Crasis, and union,
and quelleth all the Jars that are among them; the Formal part of it, in which
lies the Specific quality does by its Actinobolism or Irradiation, expel all
the Malignancy and Poison of the Air thorough the Pores, by casting the Patient
into a gentle and moderate sweat, and strengthening the noble Parts.

Against Fevers and Agues.
It works the same way, and besides it destroys and scatters the Ferment,
in which lies the form of the Fever, and the type of the Ague.

Against the Flux, Small Pox, and Measles.
These Diseases being naturally rooted in the Body, as a part and portion of
the impurity of the Menstrual Blood, which is the reason that all mankind is
liable to it once in its life, sooner or later, and may be called The original
s^n of the Body, or as Avicenna calls it, Morbus Menstrui. This noble Remedy
cleanses all those Impurities by separating the pure from the impure, which it
thrusts away from the Center to the Circumference thorough the Pores; and so
comfort the noble Parts.

Against all immoderate Fluxes in Women.
It works by its Specific quality of corroborating the Liver and Spleen, the
Intempery of which is the Antecedent and chief au se of all these disorders.

Against all Bloody* Fluxes, Gripings, and Lasks.
There being such a sympathy between Humane Blood, and the Tincture of Coral,
it is not hard to guess, that in this case it works by the amity and
friendship they have together; by which the Blood is cheered up, and, as it
were, courted to remain in its Receptacles and Vessels; by which means, and the
strengthening of the Vitals, all the Preternatural symptoms cease.

Against Spitting of Blood, and the Piles.
All these kinds of Haemorrhagies proceeding from a Vein that is either broken,
corroded, or gaping, it is apparent, that no better Remedy can be given then
the Tincture of Coral, given in a proper Vehioulum, having manifest Qualities
for the healing of the Veins, and Specific ones for the stanching of the
Blood; and it is agreed by all Authors.

Against the Fits of the Mother.
Seeing that this Disease called by the Latins Vteri Suffocatio, has more
several Causes then can at this time be easily expressed. We shall only say,
That the Tincture of Coral being ministered in a proper Vehicle, scatters all
those noxious fumes; and by its Radiation, penetrates as far as to the seat of
the distemper, and strengthens all the Vitals.

Against Dropsies.
It is known to every Body that most Dropsies come by an Intempery of the Liver
or Spleen; which is visibly and palpably rectified by this noble Remedy, having
first purged and emptied the superfluous Matter.

Against the Convulsion.
This Disease being most frequent among Children, and proceeding from the
Malignant Vapors of the Body, which vellicate and pluck the Nerves, is cured by
the Irradiation and Specific quality of this Remedy.

Against the Palsy.
The Palsy being an abolishing of the Motion, and sometime of the Sense,
caused by the want of the Animal Spirits, which are necessary for the free
motion of the Body, is helped by this Remedy; which opens obstructions,
dilateth the passages, quickneth the Animal Spirits, and makes them fit for
Radiation.

Against the Falling Sickness.
The Epilepsie or Falling Sickness, is an often stretching of the Body, or a
short Convulsion, by which a Man falls down on a sudden, without Sense or
Motion; so that he neither hears nor sees, nor remembers any thing that is
past in the Fit, when he is out of it. In the agitation they foam at the Mouth,
and the Muscles being loose, either the Urine, or Dung, or Seed. comes out
involuntarily. This being caused by a Malignant Vapor which proceeds from
either the Brains, the Stomach, or some particular part of the Body, is cured
by the Tincture of Coral, given in Paeony Water, after the necessary
Evacuations.

Against the Stone and Gravel.
In this distemper we give both the Tincture and the Salt; that while the
Tincture comfort the noble Parts, the Salt by its opening and diuretic
faculty may waste and break to pieces whatsoever is of Stone or Gravel.

Against Ulcers.
Ulcers being either inward or outward, the inward ones are cured by the taking
of the said Tincture in a proper Vehicle; and the outward ones, be they never
so malignant, are cured by the outward application of it; for it corrects all
malignity, and cicatrizeth them, even to admiration.

Against the Pleurisy.
It has been a general opinion, that a Pleurisy cannot be cured without
Blood-letting* but give me leave to tell you, That in my forty years experience
and practice, I have seen more misearry by that way, then saved; unless the
Body be extraordinarily Plethorical, and the Pleurisy exceeding violent* the
reason is, that substracting the Blood, you exhaust the Treasure of Life. So
that many times, the Patient cannot last till Suppuration, for want of strength
and so drops by the way before he can reach home. Add to this, that the Fever
which is an inseparable companion of the Pleurisy, is not so soon extinguished
this way as it is scattered into several Particles, by this noble Remedy, while
the Fomentations discuss the seat of the distemper, and assuage the pain and
other symptoms, and proper Pultesses utterly dissipate the Imposthume.

Against Barrenness in Women.
There being diverse and almost innumerable Causes of Barrenness, we do not
pretend here to shoe every foot by the same Last; we know that some of the
Causes may belong to Surgery, as well as to Physic. The judicious Physician
that shall be near at hand, will easily distinguish them, and prescribe
Remedies proper for them. We do only pretend that whenever the Cause shall
lie in any intempery of the noble parts, no Remedy shall go beyond this.

Against the Running of the Reins.
The Body being duly purged, and the malignity swept away, our Tincture is a
Sovereign Remedy to stop it, by comforting the parts, and to prevent any
lachrymation or weakness, which use to follow that distemper, and many times
put the Patients to a great deal of impatiency, and the Physician to his
nonplus.

Against Intemperies of the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys.
This Tincture being given in a proper Vehicle, will rectify them, as well by
its Anatical temper, as by its Actinobolism and Specific qualities.

Against the Venereal Disease, vulgarly called the Great Pox.
This Disease having its chief foundation in the Liver, which by the Malignant
quality of this distemper, has lost his Tone, and dispersed the Disease
thorough the whole Body. By the use of this Tincture is brought to its right
temper again; and all the malign^ty of the Disease expelled, by the
Alexipharmacal and Specific quality of it.

Against Faintings.
Fainting is a sudden failing of the strength, that is, a sudden diminution of
the Vital, and consequently of the Animal Actions. The Cause is a sudden want
of the Vital Spirits, which by the Virtue of this Tincture, and of our
admirable Water mixed together, are on a sudden repaired, and the Patient kept
in the Land of the Living, as I have sufficiently proved upon diverse persons
that are alive to this day.

Against Surfeitings.
There are two kinds of Surfeits, one in quantity, the other in quality, but
both many times mortal. The Surfeit in quantity is, when one eats or drinks
more then his appetite desires, and his strength can bear. The Surfeit in
quality is, when one eats or drinks never so little of a thing that he has
a prejudice against; both are immediately cured by the Tincture of Coral, mixed
with our Cordial Water; not as the former Diseases we have made mention of,
either by Specific qualities or Actinobolisms, but by their gratefulness and
friendliness to our nature, which when it lies under the burden of a Surfeit,
and finds the gratefulness of this Remedy it graspeth upon it, and lets fall
the Matter of the Surfeit, which being loosed it expels by Vomiting, without
leaving any Particle of it behind, and so is immediately well, as I have tried
many times, even to the admiration of the beholders.

Against Vomitings.
This is a pernicious Symptom which is much in reign, when a Patient can retain
nothing in his Stomach, but immediately brings it up all again, whether Meat,
Drink, or Physic. But this Tincture, and its Vehicle are so friendly to
Nature, and of so admirable a Virtue, that it will immediately stay the
Vomiting; And if there be any Cause of it, will bring it up, or if the Remedy
stays with the Cause of the Vomiting in the Body, it will certainly conquer
and destroy it.

Many more other Diseases could I mention, in which the Tincture of Coral would
effect wonderful things. But I think these will be sufficient for any
reasonable and ingenuous person: Those that will know more, may advise with the
Author, who shall ingenuously tell them if it be fit for their distemper or
not, and in what Vehicle it must be taken; advising them seriously, That if
they receive no benefit by this Remedy in those Diseases for which it is
properly administered, they can hardly expect it from any other. The Author
having also a peculiar Talent to judge of Diseases, and the Remedies thereof,
by the Inspection of Urines, desires those that will save charges or lives,
afar of, to send their Water; by the examination of which, they shall receive
all reasonable satisfaction: And for these purposes and others, he shall give
his constant attendance at his own House, from eight of the clock in the
Morning, till eleven; and from three in the Afternoon, till five. The rest of
the time, it will be known where he is, and when he will be at home again.

Those also that shall doubt of the reality and extraction of the said
Tincture, may have from him some of his Menstruum, with which he extracteth it,
and with that and their own Coral, make the experiment themselves.

CHAP. X.
How and in what Vehicles the Tincture of Coral is to be administered.
THis Tincture being so noble and so precious, and working so powerfully in so
little a quantity, is to be used with all circumspection imaginable, that there
be no waste in the quantity, nor impediment in the quality. There would be a
great waste in the quantity, if it were taken alone, and by it self,
considering, That one pound of Coral will scarce yield above one dram of
Tincture; therefore we give it in a little quantity (suppose of about twenty
drops) in a proper Vehicle, suppose of two or three ounces; that by its
diffusion in it, it may go and enter over all the noble parts of the Body; as
you see that a grain of Cochenille will die a thousand times of its weight of
Water; and that Saffron will diffuse its Tincture in a prodigious quantity of
liquor. There would also be a waste in the quantity, if the Tincture were given
alone, and by it self; for the Natural heat would consume it, before it could
diffuse its virtue, and radiate thorough the whole Body. Add also, that a
Specific Vehicle will make it work more effectually and determinately upon the
part aimed at. There would be also an impediment in the quality, if it were not
given in a Vehicle that were unfit, or contrary to the distemper that it is
given for; as if of two Horses, the one should draw before, and the other back,
they could hardly reach home in a convenient time; or, if it were given amongst
Meat, or upon a full Stomach, it is evident, that its virtue should be drowned,
and its Radiation hindered: As when a thick cloud is interposed between the
Sun, and us. For the illustration of what we have said, it is visible, and in a
manner palpable, That if the said Tincture were given against the Plague and
Malignant Fevers in Plantain Water, it would hardly work the desired effect,
because Plantain Water is cool and astringent; and our intention in this, is to
expel the malignity of the Plague and Fevers by a moderate sweat, which cannot
be conveniently procured, but by a hot Vehicle, such as is our Cordial Water,
or that of Carduus, and such other-like. Contrariwise, if in immoderate Fluxes
of Women and Haemorrhagies, it be administered in hot Vehicles, and not in cool
and Astringent ones, such as Plantain Water is, little good can be expected of
it, by reason of the contrariety and disproportion that is between the Agent
and the Patient, that is, the Remedy and the Disease. Let it therefore be
concluded, That it must be given in a proper Vehicle, that is, such a one, as
is proper for the distemper, and will forward the effect of the said Tincture,
and has a peculiar analogy and correspondence with the Disease aimed at. As
for example, For the stopping of all immoderate Fluxes in Men and Women, it
ought to be given in Plantain Water, or the decoction of the Roots of
Tormentil. For the cleansing or renewing of the Blood, in Fumitory or Cichory
Water. For strengthening the Heart and the Vital Spirits, in Bugloss, or Borrage
Water. For comforting and strengthening the Stomach, in Mint or Penniroyal
Water. For removing of obstructions in Sorrel Water, Little Centaury,
Spleenwort, Liverwort. For dissolving congealed Blood, in Water of Chervil or
Daisie. For the Fits of the Mother, in the Water of Motherwort, Balm,
Penniroyal. For the Dropsy, Convulsion, Palsy, Falling Sickness, in Cinnamon
Water, continuing for a while, because those Diseases are stubborn. For the
Stone and Gravel, in Saxifrage or Restharrow Water. The dose is from six grains
or ten, to a scruple or two, according to the age and strength of the Patient,
and the greatness of the distemper: And so it may be said of all the rest of
the distempers which it is proper for. Upon which, the Author will give his
advice to those that shall desire it; and for that purpose, shall give his
constant attendance at his own House, from eight of the clock in the Morning,
till eleven; and from three in the Afternoon, till five. The same Author having
also a special Talent to judge of Diseases, and the Remedies thereof, by the
Inspection of Urines, may be advised with at the said time; therefore those
that shall be minded to save the charges of Fees, may at the said time bring or
send their Urine, upon sight whereof, they shall receive all reasonable
satisfaction.

As for the said Tincture of Coral, with the Vehicles proper for it, they are
only to be had and ministered by him, to prevent all supposition, falsification,
or mistakes, the World, at present, being so full of Envy, Backbiting, and
Deceitfulness, that he dares trust no Body with it; but is resolved, as he is
the sole Author of it, so to have all the praise of it, and bear all the blame
alone, if any be. He also carries always some of the said Tincture about him,
ready to be administered, whenever occasion shall require, that no time may be
lost, as most commonly it is, in acute and exceeding hasty Diseases. That shall
not hinder, but if any Body be satisfied with the Virtues and Effects of the
said Tincture, he may have of him what quantity he pleases to lie by him,
against the time of need; and this he does to make good his Motto, which also
was that of Cardan. Io suon Medico non di parole ma d'effetto.

From my House in Clarkenwel Close, the Second on the Lefthand. Garencieres.

FINIS.

