A Brief EXAMINATION Of the present Roman Catholic Faith; Contained in Pope
PIUS HIS New Creed, BY The Scriptures, Ancient Fathers and their own Modern
Writers, in Answer to a Letter, desiring satisfaction concerning the Visibility
of the Protestant Church and Religion in all Ages, especially before Luther's
time.

Imprimatur.

October. 26. 1688.

Guil. Needham.

London, Printed for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1689.

Pope Pius his CREED, OR THE Profession of the Roman Catholic Faith.
V. Bullam Pii 4. super forma professionis fidei, sub finem Concilii Tridentini.
THAT the Profession of one and the same Faith may be uniformly exhibited to
all, and its certain form may be known to all; we have caused it to be
published, strictly commanding that the Profession of Faith be made after this
form and no other. I N. do with firm Faith believe and profess all and singular
things contained in the Creeds (to wit, Nicene, etc.) which the Roman Church
uses; namely, I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth,
and of all things visible and invisible, etc. The Apostolic and Ecclesiastical
Traditions and other observances and Constitutions of that Church I firmly
admit and embrace. -- I do also confess, that there be truly and properly Seven
Sacraments of the new Law instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, Extreme Unction,
Orders, Marriage, etc. And that they confer Grace. All things which concerning
Original Sin and Justification were defined in the 4th Council of Trent I
embrace and receive. Also I confess, that in the Mass is offered to God a true,
proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead; and that in the Holy
Eucharist is truly, really and substantially the body and blood of our Lord,
and that there is made a conversion of the whole substance of the Bread into
his Body, and of the Wine into his Blood, which conversion the Catholic Church
calls Transubstantiation. I confess also, that under one kind only all and
whole Christ, and the true Sacrament is received. I do constantly hold there is
a Purgatory, and the Souls detained there are helped by the suffrages of the
Faithful. And likewise, that the Saints reigning with Christ, are to be
worshipped and prayed to -- and that their Relics are to be worshipped. And
most firmly I avouch, that the Images of Christ and the Mother of God and other
Saints, are to be had and retained, and that to them due honor and veneration
is to be given. Also, that the power of Indulgences was left by Christ in the
Church; and I affirm the use thereof to be most wholesome to Christ's people.
That the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church is the Mother and Mistress
of all Churches. I acknowledge, and I vow and swear true obedience to the
Bishop of Rome, the Successor of St. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, and
the Vicar of Jesus Christ. And all other things likewise do I undoubtingly
receive and confess which are delivered, defined and declared by the sacred
Canons and General Councils; and especially the Holy Council of Trent. And
withal, I condemn and accurse all things that are contrary hereunto, -- and
that I will be careful this true Catholic Faith, out of the which no man can
be saved, which at this time I willingly profess, be constantly (with Gods
help) retained and confessed whole and inviolate to the last gasp, and by those
that are under me -- holden, taught and preached to the uttermost of my power,
I the said N. promise, vow and swear. So God me help, and his Holy Gospels.

A Brief EXAMINATION OF THE Present Roman Catholic Faith, etc.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, wherein you desire I would give you satisfaction
concerning the Visibility of the Protestant Religion and Church in the Ages
before Luther. In order thereunto, I send you these Lines, requesting you, as
you love and value the safety of your own Soul, laying aside the blind belief
of the Roman Infallibility, (which renders all Discoursing or Writing vain and
unprofitable) to read them seriously and impartially. You begin thus: I find
your Divines asserting that the Church has been hidden and invisible.

How Protestant Writers are to be understood when they argue against the
perpetual Visibility of the Church.
To which I answer; That the Church has been for some time hidden, i. e.
obscured; so that it was not conspicuous or easily discernable by all
Christians, much less Heathens, is a truth so manifest, that our Adversaries
themselves grant it; as I shall show afterward. That the Catholic Church was
ever wholly rooted out by Heresy or Persecution; or that in any Age all
outward profession of the Truth, though sometime more secret and private, was
wholly hidden and utterly invisible in the eyes of all men, we affirm not.
Cardinal Bellarmine himself notes, Multi ex nostris tempus terunt dum probant
Ecclesiam non posse absolute desicere; nam Fleretici id concedunt. De Eccles
Militan. lib. 3. cap. 13.
that many of his Church have taken much needless pains in proving against us
the perpetuity and indefectibility of the Church, which as he confesses, we
never denied: We only say that any particular Church, even that of Rome, may
utterly fail. But you add, I find your Divines saying otherwise, for Bishop
Juel, Apol. p. 7. writes, That Luther's preaching was the very first appearing
of the Gospel. And page 8. That Forty years and upward, i. e. at the first
setting forth of Luther and Zuinglius, the truth was unknown and unheard of;
and that they came first to the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel. Let
Bishop Juel answer for himself. Defense of the Apol. page 82. Ye say we confess
our Church began only about Forty years since. No, Mr. Harding, we confess it
not, and you your self well know we confess it not. Our Doctrine is the Old,
and yours is the New. We say our Doctrine and the order of our Churches, is
older than yours by Five hundred years. And he not only says it, but
unanswerably proves it by the Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers. Hence that
Book is appointed to be had in all our Churches; so great a respect have we for
Primitive Antiquity; and so far are we from imagining the Gospel or the Truth
we profess to be no older than Luther or Zuinglius. But Mr. White in his
Defense of the Way to the Church, Page 355, 356.
says, Popery was such a Leprosy spreading so universally over the Church,
that there was no visible Company of People appearing to the World ( viz. in
the Ages next before Luther) free from it. True, he says so, but he explains
his meaning in the same place; for he acknowledges the Churches of Greece,
Aethiopia, Armenia, to have been and still to be true visible Christian
Churches; yea, that the Church of Rome is a part of the Visible Church of God,
wherein our Ancestors possessed the true Faith, as to the Fundamental Articles
necessary to Salvation, and were some of them saved: So that he acknowledges
in some sense, the Visibility of the Church, Ecclesia vera erat in Papatu, sed
Papatus non erat vera Ecclesia. Alii cautius Papatum dixerunt fuisse in
Ecclesia, non Ecclesiam in Papatu. Prideaux Lect. de Visibil. Eccl. p. 136.
even Roman; which Protestants deny not; who grant that the true Church was in
or under the Papacy, although the Papacy was not that Church. Neither is there
any contradiction in this, for a Leper is a true Man, and as truly Visible as
one that is clean. Leprosy is not a distinct Body, but a Disease cleaving to
it. In like manner, Popery is not of it self a distinct Church, but a corrupt
humor in latter Ages predominant in the true Visible Church of God.
Nevertheless he denies first the Papacy, i. e. the Errors and Corruptions in
Doctrine and Worship introduced of late by the Popes and their adherents, to be
any part of the true ancient Christian Catholic Faith, by which our Ancestors
were saved, any more than Leprosy is any part of a Man. Secondly, he denies
that there is always and at all times in this true Visible Church a visible
Company or State of People actually and personally divided from the rest that
profess the True Faith, perform Religious Worship, and exercise
Church Discipline in open and conspicuous manner, wholly free from the
Corruptions and Abuses of such as have defiled the Church. For it is one thing
to be a True Visible Church, another to be free from all such Errors and
Corruptions, as may, being wilfully persisted in, endanger Men's Salvation, and
therefore need Reformation. The Church of the Jews was the true, yea, the only
true Church of God; yet in the time of Elijah, and after in our Savior's days,
they were generally ten Tribes of twelve overrun with Idolatry and
Superstition. The like we say of the Church of Rome in the Ages next before
Luther, when not only gross Ignorance, but many palpable Errors and Corruptions
in Doctrine, Worship, and Government, did visibly appear, which many eminent
Professors, (sufficient, The Answer to D. White, page 354.
as a Jesuit confesses, to prove the Churches Visibility under Persecution)
who lived and died in the Communion of that Church, openly opposed, lamented
and bewailed, as S. Bernard, See the Articles of Reformation proposed to the
Council of Trent, by Ferdinand the Emperor, and Charles the Ninth. Apud
Goldast. constitut. Imp. tomo 2. p. 376. and tomo 3. p. 570.
Clemangis, Alvarus, Pelagius, Cameracensis, Bishop Grosthead, with innumerable
more; although they were overborn by the predominant Party then bearing rule,
who could not endure to hear of Reformation, tho much desired by many true
Catholics, and promised by Adrian the Sixth, and other Popes before the
calling of the Council of Trent. But it is very disingenuous to quote out of
any Writer a line or two, and not to add with it his explained sense and
meaning. As for Mr. Perkins, who in his Reformed Catholic (which I have not
now by me) says, That during the space of 900 years there was no Church
Visible besides the Roman Catholic Church, his Words (if his) admit of the
same Answer. But I dare appeal to any Christian, whether he can possibly
believe that any learned Protestant Writer, yea any man in his wits, Juels
Defense, page 45, 46.
should think that the Gospel preached by our Savior and the Apostles,
asserted by the Ancient Fathers and Martyrs, should first appear in the World,
when Luther and Zuinglius began to preach. For my part I utterly renounce that
Gospel, Faith, and Church, of which Luther, Zuinglius, or any mere mortal man,
tho pretending to be Infallible, is the Author and Founder. Did not I believe
the Doctrine generally owned by the Protestants, to be grounded in the
Scriptures and the concurrent sense of the Ancient Fathers, I could not
satisfy my own Conscience as to the profession of it. The true meaning then of
some Protestant Writers could be only this; That the Gospel or Christian
Religion did in Luther's days begin first to appear more eminently freed or
reformed from those after-grown Errors and Corruptions it was in some later
Ages mis-figured with, being reduced to the prime Rule of Faith, Garenz. de
Sergio de Conci^^^ 706.

Aquin. 2. qu. 1. art. 7. resp. ad 4.


the Scripture, and its best interpreter, Primitive Antiquity. And is it not an
unspeakable Blessing, that we enjoy such a Reformation? For I can scarcely
think, that any sober Romanist will deny, that the first were the best, and the
last the worst Ages of the Church, and that there was after the Apostles days,
and the first 5 or 600 years a manifest declension of the ancient purity of
Doctrine and simplicity of Devotion, although there still remained a true Church as
to essentials.

The Question concerning the Visibility of the Church stated.
BUT that we may not beat the air, I shall first of all enquire into the true
state of the Question. Protestants do not, as Bellarmine grants, affirm the
Church to be wholly and absolutely Invisible or utterly hid from the eyes of
all men in any Age, but comparatively only, not being always equally Visible.
They acknowledge that God ever had and will have a Church in the World which
shall make in some degree a Visible profession of Christian Religion even under
Persecution, Thus it was in the days of Athanasms and Hilary. See their words
below.
tho not so illustrious and conspicuous; for they say that the Church may be
reduced to a small number, the Orthodox Pastors may be violently thrust out of
their Churches, and the best Christians forced to worship God privately in
corners. And will any man deny but this detracts much from the Visibility and
conspicuousness of the Church?

They of the Church of Rome grant all this. The Jesuit Mr. White answers, does
not avow, yea disowns it, that the Church is visible, Defense of the Way. p.
354.
i. e. that it is a Company of Christians so illustrious as it not only may be,
but actually is known to all men living at all times; for says he, Ecclesia
aliquando obscuratur and tanquam obnubilatur multitudine scandalorum, etc.
Epist. ad Vincent. 48.

Firmiores partim exulabant, partim latitabant. Ibid.

Diligenter animadverti debet non sic accipiendum esse quod dicimus Ecclesiam
esse semper conspicuam, quasi velimus eamomni tempore dignosci posse aeque
facile. Novimus enim illam aliquando errorum, schisinatum, persecutionum
fluctibus esse agitatam, ut imperitis quidem nec satis prudenter rations
temporum rerumque circumstantias aestimantibus cognitu fuerit difficilis quod
tum maxim accidit cum Arianorum perfidia in orb^ p^ene t^to dominabatur.
Analys. Fid. l. 6. c. 4.


I know well enough that the Church has not always, especially in time of
Persecution, such an outward worldly and prosperous estate. I grant also, adds
he, that sometimes the Church is obscured, as S. Austin says, with multitude
of Scandals, and therefore it is not always alike famous and illustrious,
especially so as to shine actually through the whole World. I will add the
Words of another learned Jesuit, Greg. de Valentia. When we say the Church is
always conspicuous, this must not be taken as if we thought it might at all
times be discerned alike easily. For we know, that sometimes it (i.e. the
Church, the Mountain, Isai. 2.2.) is so tossed with the waves of Errors,
Schisms, and Persecutions, that to such as are unskilful (as the far greater
part of Christians ever are) and do not discreetly enough weigh circumstances
of times and things, it shall be very hard to be known; which then especially
fell out, when the falsehood of Arrians bare rule almost over all the World.
Therefore we deny not, but that it will be harder to discern the Church at some
time than at other some; yet this we avouch, that it always might be discerned
by such as could wisely esteem things: So he.

And is this all they would infer from Mat. 5.14, 15. Ye are the light of the
world. A City that is set on an hill cannot be hid, etc. Is a Light or City on
a hill only discernable by a few discreet quick-sighted persons? Is this the
Visibility they so much contend for? Well, it is here granted us, that the
Church is not always easily visible or discernable to all, but only to a few
discreet Persons. If this will satisfy them, we shall readily grant, that the
Protestant Church under the Persecution and Errors of the Papacy was not easily
discernable, yea was or is hardly visible to such as are unskilful, and do not
wisely enough weigh circumstances of times, viz. of Oppression and Persecution:
Yet this we say, that it might have been discerned even in the next Ages before
Luther, not only in the Waldenses, Wicklevists, Albigenses, and Bohemians, (how
odious and contemptible soever they are rendered to the ignorant and unskilful
by their Adversaries) but many other eminent Professors and Writers of their
own Church, by such as can discreetly judge of things and times.

What great matter then can these men make of the Visibility of the Church they
so much boast of? But is all this Contention about nothing? truly it is no
easy thing to resolve what it is our Adversaries would have more than is
already granted by us. I will give the best account I can find out of their own
Writings, what it is they aim at. Bellarmin stateth not the question, Ecclesia
est ^^tus hominum ^^a visibilis and palpabilis ut est coetus populi Romani vel
regnum Galliae. Bellarmin. de Eccles. Milit. lib 3. cap. 2.

Ecclesia visibilis est, i. e. sic in luce hominum and conspectu posita ut
quovis seculo evidenter internosci and quasi digito monstrari queat congregatio
illa quam esse veram Ecclesiam determinate oredere possis ac debeas. Haec autem
Ecclesiae proprietas universos Haereticos pessime habet. Anal. Fidei, lib. 6.
page 30.


but somewhere says, that The true Church is a Company of men as visible and
palpable as the Kingdom of France, Spain, or the State of Venice. Gregory de
Valentia abovementioned affirms, that the Church is Visible, i.e. is so placed
in the light and sight of men, that in any Age, that Congregation, or Company,
may be evidently distinguished, and as it were pointed at with the finger,
which you may and ought determinately or particularly believe to be the true
Church. This property of the Church (says he) exceedingly troubles all
Heretics.

But it would exceedingly trouble him were he alive, or any man else, to
reconcile this with his former concession. For if the true Church be so placed
in the light and sight of men, that in any Age it may be evidently discerned
and pointed at by the finger; how is it that (as he is forced to grant) in
times of Persecution, and over-spreading Error, as under the Heathen Emperors,
and in the prevalency of the Arian Heresy, it is very hard to many, to see
where the true Church is, yea none do discern it, but such as prudently weigh
circumstances of times and things, which the far greater part of men neither do
nor can? Who of our Adversaries if he had lived in the days of Hilary, would
not have taken the Arians for the true Church? Did not all, or the far greater
part of Bellarmin's Notes of the true Church belong to them only, as Multitude,
Succession, temporal Prosperity, external Glory, efficacy of Doctrine,
converting, Ad ann. 358.
or rather perverting, almost, as Baronius grants, the whole World? Would they
have taken those few for the true Catholic Church, who separated themselves
from their heretical, but supposed infallible, Head and Guide of the universal
Church, Pope Liberius? Ad ann. 357.

v. Bellarmin. de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 9.

Liberius post exactum in exilio biennium inflexus est, minisque mortis ad
subscriptionem inductus, atque ita restitutus est Ecclesiae. Epist. ad Solit.
vitam agentes.

Hieron. in Catal. In Fortunatiano; Subscripsit Haeresi Arianorum. Et in
Chronico, ait Liberium taedio victum exilii in Haereticam pravitatem
subscripsisse. Liberius is declared to be a Heretic by the Sixth, Seventh, and
Eighth General Council, and Pope Agatho, and Pope Leo the Second. Patet ex lib.
de Romany Pontificibus multos Clericos Romae a Constantio necatos esse qui
noluerunt cum Liberio communicare. Baron. ad ann. 357. parag. 49.


Baronius the Cardinal acknowledges that he communicated with the Arians, and
in his own Letters still extant, he professes, that in all things he agreed
with them: Yea farther S. Hilary, Athanasius, and S. Hierome write that he
subscribed to the Heresy of the Arians, and yet Bellarmine and other of their
Writers, make it an essential qualification of a Catholic or Member of the
true Church, to hold Communion with the Bishop of Rome, and to live under his
Government; who instead of being an infallible Guide to others, may fall into
damnable Heresy himself. I would gladly know which Company was at that time
the true Church, whether they that joined with Liberius, or such as separated
from him? Here I cannot but observe (which Cardinal Baronius takes notice of)
that when by the favor of the Emperor Constantius, and the intercession of
the Arian Bishops, Liberius was upon his subscription restored to his
Bishopric, many Clergymen chose rather to suffer death, than to join in
Communion with him; whom they themselves account Martyrs, or at least dare not
condemn as damnable Heretics and Schismatics; the appellations they bestow
upon Protestants, for their not communicating with the Roman Bishop.

But I have not yet done with Valentia, Non usque adeo ipsi volumus Ecclesiam
esse conspicuam ut censeamus aut oculis cerni aut evidenti ratione intelligi
posse ipsam etiam Ecclesiae quasi essentiam and veritatem, aut etiam
proprietates ejus omnes. Non enim arbitramur palam aspici aut evidenter
cognosci posse quod ulla congregatio sit revera coetus recte colentium Deum,
etc. Imo vero haec in illa ipsa congregatione hominum inesse, quae vera est
Ecclesia, non nisi obscura fide credimus, etc. Anal. Fid. l. 6. p. 30.
who in the same place farther grants, that the Essence and Truth of the
Church, i.e. true Faith, Holiness, and the like, are not visible, neither can
be evidently known or believed to be really in that company of men it self, who
are indeed the true Church. Is not this the Protestants Invisible Church? Who
sometimes say that it is one thing to see that which is the Church, viz. the
Persons publicly professing true Religion in it; and another to see that it is
a true Church, which depends upon the sincerity of their Profession, known only
by God, who searches the heart. Nothing can be more evidently true than this:
For suppose I see (and what can I see more?) a Company of men baptized into the
Name of Christ, meeting together in Churches to serve him, to read, pray,
receive the Sacraments, as the Arians and other Heretics did, and many prohane
Persons or Hypocrites daily do; is this sufficient evidence to assure me that
they, and not others, who perform the very same outward acts of divine Worship,
tho more privately, are the only true Church, to which I am bound under pain of
Damnation to join my self? How is it then true that he says a little before,
that the Church is so visible, that in any age that Company may be evidently
distinguished, and as it were pointed at with the finger, which you may and
ought determinately and particularly believe to be the true Church? In short,
The Persons and outward profession of the Members of the true Church are
visible, Hieron. in Comment. in Psalm. 130. Ecclesia non in parietibus consistit
sed in dogmatum veritate; ante 20 enim annos omnes Ecclesias has Haeretici
possidebant, Ecclesia autem vera illic erat ubi vera fides erat. Apud Bellar.
de Eccles. Milit. lib. 3. cap. 2. and cap. 9.
but that which makes them a true Church is still invisible; so that I am still
to seek for the true Church, especially seeing it is granted by Bellarmine,
Turrecremata, Canus, Soto, and others, that wicked Men and Hypocrites are only
nominal or equivocal Members of the Church, that they are rather in or within,
than of the true Church, as dead Members or ill humors are in humane bodies.

I will only add Costerus a noted Writer amongst them: Christ, says he, would
have his Church not only Visible but very conspicuous, that the grace of God,
which in this Congregation, and not elsewhere, is preserved and conferred, may
be known unto all men; whence he has made her like to a City placed on a hill,
and to a Candle set on a Candlestick. Here we may plainly perceive that a mere
Visibility of the Church will not content our Adversaries unless it be very
conspicuous, so as that all Persons may know it. The truth is, their Principles
oblige them to no less.

For first they say, that God would have all men to be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth, and that therefore he affords all men sufficient
means to come to the truth. Secondly, They deny that the Scripture, in regard
of its imperfection and obscurity, is sufficient to this end, but that the
teaching of the visible Church is the Rule of Faith, which all persons,
especially those that are ignorant and unlearned, must by an implicit faith in
all things adhere to. Whence thirdly, it unavoidably follows, that if God
afford all men sufficient means to come to the knowledge of the truth in order
to salvation, and the teaching of the true Church be the ordinary means
appointed thereunto, then the Church must be in all ages and places, not only
visible to some few discreet wise persons, as Valentia says, but very
conspicuous and clearly discernable to all, even the most ignorant and
weak-sighted, like a City set on an Hill, etc. Lastly, They affirm (where lies
the Mystery) that their Roman Church is the only infallible teaching Church in
and by its Head the Pope, to whose determination, as Pope Boniface solemnly
determined and pronounced all are bound de necessitate salutis to submit.
Subesse Romans Pont. omni humanae creaturae declaramus, definimus and
pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Extravagant. de major. and
obed. Vnam sanctam. Cum omnia plane dogmata ex testimonio Ecclesiae pendeant,
nisi certissimi simus (certitudine scil. infallibili ut ibidem ait) quae sit
vera Ecclesia, incerta erunt prorsus omnia. De Eccles. milit. lib. 3. cap. 10.
The perpetual, illustrious and glorious visibility of this their Church (as
for other Churches they are not at all sollicitous what becomes of them) is
that they so earnestly contend for. Their great Champion Bellarmine well
perceived this when he said, that in regard all points of faith depend upon the
testimony of the Church (i. e. their Roman Church) unless we be most certain
which is the true Church all things in Religion will be altogether uncertain.

Arguments against the Church's being always conspicuous or easily discernable.
But that this kind of glorious, illustrious and conspicuous visibility
necessarily and perpetually belongs to any particular, or their Roman Church is
visibly and palpably false; as the Scriptures and Ecclesiastical Histories
evidence. In Elijahs days there was a true Church of God in Israel; yet it was
so far invisible that the Seer or Prophet himself could not see it. Whence he
complains that he was left alone, although God assures him he had reserved to
himself 7000. 1 King. 19.18.
that never bowed the knee to Baal. Let them not think to evade by saying that
the Church of Israel was a particular Church, for so is the Church of Rome,
which by all their infallibility can never be made the Catholic or Universal
Church.

In the time of our Savior the chief Priests with the consent of the
generality of the people condemned and crucified him as a Blasphemer and a
false Prophet, whilst only some few persons, obscure and contemptible in the
eyes of the World, as Simeon, Nicodemus, etc. believed on him. I desire to know
amongst whom the true Church was then to be found, Etsi non nisi duo fideles
remanerent in mundo in iis salvaretur Ecclesia. Forta litium fidei. lib. 5.
quoted by B. Ives, p. 83.
and that in a conspicuous and illustrious state? Do not some of your own
Writers affirm that there was no true faith to be found on Earth, I mean at the
time of his crucifixion, but in the heart of the Virgin Mary.

To descend lower, Durand. Rationale lib. 6. c. 72. Turrecremata de Consecrat.
Distinct. 2. number. 4. Ad annum Christi 304. Nomine Christianorum deleto qui
rempub. evertebant.
in the days of Dioclesian (the worst and last persecutor of Christians) such
havoc and prodigious destruction was made of the Christian Church, that
several Trophies and Monuments, as Baronius grants, were set up in Spain in
memory of the total extirpation of Christianity, superstitione Christi ubique
deleta. Where was then the conspicuous, as Costerus phraseth it, and
illustrious state of the Catholic or particular Roman Church? Surely had not
the Church of Rome her self, as well as other Christian Churches been in a
great degree invisible as to the knowledge of the Roman Emperor and his
Inquisitors, in all humane probability the name of Christians, as they boasted,
had been wholly rooted out.

I might add the state of the Christian Church, even Roman, Ingemuit totus
orbis and se factum esse Arianum admiratus est. Dialog. contra Luciferianos.
under the prevalency of Arianism and its heretical Head Pope Liberius, when,
as St. Hierom writes, the whole World sighed and wondered how it became Arian.
When the Catholic Bishops were banished from their Sees, and the Orthodox
Christians forsaking the Churches worshipped God in cryptis in private houses
and corners. Concerning which deplorable times St. Hilary writes in this
manner to such as communicated with the Arians: Male vo^^^s parietum amor
cepit, male Ecclesiam Dei in tectis aedisiciisque veneramini. Montes mihi and
lacus and carceres sunt tutiores. Addit: Rarumesse apud Orientem invenire aut
Episcopum aut populum Catholicum. Lib. contr. Auxentium. Quae nunc Ecclesia
Christum libere adorat? Siquid^m si pia est periculo subjacet. Nam si alicubi
sunt pii, sunt atem ubique tales permulti, illi itidem absconduntur, etc.
Epist. ad solitariam vitam agent. Vid. Apolog. ejus ad Constant. and de fuga.
You are ill taken with the love of walls, you ill seek or reverence the Church
of God in Houses and Structures, Mountains and Prisons and Dungeons are safer.
He adds, that 'twas hard to find in the East a Catholic Bishop or people.
Athanasius says as much or more. What Church, says he, now adores Christ
freely? Seeing if it be pious it is in danger. For if there be some pious and
studious of Christ, as there are every where many such, they also, as the great
Prophet ELIAS, are hid, thrust themselves into holes and caverns of the Earth,
or wander in solitude.

These things being undeniably evident, I desire to know whether in those days
the true Church was not only visible, but very conspicuous to the sight of all
men, so that it might be evidently distinguished, and as it were pointed at
with the finger, as Costerus and Valentia affirm.

But what need is there of many words in this case? Pauio ante mundi finem
externus status Ecclesiae Romanae cessabit, and publicum fidelium cum eadem
commercium, and (...) passim obtinebit, and tamen tunc pii cord Papa and
Ecclesia Romana communicabunt. Rhemenses in Annotat. in and animo cum 2 Thessalonians.
2. and Revel. 12.
when our Adversaries themselves grant, that a little before the end of the
World when Antichrist shall come, the external state of the Roman Church shall
cease, and that the public worship of God shall by persecution be suppressed,
and that the truly pious shall communicate with the Pope only in heart and
soul. The difference then betwixt them and us comes only to this, that what we
say has been, they say shall be hereafter; whilst it is agreed on both sides
that an illustrious conspicuous visibility is no essential property or
inseparable note of the true Church.

Texts alleged for Visibility (as meant by the Papists) answered.
I now come to examine the places of Scripture mentioned in your Letter to
evince the contrary.

The first and principal urged by Valentia and many other is, Matthew, 15.14, 15.
Ye are the light of the World. A City that is set on an Hill cannot be hid.
Neither do men light a Candle to put it under a Bushel, etc. To which may be
added, Isa. 2.2.60.20.61.9. Dan. 7.14. quoted in your Paper. To all which the
same Answer may be applied.

My reply is, that those words do not prove a perpetual, conspicuous and
illustrious visibility of the Church in all Ages to all persons, which our
Adversaries contend for. First, Because the words are not spoken, at least
directly, of the Church general or successive in all Ages, but of and to the
Apostles personally, Ye are the light of the World. And seeing they were
commanded by our Savior to teach all Nations, we may reasonably suppose that
they were under a special protection of divine Providence until they had
fulfilled the work committed unto them. But the case of ordinary Pastors and
Teachers of the Church is not the same with that of Apostles. Secondly, Suppose
we understand the words of the Church general or successive, which we grant to
be a light to the ignorant World and like a City set on a Hill; yet it cannot
be denied, yea our Adversaries grant it, that this light of Apostolic doctrine
in the Church may be obscured or eclipsed by error, Aug. Epist: ad Vincentium
supra.
scandal and persecumay be obscured or eclipsed by error, scandal and
persecution, as the Sun and Moon sometimes are, tho they be glorious and most
visible lights.

In like manner a City set on an Hill may be so clouded by foggy mists and
vapors that it may become for some time invisible, at least not so visible or
conspicuous as that any man may point at it with his finger.

The other Similitude of Men's lighting a Candle and setting it on a Candlestick
that so it may give light to all in the House, signifies the clearness,
universality and diffusiveness of the doctrine taught by the Apostles. But that
any one particular Church, Greek or Roman, should be such a Candlestick as can
never fail or be removed as well as that of Ephesus and many other Apostolical
Churches wholly rooted out by Mahometanism, Revel. 2.
or which should be, as our Adversaries too grossly affirm, more visible and
discernable to all men than the light it self ( viz. of the Gospel contained in
the Scripture) placed in the Candlestick, i. e. the Church; this I suppose no
prudent man will take to be our Savior's meaning in those words.

That they make their Church (the Candlestick) and its Authority more visible
to us than the truth or light of the holy Scripture, is so notorious I will not
stand to prove it. Quae sit vera scriptura, and quis ejus verus sensus non
possumus scire, nisi ex Testimonio verae Ecclesiae. Bellarmin. de Notis Eccl.
lib 4. c. 2.
In a word; A Candle tho burning clearly on a Candlestick may in time want
snuffing, and so may the most Apostolical Church in after-Ages need Reformation.

The second place is, Matthew. 18.17. Tell the Church; if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen or Publican. Now, says the Letter, It
were very hard to be condemned for a Heathen or a Publican for not hearing a
Church that has so closely lain hid that none could hear, see, feel or
understand it for 900. years.

First, I answer, That these words prove not the Church visible or palpable to
all men Heathens and Infidels enquiring after the true Church, but at most to
Christians only who live under the Church's government and submit to her
Censures. Secondly, The words relate to a particular Christian Church of which
a person is a member; for it were absurd to imagine our Savior should oblige
any Christian if his Brother should offend him, to tell the whole Catholic
Church throughout the World his offense per literas Encyclicas. Yea, it is plain
and undeniable, the place respects not the whole diffused number of Christians,
no not in any particular Church, but the Governors only. Now our Adversaries
will not I hope, say that any particular Church, except their own, much less
its Rulers or Representatives, shall be eminently visible and conspicuous to
all Christians at all times. Certainly our Savior in this place does not
promise any special privilege to the Church of Rome more than Antioch, Ephesus
or any other Apostolical Church, to whom that Precept of telling the Church
does equally belong; some of whom are long since utterly extinguished by the
overflowing of Mahometanism. How can they then from this place infer that any
particular Church shall be perpetually visible and conspicuous to the World
exercising Church Government over its members? Nay farther, How could the
Christians belonging to their Roman Church when under the persecution of
Dioclesian or Constantius, (at which time the Shepherds being smitten the sheep
were all scattered, the Church dissipated and all Church Discipline
interrupted) tell the Church, or make complaint to the Governors of it, when
they scarcely knew where they were, to whom in case of offense and scandal to
make complaint. Our Savior's Precept then supposes the free exercise of
Church Government, which in times of violent persecution cannot be exercised or
supposed.

I might add, Acosta de Temp. noviss. lib. 2. cap. 15. Telesphorus de Magnit.
tribulat. page 32. Aquipontanus de Antichrist. page 23.
That their own Writers, Acosta, Telesphorus the Hermit, and others confess,
that when Antichrist comes all Ecclesiastical Order and public service of God
shall be buried, the Church-doors destroyed, the Altars forsaken, the Church
empty, etc. Now I appeal to the conscience of any man, whether at that time it
would be possible in case of Scandal to tell the Church, when the Church shall
be forced to hide it self and all Ecclesiastical Order is suppressed and
dissolved by the violence of Persecution.

Lastly, Whereas it is objected, that the Protestant Church has so closely lain
hid for 900. years that no man could see or understand it; this is very falsely
affirmed as I shall show afterward, unless such as professed the Religion of
the Scriptures, Ancient Fathers and Councils, protesting against some new Roman
additional Articles, imposed of late by Pope Pius and the Tridentine Council,
were no true visible Church of God.

The last place, viz. 2 Cor. 4.5. If our Gospel be hid, etc. is least of all to
the purpose; for there Saint Paul plainly speaks not of the Church but of the
Gospel or Christian Faith, Hieronym. in Nahum c 2.

Chrysostom. Hom. 49. in Matthew. Nunc nullo modo cognoscitur quae sit vera
Ecclesia Christi, nimirum ex quo obtinuit haeresis Ecclesias, nisi tantummodo
per Scripturas. Irenaeus cont. Haeres. lib. 2. Quae praeconiaverunt pestea per
Dei voluntatem scripserunt, etc Costerus Enchirid. cap. 1. Alphonsus de Castro
cont. Haeres. grant this.


which is clearly delivered by the Scripture, to which, as St. Hierom and St.
Chrysostom acknowledge, we ought, especially in times of Heresy and
Persecution, to have recourse for our establishment in the truth; and if the
Gospel first preached and afterward written by the Apostles (for what they
first preached they afterward by the will of God, as Irenaeus says, wrote) be
hid to any, it is hid to them that perish, whose minds the Devil has blinded.
Does not this place expressly confute our Adversaries, who affirm that the
Gospel as revealed by the Scripture is dark, obscure and invisible to the
Laity, that so they may hang their faith by a blind and implicit obedience on
the visibility and infallible Authority of their Church or Popes, who may be,
as some of them have been, notorious and manifest Heretics? So that these
words of St. Paul can do them no service.

The Fathers alleged for the Roman visibility considered.
I come now to the Fathers quoted in your Letter; and first for Chrysostom's
saying, Hom. 30. in Matthew.
It is easier for the Sun to be extinguished than the Church to be darkened; I
wonder any sober men should require us to believe that on Chrysostom's
Authority which they do not believe themselves. For the Romanists, Valentia and
others, as we have seen, confess that the Church, even their Roman Church, may
be obscured or darkened; as it undeniably was under the Heathen and Arian
Emperors, in times of prevailing Heresy and Persecution. So that Chrysostom
must even by them be understood of a total, not partial, Eclipse or darkness:
for in that place he treats of times of persecution, wherein all grant the
Church may be darkened, and says, the Tyrants are gone and perished, but the
Church remains unconquered.

As to the places quoted out of Saint Austin, Tract. in Joan. and de Unitate
Ecclesiae Cap. 7. I answer, That he speaks of the state of the Christian
Church as it was in his days, in its external luster and glory, retaining the
Primitive Faith without addition or detraction. It was indeed strange blindness
in the Donatists he writes against, not to see the true Church, which as a
Mountain or light on a Hill was then plainly visible before them all over
Africa, yea the whole World; but to dare to restrain it to pars Donati, the
faction of Donatus, as now the Jesuits restrain it to the Popish party, was
plain impudence. Nevertheless, St. Austin does not say, that the Church should
always and in all after-Ages remain in that visible, prosperous and illustrious
state, yea contrarily he confesses, that it is sometimes obscured through the
multitude of scandals; Aliquando obscuratur. Epist. ad Vincentium 47. Ecclesia
non appar^bit impiis tunc persecutoribus ultra modum saevientibus. Epist. 80.
ad Hesychium. Vide de Baptist contra Donatistas lib. 6 cap. 4. and Enarrat. in
Psalmum. 10.
that it is like the Moon that may be hid, that it shall not appear by reason
of the unmeasurable rage of ungodly persecutors, yea, so obscured that the
members thereof shall not know one another.

This arguing then from the State of the Church of old in St. Austins days is
just like theirs who would persuade us, that the Church of Rome is now the only
true Catholic and Apostolic Church, because St. Paul 1600 years ago says,
their Faith was commended throughout the World, Romans 1. ver. 8. (so was their
Obedience also, Romans 16.19.) But does the Apostle say they should continue in
that Faith more than Obedience unto the end of the World, or that their Church
alone should never corrupt the Faith or apostatize in any degree from it? Tim.
4.1.
He seems to say otherwise when he thus writes to the Roman Church, Romans
8.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Boast not against the branches -- thou bear not the
root, but the root thee. Because of unbelief they, i. e. the Jewish Church,
were broken off and thou stand by Faith, be not high-minded but fear, for if
God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. And
as to Christian Obedience, De Pontif. in lib. 1. in Praefat. Genebrard.
Chronol. lib. 4. seculo 10. Baronius in Ann. 912. number. 8. and in ann. 985. number.
1.
it is granted by Bellarmin, Genebrard and others, that some Popes have been so
scandalously wicked, that they were rather Apostatical than Apostolical, and
scarcely deserved to have their names registered in the Catalogue of the Roman
Bishops.

Concerning the Papists demanding the Names of such as professed the Protestant
Religion before the Reformation.
As for the second Question, wherein satisfaction is desired, to answer Roman
Catholics, when they demand the names of some Professors of the Protestant
Religion before the Reformation; it being to them strange that if Protestancy
be from the Apostles and has been in all Ages, they can show no Writings of
some eminent Professors of it as well before the Reformation as many now since.
To this I reply first, That although the Apostles were not called by the name of
Protestants, as neither were they by the name of Catholics or Papists, yet
they were really of that Religion Protestants do profess; for from the Apostles
and their Writings have we learned the Religion we maintain against additional
Popish Errors, and traditional or unwritten points of Faith. Such as these
reckoned up by Pope Pius as Articles of the Roman Catholic Faith, which all
Papists must swear to profess as necessary to salvation. That there are seven
Sacraments properly so called, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Invocation of
Saints and Angels, Worshipping Images and Relics, Indulgences, the Bishop of
Rome's Supremacy over all Christian Churches, Real and proper Sacrificing of
Christ in the Mass, Communion in one kind, etc. All which are either not
mentioned in the Apostles Writings, or contradicted and condemned by them.
Secondly, I answer, That the Ancient Fathers and Councils for 4 or 500 years at
least, (I might say more) after Christ were not in the points abovementioned
of Pope Pius his Faith, but either say nothing of them, or testify against
them, or at least speak doubtfully of them; whence I conclude that they were of
the Protestant, not Popish, Religion. This I shall show from their Writings.
Yea, thirdly, That some of the New Articles of Faith before named cannot be
proved to be any part of the ancient Catholic belief by the Authority of any
eminent Writers for above 1000 years after Christ, particularly in the points
of seven Sacraments, Purgatory, Indulgences, Communion in one kind, and some
others. Lastly, That there is scarcely any point, especially of them before
rehearsed, condemned by us in the present Roman Church, but we are able to
produce multitudes of eminent Writers and some of their own Communion, who
complain of them or protest against them, as well as we, in the Ages next
before Luther. To perform my promise I shall now prove, 1. Assertion.
First, That the Articles of the present Roman Catholic Faith recited by Pope
Pius, and added by him to the Nicene Creed, are either not mentioned at all in
the Apostles Writings, or refuted and condemned by them.

Seven Sacraments not taught by the Apostles.
First, For their seven Sacraments. The Apostles no where teach us to
acknowledge seven Sacraments, or that Matrimony, Orders, Extreme Unction,
Confirmation, Confession are such, and, as Bellarmin affirms, Nec plura, nec
pauciora. De Sacram. lib. 2. c. 24. Chrysostom. Ambros. Austin, etc.
only such. Baptism and the Holy Eucharist we own, flowing, as the ancient
Fathers speak, out of Christ's side, whence came forth Water and Blood; which
are answerable to the two only Jewish Sacraments, Circumcision and the
Passover, as we read, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. More we find not. It Is true, St. Paul
discoursing of the Conjugal Union betwixt Christ and his Church, terms it
(...), Ephesians. 5.32.
a great Mystery. The vulgar Latin translation renders it ambiguously and
improperly magnum Sacramentum, a great Sacrament. Hence the Romish Church will
needs have Matrimonv instituted by God in Paradise to be a proper Christian
Sacrament; but St. Paul declares he meant no such matter; In locum.
for, as Cardinal Cajetan observes, he immediately adds, But I speak of
Christ and the Church. St James also mentions Anointing the sick with Oil;
James 5.14.
but that was in order to the miraculous gift of healing the Body, as we may
gather from Mar. So Cajetan expounds that place.
6.13. It had no spiritual effect on the Soul, as all Sacraments properly so
called have and must have, as is granted. The forgiveness of sins was by Prayer
to God, not Oil, ver. 15.

Nor Transubst.
Secondly, The Apostles did not teach Transubstantiation, Durand. Biel, Scotus,
Cameracensis, Cajetan, grant it canbe not evidently proved from the Scripture.
See below, Matthew. 26.26. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Card. Contarenus de Sacram l. 2. c.
3. Canus. loc. Theol. l. 3. c, 3. Fisher cont. Luther c. 10. say the same, 1
Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. Verse 29. The Church is called Christ's Body, is it
therefore his Natural Body in a literal sense? 1 Cor. 10. John 15.1. Did Christ
eat his own Body, when the Sacrament was administered and taken by him? So
Chrysostom Hom, 40, in Jean. 3.
or that by consecration the substance of the Bread and Wine in the Lord's
Supper are annihilated or turned into the substance of Christ's body and blood.
Yea, St. Paul expressly declares the contrary, for he calls it Bread and Wine
even after consecration. The Bread that we break (but Christ first blessed and
afterward brake it) is it not the communion of the Body of Christ? The Cup of
Blessing we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? So that
Bread and the Cup, i. e. by a Figure or Metonymy, as all must grant, the Wine
in the Cup remain in the Communion as means whereby we obtain the communion of
Christ's Body and Blood. In the next Chapter in 3 Verses together he calls it
Bread. May not we call it so? or was it not what St. Paul called it? But he
calls it the Lord's Body. True. Yet not in a literal, but Sacramental sense,
even as the Cup, (which to be sure is not transubstantiated) is termed his
Blood or the New Testament and Covenant in his Blood, as the Lamb was called
the Passover, Circumcision the Covenant, Baptism the Laver of Regeneration, in
which nevertheless Romanists do not believe any Transubstantiation. This Bread
we doubt not, is in deed Christ Body, as that Rock in the Wilderness was
Christ; as Christ was the true Vine or true living Bread, which no sober man
will interpret in a literal, proper and substantial, but in a Sacramental,
symbolical or typical sense.

Nor Purgatory.
Thirdly, According to the doctrine of the holy Scripture there neither is nor
can be Purgatory. Polydore Virgil. de Invent. l. 1. c. 1. Biel in Can. Missae
lect. 57. Alphonsus de Castro, lib. 8. tit. Indulgent. Valentia de Indulg.
grant that Purgatory is not to be found in Scripture, nor Indulgences. 1 Thessalonians.
4.14.
This I prove from Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord -- for
they rest from their labors. How do men who die in a state of grace, and so in
Christ the Lord, rest from their labors, if as soon as they die they are
tormented, or, as the Roman phrase is, labor (none know how long) in the fire
of Purgatory? It Is confessed by our Adversaries that all impenitent and wicked
men, who being void of grace die not in the Lord, go to Hell, not Purgatory.
How do righteous and good men enter into peace and rest according to Isa.
57.20. if after death they enter into fiery torments? St. Paul says it
generally of all Believers in Christ, not Martyrs only, as some would evade,
that they sleep in Jesus, and would not have us to sorrow excessively for them:
How do they as it were sleep in Christ's bosom? Why should we not mourn
exceedingly for them, if they probably lie in flames of fi^e under unspeakable
torments not much inferior to them of Hell, as is granted, excepting only the
duration or continuance? Add John 52.4. He that believes shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life. But he that comes unto
Purgatory comes into condemnation.

Possibly it will be objected that Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 3.12. Patres aliqui, per
ignem non intelligunt ignem Purgatorii sed Divini Judicii; quomodo loquitur
Paulus. 1 Cor. 3. Bellar. lib. 1. de Purg cap. 1. Augustine. de fide and
operibus, c. 15. Ad Dulcitium. qu. 1. Bellarmin. de Purgator. lib. 1. c. 5.
(...); As Chrysostom expounds it, Tom. 5. Hom. 28. p. 467. Ad Dulcitium qu. 1.
plainly delivers the doctrine of Purgatory, The fire shall try every man's
work: he shall be saved, yet so as by fire. But how can it be a plain place for
Purgatory, when Origin and Augustine, yea Bellarmine himself, confess it is a
most obscure one, and therefore very unfit to ground an Article of Faith upon.
St. Paul's whole discourse in that Chapter is Metaphorical and allusive, as
those words especially evidence, v. 15. (...), as it were by fire, or as by
fire, i. e. with much danger and difficulty, like one who runs through the fire
to save his life. That the place proves not the Roman doctrine of Purgatory is
manifest by this argument urged by * Saint Augustine. The fire St. Paul
mentions shall try every man's work. The fire of Purgatory, as they
themselves grant, tries not every man's work; Ignis probationis, non
purgationis, Aug. de fide and operibus c. 15.

Non est plene remissa culpa, quamdiu peccator est reus solvendae poenae.
Ceanus loc. Theolog. lib. 12. page 435.

Exemplo reatu eximitur and poena. Tert. de Baptismo, cap 5.

So Theodoret, Theophylact, and Anselm, approved by Bellarmin, lib. 1. de
Purgator. c. 5. page 586. Malachi 3. c. v. 3.


for it tries only such men's works as die under the guilt of venial sins, or
such mortal ones as are forgiven, but are not fully satisfied for, and
therefore (which is a contradiction) are still to be punished. Therefore St.
Paul's fire cannot be the fire of Purgatory into which the best and worst sort
of men come not at all. Again, It Is one thing to try men's works whether they be
good or bad, and another to punish and by punishing to purge away the guilt of
such as are bad. In all probability St. Paul by the fire in that Text
figuratively expressed the severe judgment of Christ at the last day. The day
shall declare it. Then indeed our Savior like a Goldsmith or Refiner shall
exactly try every man's work, etc. then such as retain the foundation, i. e.
true faith in Christ, and build upon it wood, hay, stubble, i. e. erroneous
opinions and fond imaginations, (of which this Purgatory doctrine is one
instance) shall be saved, yet so as by fire, i. e. with much danger, undergoing
a strict scrutiny.

Nor Prayers to Saints. or Angels, Psalm 50. De Sanct. Beat. l 1. c. 19.
Becanus in Euchirid. c. 7. Salmeron in 1 Timothy 2. disput. 2. art. 7. Vide Sixtum
Senens. Biblioth. lib. 6. Annotat. 345. Enchiridion in 1 Timothy 2. disput. 7.
art. 22. qu. 1. art. 10. Col. 2.18. Romans 10.14.
Fourthly, The Scripture no where commands, advises or encourages us to pray
to Saints or Angels but to God only. Call upon me in the time of trouble, etc.
When ye pray say, Our Father, etc. In the Old Testament Bellarmine grants,
there is no mention of Invocation of Saints, because the Patriarchs, Prophets
and Saints were in Limbo, not admitted to see God; of which opinion as to
Christians, were many of the ancient Fathers, although the Papists now reject it
as an Error. In the New, at least if we except that most abstruse Book, the
Revelation, Eccius, Salmeron, Bannes and others confess that it has no
footsteps. Yea, Saint Paul expressly condemns worshipping Angels out of a
voluntary humility after the vain Philosophy of the Platonists, who yet did not
worship them as Gods, any more than Papists, but only as Messengers or
Mediators betwixt God and men. Elsewhere he asks the Roman Church (which she
should remember) How shall they call on him, i. e. lawfully, on whom they have
not believed? But we believe in God only, not in any Saint or Angel. How shall
we then call on them? I might add, that the Church of Rome has no certainty,
even of humane Faith, that the Saints in Heaven know our wants or hear our
Prayers; for they know not on what ground to settle this belief. Some flying to
extraordinary Revelations, some to the brittle and voluntary Glass of the
Trinity, some to the reports of Angels, intruding into the things they have not
seen nor can be assured of, cleaving to what is uncertain, Certa ratione
nescimus an Sancti nestra vota cognoscant, quamvis pie hoc credamus. Cajetan.
in 22. qu. 88. Art. 5. 1 John 2.2. 1 Timothy 2.5.
and neglecting what is undoubtedly lawful, i.e. to pray to God through the
merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, the only Mediator betwixt God and man,
the only Advocate with the Father, who is alone the Propitiation for our sins,
who so loved us as to die for us, which neither the blessed Virgin nor any
Saint ever did. In a word, Prayer or Invocation is, as all grant, Latria, an
act of divine Worship, and therefore must by no means upon any pretense be
given in any degree to fellow servants, but reserved to God our Sovereign only.
See thou do it not (as the Angel said to St. John who would have worshipped him,
not as God, but as the subordinate revealer of those glorious mysteries to him)
I am thy fellow servants, worship God. Rev. 22.9. Vtinam velletis ipsos colere,
facile abipsis disceretis non ^^los celere. Audite Angelum. doctorem etc.
August. in Psalm 96. V. Psalterium B. Virginis apud Chemnitium in Exam.
Concilii Trident. See Bishop Andrews his Posthuma against Cardinal Perren.
Doctor Brevint, etc.
They who are for worshipping Angels, Why do they not, as St. Augustine says,
hearken to the Angel, saying, See thou do it not. As for their usual evasion,
That they do not pray to them, but only desire them to pray for them, it is vain
and impertinent; for they not only pray or desire them to pray for them, but
they directly pray to them, using the very words and Prayers which David and
other holy men of God have used to God himself; yea they beg of them such
things as none but God can bestow; as forgiveness of sins, increase of Grace,
and Eternal Glory. No man that has read their Breviaries and Prayer-Books can
be ignorant of the truth of this.

Nor the worshipping of Images, Inter traditiones est Imaginum veneratio.
Aquinas par. 3. q. 25. art.3. This Law is not ceremonial, but natural, or
moral; as Irenaeus, Tertul. Cyprian, Auslin affirm. See Bellarmin. lib. 2. de
Imag. cap. 7. The 2. Nicene Council say it was ceremonial, who yet ground
worship of Images, not on Scripture, but Ecclesiastical Tradition, V. Council.
Nic. 2. act. 7. apud Coriol.

Abulensis in loc. qu. 5. Aquinas part. 3. qu. 25. art. 3. Durandus lib. 3.
did. 9. qu 2. ait fatuum esse imagines ad repraesentandum Deum facere. Vasquez
lib. 2. de Adorat. disp. 4. c. 2. who quoteth others. Exodus 32.5. Lactant.
Instit. lib. 2. Exodus 32.1. In Exodus 32, 6. 1 Cor. 10.7. Par. 3. qu. 25. art.
3. and 4. Azor. Instit. lib. 9. c. 6. Suarez. Tom. 1. disput. 54. sect. 4.
Vasques de adoratione lib. 2. c. 4. Valentia, Costerus.


but exp esly forbids it. No Precept nor Example can be found of any Prophet or
Apostle that required or practiced it. The second Commandment, most
suspiciously, if not consciously, thrust up into the first by Popish
Catechisms, is clearly against it, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, nor (which is more comprehensive) the likeness of any thing in Heaven or
Earth, etc. thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, etc. Now, what
things are in Heaven? God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Angels and
glorified Saints. We may not therefore make (to worship them) the Images or
likenesses of any of these. All are forbidden. Surely if any Image were to be
made and worshipped, certainly that of God might. But God himself expressly
forbids it, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. for says he, When I came down from Mount Sinai, ye
saw no manner of similitude, etc. take heed therefore lest you corrupt your
selves by making any graven or molten Image, and likeness, etc. Hence some,
even of the Roman Church, condemn the making of any image of God. How highly
was God incensed against the Jews for making and worshipping the golden Calf,
which yet was, tho not a formal Image, an Emblem or memorial of the true God?
Hence the Feast was proclaimed to be kept at least ultimately and
intentionally, as Papists use to distinguish, Johovae, to the honor of
Jehovah. Could the Jews be such Sots themselves as to imagine that the Calf,
made a day or two before, brought them out of Egypt several months before it
was made? They called it therefore their God only as a representative or
Hieroglyphical memorial of him they had a mind to see, (as Heathen Idolaters
ever had) going before them in Effigy. Make us Gods (or a God) to go before
us. Yet St. Paul expressly condemns this Feast and Worship as plain Idolatry.
Neither be ye Idolaters as were some of them, as it is written, The people sat
down to eat and drink, etc. And Idolatry is summus seculi reatus as Tertullian
has it, no less than high Treason against the Majesty of God in giving his
honor upon any pretense, or in any respect to what is not God but a Creature,
as every Image, whether materially or formally considered, is. Now it is the
known doctrine of Aquinas, Azorius, and the Jesuits, that the very same honor,
latria, which belongs to God or Christ is to be given to their Images for their
sakes whom they represent; as if out of reverence to the King I should honor
his Judges, Officers or Favorites with the very same outward expressions of
reverence, homage and Allegiance I yield to himself. Would any wise Prince take
this well? In a word; Let it be only remembered that God, especially in this
particular of worshipping Images, has declared himself to be a jealous God,
visiting the iniquity, Exodus 20.
signally the Idolatry, of Fathers upon their Children, 2 Chronicles. 5.3.24.
of which good King Josiah the Son of Manasseh was a remarkable instance.

Nor Indulgences.
Sixthly, Concerning Indulgences, i. e. a Power in the Pope for Money to grant
out of the common Treasury of Christ and the Saints merits amassed together, as
much as he pleases to any person for the freeing of him from the temporal
punishment due here or in Purgatory for his sins; as if Christ alone were not
abundantly sufficient; is a doctrine which has no real ground, not the least,
in holy Scripture. We read indeed of St. Paul's remitting to the penitent
incestuous Corinthian part of that Ecclesiastical Penance which was imposed on
him, but of making over to him, V. Cassand. consult. art. 12. in fine. 2 Cor.
2.10.
or any one else, the merits of any Saints, we find not the least intimation.
Cardinal Cajetan, Durand, Roffensis and others grant that Indulgences have no
ground in Scripture, as we shall show hereafter; yea they are contrary to it,
which every where ascribes all remission of all sorts of sins, and consequently
of all punishment properly so called to be inflicted by God for them, wholly
and only to the blood, merits and satisfaction of Christ our Savior and
Redeemer, who is highly dishonored by these pretended Pardous. Saint Paul, not
without some indignation, asks the Corinthians, Was Paul crucified for you? 1
Cor. 1.13.
If the sufferings of St. Paul and other Saints satisfy, at least in part, for
men's sins, or, which is all one, for the temporal punishment due to them; why
may it not be truly said, that Paul as well as Christ was crucified or suffered
death for us? Indeed I cannot but wonder at the strange perverseness of our
Adversaries, who will by no means grant that the merits, righteousness and
obedience, especially active of Christ, are or can be through says imputed
unto us for our justification and remission of our sins, and yet earnestly
contend that by the Papal Indulgence the merits, fastings, and prayers of
Saints, Monks and Friars may be imputed or made over to any that will be at the
cost to purchase it.

Nor the Popes Supremacy.
Seventhly, As to the Popes Supremacy over all Christians and Churches, although a
great noise is made with Thou art Peter, etc. and to thee will I give the Keys,
etc. Certainly, Card. Cusanus concordant. lib. 3. cap. 13. Marsilius defens.
part. 2. cap. 18.

Licet forte non sit de jure divino Romans Pontif. ut talem Petro succedere, etc.
Bellar. de P.R. l. 1. c. 12. Matthew. 22.26.


as some of their own Writers confess, it has no ground in Scripture, yea, it
is contrary thereunto. For that our Savior, although his Apostles were often
disputing who should be chief amongst them, never declared Peter to be his
Viceroy or Vicar, which would have put a final end to all this contention about
Supremacy. Yea, he makes them all alike equal, even after he had said, Thou art
Peter, etc.

Secondly, V. Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 1. de primatu Jacobi. Hic primus
Episcopalem cethedram cepit; cum ante caeteros omnes suum ei in terris thronum
Dominus tradidisset. Epiphan. adv. Haeres. lib. 3. Tom. 2. page 1039. Jacobus
Apostolorum princeps, Ruffinus Hist. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Saint John was the Disciple whom Jesus loved in an especial manner above the
rest of the Apostles, for no doubt he had a love for every one of them. Saint
James, his Brother or Cousin was made Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles, and
succeeded our Savior in his Throne, as Epiphanius says. Why might not either
of these plead a right of Supremacy as well as Peter?

Thirdly, Saint Paul, although he was Novissimus Apostolorum the last Apostle
called after all the rest, 2 Cor. 12.11.
yet he says he thought he came not behind even the chiefest Apostles; yea, 1
Cor. 15.10.
that he labored more than they all, and had on him the care of all the
Churches. 2 Cor. 11.28.
Can we think he would have presumed to have written of himself in such an high
manner if he had thought that Christ his Lord had appointed St. Yet Stapleton
durst write, Petro data est potestas mandativa, atque regiminis. Apostolis
potestas executiva, tantum est gubernationis. Doctrine. Princip. lib. 6. c. 7.
Peter as his Vicegerent to be the Head, Sovereign Prince and supreme
Governor of all the Apostles, Churches and Christians? Nay farther, it is
clear from Gal. 1.12, 17.18. That St. Paul neither received instruction nor
Authority to preach the Gospel from St. Peter, but immediately from Christ
himself, Cypr. Epist. 71. Nec Petrus super quem Dominus aedificavit Ecclesiam
cum secum Paulus disceptaret, vendicavit se primatum tenere, and obtemperari
sibi oportere. Petrus and Paulus ambo principes, Card. Cusanus Epist. 2. de usu
Commun. Gal. 2.11.

Erat Paulus Princeps Apostolorum honor par Petro, ne quid dicam amplius.

Chrysostom. in Galat. c. 2. Petrus universalis Episcopus non vocatur, Greg.
lib 4. Epist. 32. Paulus ascendit Hierosolymam Petri cognoscendi causa, ex
Ofsicio and Jure scil. ejusdem fidei praedicationis. Tertul. de Praescr. non
subjectionis. Matthew. 16. V. Cyprian Epist. unit. Eccl. in locum h^. It Is St.
Chrysostoms observation Sermon de Pentecoste and Hom. 55. in Matthew. Add Hilary
lib. 2. de Trinit. 16. Ambrose in Ephesians. cap. 2. Pope Gregory the Great, in Psalm.
102. v. 25. Cyril de Trinit. lib. 4. Aug. de Verb. Domini, Ser. 13. Beda in
cap. 21. Joan. Lib. 1. in Jovnian. Compare Origin. in Matthew. 16. Ephesians. 2.20.


and executed his Apostolic Office three years before he ever saw St. Peter's
face. Which is furthermore evident and undeniable from Gal. 2.9. That James is
placed before Cephas or Peter, and Cephas and John gave to Paul the right hand
of fellowship, as to one equal in Authority with themselves; and in ver. 11. we
find Paul withstanding Peter to his face, not seemingly (as St. Hierom thought,
opposed therein by Saint Augustine) but really and in earnest, for Peter was
indeed, as the Text says, to be blamed. All which particulars laid together
evince, I think, to any ingenuous man that St. Peter was not supreme over all
the Apostles; for where there is an Equality there can be no Supremacy. But St.
Paul does assert and prove himself equal, not inferior, to St. Peter.
Therefore St. Peter was not Supreme, at least St. Paul did not think him to be
so. Now if S. Peter had not Supreme Power over all Christians, how can the Pope
pretend to it as succeeding St. Peter in his Authority? Can he have more Power
than St. Peter had? As for those words, Thou art Peter, etc. it is to be
observed that our Savior says not, Thou art Peter and on thee, but on this
Rock, i. e. this faith thou have professed that I am the Son of God, will I
build my Church, and so many of the Fathers expound it, as I shall show
afterward. It Is true, Our Lord promised to give unto Peter the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and accordingly after his Resurrection he gave him them; but
our Savior gave them him and the rest of the Apostles all together at the same
time and in the same manner. And as the Christian Church was in some sense
built on Peter, i. e. in respect of the faith he taught, so it was equally pari
modo and ex aequo (as St. Hierom says) on the rest of the Apostles, agreeable
to that of St. Paul, being built on the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself (not Peter) being the Chief Cornerstone. It is
not therefore true that some affirm, Potestatem Apostoli receperunt immediate a
Christo. Francis. de victoria Relect. 2. qu. 2. Conclus. 3. and 4.

John 20.22. Matthew. 16.16. John 21.17.

Non Petrus sed Christus Graecis Paulum praefecit. Chrysostom. Hom. in 2. cap. ad
Galatas. Matthew. 28.18, 19.

Cum dicitur Petro, pasce oves meas, ad omnes dicitur. Aug. de agone Christi c.
30.

1 Pet. 5.2. Acts 20.28. Gal. 2. Chrysostom. at least in 18 places calls St. Paul
(...). Casaubon. Exercit. 16. Paulus Apostolorum maximus. Origin. Hom. 3. in
Numer. Quamvis Apostolis omnibus post resurrectionem suam parem potestatem
Christus tribuat, etc. Cypr. de unitate Ecclesiae, Paulus erat Petro (...), nec
opus habuit Petro, Chrysostom. in Gal. c. 2.


that our Lord gave the Keys first to Peter to be communicated by him ^o the
rest of the Apostles. No. The Scripture plainly says, Christ breathed on them
all at once together and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit
they are remitted, etc. Here the Keys promised to Peter are given not only to
him, or first to him to be given to the rest of the Apostles by him, but to all
of them together in one and the same breath without preferring one before
another. Neither does that other place, feed my Lambs, feed my sheep, prove in
the least that Christ committed his whole Church to Peter only as Universal
Pastor and Head of it; for to feed Christ's sheep is to teach them with the
word of life; and this is charged immediately and equally on all the Apostles
who had their Mission and Commission not from Peter but from Christ himself,
saying, All power is committed to me, etc. Go ye therefore teach all Nations,
etc. Yea, this duty of Feeding, as also Ruling, implied, as some think, in the
word (...), is a Duty incumbent on all inferior Pastors and Bishops, as St.
Peter himself acknowledges, Feed the flock of God taking the care thereof,
(...). To this I might add that St. Paul had a greater part by far of Christ's
flock under his Pastoral care than St. Peter, for he was the Apostle of the
Uncircumcision or Gentiles, preaching to them; Peter of the Circumcision or
Jewish Nation. From all which it is evident that the Pope, supposing him (which
is not at all granted) to succeed Peter in his whole Apostolic Power in
plenitudinem potestatis, it no way follows that he is or can be Supreme Head of
the Universal Church. Other Apostles in their Apostolic Churches planted by
them being as to Ecclesiastical Power not at all inferior but equal to him and
the Roman Church.

As for a priority of Place or Order, in regard Rome was at first before
Constantine's days the Seat of the Emperor, we deny it not; but this
Preheminency, as the General Councils of Constantinople and Chalcedon declare,
was given by the Ancient Fathers and Bishops (they say not by any appointment
of Christ) in regard it was the Imperial City; of which more hereafter.

But to put an end to this Controversy, we will appeal to an infallible Judge
such as the Pope himself shall not refuse, even Saint Peter himself, whose
words are these, 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves, etc. whether to the King as supreme, etc. If St. Peter
acknowledge not himself, but the King, to be Supreme, methinks it should ill
become his Successors to deny Kings to be supreme over them. But possibly it
will be said, St. Peter meant this supremacy only in matters Civil, not
Ecclesiastical. Well, we take what is granted. Carerius de Potestate Pontificis
lib. 2. cap. 23. Cajetan. in Aquin. 2. qu. 99. art. 3. See the R R. Bishop of
Lincoln, his observation on the Pope's Bull, against Q Elizabeth.
How is it then consonant to Apostolical doctrine for St. Peter's Successors to
exempt, and that in civil matters, all Clergymen from the jurisdiction and
commands of the King, as if they were not his Subjects as well as others? Yea
farther, to absolve the Laity also from all obedience to their natural Princes,
cursing all such as obey them, stirring them up when they think fit to fight
against, depose and murder them. Is this to acknowledge the King supreme?
Peter did but draw his sword to rescue Christ the Son of God from the hands of
Murderers, and he is commanded to put it up; And may Popes, as they often have
done, command Subjects to draw it against their lawful Sovereigns? But the King
here spoken of was an Heathen, even Nero. True. However all Christians
according to Apostolical doctrine must be subject to their King tho an Heathen,
and ought they not much rather then to be subject to him being a Christian? St.
Paul's Precept is general, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers;
which Powers were at that time Heathens, yet every soul, i.e. a Synecdoche,
every Person, tho an Apostle or Evangelist, (...). Chrysostom. in locum. As also
Theodoret. Theophylact. and Oecumenius in locum. Add Bernard. Epist. 64. ad
Senonensem Archiepisc. Qui scipsum excipit, seipsum decipit.
as St. Chrysostom comments on that Text, much more the Pope, ought to be
subject.

Possibly some will reply, That the Church and St. Peter the Head of it had no
Auhority over Heathens which are without, but that they had a supremacy over
all Christians and consequently over Kings as Christians.

If this exception be of any weight, it unavoidably follows that whilst Nero
was an Heathen St. Peter was his Subject and he Sovereign, but if he had become
a Christian S. Peter was his Sovereign and had the supremacy over him. Was not
this an excellent reason to persuade Nero to become a Christian, whereby he
must deprive himself of the Sovereignty? The truth is, Christ came not tollere
jura sed peccata mundi, to take away the sins, not the rights of the meanest
Subjects, much less of Kings, or in the least to diminish their just Authority.
1 Timothy 6.1, 2,
The Apostles expressly charge Children to be obedient to their Parents,
Servants to their Masters, tho they were Heathens and themselves Christians.
Dominion is not founded in Grace, neither is Christ's Kingdom, as he himself
professed, of this World, for then would my Servants fight. He that gives Kings
converted a Crown of Glory, deprives not them of their Earthly one, or any due
right belonging to it. Obedience therefore in all things either active or
passive, is necessarily to be yielded unto them as supreme Governors.

Nor the Sacrifice in the Mass.
Eighthly, Concerning a real and proper Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass or Holy
Eucharist, it is expressly contradicted in the Scripture, especially by St.
Paul, Heb. 7.27.9, 25, 26, 27, 28. 10.10. In which places the blessed Apostle
distinguishes Christ's Sacrifice from, and prefers it before the Levitical
ones, in regard they were reiterated and often repeated, not so this; but by
once offering of himself, once offered up by himself, Heb. 9.27, 28.
and once for all, he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. As then
men properly can die no more than once, so Christ can be properly sacrificed no
more but once. It Is St. Paul's own argument. In the Mass therefore Christ is
not properly sacrificed. Mark what an absurdity in the Apostles judgment would
follow thereupon. If Christ should be offered by himself, or others often, more
than once, ver. 26.
then must he have often suffered. But Christ has suffered once and cannot
suffer again. Therefore he is not offered again by himself, or by any Priest in
the Mass as a proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead, which
our Adversaries affirm. Yea, if Christ were truly and properly sacrificed in
the Mass, he must necessarily suffer death a thousand times over; for
sacrificing any living thing, and such is Christ, to God, Ad verum sacrificium
requiritur, ut plane destruatur, and ipsa etiam substantia consumatur. Bellar.
lib. 1. de Missa cap. 2.
implies killing and taking away the life of what is sacrificed, as the very
name (...) from (...) notes. But I hope Romanists will not say they kill
Christ in the Mass: if they deny it, then Christ is not there properly
sacrificed; if they should attempt it, the thing is impossible; for Christ,
being now impassible and in a glorified State, can die no more, as we read,
Romans 6.9. When then they distingush of sacrificing Christ in a bloody and
unbloudy manner, and say they offer up and sacrifice him incruente, without
bloodshed, they yield the cause; for all proper sacrificing implies
destruction, as Bellarmine grants, De Missa lib. 10. cap. ul.
or if it be a living thing the shedding the blood is killing of what is
sacrificed, for without shedding of blood there is no remission.

If by their sacrificing Christ in the Mass they meant only a representation to
God or men of Christ's bloody sacrifice of the Cross, or a commemoration of his
death, termed, 1 Cor. 11.26. a showing and setting it forth visibly and
sacramentally by eating of that Bread and drinking of that Cup, we should not
oppose them: but Representation or Commemoration of Christ's death is one
thing, and proper Sacrificing his Body and Blood, really, corporally, and
carnally as it was on the Cross, is quite another.

As for Bellarmin's Reply, that Christ is sacrificed not under the likeness of
a living thing but of Bread which has no life, and therefore there is no
necessity he should be slain or killed in the Mass, it signifies nothing. For I
ask, Is the likeness of Bread only offered up to God as a propitiatory
Sacrifice, or Christ himself, his Body and Blood, Bellarmine places the
essence of the Sacrifice of the Mass, in the Priests manducation, or eating,
and consumption not of the substance of Christ's Body, but the Accidents or
Appearance of Bread only, de missa l. 1. c. ^^^. But a true Sacrifice requires
a consumption of its substance; as is above by him granted. Ergo.
who is a living Person; yea, lives for ever? If Bread only, it is blasphemous
to make it a propitiatory sacrifice for sin. If Christ himself, who is a living
Person, be truly and properly sacrificed, he must be truly and properly slain.

As for their usual pretense that Masses apply to us the Virtue and Merits of
Christ's Passion: I answer, That the Sacrament of the Eucharist is abundantly
sufficient thereunto, and peculiarly instituted to that very purpose; for the
bread that we break is it not the Communion or communication of the Body of
Christ, and the Cup of blessing that we bless the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? And what is the Communion or communication of Christ's Body and Blood
broken and shed for the remission of our sins, but the communication or
application of the Merits of both unto us in order thereunto? So that the
reiteration of Christ's sacrifice of himself on the Cross is altogether
unnecessary.

Nor Communion in one kind only.
As to the ninth Article of Pope Pius his Creed, That is is not necessary to
receive both Bread and Cup in the Holy Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, it
is so plainly and almost palpably contrary to the institution, example and
command of Christ himself, as also the Apostolical tradition of St. Paul, that
it is a wonder how any Christians dare own any such Doctrine. Take, eat, drink,
do this in remembrance of me; so our Lord at the first institution of it. Saint
Paul repeats this Institution to the Corinthians, commending it to the
observation of the whole Church, Laity as well as Clergy; joineth eating of the
Bread and drinking of the Cup together four several times in four Verses, 1
Cor. 11.26, 27, 28, 29. Lays down an express Apostolical Canon, Let a man
examine himself, etc. What man? An Apostle only? or a consecrating Priest? No.
But any ordinary Christian capable of this Sacrament. Well. What is then to be
done? Let him eat of that bread, as it is his necessary and indispensable duty
to do; but is that all? No. For he adds, And let him, (whether Layman or
Clerick, whether Consecrator or not) also drink of that Cup. For as often as ye
(Christians in general) eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup, ye show forth
(as is your duty to do and which otherwise you do not) the Lords death till he
come. Does it not look like Antichristianism for Christ's Vicar to presume to
alter, Panis and vinum ad essentiam sacramenti pertinent. Bellarmin. de Euchar.
lib. 40. cap. 60. v. Council. Trident. Panis and vinum non tam essentiales, quam
integrales hujus sacramenti parts videntur, Bellarmin. de Euchar. lib. 4. cap.
22. Sine vino igitur sacramentum non integre administratur.
mutilate, or in any substantial part (as the Cup in the Eucharist is
acknowledged to be) to abrogate his Lords Instituion and Command? How dare any
Christian divide asunder what Christ and Saint Paul have joined together? The
receiving the Cup is as necessary to any Christian, Clerick or Laick, as the
sacred Bread. By the same reason the Church of Rome forbids the Laity one, they
may both; for both are equally commanded, both are as necessary as either. The
Romish pretended Power to dispense with the Laws of God and to alter the
institutions of Christ is alone a sufficient argument to discover how little
they regard the Apostolical Doctrine or Primitive practice of the Church, from
which, as we see, they have manifestly departed. In a word, If the Pope and his
Councils have power to alter and dispense with, yea countermand, Christ's
express Laws and Institutions, Sir Edward Sandys Europae Speculum.
but it is made, as a learned Traveller observes, a mere piece of humane Policy
to be framed, altered and modeled at the wills and pleasures of men; which
directly tends to promote Atheism; for which crime Italians are notorious.

Thus I hope I have made it evident to any unprejudiced Person that the 9
Articles abovementioned, which Pope Pius not 200 years ago added to the old
Nicene Creed, as parts of the true Catholic Apostolic Faith, without which no
salvation is to be had or expected, are errors and corruptions of it, contrary
to the doctrine that the holy Apostles have delivered to them and us in their
Writings. So that I may justly ask them, Where was your Creed and Church before
Pope Pius, who was hardly so old as Luther.

I might add several other Doctrines and Practices as contrary to Scripture (if
I understand any thing in it) as Darkness is to Light; particularly, Concerning
some practices in the Roman Church which are against Scripture. As 1. Service
in an unknown Tongue.
that unreasonable service of God in a Tongue the people do not-understand. Can
any thing be more plainly contradictory to the whole fourteenth Chapter of 1
Cor. Does not Saint Paul there condemn all Speaking, whether in Sermons,
Prayers or Thanksgivings, in the Church in an unknown Tongue? ver. 2. Unknown,
not to God; who knows all things, even Sermons in Latin, Greek or any Tongue
else, but to Men. He prefers Prophesying, i.e. Preaching or expounding the
Scripture, before Tongues, i. e. strange and not understood by the Hearers, for
this very reason; because he that speaks in an unknown Tongue speaks to
God, not unto men, for no man understands him, howbeit in the Spirit, i.e. by
a miraculous gift of the Spirit, Ver. 3.
as the gift of Tongues was, he speaks mysteries, i. e. profound and
admirable Truths. But he that prophesies or preaches in a known Tongue
speaks unto men, to Edification, Exhortation and Comfort. He that speaks in
an unknown Tongue edifieth himself, Ver. 4.
not the Church. But Saint Paul would have the whole Church edifi'd or profited
by whatever is spoken. Hence he commands ver. 26. all things to be done to
edification, and forbids any one to use his miraculous gift of Tongues in the
Church unless he interpret what he says, or another for him, that so the
Church may receive Edifying, i.e. spiritual profit, being built up in their
most holy Faith. Is it not as clear as the day at Noon, that according to St.
Paul's doctrine there is no profit or edification redounding to the People by
whatsoever is spoken in the Church in an unknown Tongue? Neither does he in
that Chapter speak only of Sermons (Papists themselves are not so absurd as to
preach in Latin to their people) or private Conferences, as Bellarmine would
evade, he speaks generally of whatever is spoken in the Church, it must be in
a Tongue known to the people, that so the people may be profited by it, in
regard else they are not edified or profited at all. Neither does he speak of
Sermons only, but Prayers and Thanksgivings: hence ver. 15, 16. I will pray
with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also, I will sing with
the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also. So that in St. Paul's
judgment it is necessary to pray and sing Praises, Psalm 47.7.
as David says, with understanding. Then he adds, Else when thou shall bless
(God) with the Spirit, i.e. by an extraordinary gift of strange Tongues
bestowed by the Spirit on many in those days, how shall he that occupies the
room of the unlearned say Amen to thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands
not what thou say? Where two things are as plain as if they had been written
with a Sunbeam. First, That St. Paul in that Chapter discourses not of Sermons
or Conferences only, but Prayers and Hymns. Secondly, Justin. Martyr, Apol. 2.
Hieron. in Epist. ad Galatas, lib. 2. in praefat.
That the unlearned cannot, as they ought, say Amen to Prayers or Hymns of
Thanksgiving they understand not. We use, as the ancient Church did, to say
Amen to Prayers, not to Sermons or Conferences. So that Saint Paul expressly
condemns Prayers in an unknown Tongue used at this day by the Roman Church in
her Latin Service. And there is ground to think this is one reason why they
suffer not the Laity to read the Scriptures, lest they should by them discern
this amongst other of their palpable, erroneous and corrupt practices. This may
be a second instance that the Romish Religion is not Apostolical.

Denying the use of the Scripture to the Laity. V. Claudium Espenceum in Titum
cap. 2.
For what can be more contrary to our Savior's command, John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, etc? And that of Saint Paul, Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all wisdom and spiritual understanding? Yea, to the very
end of Gods giving the Scriptures, than to forbid the generality of the people
to read them, lest they should by it become Heretics, i.e. Protestants? Did
Saint Paul write his Epistles to the learned or Clergy only at Corinth,
Ephesus, Philippi, etc. and not to the whole Church? Yea, does he not adjure
them at Thessalonica to cause his Epistle to be read, 1 Thessalonians. 5.27.
not only to the Rulers or Elders of the Church, but to all the holy Brethren
or Saints? Might they hear what was written to them, but not read it? Were they
not Greeks, and did not Saint Paul write unto them in their own vulgar Tongue?
To what end, if not that they should read it? Otherwise surely he would have
written to them in Hebrew or Syriack, for he had the gift of many Tongues.

But say some Politicians, The common people are apt to mistake and to wrest
the Scriptures to Heresies and their own destruction.

To which I answer, First, Plus inde ob hominum temeritatem detrimenti, quam
utilitatis oriri, etc. Index libror. prohib. Reg. 1.
If the Scriptures be so apt to be misunderstood, and do more hurt than good,
why should we look upon them as a singular blessing of God to his Church?
Secondly, Do only unlearned men wrest the Scriptures? We know the old
Heretics, as Arius, Nestorius, Pelagius, etc. were neither unlearned nor
Laics. Thirdly, Why did St. Paul, if the Scripture be so dangerous to the
common people, command his Epistle to be read to all the holy Brethren? Might
they not mistake his true meaning by hearing it read as well as reading it?
Lastly, I answer, The Church of God is not to be governed by the late Policies
of men, but by the Laws of Christ and the example of the Primitive Church; who
although many damnable Heresies arose in those Ages, Cyril. contra Julian. lib. 6.
and were colourably maintained by the Scripture, Hom. 2. in Matthew. Chrysostom.
Hom. 3. in Lazarum Hom. 9. in Coloss. Hieron Epist. ad Eustochium, Salvinam,
Celantiam, in Epitaphio Paulae.
as Julian the Apostate objected, yet never forbad any man to read the
Scripture, but exhorted and encouraged the Laity, even Women to do it. A
License to read the Scriptures would have been looked upon in those days as a
prodigious Novelty. Because many people receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body
and Blood unworthily to their own damnation, may therefore the Laity be wholly
and generally kept as well from that Bread as they are by Romanists from that
Cup unless they have a special License from the Church? But concerning the
judgment and practice of Primitive times, we shall say more by and by. I might
add more instances, but these may suffice to make good my first Assertion, that
the present Roman Faith or Religion is not grounded on the holy Scriptures.

The sense of Antiquity concerning the Points in Dispute.
The second thing I am obliged to show, is, That the Points abovementioned are
no parts of the true ancient Catholic Faith, or were so esteemed by the holy
Fathers and Councils for at least 4 or 500 years after Christ, but rather
condemned and rejected by them.

Concerning the seven Sacraments.
I will begin with the Doctrine of the seven Sacraments. The ancient Fathers
when they treat of the Sacraments of the Church in the strict and proper sense
of the word (for it is equivocal) mention two only, V. Augustine. de Symbolo.
Ambros. de Sacram. Card. Richelieu hence grants there are properly but two,
Examen Pacific. Epist. 118. ad Januar.

V. Ambros. de Sacram. Incarnation.

V. Cyprian. de ablution. pedum. Aug. de bono Conjug. 1.18. and lib. 1. cont.
Faust. c. 14. Bernard. de coena Domini.


viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper. These Justin Martyr in the end of his 2d
Apology, where he describes the public service of the Church on the Lord's
days, takes notice of, and none of the other five. Chrysostom, Cyril and
Theophylact on John 19. As also Ambrose, Austin and Damascen write, that the
Water and Blood that came out of our Saviors side, signified the Sacraments of
the Church, viz. the Water, Baptism, and the Blood, the Eucharist. Irenaeus no
where mentions any more Sacraments than these two. Saint Austin says, Christ
has left us a very few Sacraments, numero paucissima, Baptism and the
Eucharist. It Is true, The Fathers sometimes term Confirmation, Orders, etc.
Sacraments; but then they use the word in a more large sense, as when they call
the Doctrines of the Trinity, Incarnation, etc. Sacraments, i. e. Mysteries.
Our Savior's washing his Disciples feet, the sign of the Cross; yea Polygamy
are sometimes honored by Cyprian, Augustine, Bernard, with the name of
Sacraments, i. e. sacred or mystical Signs; In which sense there may be not
only seven but seventeen Sacraments. But to avoid falling into a Logomachia or
strife about words, it is agreed, as Bellarmin himself grants, that the
essential note of a proper Sacrament is to communicate justifying Grace. De
Sacram l. 1. c. 11. Costerus Enchir. p. 340.

Peter Lombard and Durandus say; Matrimony confers not Grace. See Cassandr.
Art: 14.


Do holy Orders communicate justifying Grace, or Matrimony either? If the
latter, I wonder why they should prohibit it the Clergy. If the former, surely
there would not be found sons of Eli or Belial in their Church who know not the
Lord. But enough of this at present.

Concerning Transubstant.
Secondly, The Ancient Fathers did not believe or teach the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, Alphonsus de Castro de Haeres. lib. 8. says the same: It
was first taught by Paschasius, anno 818. See Bellarmin. de Script.
i.e. that by consecration, the substance of the Bread and Wine cease to be,
and are turned into the very substance of the Body and Blood of Christ, which
he now has being at the right hand of God.

Ad Philadelphin.
Ignatius says, that in the holy Eucharist one and the same Bread is
administered to all.

Justin Martyr calls it Bread and Wine after Consecration, and says, our
flesh and blood are nourished by them: In Apol. 2. (...). In like manner
Irenaeus lib. 5. c. 12. Bellar. min, lib. 2. de Euch. cap. 4. ad finem.

V. Bonavent. l. 4. Sent. Did. 12. art. 3. qu. 1.


I adjoin, But mere Accidents cannot nourish our bodies. Therefore the true
substance of Bread and Wine still remain. Our Adversaries dare not affirm that
our bodies are nourished by some substance. He adds a little after, that the
Deacon uses to carry to the sick Bread and Wine to be received at their own
Houses. Irenaeus declares that the Eucharist consists of two things, one
terrestrial, viz. the Elements of Bread and Wine; the other Celestial, viz.
Christ's Body and Blood. Iren. Lib. 4. adv. Haer. c. 34. Ex duabus rebus
constat, terrena and caelesti.


Clemens Alex. Paed. l. 1. cap. 6. (...). Paedag. l. 2. c. 2. in fine. (...).
understood those words, Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, in a
symbolical or figurative sense; and disputing against the Encratites, who
condemned all use of Wine, he confutes them from the Example of our Savior who
drank in the holy Eucharist of the fruit of the Vine. An evident proof that
Clemens did not believe any transubstantiation of the substance of the Wine
into the very Blood of Christ.

Tertullian disputing against Marcion, who held that Christ had not a real but
fantastic body only, (as Romanists speak of the Sacramental Elements, which
seem only to be what in truth they are not) draws an argument from the
Eucharist, saying, A figure of a Body argues a true Body; (in another place,
Christ represented by Bread his Body) But Christ taking Bread made it his Body,
In Marcion lib. 1. c. 14. Repraesentat corpus suum pane. Ad Marcion. lib. 4. c.
4. Hoc est corpus meum, hoc est figura corporis mei. V. lib. 3. in Marcion. c.
19. corporis sui figuram pani dedisse.
saying, This is my Body, i.e. the figure of my Body. So Tertullian understood
it. Marcion might easily have retorted this Argument, if the substance of Bread
remained not in the Sacrament, by saying, As the Bread in the Sacrament seems
to be Bread, but is not truly and really so, in like manner Christ's body
appeared to to be a true humane Body, but was not really what it seemed.

Origin in his third Dialogue against Marcion uses the same argument, V. Hom.
9. Si secundum literam sequaris occidit haec litera. Hom. 7. In cap. 17. Matthew.
Juxta id quod habet materiale. Haec de Typico Symbolicoque corpore.
and in his seventh Homily on Levit. he says, In the Gospel there is the
Letter which kills him who understands not spiritually. If according to the
letter you take those words, Unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc.
Occidet haec litera, this letter or literal sense will kill ye. And in another
place he is not afraid to affirm, that the consecrated Elements according to
what is material in them go into the belly and so into the draught, which it
were horrid blasphemy to affirm of Christ's natural Body. But he ascribes it to
his sacramental, typical or symbolical Body, as he there calls it.

Cyprian disputing against the Aquarii, who would not use Wine but Water only
in the holy Eucharist, Epist. 63. Vinum quo Christi sanguis ostenditur.
argues in this manner, Where there is no Wine in the Cup, the blood of Christ
cannot be expressed, for we see the blood to be shown, (ostendi) in the Wine.
And in his Comment upon the Lords Prayer he applies those words, Give us this
day our daily bread, to the sacramental bread. The same Cyprian declares in his
Sermon of the Lords Supper what manner of body is in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, when he says, Veracissimum and sanctissimum creat and corpus suum
sanctificat. De coena Dom.
Who continually, even to this present day, does create, sanctify and bless
his Body, distributing the same to godly Receivers. Now it is undeniable that
Christ's very own proper body is not continually created, sanctified or blessed.

The words of Athanasius are very remarkable. "Our Lord distinguishes the
Spirit from the Flesh, Ad Serapion. De Spir. S. In cap. 6. Joann. V. C^prian.
de coena Dom. and August. de verb^s Apost. Sermon. 2. Tom. 10. spiritualiter
intelligenda sunt, nisi manducaveritis carnem, etc. Aug. Tract. 27. in Joan.
ubi plura.
that we might learn that the words he spoke John 6. were not carnal, but
spiritual. For to how many men was his body enough to eat, that it should
become the food of the whole World? But therefore he mentions his Ascension
into Heaven, that he might draw us off from a corporal sense, and thenceforward
should understand his Flesh he spoke of as heavenly and spiritual Food (...),
for the words I speak to you are spirit and life; as if he had said, my Body
which is shown and given for the World is given for food that it may be
spiritually (...) communicated to every one.

Cyril of Jerusalem says under the Type, (...) of Bread, Mystagog. lib. 4.
where he grants that in John 6, etc. Except ye eat, is to be understood (...)
spiritually.
Christ's Body is given thee, and under the Type of Wine, his Blood.

Nazianzen terms the Bread and Wine (...) antitypes of Christ's Body and
Blood. In like manner Dionysius Areopag. and Basil in his Liturgy.

But I must not forget Gregory Nyssen; As, says he, In Laudem Gorgoniae. Orat.
in Baptis.
the Altar is by Nature a common Stone, but being consecrated to God's service
is made an Holy Table; and as the Eucharistical Bread is at first common Bread,
but when the Mystery, i.e. Mystical Prayer of consecration has sanctified it,
is called and is the Body of Christ. As the Priest to day a common man by
benediction is made a Teacher of Piety, and nothing changed in body, has his
soul transformed by invisible Grace, so the Water in Baptism when it is nothing
else but water by the heavenly blessing of Grace renews a man. Where it is
evident Gregory Nyssen allows no other Transubstantiation in the Eucharist
than in Baptism, the Ordination of a Priest, or the Consecration of an Altar.

Chrysostom in his Epistle to Caesarius (which is to be seen in the Florentine
Library Which is published since this Author wrote. See the Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Chapter of E. in answer to the Bishop of Meaux, in Append. It is
quoted by Damascen. contra Acephalos. Etiamsi Natura panis permansit. Hom. 11.
in Math. V. Athanas. ad Serap. de SS. Comment. in 1 Cor. 10. V. Chrysostom. Hom.
46. in Joan. Sicut mortis similitudinem sumpsisti, ita etiam similitudinem
pretiosi sanguinis. De Sacramentis lib 4. cap. 5. Haec oblatio est figura
corporis and sanguinis Domini. Ibid. Fide tangitur Christus, non corpore.
, as Peter Martyr a Florentine witnesses, as also in the University-Library at
Oxford) writes after this manner, Before the bread be sanctified, we call it
Bread; but the divine Grace sanctifying it, we call it the Lords Body, although
the nature of bread remain. These words directly overthrow Transubstantiation.
In another place the same Father discourses after this manner, If it be so
dangerous to apply to private uses these hallowed Vessels in the which is not
the very true body of Christ, but only the Mystery of his Body is contained,
etc. much more our bodies to sin. Adding, That we ought to climb up into
Heaven, when we receive the Communion, if we would have the fruition of
Christ's Body, yea rather above the Heavens; for, says he in another place,
Wheresoever the carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together. The
Lord is the Carcass because of his death, and this is a Table for mounting
Eagles, not for prattling Jays.

I shall now add the words of St. Ambrose, who discoursing of our Savior's
celebrating the holy Sacrament with his Disciples, breaking bread and giving it
to them, saying, Take, eat, this is my body, etc. adds, As ye have received the
similitude of my death, so drink also the similitude of my precious blood. This
oblation is the figure of the Body and Blood of the Lord. In another place,
Christ is touched by Faith, not bodily.

Let us now hear Theodoret's testimony, Our Savior, says he, In Lucam lib. 6.
cap. 8. So Saint Jerome in Psalm. 50. Dei, tui corpus and sanguinem mente
continge, cordis manu suscipe.
in the institution of the Eucharist changed the names (not natures) of things,
and applied that to his body, which belonged to the symbol or sign of it, and
to the sign what appertained to his body, which he did, that such as partake of
the divine Mysteries should not be attent on the nature of those things they
see, but by the change of names should believe that mutation which is made by
Grace. For he, (that is Christ) that called what is by nature a Body, Wheat or
Bread, the same honored the signs or symbols with the names of his Body and
Blood, not changing their Nature, Dial. 1.8. (...).
but adding Grace to Nature. And when the Eutychian Heretic would hence draw
an argument, that as the signs of Christ's Body and Blood are one thing before
Consecration, another after it; so our Lord's body after it is Union to his
divine Person ceased to be in substance what it appeared, and was changed into
the divine Nature of the Godhead. Theodoret replieth upon him, (...).
You are taken in your own Net; for the Mystical signs after Consecration
recede not from their former nature, but remain in their former substance, form
and appearance. Mark. He says not only in their former form and appearance,
but in their substance also. This is an irrefragable testimony against the
Novel Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

I will add the words of Gelasius, who was, as some say, Bishop of Rome; but
however one that lived toward the latter end of the fifth Century. His words
are plain in his Book against Eutyches and Nestorius. Lib. de duabus Christi
Naturis.
The Sacraments we receive of Christ's body and blood are divine things, by
which we are made partakers of the divine Nature, and yet the substance or
nature of Bread and Wine cease not. And indeed the Image of the body and
blood of Christ in the sacramental participation is celebrated. Tamen non
definit esse substantia vel Natura panis and vini Imago and similitudo, etc. In
ejus imagine profitemur, celebramus and sumimus. Permanent tamen in sua
proprietate.
We must therefore think that of Christ our Lord which we profess, celebrate
and take in his Image, i.e. the Sacramental signs of his Body and Blood, that
as these by the operation of the Holy Ghost pass into a divine substance, and
yet remain in the propriety of their own nature; so that great mystery of the
Incarnation whose Virtue they represent, show one whole true Christ consisting
of two Natures properly remaining. The same is affirmed by the Patriarch
Ephraim, in Photii Bibliotheca Cod. 229.


Augustine, Tract. 25. in Joan. Basil in Psalm. 33. says the same. Lib. 3. de
Doctrine. Christ. cap 16. Flagitium jubere videtur Nolite parare fauces sed Cor.
Nos non tangimus Christum, sed credimus. Augustine. Sermon. 33. in Lucam.
Devorandus auditu, ruminandus intellectu, side digerendus, Tertul. de Resur.
who has with the consent of the more Ancient Fathers, delivered several
things which utterly overthrow the present Roman Article of Faith,
Transubstantiation. As first, That Christ's Body or Flesh is not to be eaten in
a proper, carnal, oral, but figurative and spiritual sense; not by the mouth of
the body, but by Faith the mouth of the Soul. For having laid it down as a
general Rule, that whenever the Scripture seems to command any thing wicked
or flagitious, we must understand it as a figurative and improper form of
speech, he instanceth in those words, Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of
man, etc. Figura est ergo, It is therefore, says he, a figure, requiring us to
communicate in Christ's Passion sweetly, and profitably, remembering that his
flesh was crucified and wounded for us. The same is affirmed by Cyprian de
coena Domini, As often as we do this in remembrance of him we whet not our
teeth to bite, but with a sincere Faith we break the holy Bread. Which is,
says he, Cibus non dentis aut ventris, sed mentis, meat not of the mouth or
teeth, but mind. In like manner Cyril Catec. Mystag. 4. Ambrose de Sacramentis
lib. 1. cap. 4. Idem Sermon. 58. and in Lucae cap. 10. v. 24. Besides others of
the Fathers I shall not now mention.

Tract. 26. in Joan. Cyprian de coena says the same. Compare Aug. De Civit.
Dei l. 21. c. 25.
Of the Lord's Table, says he, some receive to life, others to damnation; but
the thing whereof it is a Sacrament every man receives to life, none to death.
To eat that meat and to drink that drink our Savior explaineth when he says,
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me; whence he that
dwells not in Christ, (proculdubio) questionless neither eats nor drinks
spiritually, although he carnally and visibly press with his teeth the Sacrament
of Christ's body and blood; but rather eats and drinks the Sacrament of so
great a thing to his own condemnation, because being unclean he presumes to
come to the Sacrament of Christ. Whosoever eats me shall live by me. In
another place; Non dicitur qui manducat digne, sed qui manducat me. Cajetan. in
locum.
He that is at discord with Christ or an enemy to Christ, neither eats his
body nor drinks his blood, although he daily receive indifferently (as if there
were no difference betwixt that bread and common bread) the Sacrament of so
great a thing to the punishment of his own presumption. Which is no more than
what Origin had written long before him on Matthew. 15. where he says, Sentent.
339. Qui discordat a Christo non corpus ejus manducat, etc. V. Ambrose de it is
qui myster. initiantur, cap. 9.
If it were possible for any wicked man, persevering such, to eat the Word made
flesh, seeing he is the living bread, it would not have been written, Whosoever
eats this bread shall live for ever. St. Hierom in Jerem. lib. 4. cap. 22.
and also cap. 66. in Esai. affirms the same, saying, That Heretics do not eat
the body or drink the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, because then they
should have everlasting life.

Augustine expressly affirms, In signis diversis cadem fides. Aug. Tract. 45.
in Joan. ubi plura legas. Lib. 20. cont Faustum, c. 21.
that our Fathers the Patriarchs and Prophets under the Law did eat the same
spiritual meat and drink the same spiritual drink with us under the Gospel,
i.e. Christ: for they drank of that Rock which followed them, and that Rock,
St. Paul says, was Christ, Tract. 26. on John. Contr. Faustum. lib. 19. cap.
16. Whence it undeniably follows, that the eating of Christ's flesh in an oral
carnal manner is not necessary to salvation, which before Christ's Incarnation
was impossible as it is now unprofitable.

Augustine, Epist. ad Dardanum, writes, Epist. 57. Tolie a Corporibus locorum
spatia and nusquam erunt. Christus ubique per id quod Deus est, in coe^o autem
per id quod homo est, etc.
that Christ's body being a true humane body necessarily takes up a space
answerable to its quantity; and says, That to deny a body to take up space, is
to deny it to be a true body. And adds, That the body of Christ is not
everywhere, but in a certain determinate place. Whereby he utterly overthrows
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the possibility of eating and chewing, or,
which is all one, the swallowing down whole Christ's body, that it should be in
a thousand places at once, and should be contained whole under the least piece
of Wafer. Which is in effect to revive the Heresy of Marcion and the
Manichees, who denied the verity of Christ's Body turning it into a Phantasm,
Non he corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis. Sacramentum vobis commendavi,
etc. Compare Cyprian de unctione Chrismatis. Christus tradidit Discipulis
figuram corporis sui. Augustine. in Psalm 3. Non hoc corpus quod videtis,
manducaturi estis. Sacramentum commendavi vobis quod spiritualiter intellectum
vivificabitvos. Epist. 23.
Sprite or Spirit. But I cannot omit his words upon the 98th Psalm, where he
brings in our Savior speaking thus to his Apostles: Ye shall not eat this body
ye see, nor drink that blood that my Crucifiers shall shed. I have commended to
you a Sacrament which being spiritually understood, spiritualiter intellectum
shall give you life. What can possibly be said more plainly by any Protestant
against Transubstantiation? Our Adversaries answer, That they did eat the very
same body which they did see, but not codem modo, not in a mortal, visible, but
in an invisible, immortal and impassible manner. Which Answer signifies
nothing; For although not in the same manner, yet they grant the very same body
was really and substantially eaten by the Apostles which they saw present with
them at the Table, and that not in a spiritual and Sacramental, but in a
corporal, carnal and substantial sense, which perfectly contradicts what Saint
Augustine there says, Ye shall not eat the body ye see, etc. Again, I would
gladly be resolved whether the Apostles did eat Christ's very body then present
as mortal or immortal. If as mortal and passible, then they did eat it eodem
modo after the same manner, as it was there present and seen by them; if as
immortal, how did then Christ's body really die upon the Cross? And then it
must be granted that Christ's body was immortal before his Resurrection or
Ascension. I will only add, that I be not too tedious, his words in his
Epistle to Boniface, If Sacraments had not some similitude or likeness of those
things of which they are Sacraments, Ex hac similitudine plerumque etiam
ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. Compare Quaest. in Levit. lib. 3. cap. 57.
Sicut scriptum est, septem spicae septem anni sunt. Non enim dixit septem annos
significant.
they would be no Sacraments. From this similitude for the most part they
receive the names of the things themselves they represent. As then, secundum
quendam modum, after some manner, the Sacrament of Christ's body is his body,
so the Sacrament of Faith is Faith. Thus I hope I have made it evident, that
the present Doctrine of Transubstantiation is no part of the Primitive and
Catholic Faith; which the Fathers in the five first Centuries after Christ
owned not, but refuted and condemned it.

I know very well that many things are objected against us out of the Fathers,
that Ignatius, Justin Martyr and Irenaeus affirm, that the Bread and Wine in
the holy Eucharist is the Body, flesh and blood of Christ; yea, as Cyprian and
Saint Ambrose declare, That they are changed, De coena Domini. De Sacram.
tho not in show or Effigies, yet in Nature; that they remain what they were,
and are changed into another thing. To all which in brief I answer, That we
question not the truth of him that said, This is my Body. We unfeignedly grant
it is so, secundum quendam modum, as Augustine above, Epist. 23.
in a true and sacramental, tho not literal and proper sense. We undoubtedly
believe on Saint Paul's infallible Authority, that the Rock in the Wilderness
of which the Israelites drank was Christ; he says not, as Saint Augustine
somewhere observes, it signified Christ, but it was Christ; yet no man is so
simple as to understand those words not in a figurative and improper but a
proper and literal sense. Furthermore, Petra erat Christus. Non dixit Petra
significat Christum, etc. Quaestiones in Levitic. l. 3. c. 37.
we grant with Cyprian that the Bread and Wine are not changed in outward show,
yet in Nature (taking the word Nature in a general sense, as when we say, a man
becoming more kind and civil, he is grown better natured.) In regard of common
bread and wine they are changed and converted into an holy Sacrament, wherein
we have Communion with, or real, tho spitual, communication of the body and
blood of Christ. In like manner, we subscribe to that of Ambrose, That they
remain what they are, i.e. as to substance, (which directly overthrows
Transubstantiation) and yet are changed into other things as to use and
quality. When in and by the Resurrection a natural, mortal and corruptible body
is turned into a spiritual and immortal one, we all grant the nature of it is
changed; yet no good Christian will deny but that it remains for substance the
very same body.

I know also our Adversaries much urge the sayings of Hilary and Cyril of Alex.
Lib 6. de Trin. in Council. Ephesians.
That by virtue of the Eucharist Christ's body and blood is corporally and
naturally united to us. But this is impertinently alleged; for they speak not
of the Union of Christ's Body and Blood to the outward Elements of Bread and
Wine, but to the souls and bodies of all faithful Communicants, and to them
only, who thereby become bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. In a word.
As the Fathers say, Christ's Body is in us, V. Ambrose de Sacram. l 4. c. 4.
Augustine. Tract. 1. in Epist. Joann. Sicut Christus in nobis hic, ita nos ibi
in illo sumus.
so that our bodies are in him; not only by Faith and Charity, but in very
deed. And if it be so, that our substance is not turned into Christ's
substance, why should we think that the substance of the bread must be changed
into the substance of Christ's body? Or his body should be any more corporally
in our body than our body is in his?

Lastly, They vehemently press the sayings of Chrysostom and other of the
Fathers in their popular Homilies who say, Hom. 83. in Matthew. Hom. 63. in
Matthew. Hom. 60. ad Populum Antiochen. Hom. 45. in Joann. Hom. 24. in 1. Epist.
ad Corinth. Vid. Aug.
in the holy Sacrament, we see, touch and eat Christ's body, that our tongues
are made red with his blood, even that blood which did flow from his side on
the Cross, that what he suffered not on the Cross he suffers in the Sacrament,
viz. his body to be broken with our teeth. Do thou see Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament? Think it not. In like manner Cyril of Jerus. Mystag. But such
Hyperbolical expressions used by the Fathers to stir up devotion and preserve
an high reverence of the Sacrament in the minds of their Hearers are not to be
taken, as our Adversaries well know, in a strict, literal and dogmatical sense.
No Papist according to his own principles can rationally hold, that Christ's
body is corporally pressed, pierced or touched by men's teeth, or that their
tongues are dyed red with his blood, seeing they affirm that Christ's Body is
there, incruente, in an unbloudy manner; insomuch that they acknowledge those
words in Berengarius his Recantation, tho drawn up by the Pope, viz. That
Christ's flesh in the Sacrament is sensually pressed or torn by men's teeth,
must be cautiously understood, not of Christ's Body, but of the outward Species
or Elements only, Author Glossae in Decret.
lest we fall into a worse Error, than that he retracted.

Secondly, I answer, That the Fathers use the like Rhetocal or Hyperbolical
expressions in their popular Discourses concerning Baptism; Cap 19. Passio
Domini in qua tingimur. Mystag. 4. In Sacramentis, non quid sint, sed quid
ostendant, attenditur; quoniam signa sunt rerum aliud existentia and aliud
significantia. Aug. cont. Max. l. 3. c. 22. Ne quis attendat in eis quod sunt,
etc. de Doctr. Christ. c. 7. Hom. 16. in Sacram. Euchar. Tom. 6.
wherein neither we nor our Adversaries admit of any Transubstantiation. Thus
Tertullian in his Book of Baptism says, that thereby we are dyed in the
passion or blood of our Lord. In like manner Cyril of Jerusalem, after he had
instructed Christians not to look upon the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament as
mere Bread and Wine, whatever sense suggesteth, but as the body and blood of
Christ, affirms the same of the Water in Baptism, that it is not (...) mere
or bare Water, and the same he says of the Oil in Chrism, though neither of
them are substantially changed into the very blood of Christ. Many more
instances might be added, but these may suffice. I will only take notice of a
Similitude used by St. Chrysostom, in which Bellarmin triumphs. It Is this: As,
says he, Wax set on fire loses its substance being turned into fire, so by
consecration the substance of the bread is changed into the flesh of Christ. To
which, and the like expressions quoted out of the Fathers, In Epiphanium, page
244. and page 288.
I shall answer in the words of Petavius the Jesuit: There are many things,
says he, in the Holy Fathers, especially in Chrysostom, scattered here and
there in their Homilies, which if you would reduce to the rule of exact Truth,
they will seem altogether void of good sense: Sixtus Senensis lib. 6. Biblioth.
Annotat. 152.
Another of their own Church ingenuously aknowledgeth that Preachers, such as
the Fathers were in their Homilies and popular Discourses, often speak things
by an Hyperbole, being carried away, affectuum impetu and orationis cursu, with
the heat of their affections; which often, says he, befell Chrysostom. Yea,
Rhetoricati sumus and ali quid declamationibus dedimus.
Saint Hierom confesses of himself, We have played the Rhetoricians in a
Declamatory way. To close this. Similitudes are the weakest kind of Arguments.
Neither may our Adversaries in prudence urge this similitude of fired Wax too
vehemently against us. If so; they must necessarily grant, that not only the
substance of the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament cease to be, but the very
outward accidents also. For when Wax is fired, not only the substance but the
very accidents are disserent from what they were before. And so much at present
for Transubstantiation.

I pass to the next Article, Purgatory. 3. Art. Concerning Purgatory.
The Ancient Fathers for five hundred years after Christ, did not hold the
Romish Doctrine of Purgatory as an Article of Faith; yea, some of them expressly
contradict it. I will begin with the Greek Fathers. Clemens Romanus and
Ignatius in their genuine Writings take no notice at all of it.

Justin Martyr denies it. We believe, says he, (...), (...).
every man after his departure hence goes according to his works either into
everlasting punishment or life. And immediately adds. Men would avoid sin, if
they considered that they must go (without Repentance) into eternal punishment
by fire. But of enduring temporal punishment for sin by fire, not a word is to
be found in all his Writings. Quest. 75.
Amongst the Questions and Answers which are printed with his Works, it is thus
resolved. After the departure of Souls out of their Bodies (...), presently,
they are by Angels carried to places fit for them; the Souls of the just to
Paradise, of the unjust to Hell, in which places they are kept until the
Resurrection. Here no notice is taken of Purgatory or any middle or third place
out of which Souls may be delivered by Prayers, Masses, Indulgences, etc. It Is
true, this Writer is much younger than Justin Martyr, but it makes the more
against our Adversaries; for it shows that long after his death this Article
of Roman Faith was not Catholic or universally received.

In Irenaeus, (as Erasmus also has observed who was very well seen in his
Writings) there is no mention of Purgatory, but in the close of his last Book
there is somewhat contradicting it, for without any distinction of Persons or
sins, mortal or venial; he declares his opinion, that the Souls of all Christ's
Disciples go to one invisible place, Origin. Hom. 18. in Jeremiam, page 163.
edit. Huet.

Dum hic sumus, remedium non postea.

Vita Constant. lib. 4.63.


(hades) there remaining till the Resurrection, as Tertullian, Origin,
Lactanctius, Ambrose and other of the Fathers held, which is inconsistent with
Purgatory as invocation of dead Saints also, and contradicted by the Romanists.

Eusebius Caesariensis has written several Volumes, in all which, as Scultetus
has noted, there is not the least mention of Purgatory. It Is true, he relates
how the people prayed for the Soul of Constantine. But Constantine, as he
assures us in the next Chapter, went not to Purgatory, but was taken up to his
God, and joined his divine part, his Soul, to God; yea, a little before his
death, he himself, as Eusebius reports, used these words, Now I know my self to
be happy, to be now accounted worthy of eternal life. Prayer then for the dead
does not necessarily infer Purgatory. De Praep. Evang. lib. 11. c. 20. lib. 13.
I grant, he reports Plato's opinion concerning purgation of a middle sort of
men by temporal punishments after death. But adds, that Plato, through
ignorance of the Scripture erred in many things.

I pass to Athanasius, in all whose Writings, tho many and large, I can find no
mention of this Article of Faith, Purgatory; and am the more confirmed it
cannot be found, in regard Bellarmin quotes nothing out of him or Eusebius
against us.

Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration in Caesarium, Oration 10.
delivers himself thus, I am moved by the sayings of the Wise, that every Soul
that is beloved of God (as the Souls sent by Romanists to Purgatory are
acknowledged to be) presently (...), after the loosing from the body and
departure hence, that which darkened the mind, being either purged or cast from
it or done away, in what sort I cannot well express, (whence it is evident he
believed not they were purged by fire, as Romanists peremptorily affirm)
begins sensibly to discern that good which remains for it, to be filled
with wonderful delight, and to leap for joy. But this wonderful delight and joy
cannot consist with Purgatory torments, or the fear of them. Nazianzen then was
no Papist in this point. On those words, Orat. de Paschate, (...).
Ye shall carry out nothing until the morning, etc. He says, Beyond or after
this night, i. e. after death, there is no purging; if no purging, no
Purgatory. In another place he says, After this life is a time of punishment,
but not of purging. Hence he adds, It is better for a man to be chastis'd and
purged by temporal affliction here. All which places directly confront the
Romish Doctrine concerning purgation of Souls by fire after death. In his
fourth Oration on Baptism he mentions several sorts of fire: I know, says he,
the purging fire, viz. that which Christ came to send on Earth, viz. the fire
of Tribulation and temporal Affliction, as Nicetas in his Comment understands
it. The fire of love and faith toward God which purges the Soul from sin.
Therefore, says he, Christ desired to have it kindled on Earth as soon as
might be that we might have the benefit of it. This cannot be Purgatory-fire
which Christ kindled not on Earth. I know, says he, another fire; but it is a
punishing, not purging fire, as that of Sodom, or that which goes before the
face of the Lord to burn up his Enemies, or the fire joined with the
never-dying worm, which is eternal. Had Nazianzen known any other fire
purgative of Souls after this life, no question he would here have mentioned
it; but he was it seems wholly ignorant of this Romish Purgative fire after
death, which Bellarmine asserts to be a point of Faith, which he that believes
not cannot be saved, De Purgat. l. 10. c. 15.
but shall go to Hell. Parcite, non credimus. However to make a show of
Nazianzen's consent, he quoteth those words in his Oration, In Sancta lumina,
They shall be baptized with another fire, which is the last Baptism -- which
devours the gross matter like fire, and consumes the levity of sin. But herein
the Cardinal discovers much want of sincerity and fair dealing, for Nazianzen
in that place speaks thus (...). By chance, or it may be, they shall be there
baptized with fire; so that he delivers it not positively as an Artiele of
Faith, but as an uncertain Opinion or possibility only, as Augustine does after
him. Again, he directs his Speech to the Novatian Heretics. But the Roman
Church is not so merciful as to send Heretics to Purgatory, and possibly he
might mean by that Fire, Origin. cont. Cols. l. 5.

Cyril. Catech. 15.


the fire of Conflagration at the end of the World; as others of the Fathers,
(which Bellarmin denies not) are sometimes to be understood.

I must not omit his intimate Friend Basil the Great, who says, Moral. sum.
lib. 10.
The present time is the time of repentance and remission of sins. In his
Exhortation to Baptism, he mentions only Heaven and Hell taking no notice of
Purgatory. By the Baptism of Fire he understands (...), the word of Doctrine.
In his Comment on Psalm. 33. he distinguishes two sorts of men only, such as
are dead to sin and die in a mortified and sanctified Estate, and such as are
sinners. The death of the former is blessed, of the latter, miserable, in
regard punishment attends them like Dives in the Parable: Now Dives, we know,
was in Hell, as is plain, Luke 16. not Purgatory. Basil therefore it seems
knew no such place.

I pass to Epiphanius, who confuting the Novatians, writes thus: Her. 59.
In the other World after men's death there is no Fasting, Penance, Alms or
Piety; there Lazarus comes not to Dives, nor Dives to Lazarus. (Why did he not
except those who are laboring in Purgatory, as Romanists speak?) Epiphanius
goes on; The Storehouses are sealed, no coming out, the time accomplished, the
Combat ended, the Race run, and the Crowns are given, (To what end then are
Prayers, Masses, Indulgences, etc?) and they who have striven are quiet. If
quiet, how laboring in Purgatory? Again, All things are plainly ended after
death; whilst all are in Combat, after falling there may be rising again.
There is yet hope, there is yet help -- Salvation is not desperate. After death
the King shuts the door, admits none. After our departure we may not correct
what was amiss formerly in us. How are these words reconcilable to the modern
Romans Faith? They say, men may correct after death, by the help of others,
what was formerly amiss in them. After death Salvation is not desperate, there
is yet hope and help for some of a middle sort when they have undergone
temporary punishment or penance in Purgatory. The door of Heaven after death is
not shut, the Storehouses are not sealed up, but may be opened afterward; the
Combat is not ended, nor, (whatsoever Epiphanius says) all the Crowns yet
given, some being reserved for those that are making satisfaction, for their
venial sins or completing it for those that were mortal in Purgatory. Yet the
Fathers are all theirs, and the Roman Church never did, never can, err.

But it is objected, that Epiphanius undoubtedly held Purgatory as a point of
Faith, in regard he allows Prayers for the dead, and condemns Aerius as an
Heretic for denying it.

I answer, Prayer for the dead does no way prove the Romish Purgatory. Or that
they for whom the Church anciently prayed were in pain or torment; neither does
Epiphanius intimate any such thing, yea he contradicts it in part at least,
when he says, We pray for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs; who, as
our Adversaries confess, were never in Purgatory, but happy in the Lord. Saint
Ambrose prayed for the Emperor Valentinian when deceased, De Obitu Valentin.
Confess. lib. 9. cap. ult.
yet in the very same place he declares that he believed he was in heavenly
Glory: Saint Augustine also prayed for his Mother Monica when departed; yet
immediately adds, that he believed God had granted what he begged, i. e.
remission of her sins and everlasting life. Prayer then for the dead does not
infer Purgatory. But this by the way.

Let us now hear what Saint Chrysostom says in his third Sermon upon the
Philippians, he makes not three, but only two sorts of Christians; Such as die
in the true Faith, and such as die in Infidelity and their Sins. The former
after their departure out of this life are blessed, who are gone to Christ, and
there are nearer to him, not by Faith, but face to face. And Homily the fourth
on the Epistle to the Hebrews, Tell me what mean those bright Lamps in
Funerals? Is it not that we bring forth the dead like victorious Combatants?
(...).
Why are the Hymns? Is it not because we glorify God, for crowning him that is
departed, (...), that he has freed him from labors and from the fear of
death, having him with himself? Consider what ye sing when ye say, Return unto
thy Rest, O my soul, etc. These expressions agree with Purgatory like Water
with Fire. How are they blessed with Christ, victorious, crowned, free from all
sorrows, at rest and peace, who being of the number of the faithful, no gross
sinners, but in a state of Grace, are yet tormented in the fiery flames of
Purgatory. The same Father in another place has these words, Hom. 5. in
Genesin.
He that in this present life shall not wash away his sins, shall find no
consolation hereafter; this is the time of combating, that, of crowning. I
shall only add what he writes in his second Homily upon Lazarus, quoted by
Bellarmin, When we are departed hence it is not in our power to repent, or to
wash away the sins we have committed. V. Cyril. Alexand. in Joan. lib. 12. c.
36.
Thus we have seen that the Greek Fathers in the first Ages of the Church were
not of the present Roman Faith as to this new Article of Purgatory. I might
descend lower were it not needless; for it is confessed by some of the Romish
Writers, V. Polyd. Virg. de invent. rerum. lib. 8. c. 1. Alph. de Castro c. 8.
p. 572.
particularly Roffensis the Pope's Martyr in Henry VIII. his days, That in the
ancient Fathers, especially the Greeks, there is either none, or very rare,
mention of Purgatory. Neither, says he, did the Latin Fathers all at once
receive it, neither does the Greek Church at this day believe it. This
Concession is true; for the Greeks in their printed Confession offered to the
Council of Basil, Jeremy Patriarch of Constantinople, Ann. 1438.
in his Censure of the Lutheran Confession, and Cyril Patriarch of that Church
in his Confession of Faith, sent by him to Cornelius Hage Ambassador for the
States of Holland at Constantinople, An. 1630. deny any purgation of sins after
death by fire in Purgatory, which, say the Greeks in their Apology, was
condemned by the fifth General Council, although it is not now to be found in the
late Editions of the Councils.

From what has been said I hope it is evident, First, That there neither is
nor ever was any Catholic or universal consent of all Christian Churches as to
this new Roman Article of Faith, viz. Purgatory. Secondly, That Bellarmin the
Jesuit does but abuse the World in quoting the Greek Fathers as owning it. For,
is it probable that the Romans should understand their meaning in their
Writings better than themselves?

It Is true, some of them, as Origin, Gregory Nyssen, etc. mention Purgation of
Souls from sin by Fire, but it makes nothing for the Popish doctrine of
Purgatory. For First, Origen's Purgatory is universal, which all, Prophets,
Apostles, Origin. in Exodus Hom. 6.
the blessed Virgin, must pass through; not some only, neither very good nor
very bad, but of a middle sort, as Romanists hold. Secondly, The Purgation,
Saint Basil, Gregory Nyssen, and others speak of, is not before the
Resurrection, V. Origin in lib. Regum. p. 36. Contra Celsum, lib. 5. p. 241.
Cyrilli Catech. l. 15. page 168.

Ego puto quod and post resurrectionem ex mortuis indigeamus sacramento nos
eluente and purgante. Origin. Hom. 14. in Lucam.


but at the end of the World, by the fire of Conflagration, which shall purge,
as some think, the whole Creation, so that at last all men, even Devils too,
shall be saved, as Origin held, who turned Hell into Purgatory. Such Sentences
of the Fathers will not at all be serviceable to our Adversaries purpose. So
much for the Greek; come we now to the Latin Fathers.

I shall begin with Tertullian, who in his Apologetick, Cap. 47. mentions only
two places to which Souls go, Hell and Paradise. In his Book De Testimon.
Animae Cap. 4. He thus bespeaketh the Soul: We affirm thee to remain after
death, and to expect the day of judgment; Expectare diem Judicii proque merito
aut cruciatui destinari, aut refrigerio utroque sempiterno.
and according to your behavior to be destinated to torment or comfort; and
both eternal. As for temporary torments in the fire of Purgatory before the day
of Judgment, Tertullian takes no notice of them. In his fifth Book against
Marcion, Cap. 6. commenting on that famous place, 1 Cor. 3. he rightly
understands the Gold, Silver, Hay, Stubble, not of sins venial or mortal, but
Doctrines worthy or unworthy of the foundation, i. e. Christ or Christian
Religion, Strom 5. (...).
with whom agrees Clemens of Alex. in his fourth Book Cap. 34. against Marcion,
as also De Anima Cap. 35.55. he says, The Souls of all good Christians are in
Abraham 's bosom, in refrigerio, a place of refreshment until the Resurrection
(as many of the ancient Fathers thought) when they shall receive plenitudinem
mercedis, the fullness of their reward; Not, as Papists now teach, any of them
in Purgatorian torments. It is farther observable, that he there distinguishes
that place from Hell or any part of it, as Purgatory is supposed to be. And
discoursing on those words applied by Romanists to Purgatory, Thou shall not
come out thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing; He affirms, that
all Souls abide apud inferos, till the Resurrection. Which utterly overthrows
the Roman Doctrine of Purgatory and renders all their Masses, Indulgences, etc,
vain and unprofitable.

From the Master let us pass to his Scholar Saint Cyprian, who in his Epistle
to Demetrian, says, that at the ending of this temporal life we are severed
into the receptacles either of eternal death or immortality. Ad aeternae mortis
vel immortalitatis hospitia dividamur, p. 166.
And in his Book De bono mortalitatis, he comforts the Christians generally in
a time of raging Pestilence with these considerations: That the servants of
Christ when they die, depart, as Simeon desired, in peace. Enter into Paradise,
go to Christ, begin to reign with Christ, that when they are taken out of the
storms of this World they gain the haven of Rest and eternal security.
Securitatis aeternae portum petimus.
Lastly, That after death the righteous are called ad refrigerium to
refreshment; (not torment in Purgatory fire whither some are sent by the
Romanists) and the unrighteous to punishment. All which expressions are utterly
inconsistent with this new Article of Faith; as every man not blinded with
prejudice may easily discern. To the same purpose in his Epistle to Antonium;
he advises, in contradiction to the bitter doctrine of Novatus, that pardon
and peace should be granted to Penitents in extremis, at or a little before
their death; Because, says he, apud inferos exomologesis fieri non posset, in
Hell or the state of death, or in the grave (as the word Inferi is sometimes
taken) there can be no satisfaction made by suffering penance or punishment for
sin. It Is true, in the latter end of the same Epistle, he says, It Is one thing
to be presently admitted to the reward of Faith or heavenly Glory, and another
to be purged from sins by being long tormented in fire. But this testimony is
no good proof of the Roman Purgatory, in regard he there speaks expressly De
die judicii, of the day of Judgment after the Resurrection; whereas our
Adversaries confess, that their Purgatory Fire is of no use after the
Resurrection and eternal Judgment. The like saying he has in his Epistle to
Demetrian. After we have gone out of this life, nullus remanet satisfactionis
locus; There is no place for satisfying for our sins. Here life is got or lost
for ever. Our Adversaries say, after we are gone out of this World we may by
suffering in Purgatory fully satisfy God for our sins, complete our
Exomologesis or Penance, obtaining thereby at last life eternal. Surely Saint
Cyprian was of another opinion.

Come we to Lactantius. The Heathens, says he, Instit. lib. 6. c. 3. and lib.
3. c. 19.

Caeli and inferorum.


speak of a Bivium two ways, apud inferos, relating to the dead; which more
truly say, that these two ways are Heaven and Hell, for to the righteous
immortality, to the wicked eternal death belongs. Here Lactantius mentions two,
not three ways, men go after death.

The next Latin Father is Saint Hilary, who in his Comment on Matthew. C. 27.
overthrows the main ground on which Purgatory is built; for he says,
expounding the Parable of the Virgins, Alienis meritis ac operibus neminem
adjuvandum etc. that no man after this life can be helped or delivered by the
good works or merits of others, because every man must necessarily provide Oil
for his own Lamp. The wise Virgins in Saint Hilary's judgment are they, who
embracing the opportunity or season of this life, the time of repentance and
reconciliation with God, prepare themselves for Christ's coming. The foolish
are they who would be borrowing Oil of their Neighbors, provide not in time
for themselves, but depend on the courtesy of others, their Works, Prayers,
Merits, which will stand them in no stead, when being out of their bodies they
have neglected and lost the time of repentance. If Hilary was in the right,
redemption of Souls out of Purgatory by other men's Prayers, Merits, Fastings,
by Indulgences, Masses, Pardons, Scapularies, and such foolish inventions, are
all vain and insignificant, which will stand men in no stead, yield them no
help or relief. The same Father elsewhere makes only two sorts of men Fideles
and Impii, In Psalm. p. 120.
faithful and impious; The former, he says, going out of the body are placed
in Abraham's bosom, where they are kept free from evil, viz. of punishment,
till after the resurrection (so he thought) they be admitted into Heaven; the
other are hindered like Dives by the interposing Gulf from going thither. To the
same purpose he discourses in Psalm 2.

I pass to Saint Ambrose, who in his Book De Bono Mortis, says thus: Cap. 2.
He that receives not here remission of sins shall not be there, i. e. in
Heaven. He speaks indefinitely of all sins whether mortal or venial. And
again, Cap. 12. When that day, viz. of death, comes, they go to their
Redeemer, to the very bosom of Abraham, a place of rest, not torment, speaking
of good Christians. Certainly, it is harsh to affirm that justified persons
reconciled to God by Christ's blood, (for as Hilary even now taught us, this
must be done here in this life or no where) and consequently in a state of
Grace and favor with him, should in regard of some small venial sins or
mortal, as they are called, not fully satisfied for in this life by Penance,
Fasting, Alms, etc. be cast into fiery torments, and to lie there many years,
none know how long, unless helped out by the uncertain Prayers, Merits, etc. of
others; particularly unless the alsufficient and abundantly satisfactory Merits
of Christ be applied to them by the Popes Indulgences.

I add next Saint Hierom, In Amos cap. 9.
who says, When the Soul freed from the bands of the body shall have liberty
to fly whither it will, or whither it is compelled to go, It shall either be
carried to Hell, of which it is written, In Hell who will confess to thee? or
it shall be lifted up to Heaven. It seems a third place, viz. Purgatory,
Hierom knew not.

I will end with Saint Augustine, who having mentioned Heaven and Hell,
Hypognost. lib. 5. De Pecc. mer. and remiss. c. 28. Epist. 80.
adds, A third place we are altogether ignorant of, neither do we find it in
holy Scripture. Elsewhere he says, There is no middle place to any, that he
should not be with the Devil, who is not with Christ. In his Epistle to
Hesychius, he writes thus: In what state the day of death finds any one,
accordingly shall he be judged at the last day. The like Sentence almost word
for word we find in Justin Martyr, In Dial. p. 107.
who quoteth it as a saying of our Savior, In what things I find you, so will
I judge you. In his Epistle to Macedonius, he says, After this life there is
no place to correct our manners or what has been amiss. How then can
Repentance or temporal satisfaction for sins be perfected or supplied after
death? I will add his words upon the 31. Psalm, If God pardon sins he will
cover them; if he cover them, he will not take notice of them, if he will not
take notice of them, he will not punish them. How is this reconcilable with
Gods punishing the sins that he has pardoned, in Purgatory? It Is true, We know
God punishes sometimes in this life such as he pardons, for their future
amendment and for example to others; but what is this to punishing men after
this life, when there is no amendment possible, as our Adversaries grant, nor
others to be thereby warned?

I acknowledge there are some places quoted by Bellarmin and others, wherein
St. Augustine seems to own Purgation of the Souls of some men from sin after
this life, as De Genesi lib. 2. contr. Manich. Cap. 10. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21.
cap. 24. Although Ludovicus Vives says, Comment. in locum.
the place is not to be found in the ancient Manuscripts, nor in that printed
at Friburge, Hom. 16. inter 50. in Psalm 37.

But in his Enchiridion, his Book De fide and operibus, and Ad Dulcitium, where
he professedly handles this Point, and expounds the principal place of
Scripture now urged by Romanists for their Doctrine of Purgatory; he speaks
very doubtfully and uncertainly. First, He acknowledges that 1 Cor. 3. is
difficult and obscure, one of those intimated by Saint Paul, 2 Epist. Cap. 3.
ver. 16. of the true meaning of which he was not certain. But such an obscure
place is, as all will grant, a very unfit ground to build an Article of Faith
upon, which to deny shall be Heresy and destructive of Salvation. Secondly, To
Dulcitius, quoting his own Books beforementioned, he interprets it expressly De
igne doloris, of the figurative and metaphorical Fire of grief, (according to
Psalm 39. My heart was hot within me, at last the fire kindled, etc.) arising
from the loss of temporal enjoyments, as Estate, Wealth, etc. too earnestly
loved, yet renounced, and with some reluctance forsaken for Christ's sake and
the Gospels. Such a man, says St. Augustine, is saved, yet as it were by fire,
urit enim eum dolor, for grief burns him, as Latin Authors speak. So that by
Fire in that place, 1 Cor. 3. This learned Father did not, so far as I can
perceive, understand any proper and material fire but Metaphorical only. Then
he immediately adds, Whether therefore in this life only men suffer these
things, i. e as I said before, this figurative fire of grief, or also after
this life some such judicia, judgments or punishments follow the sense of Saint
Paul's words, quantum arbitror, as I think abhors not from truth. So that Saint
Austin does not peremptorily assert it as a point of Catholic Faith to be
believed necessarily to Salvation, that there is any such, to wit, grief after
this life, but leaves it uncertain, and delivers it as his opinion only.
Thirdly, It is worthy of our observation, that they who held (amongst whom
Saint Jerome was one) that all Christians, In fine Comment in Isaiam.
not Heretics or Schismatics) who professed faith in Christ should, how
wickedly soever they had lived and died be at last saved (an Opinion detested
by Saint Austin, and earnestly confuted by him in several places of his Works)
did bring this very Text, 1 Cor. 3. to prove it. He that builds on this
foundation, i. e. faith in Christ and the p rofession of it, wood, bay,
stubble, i. e. a wicked and barren life, shall be saved, yet so as by fire.
Saint Austin laboring to bring men off from this dangerous Error so plainly
contradicted by the Holy Scripture in many places, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Forsitan
verum est, lib. 21. de Civit. Dei, cap. 26.
is sometimes not unwilling to grant, that it is possible that some of the
weaker sort of Christians departing out of this life under the guilt of some
lesser sins might be purged some way or other from them after this life, (which
the Greeks at this day, who deny the Romish Purgatory, grant) but he is far
from believing or urging it on others as an Article of Catholic Faith, of
which to be sure he would never have spoken in so doubting and uncertain a
manner; neither will any learned man deny but that some of the Ancient Fathers,
as Saint Chrysostom, St. Jerome, with others noted by Sixtus Senensis were of
Opinion that men dying grossly wicked, yea and Devils too, says Origin, should
at last be saved, or might at least have their punishment in Hell mitigated by
the Prayers and Alms of their surviving Friends, which Tenet is now condemned
even by the Papists themselves. Fourthly, It is considerable that Saint Austin
ad Dulcitium expressly affirms, that the Fire mentioned 1 Cor. Ergo utriusque
opus probabit.
3. is such, as not only he that builds on the foundation Wood, Hay,
Stubble, but also he that builds or lays on Gold, Silver, precious Stones
must pass through. For, Saint Paul immediately adds, the fire shall try every
man's work: then he adds, the tentation of tribulation, ignis est, is fire, i.
e. in a figurative and metaphorical sense, as it is written, Ecclesiasticus 27.
The Furnace tries the Potters Vessels, and just men the tentation of
tribulation, which he explains thus: He that minds the things of this life,
(1 Cor. 7. cares too much for them) if yet for Christ's sake he be at last
willing to forsake them, shall be saved, but quasi per ignem, as it were by
fire, quia urit eum dolor rerum quas dilexerat amissarum, sed non subvertit
neque consumit fundamenti stabilitate munitum and incorruptum; because the
grief of the beloved things he has lost burns him, but subverts or consumes
him not being preserved incorrupt by the stability of the foundation; to wit,
Faith in Christ: Then he adds, Tale aliquid, etc. some such thing (i. e.
burning in the fire of grief, for of it he before spoke) to happen also after
this life, non incredibile est, is not incredible. (He says not, as Bellarmin,
must be believed under peril of damnation,) and whether it be so or no, quaeri
potest may be enquired after, and either be found or lies hid, to wit, that
some (not all) of the faithful by a kind of Purgatory or Purgative fire per
ignem quendam purgatorium, (whether figurative or proper and material he
resolves not) by how much the more or less they have loved these perishing
good things, shall by so much the sooner or later be saved, but not such of
whom it is said by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.9.
they shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, unless they be pardoned here upon
their true repentance. Can any ingenuous Person believe St. Austin took this
Purgatory Doctrine, whatsoever it be, or our Adversaries will have his meaning
to be, for an undoubted Article of the Christian Faith? Lastly, St. Austin
expounds that place the Romanists urge much in maintenance of their
Purgatory. Matthew. 5.26.
Thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing, as
Protestants do, that is, thou shall never come out thence; as donec, until, is
taken, Matthew. 1. last; and in other places. So Dulcitius had interpreted that
place, which S. Austin approves of, and applies to this present Controversy.

From all that has been said I infer, First, That the Fire mentioned, 1 Cor.
3. is not the Popish Purgatory fire, neither did Saint Austin so understand it.
Secondly, That the true sense of that place is, as he confesses, very
difficult, dark and obscure. Thirdly, That whatsoever Saint Austin inferred
from it, Whether that there is after this life a proper, or only a figurative
fire of Grief, it is no part of the Ancient Catholic Faith, but a truth, if a
truth, which a true Christian may be ignorant of without peril of damnation.
Quaripotest, It may be questioned or sought after, and possibly never be found
out, but lie hid. Fourthly, That therefore Saint Austin was no Roman Catholic,
Lib. quarto Dialog. cap.
or of Pope Pius's faith. I might add, that even Pope Gregory the Great
confesses that the Fire, 1 Cor. 3. may be understood of temporal affliction:
but I shall not descend so low at this time.

To these express places quoted out of Saint Austin, Bellarmin replies, 39.
Apud Bellarm. lib. 10. c. 5. de Purgatorio.
that he doubted not of Purgatory, but of the quality of the punishment and
sins there to be purged.

But it is evident from his own words above recited: First, That he understood
not the Fire mentioned, 1 Cor. 3. (the principal place alleged by our
Adversaries) in a proper and natural sense as they do, but moral and
Metaphorical, not of material but figurative Fire, the fire of Grief. The
Greeks in their Apology deny not Pardon or purgation of some sins after death,
tho not by material fire, for which nevertheless the Romish Church condemns
them as Heretics and rejecters of Purgatory. Secondly, It Is undeniable that he
did not hold the Purgation of sins after death, no not by the fire of Grief,
much less material fire, to be an undoubted truth or Article of Christian
Faith, De Purgat. lib. 10. cap. ult.
as Bellarmin in that place affirms it to be.

But in regard the words of Saint Cyprian in his Epistle to Antonian are much
urged by some as clearly confirming the Romish Doctrine of Purgatory, where he
writes, Aliud est statim fidei and virtutis mercedem accipere, aliud pro
peccatis longo dolor cruciatum emendari and purgari diu igne: It Is one thing
presently to receive the reward of Faith and Virtue; another for one being long
tormented with grief for his sins to be cleansed and purged a great while in
fire. To answer this place, we are first of all to observe the occasion of
these words: Saint Cyprian a little before takes notice of an Objection of the
Novatian Heretics against the receiving the Lapsi, such as for fear in time of
Persecution, like Peter, denied Christ. They alleged, that if such might be
admitted to Absolution and the Communion of the Church, none would be Martyrs,
or lay down their lives for the faith of Christ. Saint Cyprian answers, not so;
for although a time of Penance and then Peace, is granted to Adulterers, yet
Virginity and Continency did not languish or decay in the Church. Then follow
the words above mentioned, Aliud est, etc. It Is evident enough then that the
Fire here mentioned is not to be understood of any proper and material
Purgatorian fire, which Papists plead for, but Metaphorical, or of the fire of
Grief, as St. Austin expounds the Fire, 1 Cor. 3. which place most probably
Saint Cyprian here alludes unto; in regard such as fell away in time of
Persecution were not to be admitted to the peace of the Church until they had
undergone the grief and shame of a public, As Bellarmin grants, de Purgat.
lib. 1. cap. 5.
long and severe Penance, termed Exomologesis. So much Saint Cyprian's own
words intimate: It Is one thing presently to receive, as Martyrs did, the reward
of their Faith and Virtue (a great encouragement to Martyrdom) another to be
cleansed longo dolor with long grief, and (which are Paraphrastical of his
former words) to be long purged with fire. To this I shall add, that it was the
Opinion of many of the Ancient Fathers, as Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Lactantius, Biblioth. l. 6. annotat. 345.
Ambrose, with others quoted by Sixtus Senensis, that none except Martyrs were
immediately upon their death admitted admitted to the presence of God, ad
oscula Domini, to receive the Crown of Eternal Glory, but were kept in loco
invisibili, as Irenaeus, or in abditis receptaculis, in some secret invisible
places until the day of Judgment, sollicitously expecting then to receive their
final Sentence; this is pendere in die judicii ad sententiam Domini, as Saint
Cyprian there phraseth it.

Thus I hope I have given (let the Learned Reader judge) a true and fair
interpretation of Saint Cyprian's words, which do not import any proper fire to
purify Souls before the day of Judgment; so that upon the view of what is
abovesaid, we may conclude that the Romish Doctrine of Purgatory is no part of
the Ancient, Primitive and Apostolic Faith, but in the Fifth Century in Saint
Austin's days began to be a doubtful and uncertain Opinion only. So much at
present for Purgatory.

I should now make some enquiry in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers after
Indulgences, the fuel that feeds this Purgatorian Fire. Lib. 80. Tit.
Indulgentiae. De Indulgentiis pauca dici possunt per certitudinem, quia nec
Scriptura express de iis loquitur. Durand. l. 4. did. 20. qu. 3. Ambr. Hilar.
Aug. Hieronym. minime de iis loquuntur, Idem. ibid. Roffensis assert. Luther.
confut. art. 18.
But I am much discouraged in regard Alphonsus de Castro a learned and earnest
Papist, who lived near Luther's time, and knew what was the first occasion of
his opposing the Church of Rome, to wit, the abominable abuse of these
Indulgences by the Pardon-mongers: He, I say, in that very Book which he wrote
against Heresies, and Luther by name has informed me, Inter omnes est, etc.
that amongst all the Points in dispute betwixt Protestants and Papists, there
is not one which the Scripture has less clearly delivered, and of which
Ancient Writers have spoken less than concerning Indulgences. The Popes Martyr
Roffensis confesses the use of them was sero receptus in Ecclesia, of late
received by the Church. Of Purgatory, he says, there is especially amongst the
Greek Writers, fere nulla mentio, almost no mention of it. Now Indulgences, as
is granted, are grounded on Purgatory; they must stand and fall together. So
long, says he, as there was no care or fear of Purgatory no Man sought for
Pardons; for on it depends all the credit of Pardons: Take away Purgatory, and
what use of Pardons? When therefore Purgatory was so lately known and received
in the Church, who now can marvel at Pardons, that in the beginning of the
Church there was no use of them. Pardons therefore began after that they had
trembled a while at the pains of Purgatory. Thus he. Antoninus, Sylvester,
Pierius, Ostiensis, the Lovain Divines, Polydore Virgil, Cajetan, and others,
of whom more hereafter, say as much: so that it will be labor in vain to
search for them in the Writings of the ancient Authors. Here I cannot but
wonder our Adversaries do not blush to boast of their present Roman Faith and
Church, as if they were the same, only the same, with the ancient Primitive and
Catholic one, and to accuse us Protestants of Novelty, Heresy, and setting up
a new Faith and Church under the Banner of M. Luther, whereas they, not we, are
guilty of those Crimes by introducing new Articles of Faith, Purgatory and
Indulgences amongst the rest, which we only protest against.

Concerning Invocation of Saints.
I now come to Invocation of Saints and Angels, a grand Article of the Roman
Faith according to Pope Pius his new Creed, Eximium adorationts genus. Bellarm.
de Beat. Sanct.
concerning which I shall in general take the boldness to say, that for above
three hundred years after Christ there cannot be produced out of the genuine
Writings of one ancient Father one clear and pertinent testimony for Invocation
of Saints or Angels. Besides my own little observation I have good Vouchers for
this Assertion, to wit, the most Reverend and learned Primate Usher, who read
over all the Fathers, and Mr. Mountague in his Treatise of Invocation of
Saints, V. Molinaeum de Novit. Papis. p. 388. apud Chemnit. in Exam. p. 6. 13.

Apol. 2.


yea Cardinal Perron acknowledges this to be truth, who (as also Cassander)
never used in private Devotions to pray to any Saint. As for the place usually
quoted out of Justin M. to this purpose, it is grossly perverted by false
pointing. The words are these: But him (i. e. God the Father) and him, who came
from him and taught us and the Host of good Angels these things, the Son, and
the Prophetic Spirit we worship and adore. Bellarmine was not ashamed to
render them thus: But him (the Father) and his Son, who came and taught us
these things, and the Host of good Angels, and the Prophetical Spirit we
worship and adore. Thus by placing a note of distinction after (...), teaching
us these things, he abuses his Reader into a conceit that the Primitive
Christians, as Justin here witnesses, did adore not only the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, but the Host of Holy Angels also. Yea, if the Cardinals reading be
right, then they worshipped and adored the Holy Angels in the third place next
to the Father and Son before the Holy and Prophetical Spirit; which certainly
was far from the least thought or practice of the Primitive Christians or their
Apologist Justin Martyr, who elsewhere declares in his own and the Christians
names that they worshipped as the Father and Son; so in the third place, not
the Holy Angels, but the Holy Ghost. But enough of this, (...).
only we may observe by the way, with what honesty and fidelity our Adversaries
quote the Fathers.

There is another place they bring out of Irenaeus, Ut Maria Virgo sit Evae
advocata, Lib. 5. cont. Haer. ultra medium.
That the Virgin Mary may be Eves Advocate: Hence most impertinently they
infer, that Eve prayed or might pray to the Virgin Mary; whereas all that can
be concluded from those words is, that the Virgin Mary prays for Eve. I
wonder how it is possible to conceive that Eve should pray to the Virgin Mary
some thousands of years before she was born. The truth is, those words of
Irenaeus do not at all relate to any religious Advocation or Invocation; for in
that place he only makes a Parallel or comparison betwixt Eve and the Virgin
Mary, that as Eve a Virgin brought sin and death into the World, so Mary a
Virgin brought forth a Savior and Redeemer, ut Maria sit Evae advocata, that
Mary might be an Advocate or Pleader to excuse the sin of Eve and defend the
honor of the Sex. Take Tertullians Verses as a Comment on Irenaeus, who speaks
fully and clearly what he meant, Virgo viro nocuit, sed vir de virgin vicit;
Lib. 1. advers. Marcionem. V. Origin in Dialog, p. 256. and Tertul. de Habitu
mulier. c. 10.
Virginis ut virgo, caro carnis debita solvat.
That as by a Virgin came Death, so also by a Virgin came deliverance from
Death. The Virgin Mary in and by her Son making full reparation or satisfaction
for Eves transgression. What? Does this concern religious Invocation of the
blessed Virgin? But I shall not satisfy my self, much less others, in bare
Asserting. Let us come to the trial of the Cause and produce our Witnesses.

Justin Martyr, Ecclesia nec invocationibus Angelicis facit aliquid, sed pure
orationes dirigens ad Dominum. Iren. lib. 20. c. 57. in fine.
Apol. 2. giving an account to the Emperor Antoninus of the Christian Religion
says, We offer up the Sacrifices of Prayer and Thanksgiving to God; We think
him alone worthy of this Honor, by whom all things were created. And a little
after, We worship God alone.

The Church of Smyrna being accused by the Heathens, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4.
c. 15.

V. Lactant. Instit. lib. 5. cap. 11. de vera relig. c. 55.

Cont. Faustum, lib. 22. c. 21.


as if they intended to worship their martyred Bishop Saint Polycarp, answer in
vindication of themselves, We worship Christ the Son of God, but Martyrs we
worthily love (...) as his Disciples and faithful Servants, whose memory on
their Natalitia or Obit days we celebrate: which exactly agrees with St.
Austins's dogmatical resolution of this Question. We honor Angels Charitate,
non servitute, with love, not service: and in another place, with the worship
or honor of Love and Fellowship, as holy Men are worshipped in this life.

Origin against Celsus. Lib. 8, p. 386. Edit. Cant. and the same he says, lib
5. c. 60. vet. Edit.
The good Angels in some sense we reverence, honor or worship as Gods
Ministers, but we worship one God and his only Son with Prayers and
supplications, offering them to God by his only begotten, begging that he as
our High Priest would present them to God. He says not by the Intercession of
Saints upon our Prayers to them, or Angels, but Christ the Son of God our High
Priest, whose peculiar Office it is as such to present our Prayers and
spiritual Sacrifices unto God. And a little after, God alone is to be prayed
unto. Prayers are to be offered also to his only Son. (...).
And whereas Celsus alleged (as now Papists do) the power of Courtiers to
injure or help those who respect or disrespect them, V. Ambros. p. 300. in Romans
cap. 1.
Origin advises him to commit and commend himself to God only the Supreme
Ruler of all things, and to beg of him all that help and protection which
comes from Angels and just Men; For, says he, as the shadow follows the
motion of the Body, so he that pleases God has the Friends of God, V. Origin.
in Romanos 2. p. 140.
Angels and blessed Souls favorable to him, who will render God more
favorable, and will pray together with him, although unrequested. But of our
praying therefore to them not a word is to be found in all his Books against
Celsus, yea in these words the ground of all Invocation of Saints or Angels is
wholly taken away. Not to weary the Reader, lib. 5. in Cells. p. 233. He says,
all Prayers are to be offered up to God, and that it is not fit or reasonable
(...), to call upon Angels. If not on Angels, much less on Saints. The same we
find, lib. 8. in Cells. p. 402.

Clemens Alexandrinus accounted it gross folly to beg of those who are no Gods
as if they were; Strom. 7.
wherefore justly (seeing there is one good God) we and Angels beg of him the
bestowing of good things.

Tertullian says, Apologet. cap. 34. Praecepit Christus secret orare ut quem
ubique audire fideret, ei soli Religionem offerret. Tertullian. Apologet. cap.
30.
These things I can beg of none else but of him of whom I know I shall obtain
them, because he alone (which Papists dare not deny) grants them, and I to
whom it belongs to obtain them am his Servant, whom (not Saints or Angels) I
only serve or observe. And in another place, We are to ask of him by whom
something is promised, i. e. God. Have Saints or Angels promised us any thing?
De praescript. c. 8.

Arnobius, Lib. 3. contra Gent. The first God is enough to us, in him we
worship all that is to be worshipped.

Lactantius agrees with him: Invocatio supponit omnipraesentiam lib. 6. p.
183. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 16. 17.
for he advises all men to look up and adore nothing, worship nothing but the
Majesty of God our Father and Maker.

Eusebius Caesar. Demonstr. lib. 1. c. 5. and lib. 3. c. 3. shows, that the
Jewish Church directed their Adorations to God only; and for Christians he
affirms, lib. 4. c. 6. that they prayed to God only in the name of Christ
(not of Saints or Angels) as their Mediator. For seeing, says he, it is
peculiar to Christ, as the great High Priest, to frame for us spiritual
Sacrifices in praises and thanksgivings, and because as a Priest he has
offered up himself a perfect Sacrifice to God for us; V. Origin. supra. Psalm
20. Si cultus tantum dicatur, non soli Deo debetur, sed religio, etc. Aug. de
Civit. Dei, l. 10. c. 1. De Praep. lib. 12. c. 7.
hence we say to him, let him remember all thy sacrifice, etc. Here we see
Propitiation is the ground of Intercession. As for Angels, he grants to them
(...), honor according to the dignity of their excellent nature (so do we) but
reserveth (...) all religious honor or worship to God only. This is the very
Doctrine of Protestants. The due honor of Saints he explaineth thus: We go to
their Sepulchers (...), at them, (...) to make Prayers, not (...) ipsis to them
(as Trapezuntius falsely, if not perfidiously translated it) but (...), at them,
which is another thing.

But let us hear the testimony of Athanasius the truly Great, who every where
in his Orations against the Arians, Orat. tertia in Arian.
proves (as the rest of the Fathers unanimously do) Christ to be true God by
this argument, especially because he is prayed to; V. Novatian de Trinit. c.
14. Si homo tantummodo Christus, cur in orationibus invocaeur, etc. Quomodo
adest ubique invocatus, cum haec hominis natura non sit, sed Dei?
which were of no force if any Creature, Saint or Angel might be in any sense
invocated. Particularly in his fourth Oration against the Arians from that
Prayer of Saint Paul, God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way
unto you: He infers Christ to be consubstantial with the Father. For no man
is a true Catholic, (which appears hereby a Papist is not) would pray to
receive any thing of God and Angels or any Creature. Neither, says he, has
any Christian as yet (then Invocation of Saints or Angels was unknown and
unpractised amongst all true Christians) used this form of Prayer or words:
God, and an Angel (we may add Saint) grant it you. Laus Dec, Virginique Mariae,
in fine. Tom 2. and 3. Bellarm. See Dr. Brevint's Saul and Samuel at Endor.
Whether Papists use not such forms of words in their Prayers is too notorious
to be proved to any who are acquainted with their Books of Devotion. Then
taking notice of one of their chief Arguments now pressed by our new Roman
Catholics for proof of their Invocation of Angels, to wit, the words of dying
Jacob, The Angel that delivered me out of all my distresses, bless the Lads:
Athanasius (as the other Fathers unanimously) expounds them not of any created
Angel, but of the Son of God, who is God and the Angel of the Covenant, whom
Jacob saw face to face at Peniel, and terms God. So Eusebius. Hist. lib. 1. cap.
2. Ambrose in Psalm. 43. Novatian. de Trinit.

(...). Aug. Hi agnoscunt se esse creaturas. (...). Athanas. Orat. 3. in Arian.


He adds, David prayed to none for deliverance but to God; To thee, O Lord,
have I cried, etc. and concludes, (...) It is evident the Patriarch Jacob
joined none in his prayer to God but the Word, whom he therefore calls the
Angel, because he alone reveals the Father. Do not they then willingly abuse
themselves and others, who take Athanasius for a Roman Catholic, or Invocation
of Angels for an Article of the ancient Catholic faith, held by all sound
Christians in all Ages, or that the Angel appearing to the Old Patriarchs, was
a created Angel?

I will add his Contemporary Saint Hilary, who although he grants (which
Protestants deny not) that the Angels pray for the Church Militant here on
Earth, yet he no where allows Invocation of them, but on Psalm 29, and 124.
he advises all Christians to pray to God, in regard he is Omnipresent in all
places, ready to help, which is not true of Saints or Angels. In like manner on
Psalm 140. he says, In maledicto est religio creaturae. Hill. de Trinit. l. 8.
p. 106.
Magnificentiae Dei est orari, It pertains to the magnificence or Prerogative
of God to be prayed unto.

Hitherto the Coast is clear, and we have the unanimous consent of the Fathers
for about 340 years after Christ against Invocation of Saints, Angels or any
Creature. Whence we undoubtedly conclude that it is, tho a part of the present
Roman, yet not of the true ancient and Catholic Faith believed semper, ubique,
and apud omnes, always, in all places, by all sound Christians, for such
Doctrines, as Vincentius Lyrinensis rightly notes, are only truly Catholic,
that is, Universal, as the name it self Catholic signifies.

To proceed. Basil the Great, Hom. 3. in Hexaemeron. all Honor, Worship (...),
is due to God only. In Psalm 7. he says, Our hope is to be placed in God
only. In Psalm. 18. That if any man worship the Creature beside (tho with) the
Creator, he gives not glory to God, but the Creature; and in Psalm 45. Instead
of Saints and Angels he tells us, that in all our necessities God is our
only Refuge. In his Funeral Oration on Gordius, he acquainteth us with the
true ends of those commendatory or commemoratory Solemnities observed on the
Natalitia or Festivals of the Martyrs, to wit, to glorify God, and to stir up
the people to imitation of their Virtues, but no mention find we there of
praying to them.

I am not ignorant that out of Basil, Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, etc. their
Funeral Orations, some Rhetorical Apostrophes to and Compellations of the
Saints deceased are urged for Invocation of Saints by Bellarmine and others.

To which I answer, First, That in the most Primitive and ancient Fathers, we
as we have seen, find them not; from the beginning it was not so. Secondly,
That Rhetorical flourishes of Eloquence are no safe and sure grounds to build
an Article of faith upon, as Theodoret grants, Non ego dogmatum regulam ea
duco, Dial. 3.
quae in Ecclesia Panegyrice dicantur. The Fathers in their Panegyrical
Orations and popular Sermons (as Sixtus Senensis a Papist acknowledges) spoke
often affectuum impetu and orationis cursu rapti, Biblioth. lib. 6. Annotat.
152.
such things as taken according to the literal and strict sense cannot be
justified.

To give one instance amongst many. Nazianzen in his Funeral Oration on St.
Basil says of him. Now in Heaven (...), as I suppose (for he was not certain)
(...) he offers up Sacrifices for us. Yet no Papist will say that he
celebrated Mass, or as we speak, the Holy Encharist, or consecrated it in
Heaven, as that phrase of Offering Sacrifice is sometimes used by the Fathers.
In like manner he says of his Father, (...).
that he did in Heaven (...) fight for his Flock on Earth. Thirdly, Many of
their expressions are not (...) Prayers, but rather (...), wishes. So Nazianzen
in his Oration on Basil; Thou, Mountague of Invocation of the Saints,
O sacred and divine Head, respice nos quaeso de caelo, look on us from Heaven;
So Billius a Papist, falsely translates it. In the Greek the word is, (...), O
si, or utinam nos de caelo respiceres; O that, or I wish, thou might look
down from Heaven on us. So that it is rather a Wish than a true Prayer. This is
certain, Nazianzen in the Oration abovementioned no where prays to his own
Father.

4. They speak doubtfully and uncertainly; so Nazianzen making an Apostrophe to
the Soul of Constantius, puts in (...), if thou have any sense or knowledge of
our affairs; I am compelled to speak to him as present. More plainly in his
Oration on his Sister Gorgonia, (...), If there be such a reward bestowed on
pious Souls, (...), that thou have any knowledge or regard of our affairs,
receive (...), not orationem, my prayer (for he no where prays to her, or Saint
Basil, or his Father) but my speech, sermonem, which certainly he would have
done had he been a right Roman Catholic. But who can imagine or believe that
Nazianzen, Basil and other of the ancient Fathers would have spoken concerning
the Saints departed, their knowledge of humane affairs, so doubtfully and
uncertainly, if they had in the least believed that Invocation of Saints in
Heaven was an Article of Catholic Faith necessary to be believed under peril
of Heresy and Damnation. Credat Judaeus Apella, non ego.

But before I go on, I will take particular notice of a place quoted by
Bellarmine out of Saint Basil's Oration on the 40 Martyrs in these words: Qui
aliqua premitur angustia ad hos confugiat, etc. He that is in any affliction or
strait, let him fly to these, i. e. these Martyrs. To this I answer, First,
That Bellarmine abuses his Reader with a false Latin Translation, which is not
unusual with him. In the Greek it is only (...), not let him, but he does fly
to them. Here is matter of fact or practice; they did so: But here is no
approbation, advice or counsel of Saint Basil that they should do so. Secondly,
He exhorts them to join their Prayers unto, and with the supplications of the
Martyrs. Here then we find Intercession by them, not Prayer to them. Thirdly,
It is to be considered that these 40 Martyrs were all Cappadocians of that
Country, Montague of Invocation of Saints.
and so being, as I suppose, not long since deceased, might retain some
particular remembrance of the place of their Nativity, and near Relations.
There is not the same reason of praying to Saints, who never knew us nor we
them. Fourthly, In that very place Saint Basil affirms, that these 40
Martyrs, not severally, but all together were at the same time with diverse
persons in distant places, which whether it be a truth or no, I appeal to the
judgment of any learned Papist. They in some things reject the sayings of the
Fathers, as well as we. Lastly, He speaks only of the place and time of their
annual Festivity, which will not amount to a sufficient ground of Invocation in
any place, and at any time of need of any Saint.

I now pass on to St. Chrysostom, who Hom. 44. in Genesis Hom. 5. in Matthew. Hom.
de Profectu Evang. and elsewhere exhorts his Hearers not to rely on the
Intercession of others, but to go immediately to God themselves, propounding to
them the Example of the Woman of Canaan, Hom. 12. in Matthew.
who was never the better for the Apostles Intercession, who entreated not
Peter or James to beg for her, but went directly to Christ herself, and
received a better answer from him. Then he adds, V. Ambrose infra.
There is no need of Intercessors with God.

I come to Theodoret, who in his Comment Coloss. 2. has these words, which
give a deadly blow to this new point of Faith, to wit, worshipping Angels
mentioned and condemned by Saint Paul in that Chapter, v. 18. They, says he,
who defended the Law persuaded the Colossians to worship Angels, saying, that
the Law was given by them. Observe, their reason is not because they were Gods
or Creators of the World, but deliverers of the Law, as Saint Stephen notes,
Acts 7. This Error, says he, remained a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia;
wherefore the Synod of Laodicea, not far distant from Colosse, forbid by a Law
or Canon praying to Angels, and to this day (adds he) are to be seen the
Oratories (not of any Heathenish Idol) but of Saint Michael the Archangel.
This they advised, pretending or under a show of voluntary humility; for they
said, God himself could not be seen or comprehended, neither could be
approached unto, and we must gain his favor through the Angels. Thus
Theodoret. Here we have the Original of the worshipping of Angels, to wit,
certain Heretics condemned by Saint Paul, by the Council of Laodicea and
Theodoret. We may note also, that the Argument used by the Romanists to
establish this pretended Article of Faith is borrowed from Heretics, to wit,
that God being infinite and incomprehensible, it becomes not the humility of
sinful Creatures to make immediate addresses to him, but to use the
Intercession of Angels the favorites of God. Cardinal Baronius is so netled
with this testimony of Theodoret, that notwithstanding his pretended reverence
of the Fathers, he says plainly, Theodoreti pace dictum sit, non assequitur
mentem Pauli, Ad Ann. Christi 60. sect. 17, 22.
Let it be spoken by the good leave of Theodoret, that he understands not St.
Paul 's meaning. But by Baronius his leave, I think Theodoret, though no
Cardinal, understood St. Paul's meaning as well, yea far better than he. The
Canon of the Council of Laodicea related to by Theodoret, we find expressed in
these words: It becomes not Christians leaving the Church to run to Angels
(their Oratories) and to hold meetings of abominable Idolatry. Where you see
running to, i. e. as Theodoret understood it, praying to and so worshipping
Angels at their Oratories, is condemned by the Council as no less Crime (tho
Papists cannot endure to hear it) than abominable Idolatry. Caranza a Popish
Translator of the old Trade, ignorantly or wickedly turns (...) Angelos Angels,
Can. 35.
into angulos, Corners But according to the old saying, Veritas non quaerit
angulos, Truth seeks not these Corners.

I had almost forgot the good old Father Epiphanius, in all whose Writings
Bellarmine it seems could find nothing for Invocation of Saints; but we can
produce what is directly against it. Haeres. 74. contra Collyrid. he condemns
certain fond Women of more zeal than knowledge, who like those in Jeremy, Jer.
7.18.
offered up Cakes to the Virgin Mary as the Queen of Heaven (a Title the Roman
Catholics have, little to her honor, put upon her) saying. If God will not
have Angels worshipped, how much less the Daughter of Ann, born as other Women
( ergo in Original Sin.) What then do we, as Romanists calumniate us, or
Epiphanius, deny Mary her due honor? No. We say with Epiphanius, Let her be in
honor, but let God alone be adored; Let none worship Mary, she is to be
honored, (as we really grant) but she is not given us (...) to be bowed to, or
worshipped. So that no religious worship is to be given to her. Certainly these
foolish Women were not so filly as to take the Holy Virgin for a Goddess or
Deity, (but adored her as the Mother of Christ) for then they had been plain
Heathens rather than, as Epiphanius esteemed them, Heretics. Surely, if
offering up to the Virgin Mary a few Cakes was heretical and unlawful, is it
not much worse to offer up to her the Evangelical Sacrifices of (to say nothing
now of their Masses in honor of her) Prayers, Vows and Thanksgivings, which
themselves acknowledge to be acts of Latria or Divine Worship, Aquin. 2.2.
quaest. 88. art. 5.

V. Chemnit. Exam. p. 609, 610. and 580, 581.

Biel in Can. Missae, lect. 8. Chemnit. supra, p. 585.595.

See B. Andrews's Answer to Cardinal Perron. O faelix Puerpera, nostra pians
scelera, Jure matris impera Redemptori.


of which their Offices of the Virgin Mary and Books of Devotion are brimful.
In them they beg of her Grace and Glory; Affirm (which is sacrilegious
blasphemy) that God has made over the Kingdom of his mercy to her. They term
her the Mother of mercy, and fountain of Grace; the Queen of Heaven, their Life
and only hope. In a word, they style her, as Cardinal Bembus, Deam, a Goddess.
Is not this far to exceed the Collyridian Heretics? Is not this adoring of her
gross Idolatry?

I come now to the learned Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria in his sixth Book
against Julian the Apostate, who objected, that the Christians instead of many
Gods worshipped many miserable Men, to wit, Christ and the Martyrs; To which he
answers, We worship Christ a man, but God as well as man. Where we may
observe that the grounds of worshipping the man Christ Jesus is, because he was
God as well as man, not a religious man or Saint only: As for the Martyrs, we,
says Cyril worship them, not (...), with latria or divine Worship, but (...),
relatively and honorably, (that is, with honorable respect) such, says St.
Austin, as we yield to Holy men in this life in respect of their piety and
godliness. Then he shows, wherein the honor given to Martyrs did consist, to
wit, in a reverend regard to their (...), Tombs or Monuments, in crowning them
with Praises as Conquerors -- and concludes, we bestow on them (...), an
immortal or never withering memory. But no mention at all of any Religious (tho
the grounds of honoring Martyrs is their Piety and Religion) Worship,
Invocation or Adoration.

The same Cyril on the 16. Chapter of St. John has these words, No man comes
to the Father but by the Son. Hence he terms himself the Door and Way, who,
as he is the Son and God, bestows with the Father all good things on us. As
our Mediator and High Priest presents our Prayers to God; and hence
concludes, We must therefore pray in the name of our Savior, if we would be
heard of God.

Saint Ambrose de obitu Theodosii speaks to the same purpose, Thou, O Lord,
art alone to be invocated, solus rogandus es, art only to be prayed unto. On
the Epistle to the Romans, c. 1. he has these remarkable words, spoken I
confess of Heathens, but too justly applicable to Papists, who use the very
same excuses: Being, says he, ashamed of their neglect of God the Creator (by
worshipping Creatures rather than him) they use a miserable shift saying, by
them, Romans 1.25.
i. e. Angels and dead Heroes, men may go to God, as by Counts, or Earls, or
Courtiers we use to go to the King. It is our Adversaries ordinary Similitude.
What says St. Ambrose to it? Tertul. de Praescr. c. 8. says the same.

Rev. 22.9. See Chrysostom. de Paenit. Hom. 4. and de profectu Evangel.


Is any man so mad and unmindful of his own safety (it being laesa Majestas,
Treason) as to give the honor of the King to a Count, and not judge themselves
guilty who yield the honor of God to a Creature, and adore, leaving the Lord,
their Fellow Servants, as if there were any thing more to be given to God. For
therefore we go to the King by Lords and Captains because he is a man, but to
God, to whom nothing is hid and who knows all men's deserts, there is no need
of an Intercessour, but a devout mind. This is plain.

I go on to Saint Hierom, who in his Epitaph on Nepotian acknowledges, that
although the Saints departed possibly pray for us, yet do not hear our prayers
or Apostrophes to them: Ille non audit.

Examen Concilii Trident.


"Whatsoever I shall say is as if I said nothing, for he (Nepotian) hears me
not. It Is also not unworthy of our observation, as Chemnitius has noted, that
Saint Hierom in his Book against Vigilantius, who condemned Invocation of
Saints, censures him not as an Heretic for so doing. If it had been then a
point of Faith, no doubt St. Hierom would not have spared him. Yea, in his
Epistle to Riparius he says of Angels and dead Saints or Martyrs, nec colimus
nec adoramus, We neither adore them (with (...)) nor worship them (with (...),
an inferior religious worship) although (as we Protestants do) honoramus, we
honor them.

I will end with Saint Austin, Nominantur, non invocantur.
in his 22. Book de Civitate Dei, Cap. 10. he says, The Saints are at the
Communion named by the Priest, but not invocated. In the Canon of the Mass;
Commemorantes and memoriam facientes, Prayer is directed to God only. In his
8th Book, de Civit. Dei, cap. 17.22, 27. Nos Martyribus non Templa, sicut Diis,
sed Memorias (sicut hominibus mortuis) fabricamus, etc. Aug, de Civit. Dei,
lib. 22. c. 10. similiter, lib. 8. cap. ultimo.

Charitate non servitute. Ibid.


he affirms expressly, That whatsoever religious Services were performed at
the Tombs of the Martyrs: as Prayers, Sacrifices, Thanksgivings, were offered
not to them, but to God. So contra Faust. lib. 20. c. 21. Quicquid offertur,
Deo offertur. In his Epistle to Maximus the Grammarian, Know, says Saint
Austin, that of Catholics, (true Catholics, not Roman) no dead man is
worshipped; And in his Book of True Religion, c. 55. Our Religion stands not in
worshipping the dead. They seek not such honor. This they would have, that we
with them worship one God according to the Angels admonition, Revel. 22.9.
Martyrs are to be honored (as Origin, Cyril, Epiphanius granted) for
imitation, not adored for Religion: or as he expresses it, Cont. Faustum, l.
20. c. 21. colimus Martyrs, etc. we worship or honor Martyrs with a worship
of love and fellowship, with which the Saints in this life are worshipped. Is
any religious Worship properly so called, to be given to Saints or religious
Persons by us in this life? Let our Adversaries consider this. Lastly, in his
Book De Cura pro mortuis, cap. 10.11, 12. He overthrows the principal grounds
and reasons on which Invocation of Saints is built. For first, He judges it
very probable at least, that the Saints or Martyrs did not really and
personally appear to their Friends, although it was believed by many, Compare
Basil. M. in Mamantem.
but in imagination or appearance only. Secondly, He proves (which he says
he knew would be ill taken by some) that the souls of the departed Saints are
in a place where they see or know not what is done by or happens to their
nearest Relations, from Gods Promise to Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.18. That he should
not see all the Evil he would bring on his People; as also from those words of
Esaiah, Isai. 63.16.
Abraham is ignorant of us and Israel knows us not. Whence he infers, si tanti
Patriarchae, etc. If such great Patriarchs were ignorant of what happened to
the People who sprang from them, how are the dead interessed or concerned in
knowing and helping their Friends? He confirms his conclusion thus: If the
dead were interested in the affairs of the living, or spoke to us in Dreams, my
dear Mother would no night he absent from me. But it is true, as in the Psalm,
My Father and my Mother have forsaken me, etc. If our Parents have forsaken us,
who else among the dead know what we do or suffer? Now our Adversaries grant,
that unless the Saints departed know our particular state and wants, it is vain
and to no purpose to pray unto them. Thirdly, He answers an Objection drawn
from Dives his desiring Abraham to send to his Brethren on Earth, wherefore he
knew what they did. To this he replieth, Dives had such or so great a care of
the living, although he knew not what they did, as we have of the dead,
although what they do we know not in particular. It was only a general care or
well wishing: But, Abraham knew they had Moses and the Prophets. To this he
answers, that he might know it by the information of Lazarus. Fourthly, He
enquireth how the Saints come postea afterward (so that this knowledge comes
too late to ground Prayer to Saints in present extremities and sudden dangers.)
He answers, Possunt ab Angelis, possunt Deo revelante cognoscere, they may
know it by Angels who are conversant with us, or by Revelation from God; they
may, he says not positively that they do. Fifthly, He makes a difference
(which Romanists take little notice of) between Martyrs and other Saints, and
denies that because Martyrs per Divinam potentiam miraculously, or by special
dispensation are sometimes here on Earth in their Temples, therefore we are to
think the same of all dead Saints generally, or that they can come to us quando
volunt, when they will, as Bellarmine determines. D. Sanct. Beatit. lib. 1. c.
20.
But miraculous Dispensations are no safe Rule for ordinary supplications to
all Saints promiscuously. Lastly, supposing it true that the living are helped
some way or other by Martyrs prayed unto; he says, Whether it be by their
being present in so many distant places at the same time where their memories (
i. e. Monuments or Churches) are, or (which no doubt he could not but think
more probable) whether they being in some place remote from humane converse are
yet generally praying for such as pray (not to them, but God who might employ
Angels in answering their requests) as we pray in the general for the dead,
although we know not where they are, or what they do, definire non audeo, I
dare not resolve. From all which we may easily discern how uncertain Saint
Austin was concerning the presence, knowledge and assistance of Saints
departed, afforded to some, not who pray to them but to God; from whence we may
certainly conclude, that Invocation of dead Saints was no part of St. Austin's
Creed, but at utmost a probable and doubtful Opinion only, as we have seen
before from the writings of the Greek Fathers, Nazianzen, Basil and others.

I know well, our Adversaries urge much Nazianzen's Oration on Cyprian, and how
a Virgin assaulted by the Devil, prayed to the Virgin Mary to help her.

But Gelasius with the Authority of the Roman Church condemns that Book of the
Conversion of Saint Cyprian, which Nazianzen supposed to be genuine, as false
and supposititious; neither is it at all probable that Saint Cyprian was ever a
Magician, of which neither himself in the relation of his conversion, Lib 2.
Epist. 2.
nor Pontius in his life, nor any more ancient creditable Writer makes any
mention.

They glory also much in those words of Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 66. ad Popul.
Antioch.
He that is Emperor stands praying to the Saints, to the Tent-maker, and
Fisherman Peter, and Paul to intercede with God for him.

To which I first oppose Saint Austin's words; Epist. 42. non Petro, sed Deo.

De script. Eccl. ad ann. 398. Hom 39. in 1 Cor. 15. Sixtus Senens.


The Emperor at the Tomb of Peter, prays not to Peter, but God. Secondly,
The Homily is supposititious; for, as Bellarmine himself grants, the true
Homilies of Chrysostom, ad Popul. Antiochen. were but 21. Thirdly, Chrysostom
held, that Christian Saints departed are not till the Resurrection admitted to
the sight of God, and consequently, knowledge of our Prayers. Of which Opinion
were many of the ancient Fathers, quoted for this Invocation by our Adversaries.

Concerning Image Worship.
I come to another Article of Pope Pius his Roman Catholic Faith, to wit,
worshipping of Images. Concerning which it is certain, that the Christian
Churches for three hundred years after Christ had in them no Images to worship.
The Temple at Jerusalem had none. Philo de Leg. ad Caium.
To which purpose it is remarkable what Aelius Lampridius In the Life of
Alexander Severus.

Lib. 7. Epist. 109.


an Heathen Historian writes; When Adrian the Emperor had commanded that
Temples should be made in all Cities without Images: it was presently conceived
that he did prepare those Temples for Christ. Secondly, That worshipping them
came in above six hundred years after Christ: for Pope Gregory the Great
himself allowed not of worshipping Images, as is manifest from his Epistle to
Setenus, Quia eas adorari vetuisses omnino laudavimus, etc. Lib. 9. Epist. 9.
He commends him for forbidding the worshipping them, though not his breaking
them.
who broke down Images in some Churches because the People worshipped them.
Thirdly, That a great part of the Writings of the Ancient Fathers Tertullian,
Origin, Arnobius, Lactantius, etc. are spent in condemning the worship of
Images, or using them as helps of Devotion.

It Is true, They speak directly against the Images and Idols of the Heathens,
but most of their Reasons fight generally against all religious use or worship
of Images of what kind soever, especially of Images made to represent God
himself. Let us then hear the Fathers and judge.

Justin Martyr says, It Is (...), Apol. 2. p. 44.
an injury or contumely to God to make an Image of him (...), of base and
unworthy wood or stone. page 52.
That we ought not to worship the work of men's hands. Are not Popish Images of
the Trinity the work of men's hands, made of wood and stone as well as those of
the Heathens?

Origin in Cap. 1. ad Romans and lib. 3. in Celsum, says the same, of whom more
by and by.

Athenagoras in Legate. to the Heathens, asking, Why the Christians worshipped
not Statues, Answers, because material Statues and God very much differ. Not
the World (or any part of it) but it is Maker is to be worshipped. Men (says he
to the Emperor) pass by or through your Palace and above all honor you. In
your Games they crown not the Harp, but the Harpers. We submit not an
immaterial Spirit ( i. e. the Soul) to worship material and beggarly Elements,
i. e. Images. Does not this confute submitting our Souls in religious worship
to Popish Images? are not they material? etc.

Irenaeus testifies, Lib. 1. c. 24. Epiphan. Panar. Haer. 27. and in Anaceph.
p. 525. c. 20.
that the Gnostick or Carpocratian Heretics (the first worshippers of Images
we can find amongst Christians) crowned the Image of Christ made by Pilate, as
they said, and worshipped it. The Simonians, followers of Simon Magus,
worshipped his Image, and of Helena his Whore. Ib. Chapter 26. The Basilidian
Heretics used also Images, Ib. Chapter 23. Here we see the Primitive Antiquity and
first Original of worshipping Images: the Authors were then condemned
Heretics, but now their Abettors are the only true Catholics.

Tertullian says, Apologet c. 12.
We Christians worship (he speaks generally) no Statues or Images, which Crows,
Rats and Spiders understand. Do they not as well understand Popish Images? They
seem to understand them better than Romanists. Yea, the Ancient Fathers so
detested Images, that they condemned the very Art of Painting and Graving,
excommunicating such Christians who only to get a livelihood made them, as he
shows, De Idololat. c. 4, 5, 6.

In like manner Clemens Alexand. V. p. 46. and Strom. 5.
in Protreptico, where he farther says, I have learned to tread upon Earth (
i. e. Images or Statues) not to worship them. (...) Protr. p. 38. Simiae
Imagimbus non decipiuntur, vos deteriores. Protrept. ad gentes, p. 39.


It would be too tedious to quote all that Origin has written against
worshipping Images in his Books only against Celsus: I will mention some few
passages, Lib. 3. He says, we instill first of all into all young Christians a
contempt of all Images, and lift up their minds (Images then lift not up the
mind to God) from Veneration of Creatures to God.

In the Jewish Commonwealth no maker of Images was suffered, which turn the
mind from God. Lib. 4. Cont. Celsian. Page 284.
Our New Catholics say, they turn the mind to God. In his sixth Book he
writes thus: We count them rude and ignorant who are not ashamed to speak to
senseless things, See Cassander Consult. Art. 21.
to beg life of the dead, although some of them confess they are not Gods (as
Papists excuse themselves) but signs and representations of them only.
However, they are ignorant in imagining that a vain Smith or Carpenter can make
(so much as) a resemblance of Divinity. In the same Book he adds, They are
blind who regard the fallacious Arts of Painters or Carvers. In his 8th Book,
Celsus the Heathen accuses the Christians for not having, yea not enduring to
look on Images; See Minutius Foelix, Arnobius, etc.
Which; says he, none but fools take to be Gods themselves, (the Heathens were
not so foolish) but signa, signs or Representations of them: a not Gods, but
Demons, Angels, To which Origin replieth both for Jews and Christians; In
regard of those words, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall
thou serve. And thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. It
cannot be that any one who knows God should pray also to Images. Do these
reasons confute only Heathen Image-worshippers? Did not the Primitive Fathers
and Christians understand those Texts as Protestants now do? He adds, We have
also Images (of what kind?) not made by impure Workmen, but by the Word of God,
Temperance, Justice and other Virtues. So that Origin in the name of the
Christians in his days rejects and condemns all material Images in order to
religious worship.

Arnobius brings in the Heathens saying, non ipsa timemus simulachra, etc. we
fear not the Images, lib. 6.
but those whom they represent, i. e. Gods (who were but dead men) Demons,
Angels and Heroes. Yet he grants, that by them they struck the vulgar (as
Papists do) with fear and dread of God. And Lib. 7th, he acquaints us that the
Original of Images was, that men could not conceive what God is, and therefore
resolved to make him like themselves.

Lactantius, Instit. Lib. 1. says, We cannot worship God, if we give the same
honor to any thing else. Part 3. qu. 25. Art. 3. Azor. Instit. l. 9. c. 6. B.
Usher's Answer to Malon.
But the Papists, as Aquinas, Cajetan, Catechismus Romans Azorius, Pedro de
Crabrera, etc. acknowledge and defend, they give to the Images of God and
Christ latria, i. e. the very same Divine Honor they yield to God and Christ
themselves. In vain then do they worship God, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men: yea so besotted are they with their Images, that they
condemn Durand as little less than a Heretic, for saying that Images are
adored only improperly, Bellarmine de Imag. cap. 21. lib. 2.
because they put men in mind of the Persons represented by them, so that they
properly adore not the Images, but adore and worship the Prototypes before
them. Contrarily Azorius affirms, as also Jacob Naclantus following Aquinas,
that it is the constant Opinion of their Divines, In Romans c. 1. Constans opinio.

V. Cassand. Consult. de Imagine.

In Romans c. 1. fol. 42. quoted by Bishop Usher, in his Answer to Malon, and
Bellar. l. 2. de Imag. c. 20, 21.


that the Image is to be worshipped with the same worship given to him, whose
Image it is; seeing then for Example Christ is to be adored with Latria, so
must his Image also. The Faithful, says Naclantus, must not only Adore coram
Imagine, sed and adorare Imaginem, before the Image, but adore the Image it
self. To return to Lactantius. In his 2d Book, he disputes against Images thus:
Images are of the absent and dead; But God or the Gods are living and in all
places. The Heathens replied, they are present only in their Images. Then
says Lactantius, When they are present, what need of Images. Again, the
Heathen Idolaters fear lest all their Religion should be vain, if they see not
present before their eyes what they worship, Religio nulla ubicunque
simulachrum sed mimus, Chapter 18, 10.

So Varro apud Augustine.

Can. 36.


and therefore place Images before them. Do not Romanists use Images to the
same purpose? He adds, If Images (any Images of whomsoever) had any
understanding, they would worship men as more Noble Creatures; and concludes,
it is beyond all doubt that there is no Religion (at least true) where there is
an Image, but only a mimical show of it: This is plain and home.

The Ancient Council of Elliberis, Ann. 310. decree, that Pictures ought not to
be in Churches, lest that which is adored or worshipped should be painted on
Walls. Non solum imprudenter sed impie, etc. Loc. Theol. lib. 5. c. 4.
Melchior Canus (out of his great reverence no doubt of Antiquity) is not
afraid to charge this Council not only with imprudence, but impiety for making
such a Canon.

The Images of Christ, and the Woman he healed of her Bloudy-issue, as also the
Pictures of Peter and Paul in colors, Eusebius, Hist. lib. 7. c. 14. rather
excuses than commends, (...). See Tertul. adv. Marcion. l. 4. c. 22.
as implying some favor or imitation of Heathenish Custom to honor their
Benefactors, but has not a word of any sort of Worship given by any to them,
De Praeparat. lib. 3. c. 3. he says, What corporeal thing can be like God?
when we cannot have an image of any man's Soul? Ibid. l. 9. c. 2 Clem. Strom.
555. says the same, p. 304. Clem. Strom. 1.
He affirms, that there was no Image in the Jewish Temple, [V. Philo de
legatione] and Chap. 3. That Pythagoras taught by Moses, advised the Romans not
to make any Image of God; whence for one hundred and seventy years they had no
Images in their Temples.

Epiphanius conformably to the Canon of Elliberis, Epist. ad Joannem
Hieros^lymit. Contra Collyrid. Haeres. 79.

(...), etc. Haeres. 79.

(...), C^em. A^. Protrept.

Divina Majestas in simulachrorum stoliditate facile contemnitur. Aug. de
Civit. Dei, l. 4. c 31.


finding the Image Christi vel Sancti, of Christ or some Saint painted on a
Veil in a Church, rent it in pieces as contrary to Divine Law. In another place
he tells us the Virgin Mary was to be honored, but not given for us to
worship; if not her Person, much less, say we her Image. In the same place
confuting the Collyridian Heresy, he terms the making Images of God and dead
men to be a coarse, Idolatrous and devilish practice, whereby the minds of men
go awhoring from the only true God.

Athanasius adversus Gentes, brings in the Heathens pleading for their Images
or Idols, that they used them as Letters or Laymens Books (as Papists speak)
to help them to spell out the nature of God, of which they are marks and
significant Characters. To which he answers, that then they ought to Deifie
the maker of those Images, and prefer the Artificers before their work made by
them; yea, he says, in the beginning that Christ the Image of God was made man
on purpose to draw men off from the use of Images. The same has Eusebius
Caesariensis, adding, that true Christians spit on the Images of the dead, and
worship God only.

Chrysostom, Hom. 4. de poenitentia, Let us always fly to God both willing and
able to relieve us. If we be to make our addresses to men, we must apply our
selves unto Porters, Door-keepers, etc. In God there is no such thing. In like
manner, Hom. 12. in Matthew. If we need not apply our selves to Saints or Angels,
much less to their Images.

Saint Ambrose, C. 1. ad Romans agrees with Saint Chrysostom above, and
speaking of Idolaters, says, They do not deny God, yet they serve the
Creature, whereby they are not excused, but more accused, because knowing God,
they honor him not as God. And de fuga seculi, cap. ult. Rachel hid her
Fathers Idols, so does the Church; for she knows not vain figures of Images,
Nazianz. in Pascha Orat. 2. says the same.
but understands the true sub\ stance of the Trinity. Let us then leave the
shadow, who seek after the Sun.

Saint Jerome in Psalm 113. In St. Jerome's and Austin's days, there no were
Images in Churches, say Cassander, Consult. de Imag. Polydore Virg. de Invent.
rerum, and Erasm. in Catech.
Do thou make a God with thine own hands to adore? If thou did adore a
Beast, it were evil, yet a Beast has Eyes and Feet, but that which thou
adorest (with latria) neither sees nor moves.

I will add Saint Austin in Psalm 113, and 114. The Holy Scriptures arm us
against such as say, I worship not this Visible Image, but the Numen or Deity,
that dwells in it, or as others, I neither worship Image nor any Spirit, but
by the corporal Effigies or Picture, I see the sign of that which I ought to
worship. Saint Paul with one sentence condemns both, who have changed the truth
of God into a lie, and served the creature rather than the Creator, etc. In the
former part he condemns Images, in the latter their interpretations of Images,
Turn the truth into a lie. But who prays looking on an Image, who is not so
affected that he thinks he is heard of it? and hopes he shall have what he
desires? For this the outward figure of members extort from us, that the mind
living in the body, thinks the more that the body so like its own body has
sense also. The like we find in his 49th Epistle, Who doubts that Idols want
all sense? yet when they are placed aloft in an honorable sublimity by the
very likeness of living members, although dead and without sense, they affect
our minds, the veneration of a multitude being added thereunto, which crazy and
pestilent distempers the Scripture heals; saying, They have eyes but see not.
Whether Images in Popish-Churches have not the very same influence and effect
on ignorant and superstitious Women, let impartial men and such as have
traveled abroad amongst them determine. The same Saint Austin, quoteth and
commends a saying of Varro, De Civitat. Dei, Lib. 4. c. 9. and 31.
that they who brought in Images for the People, both took away the Fear of a
Deity (rendered base and contemptible by representations of wood and stone) and
added Error, i. e. false and unworthy apprehensions of God.

To all this it will I suppose be answered: First, That the Fathers inveigh
against making Images of God, or false Gods, not Saints.

I reply: 1. Some of them expressly condemn all Images. 2. Do not Roman
Catholics (though some of their own Writers condemn it) make Images or
Pictures of God the Father in the likeness of an old Man, and of the Holy Ghost
of a Dove? True, say they, but we do it not to represent the nature of God, but
certain properties and actions appertaining to God: I do not wonder, they say
they do not what cannot be done, to wit, to represent by an Image the infinite,
invisible and incomprehensible nature of God; But herein they say what even the
Heathens said of their Idols. For Hermes Trismegistus quoted by Cyril, Xenophon
by Minutius Foelix, Olympius by Sozomen confessed, Hist. Lib. 7. c. 15.
that it is impossible to signify the incorporeal God by a Body, and that the
form of God cannot be seen, that invisible Spirits or heavenly Powers dwelt in
those corporeal Images, but they were not the Powers themselves.

It Is granted, Ne facias nisi and tibi Deus jusserit. Tertul. de Idololat. c.
God and the Holy Ghost did appear in such likenesses, what is that to us? We
have an express command not to make to our selves any likeness of any thing in
Heaven, etc. Is not God the Father with the Holy Ghost in Heaven?

Secondly, They answer, V. Council. Constant. 6. Can, 82. apud Caranzam.
that they give religious worship to Images not for themselves, propter se, but
for the sake of the Persons they represent.

The Heathens, as we have seen above, said the very same. If Romish worship of
Images be lawful, it will be difficult to condemn or convince the Heathens of
Idolatry. The Jews did not worship the Calf for it self, but as a
Representative of God.

Lastly, They affirm, that they yield to Images a mean, low and inferior
worship, not what belongs to God only.

I answer that, as we have shown above, they give to the Images of God and
Crucifixes the same Divine worship they yield unto God and Christ themselves.
To say, they give Images Latria, and yet an inferior kind of such religious
worship, is to contradict themselves, for all Latria as such is summus cultus,
the highest worship a creature can give; if they give them an inferior
religious honor, it is not Latria.

Concerning the Popes Supremacy.
I come now to the Capital Article of the Roman Catholic Faith, The Popes
Supremacy over all Emperors, Kings, Bishops, Councils, Churches and Christians
throughout the World. Concerning the Fathers before the Nicene Council, called
above 300 years after Christ, we need not make any strict enquiry, seeing
Aeneas Sylvius (who was Pope himself afterward) confesses, Epist. 288.
that before this Council aliquis, sed non magnus, some, but no great respect
was given to the Roman Bishops: in Clemens Romanus, Ignatius, Justin Martyr,
Tatianus, Athenagoras, I find no mention of any Supremacy in the Bishop of Rome.

Come we then to the Ancient Father Irenaeus. He in his third Book, Cap. 12.
quoting the words of the Church of Jerusalem,
Acts 22, 23, 25. says, These are the words of that Church, from which every
Church had its beginning. If every Church, V. Epist. Concilii Constant. 1. c.
9. Epist. ad Damasum.
then the Roman. How can she then be Matter, and Magistra, the Mother and
Mistress of all Churches, as is now pretended by our Romanists? This was that
Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, who sharply reproved Victor Bishop of Rome,
for threatening or attempting at least to Excommunicate the Bishops and Churches
of Asia, Lib. 5. Hist. Eccl. c. 15.
for not observing Easter on the same day he did, as Eusebius relates.

At the same time lived Polyerates the renowned Bishop of Ephesus (with whom
many Catholic Bishops meeting in several Councils concurred,) who opposed Pope
Victor's Sentence, and professed he was not at all terrified with his threatened
Excommunication, but resolutely persisted in the Tradition and Custom received
from his Predecessors, particularly John the Evangelist, as we find in
Eusebius, lib. 5. Hist. c. 23.

Hence it is evident that Polycrates, as also Irenaeus, did not look upon the
Bishop of Rome as Prince and Sovereign Head of the Church, or more infallible
than any other Bishop. It Is true, Irenaeus had a great reverence for the Roman
Church, and testifies to her honor, that in his days the Apostolic Doctrine
or Tradition remained pure and incorrupt, which he opposed to the Heretical
Novelties of the Valentinians: But this no way proves that she had Supreme
Jurisdiction over all Churches; But in regard it would be long, as he says, to
reckon up all Apostolical Churches, as of Corinth, Ephesus, etc. Lib. 3. cap. 3.
(to whom he gives the same testimony of purity of doctrine) he instances in
Rome, propter potentiorem principalitatem, in regard of its more powerful
principality, known to all. But these words plainly enough relate not to the
Roman Church immediately as a Christian Church, but to the City of Rome, which
at that time was the Imperial City and Head of the World. Alas! What powerful
Principality could the poor persecuted Church of Rome enjoy then, living under
Heathen Emperors? It is not therefore meant strictly and properly of an
Ecclesiastical, but Civil Power and Principality of the City of Rome, V.
Council. Chalcedon. infra. Epist. ad Roman.
in which the Church of Rome sojourned, as St. Ignatius writes to them,
whereby through concourse of all Nations, it was rendered more conspicuous and
honorable to the World. The words of Aeneas Sylvius before mentioned confirm
the same.

In Clemens Alexandrinus I find nothing concerning this matter.

I will go on to Tertullian: Run through, says he, the Apostolical Churches.
If ye be near Achaia, ye have Corinth; if Macedonia, Philippi and Thessalonica:
si Italiae adjaces, habes Romam; If ye live near Italy, ye have Rome. Where
first observe, that he with Irenaeus ascribes the same Authority to Corinth,
Philippi, etc. which he does to Rome. Secondly, He speaks not of
Jurisdiction, but matter of Faith and Apostolic Doctrine. Thirdly, It Is
conditional, if you be near Italy, you have Rome. Tertullian never thought that
all Christian Churches were subject to Rome, either as to Doctrine or
Government, or were bound to appeal and sub mit unto her. Again, Chap. 20. The
Apostles having first preached the Gospel in Judea promulged the same doctrine
of Faith to the Nations. -- In regard of this doctrine they are accounted
Apostolical. -- Wherefore so many and great Churches are that one first Church
from the Apostles, of which all are. So all are first omnes primae, and all
Apostolical, whilst all prove one Unity; Now if all are first, all Apostolical,
how can the Roman Church claim any Primacy or Principality over all, even
Apostolical Churches?

Origin in Matthew. Petra est omnis Christi imitator.
16. Every Disciple of Christ is that Rock; If you think the Church to be built
on Peter only, what will become of John and the rest of the Apostles? What was
spoken to Peter was spoken to all the Apostles and Christians. All are Peter
and the Rock. The Keys were not only given to Peter. This now at Rome is no
less than Heresy. Epist. 45.47.49.
Let us hearken to Saint Cyprian, who usually wrote to Pope Cornelius as to his
Brother, Colleague and Fellow-Bishop, not as his Prince and Sovereign, or
Universal Bishop, especially in his 72. Epistle directed to him. 'In which
matter we force no man, we give Law to no man, seeing every Bishop has the
free liberty of his own will in the administration or Government of his Church,
being to give account of his actions (not to the Bishop of Rome, but) to God.
In his Preface before the Council of Carthage he has these words: None of us
makes himself Bishop of Bishops (i. e. Supreme Universal Bishop) or compels
his Colleagues by tyrannical terror to obedience, etc. where he seems to
reflect on Pope Stephen. Compare those words of Tertullian de Pudicit. c. 10.
The High Priest, the Bishop of Bishops (meaning the Bishop of Rome) says, I
absolve Adulterers: Ejus errorem denotabis, qui Haereticorum causam defendit.

Baronius ad Ann. 258. N. 47.

A Canonized Saint, Menolog. Graec. in October. 28.

Epist. 75.


which no doubt he spoke ironically and by way of irrision. In his Epistle 74.
he writes against Pope Stephen, charging him with Error, and pleading the
cause of Heretics against the Church of God. Can any man believe Cyprian took
Pope Stephen for his Supreme Governor and infallible Head of all Churches? But
Firmilian the famous Bishop of Cappadocia highly commended by Baronius ad ann.
258. number. 45. was not afraid to accuse the same Pope Stephen of open and
manifest folly; who, says he, glorying, de Episcopatus sui loco, of his
Episcopal Seat or Sea, and that he is Successor of Saint Peter, on whom the
foundations of the Church were laid, makes many Rocks and builds new
Churches. He adds also, Eos qui Romae sunt, non ea in omnibus abservare, quae
sunt ab origin tradita.

De Vnitate Eccles.

Paci consoretio praedicti honoris, and potestatis.

Although he said before of Peter, tibi dabo, etc. and super illum unum
aedificat Ecclesiam suam, and illi pascendas mandat oves suas.


that the Roman Church was guilty of violating the Ancient Canons, and that
Pope Stephen by Excommunicating so many Christian Churches, Excommunicated
himself. I will add that noted passage of St. Cyprian, Idem caeteri quod
Petrus, etc. The rest of the Apostles were the same with Peter, endowed with an
equal fellowship or copartnership of Honor and Power. They are all Pastors,
but the Flock is but one, which is to be fed by all (not Peter only or his
Successors by virtue of feed my sheep) by unanimous consent, not by deputation
by or subjection to Peter and such as succeed him at Rome. A little before, he
says, Although Christ granted to all the Apostles after his Resurrection parem
potestatem, equal power, breathing on them the Holy Ghost, and saying, whose
sins ye remit, etc. Yet to manifest Unity, he appointed one Chair; He speaks
to Peter and to thee will I give, etc. singularly; Why? not that Peter had a
greater Power or Authority (which he expressly denied before) than the rest of
the Apostles: but, says Saint Cyprian, to commend to us Unity, that the Church
ought to be one without Schism to the end of the World; which is the intent of
all that Discourse. Now, if Saint Peter had no Supremacy over all the Apostles
and Churches, the Pope as deriving it from him can have just right to none. Let
me add Saint Cyprian's 67. Epistle, where he advises them what to do
concerning the Heretical French Bishop, whom he would not have the People to
own, though he had surreptitiously obtained Pope Stephens confirmation. He
adds as a reason, V. Epist. 68.
We are many Pastors, but we feed one Flock, and we ought to gather and succor
all the Sheep, yea, if any of our Society e collegio nostro, i. e. any Bishop,
Si haeresin facere, and gregem Christi lacerare, and vastare tentaverit;
subveniant caeteri. Epist. 67.
should fall into Heresy and rent the Church, the rest ought to help; where he
exempteth not any Bishop, no not the Pope, from possibility of erring even
Heretically, as to be sure Pope Liberius and Honorius did.

In Arnobius and Lactantius I find nothing to our present purpose.

I pass to Saint Hilary. De Trinit. l 2. Lib. 6. n. 674. Haec fides est
Ecclesiae fundamentum, page 174.
This is the one immovable foundation; this is the Rock of Faith confessed by
Saint Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of God. Again, On this Rock of Confession
the Church is built. This Faith is the foundation of the Church.

In the same manner Saint Chrysostom often expounds the Rock, In locum Hom.
55. Christus ipse est Petra. Greg. M. in Psalm. Poenitent. 5. Augustine. in
Joann. Epist. 1. Tract. 10.
Matthew. 16. of the (...), confession of the Deity of Christ made by Peter in
the name of the rest of the Apostles.

Add Theophylact, See Liberius his Epistle to Achanasius, Opera Athan. Tom. 1.
lib. 1. in Jovinian. c. 14.
Saint Basil of Seleucia, with others. Basil the Great, Epist. 8^. ad
Athanasium terms Athanasius, in the name of the Greeks their Head, the leader
and Prince of Ecclesiastical affairs, to whom they did fly for advice. Surely
Saint Athanasius rather than the Arian Heretic Pope Liberius was like a Rock
unshaken in those days.

Saint Hierome says, the Church is built on the Apostles, ex aequo, In 1.
Epist. Joan. Tract. 10.
equally, not on Peter principally or only, much less on his Successors, and
that at Rome rather than Antioch.

Saint Austin agrees, Quid est super hanc petram, etc. What is it? On this
Rock will I build my Church, super hanc fidem, on this Faith, Thou art Christ
the Son of God.

But sparing at present particular testimonies: I shall show that all the four
first General Councils, These P. Gregory the Great received as the four
Gospels, Lib. 1. Epist. 24. all Popes are sworn to them.

Ad apicem observaturos Can. sicut Did. 16.

Hist. lib. 60. c 23. and l. 1. c. 6.

Roma Metropolis Romanae ditionis. Athanas. ad solitar. vit. agentes.


either expressly or by consequence and implicitly have refuted and overthrown
the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. I begin with the first Nicene Council,
Can. 6. where we read, Let the Ancient Customs remain. The Bishop of Alexandria
shall have the Government of the Churches of Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis,
Quoniam Episcopo Romano parilis mos est, Because the Bishop of Rome has the
like Custom, i. e. to govern Rome and the suburbicarian Region, as Ruffinus as
Roman Presbyter understood it, and the precedent words plainly enough intimate.
The Bishop of Alexandria is to govern his Diocese as the Bishop of Rome does
the Churches belonging to him of ancient Custom. Here is a manifest limitation,
or rather exclusion of the Bishop of Romes Universal Jurisdiction.

Baronius, Bellarmin and Coriolanus answer, that those words, because the
Bishop of Rome has the like Custom, means no more but this, because the
Bishop of Rome, consuevit perinittere, has used of old Custom to permit the
Bishop of Alexandria to govern those Churches of Egypt, etc.

A strange gloss and a mere begging of the Point in question: As if the right
of governing all Churches belonged to the Bishop of Rome, when the Council as
of ancient Custom, inviolable and equal to that of Rome (parilis mos) commit
the government of those Churches to the Bishop of Alexandria as his ancient
Right, might not we say as well, that the Patriarch of Alexandria permitted the
Pope to govern the Church of Rome? It is evident enough from this Canon, that
the Nicene Fathers did not imagine that the Supreme Government of all Churches
did belong to the Bishop of Rome, or that the Patriarch of Alexandria needed to
supplicate him for a Pall.

The first Council of Constantinople, Can. 2. forbids all Bishops to encroach
on the Diocesses of others lest they confound the Churches: And Can. 5. they
decree that the Bishop of Constantinople ought to have the honor of Primacy
next to the Bishop of Rome, in regard it was new Rome, to wit, made the
Imperial City by Constantine, who called it after his own name Constantinople.
Here we see the Bishop of Rome is forbid as well as others (...), to play the
Bishop in other men's Dioceses, and that the Council out of Reverence to ancient
custom grants him a priority of Place or Order, not a superiority of Power and
Jurisdiction. The general Council of Chalcedon expounds and confirms this 5th
Canon of Constantinople, who Can. 27. decree in these words: Following in all
things the Decree of the 150 Fathers (to wit, in the Council of Constantinople
before mentioned) we decree the same concerning the Privileges of the most
holy Church of Constantinople, which is new Rome. Their Reason is, for the
Fathers (...), (not God the Father, nor Christ his Son, Matthew. 16 16. but) the
Fathers the Bishops did of right give Privileges to the Throne Ecclesiastical
of old Rome, because it was the Imperial City; and upon the same consideration
the 150 Bishops (before mentioned) have granted to the Throne of new Rome, (
i.e. Constantinople) (...), equal Privileges; rightly judging that the City
which is honored with the Empire and Senate, and enjoys equal Privileges (
i.e. Civil) with old Rome the Imperial City, should also in matters
Ecclesiastical be equally with her magnified and extolled, being the second in
order after her. Here we see plainly, First, That the Church of Constantinople
is in all Ecclesiastical matters and Privileges equally extolled and magnified
with old Rome. Gratians corruption of this Canon is abominable, for he
translates it thus: We Decree that the Seat of Constantinople may have, not
(...), equal, but similia, like Privileges with (...), not Semor, old, but
Superior, superior Rome, non tamen in Ecclesiastic is magnificatur ut illa,
but is not in Ecclesiastical matters magnified as she is; whereas in the Greek
it is (...), in Ecclesiastical matters shall be equally extolled: An ignorant or
shameless man. Secondly, Observe the reason why the Fathers in both Councils
being near eight hundred Bishops, granted Privileges and Preeminences to the
Bishop of old Rome, was, because it was the Imperial City, and upon the very
same ground the Fathers in the Council of Chalcedo. judged it right and fit to
grant the same and equal Privileges to the Bishop of Constantinople, in regard
it being made the Seat or Head of the Empire by the Emperor Constantine, it
was new Rome or the Imperial City. Here is no mention made of any Divine Right
granted by Christ to Peter or his Successors at Rome. This Canon is of more
weight than all the Decrees of Popes, and the Writings of all the Schoolmen and
Jesuits put together. It was confirmed in the sixth General Council in Trullo,
Can. 36. as also by the Emperors Marcian, Justinian, Novel. 115. cap. 3, etc.

Our Adversaries alledg, In Edicto de Confir. Syn. Chalced. apud Binium, Tom.
3. p. 471. Caranza, p. 369.
that this Canon was surreptitiously obtained by the Bishop of Constantinople,
Anatolius, when the Bishop of Romes Legates with others were gone out of the
Council.

But Caranza, a Popish Collector of the Councils informs us, that upon this
complaint made by the Legates, the Canon was debated the second time, and
confirmed by the Bishops in Council; so much does Binius, Council. Tom. 3. p.
404. and 463. acknowledges also; yea, the Bishop of Rome is desired by the
Council to consent to it, as Baronius himself confesses.

I hasten to the General Council of Ephesus, where upon complaint of the
Bishops of Cyprus, that the Patriarch of Antioch claimed a Power to ordain
their Bishops contrary to ancient custom, the Fathers decree that they should
enjoy their ancient right, adding a Canon, whereby they forbid any Bishop, not
excepting the Roman, to invade the Dioc^^ses of others -- lest the Statutes of
the Fathers be broken, and under pretense of the sacred function the tumor of
secular power should creep in, and so unadvisedly by little and little we lose
our liberty which Christ has purchased by his own blood. Thus those Reverend
Bishops decreed, V. Bernard. ad Eugenium de Consid. lib. 3.
as if by a Prophetical Spirit they had foreseen the future Captivity of the
Church under the subtle Usurpation and tyranny of Popery.

The answer given by the Proctors of the Romish Court to this Canon, as that of
Chalcedon, Hunc Canonem Ecclesia Romana non recipit. Coriolanus, p. 285.

Ad An. 381. l. 38.


or any other that opposes their Dominion, is: The most holy Church of Rome
approves or receives not that Council or Canon; for all Councils, says their
great Cardinal Baronius, have more or less Authority as they are approved or
not allowed by the Roman Church or Pope. An Answer which scarcely deserves a
reply, and shows what esteem our Romanists have of even General Councils, if
they cross their ambitious designs.

I cannot omit that famous Synodical Epistle sent by the Bishops of Africa, of
whom St. Austin was one, to the Bishop of Rome, Pope Celestine, which is an
invincible Bulwark or Sea-wall against the inundation of Papal Supremacy. It
would be tedious to transcribe the whole Letter which is still extant, and
written directly against this new Article of, Codic. Canon. Ecclesiae Africanae
in fine.
not Catholic, but Roman, Faith. They first desire the Pope not easily to give
Audience to such as appealed from them to him, Ab aliis excommunicati, ab aliis
ad commumonem ne recipiantur sine synodo provinciali. Council. Nicaen. Can. 5.
or to receive into his Communion such as they had (as Apiarius a most
scandalous Presbyter amongst others) deservedly excommunicated. Which was, say
they, contrary to the Nicene Canons, which respect Bishops as well as inferior
Clericks. They tell him, that the Canons of the Church had prudently provided,
that all Controversies should be determined in the places where they arose,
where the Grace of the Holy Ghost would not be wanting to direct, unless any
one can believe that God will inspire any one man (the Pope) with Justice ( i.
e. just or right judgment) and deny it to multitudes of Priests met in Council.
The African Bishops thought no Christian man could believe this: but there are
Roman Catholics who have made it an unquestionable truth, that though all
Councils may err, yet the Pope being infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost,
cannot. The Afri^^n Fathers go on -- How can a transmarine Sentence (at Rome)
be firm and good, V. Cyprian. Epist. 55.
to which the necessary presence of Witnesses, either in regard of Sex or
infirmity of Age, and many other impediments cannot be had? That any should be
sent from your side (as Legates suppose a Latere) we do not find in any Council
of Fathers, nor in the authentic Canons of the Nicene. Do not send upon any
ones request your Clericks as inforcers (to wit, of your Sentence upon Appeals)
lest we seem to bring the smoaky Pride of the World into the Church. So these
holy Bishops (I had almost said, Prophets) without fear or flattery, wrote of
old to Christ's Universal Vicar at Rome. As for the condemning Appeals to the
Pope, therein they trod in their steps, and use almost the very words of Saint
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, and his Colleagues to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, ^
Epist. 55. vel ^ab. 10. Epist. 3. ad ^ornelium.
to whom he wrote in this manner: Cum statutum sit ab omnibus nobis, etc.
Whereas it is decreed by all of us (in some National Council of Africa) and is
both just and fit, that every cause Ecclesiastical should be there heard where
the fault was committed, and to all Pastors a part, portio gregis, of the flock
of Christ (not all the flock to one) is entrusted, which every one ought to
rule as he that must give an account to God (not the Bishop of Rome, Cornelius)
it becomes not those whom we are over, to run about to other Churches (aiming
particularly at the Roman) and by their subtle and fallacious rashness to
divide the Concord of Bishops, and dissolve the Unity of the Church, but there
to plead their cause where Witnesses and Accusers may be produced against them.
Epist. 68.
The same St. Cyprian in another Epistle advises and encourages the People of
Spain, not to receive Basilides again as their Bishop, although he had been at
Rome with Pope Stephen, by whom he was (he says) unjustly and as he supposed,
in a surreptitious manner restored (for he had been deposed) to his Bishopric.
Can any one now believe that Saint Cyprian held the supreme Authority of the
Bishop of Rome over all Bishops and Churches to be his lawful right, or which
is more incredible, an Article of the ancient Primitive and Apostolic Faith,
as Pope Pius has declared it? Surely he must then be a Person of very
Catholic, i. e. Universal Faith to believe any thing. Hen. 1.

Hen. 2. apud Matthew. Parisien.


And what did Henry VIII. as other Kings of England before him, worse than
Saint Austin and the whole African Church in forbidding Appeals, and forbidding
his Legates in their own Kingdom? Why might not England do this as well as
Africa? Well, however our Adversaries will relish it, Can. 22.
the Council of Milevis (another African Council) forbad all Appeals to
transmarine Churches (aiming no doubt especially at Rome) under pain of
Excommunication out of all the Churches of Africa; and another at Carthage,
Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 26.
decreed that no Bishop whosoever, no not the Roman, should be called the
Prince of Bishops, but only the Bishop of the first Seat or See. Gratian the
Roman Canonist according to his excellent faculty of translating, gives us the
meaning of the Canon thus: That no Bishop is to be called the Prince of
Bishops, but the Bishop of the first Seat, i. e. the Pope. Glossa quae
corrumpit textum.

I will only add the Testimonies of two Bishops of Rome: The former is
Pelagius the 2d. Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 36. and 38.
who writing to his Rival for the Supremacy, the Bishop of Constantinople
says, Nullus Patriarcharum, etc. none of the Patriarchs (and so neither the
Roman) may use or assume the Title of Universal Bishop, for hereby the name of
Patriarch is indeed taken from all the rest; which, says he, far be it from
the thought of any faithful Christian. This is upon Record in the Popes Canon
Law.

But his Successor Pope Gregory the Great, Did. 99. Cap. Nullus Patriarcharum.

Lib. 4. Epist. 34.


speaks out more plainly, who, writing to the Empress against John Bishop of
Constantinople his Rival, says, -- In this his Pride (in affecting the Title
of Universal Bishop) appears the approach of Antichrist. Wherefore, I beseech
you by the Almighty God, give not any consent to this perverse Title. In like
manner, Epist. 32. to the Emperor, -- Peter himself is not called the Universal
Apostle, ( Feed my sheep, it seems proves it not.) None of the Roman Bishops
ever assumed, though offered to them, Lib. 4. Epist. 38. ad Joann. Constantin.

In isto scelesto vocabulo consentire, nihil est aliud quam fidem perdere.
Greg. M. ad Sabinian. lib. 4. Indict. 13. Epist. 39.

Lib. 7. Epist. 30. ad Eulogium; he rejects the name given to himself.


this name of Singularity, or consented to use it (as Popes now do.) And who is
he who contrary to the Gospel and the Decrees of the Canons, presumes to take
upon him this foolish and proud Name? Did ever any Protestant inveigh more
bitterly against the Popes Universal Episcopacy? I would gladly know whether
both parts of a contradiction can be true. Whether the ancient or modern Roman
Bishops, or both, be infallible? Do not the modern Popes assume and earnestly
contend for this foolish, proud and Antichristian Name? And lest we should
imagine, that Pope Gregory condemned this Name in other Patriarchs only, not as
to himself, he adds in the beforementioned Epistle to Mauritius the
Emperor, Gracious Lord, Nunquid hac in re propriam causam defendo, etc. Do I
in this speak for my self, or plead my own cause, and not rather the cause of
the whole Church? Where note, he acknowledges the Emperor to be his Lord, and
to whose judgment he is willing to refer the whole cause. Did Pope Gregory make
the Emperor supreme Judge in an Article of Faith? Let Papists judge.
Notwithstanding all this zeal his successor Boniface soon after, Ann. 607. as
Sigebert, Marianus Scotus, Martinus Polonus and other Historians testify,
Epist. 32. ad Maurit. and lib. 2. Epist. 61. ad Maur.

Beda de aetate Anastas. vita Bonifacii 3.

Ad. Chron. l. 1.

In Praefat. Reipub. Eccl.


by the favor of that execrable Regicide Phocas obtained this proud, foolish
and profane Title, and the present Pope, not only owneth the Name, but
contrary to the judgment of his Predecessors (who are supposed to have been
infallible) executes an Universal jurisdiction over all Princes, Bishops,
Churches (as far as he is able.) to the diminution, yea almost abrogation of
their due Rights, Privileges and Authority, as Marcus Antonius de Dominis
Archbishop of Spalato justly complained. So much for the Popes Supremacy.

Concerning the sacrifice of the Mass.
The next Article is the proper and real Sacrificing Christ, his very Body and
Blood in the Mass by the Priest, as a Propitiation for the sins both of quick
and dead. This Error in all probability arose from want of a discreet
understanding of some Rhetorical or Hyperbolical expressions used by the
Ancient Fathers in their popular Sermons and Discourses concerning the
Sacrament of Christ's death and Passion. Christus in seipso immortaliter
vivens, iterum in hoc Mysterio moritur. Greg. M. de Council. Did. 2. Quid sit.
But that it was no part of their Faith, to believe that Christ is really and
properly sacrificed in the Mass, we shall evidently prove out of their own
Writings.

I shall begin with Justin Martyr, Apol. ad Antonin.
who discoursing of the Holy Eucharist, shows how the Christians then used to
offer Bread and Wine to the (...), or Minister, who receiving them, offers up
to God (not Christ himself, but) Glory, Thanks and Praise for those his gifts (
i. e. Bread, (...). Mal. 1.11. which relates to all Christians.

(...).


and Wine) which after the Ministers Prayers and Thanksgivings are distributed
to every one that is present. Where note, First, They termed Bread and Wine
after the Ministers Prayers or Consecration: Secondly, Both Bread and Wine were
given to all present; not Bread only, much less neither one nor the other, as
in Private Masses. But of sacrificing or offering up Christ himself to God, he
has not a word in that place. The same Father in his Dialogue with Trypho the
Jew, P. 201.
treats at large concerning the abrogation of the Jewish Sacrifices; and
coming to mention the Christian Sacrifice, (...).

In Dialog. page 270.


which Malachy foretold should be offered up to God by the Gentiles in every
place: he interprets it (as Tertullian, Eusebius, and the rest of the Fathers
do) of Prayers and Praises; Which, says he, I account the only perfect
sacrifices pleasing to God. Which Spiritual Sacrifices a little after he
opposes to all the Sacrifices, Offerings and Oblations of the Law. Surely, had
Saint Justin believed that in the Eucharist Christ himself, his Body and Blood
were by the Priest really and properly sacrificed to God, he would no doubt
have made mention of this Christian Sacrifice, far exceeding in virtue and
value, no only all Jewish Offerings, but the Prayers and Thanksgivings of all
Christians: at least he would never have affirmed, that the latter were in his
opinion the only perfect Sacrifices under the Gospel pleasing to God. But he
is altogether silent as to any such Sacrifice; yea, contrarily in that very
place he adds, That these only Sacrifices, to wit, Prayers and Praises
Christians have learned to make, and that in or at the commemoration or
remembrance of their alimony both wet and dry ( i. e. the Eucharistical Bread
and Wine) in which they remember the Passion of Christ. Where it is remarkable
that Justin Martyr, instead of proper sacrificing of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist, mentions only the Commemoration or Memorial of his Passion, and
that the Prayers and Thanksgivings attending it (for it is called the Eucharist,
(...)) were the only Sacrifices Christians had learned in that most solemn
Office of Religion to offer up to God. So much for Justin.

I pass on to St. Irenaeus, who acknowledges that Christ teaching his
Disciples to offer to God First Fruits of his Creatures, Lib. 4. c. 32.32, 34.
lest they should seem ungrateful, took that Bread, which is of the creature or
Creation ((...), possibly was the word) and gave thanks, and said, This is my
Body. In like manner the Cup of Wine, which is of the creature ( i. e. the
Vine) confessing it to be his Blood, and taught the Oblation of the new
Testament, which the Church receiving from the Apostles offers to God
throughout the World, to him who grants to us the First Fruits of his Gifts
in the New Testament. Here we find an Oblation, but not a Sacrifice (which two,
De Missa. l. 1. c 2.
as Bellarmine observes, are different things) much less a sacrifice of
Christ's Body and Blood. Irenaeus plainly shows what kind of Oblation he
meant, when he declares it to be not of Christ the Creator, but of Gods
creatures, to wit, Bread and Wine, which the Church offers to God. De Euchar.
lib 10. c. 27.

V. Litur. Chrysostom.


( Bellarmine grants this) First, as an expression of honor, love and
gratitude to him for his creatures bountifully bestowed on us for our
sustenance. Secondly, That out of a part of them, to wit, Bread and Wine set on
Gods Table or Altar, by the prayers of the Priest they might become
sacramentally and mystically his Body and Blood. Thirdly, That out of the
remains the poor might be relieved. These Oblations Saint Cyprian after him
calls in an improper sense Sacrifices, In Dominicum sine sacrificio venis?
Do thou come, Sermon. de Eleemosyna.

V. Canonem Missae and D. Field, in Append. p. 212.


speaking to a rich Widow, to Church without a Sacrifice, i. e. Oblation? These
Oblations of Bread and Wine offered up to God, in a way of grateful
acknowledgment of his mercies, out of which the sacramental Elements were of
old taken, are the Oblation of the New Testament taught by Christ, and observed
by the Primitive Christians. That this was his true sense and meaning appears
plainly from the next Chapter, Cap. 33.
where having quoted the Prophecy of Malachy, concerning the pure Incense and
Offering of the Gentiles (a place urged by our Adversaries for their
Mass-Sacrifice) Sacrifice) he expounds it according to Revel. 8.3. Cap. 34.
of the Prayers of Saints; and in the next Chapter discoursing of this Oblation
which our Savior taught to be offered in all places throughout the World,
which is accounted by God a pure Sacrifice; he applies to it those words: If
thou bring thy gift to the Altar, etc. Matthew. 5.
which Gift was never understood by any of Christ's Body and Blood, which
according to our Romanists own Doctrine, none but Priests, not private
Christians, offer at Gods Altar. To this he subjoineth the words of God by
Moses; Thou shall not appear before the Lord empty, i.e. without an Oblation;
For gifts, says he, Cap. 34.
testify love and honor of the Person to whom they are presented. Then he
adds, In regard the Church offers with Simplicity, her Oblation is justly
accounted by God a pure Sacrifice, as Saint Paul writes to the Philippians of
their Oblations, i.e. Psalm. 4.18.
Alms, sent to him, terming them an Offering pleasing to God; For it becomes
us, says Irenaeus, to make an Oblation to God, and in all things to be found
grateful unto the Creator -- offering primitias creaturarum ejus (not his Son,
but) the first fruits of his Creatures.

The Synagogue of the Jews offers not thus,
in regard they have not received the word (Christ) by whom it is to be offered
to God; in which respect it is termed a New Oblation of the Church. However
then our Adversaries boast much of Irenaeus as owning their Sacrifice of the
Mass; it is evident to any who will weigh the whole Context of his Discourse,
that he says nothing in the least of sacrificing Christ in the Sacrament, but
of Oblations and Alms, which are still used in our Churches at the Offertory
when the Eucharist is celebrated.

Let us now proceed to Tertullian, Lib. 3. cap 22. Gloriae Relatio, Benedictio,
and Laus and Hymni, and Lib. 4. c. 1.

Simplex Oration de Conscientia pura.

Pura prece.


who against Marcion expounds Malachy's clean or pure Sacrifice, of giving
Glory, Blessing and Praise to God; and in another place of Simple or pure
Prayer from a pure Conscience, Lib. 4. in Marc. c. 1. In like manner, ad
Scapulam, written in defense of the Christians who were accused, because they
did not offer up (as the Gentiles) any Sacrifice for the life of the Emperor,
He answers, We do sacrifice for the Emperor, but as God has commanded, pura
prece, with pure Prayer. Why does he not say, (which Bellarmine grants, de
Missa, l. 2. c. 6. might lawfully have been done) we offer up for him a most
perfect and venerable Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of the Son of God. V.
Tertul. adv. Judaeos, c. 5.

Strom. 7. p. 717.

(...), etc.


It seems he was ignorant of this Mass Sacrifice. Clemens Alexand.
discoursing much about Heathenish and Jewish Sacrifices, adds, We Christians
honor God with our Prayers, and this most excellent Sacrifice we present unto
him. And a little after, The Sacrifice of the Christian Church is speech,
(...), breathed out from holy Souls.

I will add Lactantius, Instit. lib. 6. cap. ult.
Summus colendi Dei ritus, etc. The highest rite or office of worship to God,
is praise from the mouth of a righteous Man. Would he or Clemens have advanced
Prayer or Praise above the Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass, Epist. 63.
had they believed it? But I must not forget Saint Cyprian, ad Luc. where he
says, Christ offered himself to God a Sacrifice, Add Cyprian de Unction
Chrismatis. In mensa Panem and Vinum, in cruce militibus Corpus vulnerandum
tradit.

Vino Christi sanguis oftenditur. Aqua sola Christi sanguinem non potest
exprimere. Cypr. Epist. 17.

V. Lactant. Instit. p. 1. c. 1.


and commanded the Eucharist to be celebrated in commemoration or remembrance
of him. It is the Passion of our Lord which is the Sacrifice we offer;
wherefore, as often as we offer the Cup in remembrance of the Lord and his
Passion, we ought to do what he did before us. Which last words confute the
Romish Half-communion. Surely, if the Passion of Christ on the Cross be the
Sacrifice we offer to God, evident it is, that it can be offered only by way of
commemoration or remembrance; for Christ suffered but once on the Cross, which
was performed above 1600 years ago. How can that very Passion be really and
properly reiterated or acted over again, unless by way of representation and
commemoration? But if the Sacrifice of the Mass be only a representation or
commemoration of Christ's Passion, then it cannot be a proper Sacrifice, but
improper and by similitude only, as the Picture of the Passion of a Martyr is
not really and properly the Passion it self.

I come now to Eusebius the learned Bishop of Cesarea, (...), Lib. 1. de
Demonstr. Evang. c. 10.

V. Eusebius. de Laudib. Constantini, page 488.


who teaches us, that the Sacrifice of Christ himself was prefigured by all
the Jewish Sacrifices, of which Christians make in the Eucharist a continual
remembrance, as he often repeateth it. But concerning sacrificing Christ again
and again by the Priest we find not a word. Yea, in the same place he says,
That Christians offer up (...), the memory or memorial of Christ's sacrifice on
the Cross instead of a sacrifice to God; which Memorial says, we celebrate
signis quibusdam, by certain signs, to wit, Bread and Wine on the Holy Table,
wherein we offer up to God unbloudy and rational Sacrifices (...), incorporeal
and without blood, by his most eminent High Priest Jesus Christ, i. e. Prayers
and Praises. He says not, We offer Jesus Christ the High Priest, but we offer
up other Sacrifices by him. Neither by incorporeal and unbloudy Sacrifices in
the plural, could he intend offering up Christ's Body and Blood; for how
possibly can Christ's Body be incorporeal or his blood without blood? A little
after, he explaineth more fully what he means by those Rational, Incorporeal
or spiritual Sacrifices, to wit, the sacrifices of Prayer and Praise; to which
purpose he quoteth the words of David: Psalm 50.
Offer unto God thanksgiving, etc. and those of Malachy abovementioned,
concerning pure Incense, i. e. Prayer, and a pure Offering, i. e. says he, A
broken and contrite heart. He concludes in these words: We sacrifice and offer
Incense sometimes by celebrating the memory, (...), of that great Sacrifice,
(to wit, of Christ on the Cross) by those sacramental Mysteries, which he has
delivered to us, giving thanks to God for our Redemption, and offering Hymns
and Praises to him. (The same do Protestants) otherwise by consecrating and
devoting our selves to God, and dedicating Soul and Body to his High Priest,
the Word. Ye see here how many sorts of Christian Sacrifices Eusebius reckons
up, Prayers, Praises, consecrating our souls and bodies to God, celebrating the
memory of his Sacrifice on the Cross; but concerning sacrificing of Christ
himself in and by the sacramental Mysteries, we find nothing. Can this now be a
point of Catholic Faith, of which Eusebius and all the ancient Fathers were
ignorant? Lib. 5. c. 3.
The same Eusebius in another place discourses concerning Christ's Priesthood
according to the order of Melchizedeck. His words are: In like manner, first
our Savior, then the Priests of, or from him exercising a spiritual
Priesthood, by Bread and Wine, V. Tertul. cont. Judaeos.

Ambross. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 3.


do obscurely represent the Mysteries of his Body and Blood. This makes
nothing for the Popish Mass-sacrifice. For first, Melchizedeck, as he said a
little before, (...), protulit (as the vulgar translation renders it) brought
forth to Abraham Bread and Wine, but offered obtulit, no corporal Sacrifices.
The truth is, the Mass Priests, if Transubstantiation be admitted, offer
neither Bread nor Wine, which they tell us are changed into Christ's Body and
Blood, which are corporal things. But the Christian Priesthood says Eusebius,
is spiritual, so therefore are their Sacrifices also. Secondly, All that
Eusebtus says of the Executors of this spiritual Priesthood, is, that after
Christ's Example by Bread and Wine (which he supposes to remain in their
substance) they obscurely represent Christ's Body and Blood. Does this imply,
that the Bread and Wine are miraculously changed into the body and blood of
Christ? or that representing Christ's body and blood in the Holy Sacrament
renders them a Sacrifice, or implies any offering them up as a propitiatory
Victim for the sins both of quick and dead? Certainly, did this sacrificing
Christ by or under Bread and Wine at all appertain to the Christian Priesthood,
Eusebius no doubt would have (it being so eminent and wonderful an action) made
at least some little mention of it. But how could he mention that which it
appears he was wholly ignorant of, to wit, the sacrificing Christ by Priests
in the Holy Eucharist?

Athanasius in a few words gives the Sacrifice of the Mass a deadly blow.
Orat. 3. in Arian.
The Sacrifice of our Savior once offered perfects all, and remains firm all
times. Aaron had Successors, our Lord had none. Saint Chrysostom adv. Judaeos
Hom. 36. expounds Malachy's Pure Offering of Prayer; and Hom. in Psalm 95.
reckoning up about ten sorts of Sacrifices in the Christian Church, as
Martyrdom, Prayer, Alms, etc. he takes no notice of the Sacrifice of all
Sacrifices, to wit, of Christ in the Mass. But that noted place, Hom. 17. on
the Hebrews must not be omitted; where having first said, Heb. 10.10.
that Jesus Christ is both Priest and Sacrifice, who offered himself to God
once for all, for us; he raises an Objection against what he had said from
Saint Paul, What then do we Priests? Do not we daily offer? He answers, We do
indeed offer, but it is making a remembrance of his death, V. Basil. M. in Cap.
1. Esaiae.
we do it in commemoration of what is already done; we do offer the same
Sacrifice (...), or rather (correcting himself that he might speak more
properly and exactly,) We celebrate or operate the remembrance of a Sacrifice,
i. e. of Christ on the Cross, commemorantes, and memoriam facientes, as the
Roman Missal it self speaks.

Saint Ambrose in his Comment on the Hebrews says the very same, as if he had
translated Saint Chrysostom: Cap. 10.
Do not we daily offer? Yes, We offer memoriam facientes, making in and by the
Eucharist a memorial of his death. We offer him (Christ) magis autem sacrificii
recordationem operamur, Rather or more properly, we make a remembrance of a
Sacrifice. Lib. 4. de Sacra. c. 6.
In another place he sets down the ancient forms of Consecration; Wherefore
being mindful of his Passion ( i. e. V. Canonem Missae Romans
Christ on the Cross) we offer to thee this Sacrifice -- this bread. Bread, not
the very Body of Christ in a carnal and corporeal sense. The like words we find
in Saint Chrysostomes and the Gregorian Liturgies.

I will now add Epiphanius, who says, as Athanasius above, Haer. 55.
Christ has no Successor in his Priesthood, that he is both Priest and
Sacrifice, in regard none can properly sacrifice him but himself, which he did
once for all on the Cross. And Haer. 42. Christ by his Sacrifice has taken
away the use of all Sacrifices ( i. e. properly so called) under the ^ospel. In
like manner Saint Cyril of Alexandria against Julian the Apostate, who objected
that the Christians had no Sacrifice: Lib. 9. cont. Julian.

(...).


For answer, he asserts not any external, visible and corporeal one, but (...),
an intellectual and spiritual Worship; for, says he, a most immaterial and
spiritual Sacrifice becomes God, who is in his nature pure and immaterial.

I will end with Saint Austin, who in his 20th Book against ^^^stus thus
writes: Christians celebrate the memory of this finished Sacrifice, (to wit,
Chapter 18.
of Christ on the Cross) by the Holy Oblation or Sacrament, i. e. of Bread and
Wine, and by participation of the body and blood of Christ; not by immolation,
but participation of them; not by reiteration of Christ's Sacrifice which is
finished (consummatum est) but commemoration of it. And Chap. 21. he has these
words: Lib 20. contr. Faust. c. 21. The like he has de fide, ad Petrum Diacon.
c. 19.
The flesh and blood of this Sacrifice of Christ before his Incarnation was
promised or represented by the similitude of Levitical Sacrifices: In the
Passion of Christ it was performed per ipsam veritatem, by the very truth of
the thing it self: After his Ascension, it is celebrated per sacramentum
memoriae, by a Sacrament of memory, or commemoration, not by a true proper
Sacrifice of Christ, per ipsam veritatem, and immolation of his very body and
blood, as Romanists affirm. In his Epistle to Boniface, he expresses it more
clearly. Is not Christ immolated or offered up once in semetipso, Quod natum
est ex Virgin nobis quotidie nascitur and crucifigitur. Hieron. in Psalm. 86.
and 97.
in himself, i. e. his own body and blood really, and yet in the Sacrament, not
only every Easter, but every day, quotidie populis immolatur, he is immolated
or offered to the people. He says not to God, but to the people. For
Sacraments, if they had not some similitude, similitudinem, of those things
whereof they are Sacraments, they could not at all be Sacraments. Hence the
names of the things signified are communicated to them. Here Saint Austin
plainly affirms, that Christ's body and blood are immolated or offered up in
and by the sacramental Signs, not really, properly and substantially, but per
similitudinem, by way of similitude or representation, in regard the
sacramental Symbols as he says, secundum quendam modum, after some manner, not
proper but figurative, Epist. 23.
are his body and blood; or as Saint Ambrose has it, in imagine, in an Image
or representation, but there (in He^ at Gods right hand) in veritate, Lib. 1.
de Offic. c. 48. and in Psalm. 38.
in truth; where he pre^ (...) his very body and blood by way of interpellation
to the Eyes of his Father as our Advocate. In another place, As often as the
Pascha, the Christian Passover is offered, In Psalm. 21.

Compare in Psalm 75.

Memoria quotidie nobis immolatur.

Cum hostia frangitur, and sanguis in ora fidelium infunditur, quid aliud quam
Dominici corporis immolatio significatur, Aug. de Cons. did. 2.


does Christ so often die? No: yet anniversaria recordatio quasi repraesentat
quod olim factum est, The Anniversary recordation at Easter, does as it were
represent what was done long since; and so admonishes us as if we saw Christ
hanging on the Cross. So much for sacrificing Christ in ^^e Mass, or Sacrament,
which the ancient Fathers own not, allowing only with Protestants an improper
offering of him by way of Image, representation, similitude, memorial and
communication.

Concerning Communion in one kind.
I come to the last Article beforementioned of the new Roman Creed, Receiving
the Communion in one kind in bread only. Evangelistae ita tradiderunt
praecepisse sibi Jesum, Apol. 2. prope finem.

Epist. 54.56, 63. lib. de Lapsis. Cypr. de coena Domini.


Here it is needless to quote many Testimonies, seeing our Adversaries
themselves confess, that herein they have departed from the practice of all the
ancient Fathers. We have already seen in Justin Martyr, that both Bread and
Wine were administered to all that were present at the Sacrament; yea, he there
informs us that the Deacon carried (...), consecrated Bread and Wine to such as
were sick and absent. In Cyprian's days it is undeniable, that the Sacramental
Cup was given to the people, yea Infants. Bibimus de sanguine Domini ipso
jubente, Christ commanding us, we drink of his Blood. I might allege Ignatius
ad Philadelph. Origin Hom. 16. in Number. Tertul. ad Uxorem, lib. 2. Cyril
Hierosol. Catech. etc. Ambrose lib. 1. de Offic. c. 41. de Sacrament. l. 4. c.
4. Jerome in Sophon. c. 3. and 1 Cor. 11. Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in 2. ad Corint.
Theodoret in 1 Cor. 11. Dionysius Carthusian. in 1 Cor. 11.
Austin in Levit. qu. Theophylact. 1 Cor. 11. Paschasius de Coena, Dom. with
many more; but it is needless, as we shall show by and by, Lyra in Proverb. 1.9.
and Carthusianus grant it.

Several Articles of the Romish Faith are not 600 years old.
I come to my third Assertion. That some of the Articles beforementioned in
Pope Pius's Creed, and declared by him to be parts of the Primitive Catholic
and Apostolic Faith, necessary to be believed by all Christians to salvation,
cannot be proved to be such by the Testimonies of any eminent Writers for above
one thousand years after Christ. I instance, First, In the Article concerning
their seven Sacraments. It was first made an Article of Faith by the Council of
Florence. 1439.

V. Cassand. Consul.

Art. 13

Chemnit. in Examen.

Perkins Demonstr. Problem.

Licet Primitiva Ecclesia, etc. Council. Basil. Licet ab Initio Christianae
Religionis, etc. Trent Council, Can. 1. Sess. 5.


No ancient Writer for one thousand years after Christ ever taught that there
were seven Sacraments, nec plura, nec pauciora, neither more nor less, and that
extreme Unction, Matrimony with the rest, were they. Peter Lombard, who lived
An. 1160. first taught this Doctrine, which he could not prove, although he
endeavors it in other Points, by the Testimonies of the ancient Fathers. But
of this more below.

Secondly, In the Article concerning Communion in one kind. The Councils of
Constance and Trent confess, that the Primitive Church administered the
Eucharist to the people in both kinds as Christ did; yet non obstante, as if
this were little to be regarded, they decree the Laity shall not receive both
yea, anathematize such as say, it is necessary from the Institution, practice
and command of our Savior, Do this, etc. Drink ye all of this. The same is
acknowledged by Bellarmine, Valentia, Costerus, and others of their most
eminent Writers. Consult. Art. 13.
Cassander confesses, that the Primitive Church, at least in all her public
Administrations, gave both Elements to the people for one thousand years after
Christ. Part 3. qu. 80. Art. 12.

V. Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 3. c. 23.

Alph. de Castro. De Transubst. rara apud antiquos mentio, p. 572. c. 8.


The present Roman Custom in Aquinas his days was but in quibusdam Ecclesiis,
in some Churches only.

Thirdly, Transubstantiation, as Scotus and Biel in Can. Sect. 4. acknowledge,
was first made an Article of Faith by Pope Innocent in the Lateran Council, not
much above four hundred years ago.

Fourthly, Opuse. de Imagine.
Worshipping of Images with Latria came in, as Camarinus grants, one thousand
years after Christ. The second Nicene Council condemns it.

Fifthly, V. Caranzam in Council. Nicaeno 2. Art. 2.

Alph. de Castro, lib. 8. p. 572.

V. Concess. fidei Cyrilli, Patriarchae Constant.

Dr. Field against Higgons.


The belief of Purgatory and use of Indulgences were, sero recepti in Ecclesia,
lately received by the Church, as we have seen Roffensis and Alphonsus de
Castro, two zealous Papists affirming: It Is notorious that Purgatory was first
made an Article of Faith in the late Council of Florence about three hundred
years ago, which the Greek Church owneth not at this day, nor ever did. Who can
now but wonder at the confidence of our Adversaries, who boast of their Ancient
Catholic and Apostolic Religion, accusing Protestants of Novelty and Heresy,
setting up a new Faith and Church, because we protest against and reject these
erroneous Novelties they would impose upon us, and all Christians, as Catholic
Truths necessary to be believed to Salvation?

Several Articles of the Roman Faith, condemned by eminent Writers before
Luther, and by some of their own Communion since.
But I hasten to my fourth and last Assertion, which was this; That there is
scarcely any point in Controversy betwixt us and the Papists, especially of
them beforementioned, made by Pope Pius, and the late Tridentine Council,
Articles of Faith, but we are able to produce many eminent Writers, and some of
their own Church, who condemn them as well as we in the Ages next before Luther
appeared in the World. So that what Doctrines and practices the Reformed
Protestant Churches rejected and condemned, were not the generally received,
and unanimously avowed Opinions and observances of the Roman, much less
Catholic Church, but only of a powerful and predominant Party in it.

The Numb^r of Sacraments.
I will first begin with their Doctrine of seven Sacraments. The Canonists, as
Panormitan and the Gloss on Did. 5. de Poenitentia, V. Rhe^num (...) in
Tertul. de Poenitent. Loc. Commun. lib. ^. c. 4. and 5.

In qu. Gent. Di^t. 26. qu. 3.


say, That Penance was not ordained (as the Trent Council grants all true
Sacraments are) a Sacrament by Christ, but is an Institution of the Church
only. Canus affirms, it is uncertain whether it gives Grace or no. Durandus
holds, 4. Did. 26. qu. 3. That Matrimony is no Sacrament univocally and
properly so called, conferring Grace.

Hugo de S. Victore denies, that extreme Unction is a Sacrament. Holcot quoted
by Cassander, Consult. art. 13. says, Confirmation is no Sacrament. De Sacrum.
Euchar. Part. 4. qu. 5. Mem. 2.

Naucler. Vol. 2.


Bessarion the Cardinal owneth only two Sacraments, Baptism and the Eucharist.
Alexander Halensis is of opinion, that there are only four Sacraments of the
Gospel. See Dr. Field of the Church, In Append. p. 332. and Bishop Mortons
Appeal, p. 337. The Waldenses held but two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords
Supper, as Protestants do.

Transubstantiation.
Secondly, As for their new Article of Transubstantiation, Petrus de Alliaco a
Cardinal ingenuously acknowledges, Did. 11. qu. 6. Art. 2. add Cameracensis
4. Gent. qu. 6. Art. 2. Occam in 4. Gent. 2.5.

De Euchar. lib. 3. c. 23 quaest. 3. Lib. 4. Did. 11. qu. 23. Art. 1.


that the Opinion which supposes the substance of Bread to remain still after
Consecration (which was Luther's Opinion) is possible; neither is it contrary
to reason or Scripture: Nay, says he, it is easier to conceive and more
reasonable than that which holds, that the substance does leave the
accidents, and of this Opinion no inconvenience does seem to ensue, if it could
be accorded with the Churches ( i. e. his Roman Churches) determination. Scotus
quoted by Bellarmine, says, that before the Lateran Council it was no point of
Faith. To be sure, P. Lombard the Father of the Schoolmen believed it not. For,
he says, if it be demanded, what manner of conversion of the Elements into
Christ's body and blood, is made by Consecration, whether formal or substantial,
De Verit. Corp. and Sang. D. in Euchar. p. 46.
I am not able to define. Tunstal Bishop of Durham in Queen Mary's days
declares, that before the Council of Lateran no man was bound to believe
Transubstantiation, it being free for all men till that time to follow their
own conjecture, as to the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament. Hence he
only required the Confession of a Real presence (which we grant) and no more.
Yea, he used to say, That if he had been at Pope Innocent's Elbow when he
decreed Transubstantiation as an Article of Faith, he could, he thought, have
offered him such reasons as should have dissuaded him from it. In Can. Missae.
Lect. 41.
Biel affirms, that Transubstantiation is a very new Opinion and lately
brought into the Church; and was believed only or principally on the Authority
of Pope Innocent, and the Infallibility of the Church (you must suppose Roman)
which expounds the Scripture by the same Spirit which delivered the Faith to us.

To which Durand agrees: 4 Did. 11. qu. 1. Number. 9.
It is rashness, says he, to think the body of Christ by his divine Power
cannot be in the Sacrament, unless the bread be converted into it. He adds,
that the Opinion of Transubstantiation (held by Lutherans) is liable to fewer
difficulties, but it must not be holden, since the Church (of Rome) has
determined the contrary, which is presumed not to err in such matters. Yet see
how doubtfully he speaks of their Churches Infallibility, V. Bell. de Euchar.
lib. 3. c. 23.

In 4 Sent. qu. 6.

Scotus in 4. Did. 11. qu. 3.


on whose Authority only he owneth Transubstantiation, not at all from any
cogent authority of Reason or Scripture, which he says, cannot be found. In
like manner Cameracensis professes, he saw not how Transubstantiation could be
proved evidently either out of Scripture, or any determination of the Universal
or Catholic Church, making it a matter of Opinion, not Faith, and inclining
rather as Alliaco, to Consubstantiation. Aquinas himself acknowledges, that
some Catholics quidam Catholici thought, that one body could not possibly be
present in two places locally, but sacramentally only, which overthrows
Transubstantiation: Ferus is very moderate in this point. Seeing, says he,
it is certain that Christ's body is in the Sacrament, what need we dispute
whether the substance of bread remain or not? Tom. 3. Disp. 46. c. 3.
Cardinal Cajetan himself, quoted by Suarez, confesses, that those words so
urged by Romanists in this Point, This is my Body, Supra in Part. 3. sum. qu.
75. art. 14.
secluding the Authority of the Church, are not sufficient to confirm
Transubstantiation. Of the same Opinion was Scotus. The same Cajetan notes,
that many in truth deny what the word Transubstantiation indeed imports. So
if I be not much mistaken, does Cardinal Bellarmine, who instead of a
substantial change or conversion of the Bread into Christ's Body, maintains
only a Translocation, adduction or succession of Christ's Body into the room
and place of it; which (as easy to discern) is no Transubstantiation of the
bread into Christ's Body, properly so called. Johannes Scotus Erigena about the
year 800. wrote against Transubstantiation, proving out of the Scriptures and
ancient Fathers, that the Bread and Wine are not properly, but figuratively and
sacramentally Christ's body and blood. This Book is still extant, and (no
wonder) condemned by the Infallible Index Expurgatorius.

Aelfricus Archbishop of Canterbury set out, Anno 996. in the Saxon Tongue his
Homilies: wherein he affirms, that the bread is not Christ's Body corporaliter,
corporally, but spiritually, spiritualiter. With which perfectly agrees the
Paschal Saxon Homily of Aelfrick Abbot of Malmsbury, appointed publicly to be
read to the People in England on Easter day before the Communion, still extant
in Manuscript in the public Library of the University of Oxford, and the
private Library of Bennet College in Cambridge; To which place I gratefully
acknowledge I owe the foundation of that small knowledge I have in Divinity.
Panis ille est corpus Christi, figurate, etc.

Fulber. Epist. ad Adeodatum.

Epist. ad Heribaldum.


To these may be added, Bertram de corpore and sanguine Domini to Charles the
Great, who about seven hundred years ago in a just Treatise impugneth the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation; to whom you may add Fulbertus, Carnoton,
Berengarius, Hincmarus in vita Remigii, Rabanus Maurus.

Purgatory.
As for Purgatory and its Appendix, Indulgences, whose most gross abuse defended
by the Pope, first opened Luther's mouth against him, much need not be said; in
regard, as we have seen above. Roffensis the Popes Martyr, and Alphonsus de
Castro, to whom I may now add Polydore Virgil, confess, they are late
Novelties, of which in the ancient Greek Fathers there is little or no mention.
The modern Greek Church, as appears peareth from their Confession offered to
the Council of Basil, and since that of Cyril late Patriarch of Constantinople,
denies any Purgation of sins after death by Fire. Lumbard and Gratian take no
notice of Indulgences. The later Schoolmen, Albertus, Al. Halensis, Durand,
Cajetan, quoted by Bishop Usher and Dr. Field in his Appendix, say, that
Finalis Gratia, etc. final Grace abolisheth all remains of sin in Gods
Children: Answer to the Challenge, p. 179.

Part. prima summae. Tit. 10. c. 3.

Opusc. 15. c. 1.

De Indulg. lib. 4. did. 20. qu. 3.

Primus in Purgatorium extendit Indulgentias.

V. Chemnit. Exam. de Indulg. 742. and 100 Gravamina.


what need then of any Purgatorian fire? Antoninus acknowledges, that
concerning Indulgences, nihil habemus express, etc. We have nothing expressly
or clearly delivered, either in Scripture or the ancient Fathers. This same is
affirmed by Cajetan and Durand. Agrippa de Vanitate Scient. cap. 61. says,
that Pope Boniface VIII. first extended Indulgences to Purgatory, they were
opposed before Luther, by the University of Paris, Wesselus, Wickliffe, Hus,
Jerome of Prague, Savanorola, yea the States of Germany complain to the Pope of
them as intolerable burdens, cheats and incentives to all manner of wickedness.
Add Platina in Boniface 9. Urspergensis, Chron. p. 322.

Image Worship.
Worshipping of Image was, V. Polyd. Virgil. de Invent. rerum, lib. 6.

V. Cassand. infra.

See Vspergensis and Rhegino ad Ann. 794. and Matthew. Westminst. ad Ann. 794.

Cassand. Consult. art. de Imagine. The work of Men's Hands may not be adored, no
not in honor of their Prototypes, p. 213. De Trad. Part 3. De Imagine.


as is notorious, first Decreed (though not with Latria) in the second Nicene
Council about the year 794 but was opposed and condemned by the General
Councils of Constantinople and Frankfort, in which last were three hundred
Bishops, called by the Emperor and Pope whose Legates were there present, as
the Bishop of Rhemes reports, apud Alanum Copum, Dial. 4. and Suarez grants it,
in 3. Part. Thomae qu. 25. disp. 54. This worship of Images was confuted also
by Albinus or Alcuinus out of the Scriptures, as Hoveden relates in continuat.
Bedae ad ann. 794. Moreover, by the Book of Charles the Great (if it be not the
same with the former,) which is still extant in the Vatican, and acknowledged
to be genuine by some learned Papists. Agobardus Bishop of Lions wrote against
worshipping Pictures or Images. So did also Jonas Bishop of Orleans in his Book
de Cultu Imaginum, cap. 5.
allowing them only for Ornament in Churches, but detests the giving them any
part of divine Honor, as accursed wickedness. Peresius says as much. Gerson
de defect. viror. Eccles. Holcot de Sapientia Lect. 158. Miraudula, Apol. qu.
3. condemn bowing before them: Durand. de ritib. Eccl. Catharinus de cult.
Imagine. grant, that their use is dangerous in regard of the peril of Idolatry.
See our Churches Homily on the Peril of Idolatry. Polydore Virgil says, De
Invent. rerum. lib. 6. c. 13.

De Imag. l. 2. c. 22.


all the Fathers condemned worshipping Images. Bellarmine himself grants,
that the worship of Images (as defended and practiced by the Roman Church, i.e.
with Latria or the same worship we give to the Prototypes) cannot be maintained
without such nice distinctions of absolutely and relatively, or accidentally,
univocally or analogically, properly or improperly, as scarce themselves, much
less the weak common people can understand, or if they do, can hardly avoid
Error in practicing them; Peresius more plainly: They are a scandal to the weak
who cannot understand them, but by erring. Hence the Cardinal accounts it not
safe to teach their Votaries publicly to give Divine Honor or Latria to the
Image of Christ for his sake. De Trad. p. 226.

V. Biel. in Canon. Missae Sect. 49.

Part 3. qu. 28. Art. 3.

Instit. Mor. Tom. 1. l. 9.

Suarez. Tom. 1.

Disp. 54. Sect. 4.

Vasq. in qu. 25. disp. 110. c. 2.

See Orig. in Cells. l. 6. and 8.

Arnob. lib. 6.

Apud Bellar. de Imag. l. 2. c. 8.

V. Aug. de fide and symb. cap. 7. Biblioth. Patrtom, Tom. 5. page 609. Council.
Trident. Compare Origin, Lib. 7. in Celsum.


Nevertheless it is undeniable that this is the professed Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, declared by their Oracle Aquinas, and constans opinio, as Azorius
speaks, the constant Opinion of their Divines, defended by Valentia, Suarez,
and that as the sense of the Council of Trent. Vasquez the Jesuit to defend
this Adoration blushed not to write, that it is lawful to worship the Sun, yea
(God bless us) the Devil himself, so the worship be directed ultimately to God
and his Honor; whereas it is notorious, that the Heathens might and did in this
very manner defend their gross Idolatry. The very making of the Images of the
Trinity is condemned by Abulensis, Durand, Peresius and others, yet defended
and practiced by the Roman Church. Walafridus Strabo called it Superstition and
blockishness, hebitudinem, to worship Images. I will end, that I be not too
tedious, with the words of Jonas Bishop of Orleans, as an Answer to our
Adversaries Reply, That they place no Divinity in their Images, but worship
them only in honor of God and of him whose Image it is, seeing they know
there is no Divinity in Images, they are the more to be condemned for giving to
an infirm and beggarly Image the honor that is due to the Divinity. I cannot
omit what I find in Agobardus, it being so consonant with Jonas as making one
sentence. De Pict. and Imag. p. 237.
They which answer (as our Roman Catholics now do) they think no Divinity to
be in the Image they worship, but that they worship it in honor of him whose
image it is, are easily answered, because if the Image they worship be not God,
neither is it to be worshipped in honor of the Saints, who use not to arrogate
to themselves Divine Honor. He adds, That the Images of Christ and the
Apostles were expressed by the Ancients after the custom of the Gentiles, V.
Eusebius. supra.
rather for love and memory than for any religious honor or worship. He
concludes; This is the sincere Religion, this is the Catholic Custom, p. 251.
In Confess. sidei per Critopulum Patriarch. 5.

Ann. 1430. Sess. 4.

Veritas fidei Catholicae. Caranza, An. 1409. An. 1414. Respons. de Privileg.
Patriarch.

Concord. l. 2. c. 25.

Supra, cap. 20. p. 748.


this is the Tradition of the Fathers, etc. The Greeks condemn giving Latria or
Douleia to Images in their confession of Faith. The Popes Supremacy over
Emperors, Councils, Bishops, etc. This was contradicted by the Council of
Basil (confirmed by Pope Nicolas) who decreed, that it was de fide a point of
Faith, that the Pope ought to be subject to a General Council. Of the same
opinion were the Councils of Pisa and Constance, who deposed several Popes as
Schismatics and Heretics, for refusing to appear upon their Summons. Balsamon
a Greek Writer shows, that the five Patriarchs were equal in honor and
power, and were all instead of one Head over the whole Church. Cusanus the
Cardinal confesses, that the eight first General Councils were all called by
the Emperors, and that the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon concerning the
precedence of the Bishop of Constantinople before him of Alexandria
(notwithstanding Pope Leo's disclaiming it) was in full force and Authority.
Card. Cusanus Concord. l. 2. c. 20.

Ad An. 1088.

Sigonius de Regno Ital. l. 7.


Sigebert terms the Pope absolving Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance to
their Princes, Novelty and Heresy. Otho the Emperor deposed Pope John, and
assumed his ancient right of Nomination to the Popedom. The Popes usurped
Authority over the Emperor, was wrote against by Mcrsilius, Occam, Gerson,
Dantes, Zabarella, Cusanus, Tostatus, Apud Bellarmin. de Council. l. 1. c. 140.

In Sent. lib. 4. did. 12. art. 5. Part 3. qu. 83. Art. 1.


Alliaco, Antoninus and many others.

The Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass was unknown to Pope Lumbard, who says,
The Sacrament is called a Sacrifice, because it is the Memorial and
representation of the true Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross. Aquinas expresses
his sense after the same manner. The Celebration of this Sacrament is an image
and representation of the passion of Christ, quae est vera immolatio, which is
a true Immolation or Sacrifice; and now its celebration dicitur, is called, the
Immolation, immolatio, of Christ. In Can. Missae Lect. 85.

Loc. Treol. l. 12. c. 12. p. 660. Biblioth. l. 4. Concord. c. 131.

Decret. part. 3. de Consecrat. did. 2. c. 48.

Glossa in Great. de Consecr.

See Canon of the Mass, and Dr. Field in Append.


Of the same judgment were Biel and Cornelius Muss, a Bishop of note in the
Council of Trent, who (as Canus and Sixtus Senensis relate) openly denied, that
Christ instituted any proper Sacrifice of himself when he celebrated his
Supper. Jansenius acknowledges it can hardly be proved from Hoc facite, Do
this, etc. Instead of many more who might be added, take the words of the Popes
own Canon Law, set out by Gregory XIII. The sacramental Bread, suo modo
vocatur, after its manner is called the Body of Christ, when revera indeed, it
is the Sacrament of Christ's Body, and the immolation of his Flesh made by the
Priest, is termed his Passion, death and crucifixion, non rei veritate, sed
significante mysterio, not in the truth of the thing, but in a significant
mystery. The Gloss upon it is still more plain. The Sacrament, in regard it
truly represents Christ's Flesh, dicitur Christi corpus, sed improprie, is
called Christ's Body, but improperly. It is called Christ's Body, that is, says
the Gloss, significat, it signifies it.

Ordo Romanus, appointed the Wine allo to be consecrated, De Observe. Eccles. c.
19.

In 4. Did. 9. Prop. 6. Consult. Art. 22.

In 4. Sent. qu. 11. Mem. 3.

V. Tapperum apud Cassandr. de Commun. sub utraque specie, Ibid. qu. 31.


that the people might fully communicate, says Micrologus. Ovandus declares,
as also Cassander, that it were better to grant the Cup to the people, which
was earnestly desired by the Emperors Ferdinand and Maximilian, and under some
good conditions permitted to the Bohemians. Halensis a famous Schoolman
grants, (contrary to Bellarmine) that it ought to be received under both
kinds, Which manner of receiving, says he, Dominus tradidit, our Lord
delivered, is majoris efficaciae, of more efficacy and perfection, Totus
Christus non continetur sub utraquespecie, 4. qu. 40.

Aquin. in 6. Joann.

Alph. de Castro adv. Haeres. lib. 6.

Sermon. de Quadragess. quoted by B. Juel.


(as to Grace) than to receive one only. Eccius, Salmeron, Lindanus, Valentia,
Costerus, Bellarmine, Card. Bona, confess, that the Primitive Christians for
many Ages, yea, say some, for above one thousand years after Christ, received
the Sacrament in both kinds. The custom of receiving in one kind, had its
first Original from the Manichean Heretics, as we learn from Pope Leo the
Great. P. Gelasius decrees, That if they would not receive both, they should be
excluded from both. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, in his Book called
the Devil's Sophistry, ascribes its first beginning to the private
superstitious Devotion of some indiscreet persons. Others, as Costerus in
Enchir. to the connivance or negligence of Church Governors. In the Mass Book
it self, there are (as Dr. Field observes) some expressions which imply, In
Append. in lib. 3.

In Miss. de Sanct.


that the people were receivers of both kinds: as particularly those words,
Cibo potuque refecti, being refreshed with meat and drink, in a Prayer after
the receiving the Communion. Again, Sacramenta quae sumpsimus, Domini, prosint
nobis, etc. Let the Sacraments, Lord, we have received, be profitable to us. To
these add those words: Quotquot sacrosanctum corpus and sanguinem Filii tui
sumpserimus, V. Consult. p. 238. Art. 24.
quoted by Cassander; As many of us as have received the body and blood of thy
Son. Gerardus Lorichius, and Ruardus Tapperus, are for the peoples receiving in
both kinds. See Dr. Field's Appendix to his second Book, where are many clear
Testimonies.

Invocation of Saints. Bannes, 22. qu. 1. Art. 10. Conclus. 2.
a late learned Schoolman agrees with Protestants, that it has no express
grounds in Scripture. In like manner Eccius in Enchirid. c. 15. De Venerat. SS.
Suarez in 3. Thomae qu. 3. disput. Lib. 1. de Eccles. trium, c. 6.
42. Salmeron in 1 Timothy cap. 2. disp. 8. Bellarmine himself, although to make a
show he alledg places out of the old Testament, grants, that there was no
Invocation of Saints before Christ's Ascension, in regard the Saints were then
in Limbo, and not admitted to the sight of God. The same is affirmed of the
Saints under the New Testament by many of the most ancient Fathers, V. Sixtum
Senens. lib. 6. Annotat. 345. In 4. Sent. qu. 3.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Chrysostom, to wit, that they shall not be admitted to
the Vision beatifical till after the Resurrection; Occam. Scotus, lib. 4. did.
45. qu. 4. Valentia with others deny, that the Saints departed, or Angels, see
all things in Speculo Trinitatis, in God who sees all things, but only such
as are essential to their happiness, Videt omnia qui videt videntem omnia,
Greg. M.

In 2. Tom. 3. digres. 17. p. 118.

In August. de Civil. Dei, l. 8. c. 27.


and which he is pleased to represent to them. Claudius Espencaeus testifies,
that some old Folk trusted in the Saints, and ascribed no less to them than to
God himself, and thought it easier to entreat or prevail with one of them for
obtaining their requests and desires than him. Ludovicus Vives professes he
could discern no difference betwixt the worship of Saints practiced in his time
and the heathenish Parentalia. Wickliffe, apud Walden. Tom. 3 Tit. 12. the
Albigenses and Waldenses rejected long before Luther Invocation of Saints. I
shall close this Particular with the words of Cassander a learned and ingenuous
Papist; Cons. p. 154.
-- This false and pernicious Opinion is too well known to have prevailed among
the Vulgar, while wicked men persevering in their naughtiness, are persuaded
that only by the intercession of the Saints, whom they have chosen to be their
Patrons and worship with cold and profane Ceremonies, they have Pardon and
Grace prepared them with God: which pernicious Opinion has been confirmed in
them with lying Miracles. And there is another Error, that men not evil of
themselves, Compare Sir Edwin. Sandys's Europae Speculum, page 56.

Biel in Can. Missae, Lect. 30. says as much.

Solus Deus simpliciter orandus est. Sancti magis se tenent ex part orantium,
quam illius qui oratur Halens. qu. 92. Mem. 10. Art. 4.


have chosen certain Saints to be their Patrons and keepers, and put confidence
in their Merits and Intercession more than in the Merits of Christ; so far,
that the only Office of Christ's Intercession being obscured, they substituted
into his place the Saints, and specially the Virgin his Mother, etc. Are not
these things highly injurious to the honor of our blessed Savior and
Redeemer? Did they not call aloud for an effectual Reformation?

I might add several other Points of Doctrine, which, if they be not already by
the Tridentine Decrees, may become Articles of Faith whenever the Pope
pleases.

The Popes Infallibility, To deny it, is sententia Haeresi proxima, non proprie
haeretica.

De Infallib. Papae, l. 4. c. 1. V. Caranzam. Sess. 12.38.35.

V. Alphons. de Castro adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 2. vid. cap. 4. Ibid.

Stapleton Contr. 3. qu. 4. says, it is no Point of Faith, but of Opinion only.

Cusan. Concord. l. 1. c. 14.

Canus loc. Com. l. 6. c. ult.

Cajetan. de Authorit. Papae c. 26.

Lib. 1. c. 4.

Valent. Lib. 8. Analys. fidei, cap. 1.

Pope Hadrian in 4. de Sacram. Confirmat. sub finem.

Canus Loc. l. 6. c. ult. p. 331.

Valentia Analys. fidei, lib. 8. c. 3. and 4. V. Bellar. de Pontif. M.
Waldensis Doctrine. sidei, l. 2. c. 19. Add Alph. de Castro, lib. 1. cap. 4.


the Ground, Rock and foundation of all their Faith and Religion, is fere,
almost, says Bellarmin, an Article of Faith, and but almost, which all prudent
and considering men may well wonder at. Yet it is not only denied by the
Council of Basil, who decree that it is de fide, a Point of Faith, that the
Pope ought to be subject to a General Council, (in regard he may be, as
Liberius, Zepherinus, Honorius, Anastasius and some other Popes were, a
notorious Heretic and Schismatic) but strongly confuted by Occam qu. 1. de
potestate Pontif. c. 9. Almain Quaest. in Vesp. de Autoritate Eccl. c. 10.
Ovandus 4. Did. 18. prop. 25. Coroll. 2. Nicolas Clemangis de corrupto Eccles.
statu. Alvarus Pelagius de planctu Eccl. Contarenus Gerson, etc. Lyra in Matthew.
16. Turrecremata Sum. Eccl. l. 4. part 2. c. 16.20. with many more, grant the
Pope may be a Heretic in his private person or judgment; yea, as Alphons. de
Castro, Bozius, Tom. 2. de sign. Eccles. l. 18. c. ult. Bannes 22. qu. 1. Art.
10. acknowledge that he may be, not only a Heretic himself, but impose by his
Pontifical Authority in his Decrees Heresy on the whole Church. The truth is,
there is need of an infallible Judge to determine where, or in whom the Roman
Infallibility resides. Some of them say, in the Pope alone; whether he maturely
considers what he decrees, or no. Whether the Premises on which he builds his
conclusion be pertinent or not, true or false. Some in the Pope, assisted with
a General or Provincial Council. Some in a General Council without, yea,
decreeing against the Pope. Some in the Universal Tradition of the Church. They
have little reason then to upbraid Protestants with their difference of Opinion
in lesser matters, seeing they differ amongst themselves in the fundamental
Article and ground of all their Religion.

2. The Immaculate Conception of the blessed Virgin Mary. This is almost an
Article of Faith amongst them; insomuch that no Divine can commence Doctor (as
Salmeron reports) in the University of Paris, Orig. Hom. 17. in Lucam.
Chrysostom. Hom. 45. and 46. in Matthaeum.

August. Quaest. vet. and novi Test. qu. 73. Theophylact. in 2. Lucae and
Matthew. 12.


unless he swear to maintain it. Nevertheless, it is not only contradicted by
the Ancient Fathers generally, but by the Elder School men, as Bannes, Part 1.
in Tho. qu. art. 8. dub. 5. and Turrecremata de Consecrat. did. 4. number. 11.
acknowledge. Lumbard lib. 3. Sent. did 3. Aquinas sum. 3. part. qu. 27. art.
2. Cajeran opusc. Tom. 2. Tract. 1. de conceptione Virg. Bonaventure, Did. 3.
in Sent. 3. qu. 1. Art. 1. Capreolus, l. 3. did. 3. to whom many more may be
added, assirm the same.

3. That the Apocryphal Books are to be received as of equal Authority with the
Canonical, is decreed and so made a point of Faith by the Council of Trent; yet
it is evidently contradicted, not only by the Laodicean Council, Ruffinus,
Augustine. cont. Gaudentium, l. 2 c. 23.

See Field's Appendix to his third Book of the Church. Loc. lib. 2. c. 9.

Biblioth. lib. 1. c. 19.


Origin, Hierom, P. Gregory the Great and others; but by multitudes of their
own modern Writers, as Cajetan, Lyra, Hugo, Sigonius, Occam, the ordinary
Gloss, Waldensis, Antoninus, Tostatus, Carthusianus, Faber, Clichtoveus,
Driedo, Ferus, with many more. Canus, even since the Council of Trents Decree,
says, It Is no Heresy to reject the Book of Baruc, and Sixtus Senensis since
that Council, denies the additions to the Book of Hester to be Canonical.

4. That we are justified by our own good Works, or inherent Righteousness, and
not by Faith only, is decreed by the Trent Council as an Article of Catholic
Faith; yet it is plainly contradicted, not only by the Ancient Fathers, Clem.
Romans Epist. ad Corinth. Justin Martyr ad Diognet. Origin in cap. 3. ad Romans
Ambrose in Romans c. 4. and 9. Basil de Humil. Theodoret de curand. Graec.
affect. lib. 7. Chrysostom in Galat. c. 3. Hesychius in Levit. l. 4. c. 3.
with others; but by Aquinas in Galat. 3. lect. 4. in Romans 3. lect. 4. Pighius
de justific. Cardinal Contarenus. The Antirdidag. Coloniens. Anselm, apud
Hosium. Tom. 1. Confess. Cathol. Bonaventure 4. did. 15. qu. 1. Jansenius
Concordant. c. 20. p. 157. Gerson, lib. 4. de Consolat. Theolog. prosa 1.

5. That good Works merit Eternal life, is in like manner decreed by the
Council of Trent. But Waldensis Sacramental. Tit. 1. c. 7. says, He is the
better Catholic that simply denies all Merit, and confesses that Heaven is
obtained by Grace only. The like is affirmed by Ferus, lib. 3. Com. cap. 20.
in Matthaeum. Stella in Lucam. c. 8. Ibid. c. ^^.
Marsilius de gratuita justif. P. Adrian and Clitoveus apud Cassand. Consult.
Art. 6.
Faber Stapulensis in cap. 11. ad Roman. Petavius the Jesuit, in effect denies
all Merits, which he says, Dissert. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 4. depend on Gods Grace
and free Promise. Bellarmine after his long dispute about Justification by
Works and Salvation by Merits, confates all he had said in these few words, De
Justif. lib. c. 7.
Tutissinum est, etc. It Is the safest way, propter incertitudinem propriae
justitiae, in regard of the uncertainty of our own righteousness (on which the
certain knowledge that we have any Merits at all is grounded) and the danger of
pride and vain glory, periculum inanis gloriae, to place our whole trust totam
fiduciam,
in Gods mercy only, in sola misericordia Dei. Can any Protestant say more in
opposition to Merits and Justification, C. Contarenus Epist. ad Card. Farnesium.
by our good own Works? Let our very Enemies be Judges. I might add Greg.
Ariminens. 1. did. 17. qu. 1. art. 2. Durand. 2. did. 27. qu. 2. p. 400.
Scotus lib. 1. c. 17. qu. 1. in solutione quaest.

6. See Brerewoods Enquiries, Chapter 26.

Contaren. Instructio Christ.

Rhemish Annotat. in 1 Cor. 14.


Prayer in a Tongue not understood by the People, is defended and practiced in
the Roman Church; yet censured and disapproved by Cardinal Contarenus. Cajetan
and Aquinas, in 1 Cor. 14. confess, it were better for Edification of the
people for Prayer and other sacred Offices to be performed in the Vulgar
Tongue. Of the same Judgment were Lyranus, in 1 Cor. 14. Cassander defensio
officii pii viri cont. Calvin. p. 141. Haymo and Sedulius, in 1 Cor. 14. Biel
in Can. Missae Lect. 62.

7. Auricular Confession, so severely urged by the Roman Church, is denied to
be necessary by any Divine Law, by Peresius a Tridentine Bishop, de Tradit.
part 3. consid. 3. -- Petrus Oxoniensis apud Caranzam in Sixto. By Cajetan,
Bonaventure, Rhenanus, Erasmus, with many others. It were easy, but I suppose
needless, to add any Points more. These are sufficient to evince, that besides
other Doctrines, some Articles of the present Roman Catholic Faith so decreed
and made by the late Council of Trent, were never Universally owned and
received as such by the visible Catholic Church in all Ages, no not by all
such as lived and died in the Communion of the Roman Church not long before
Luther's time, but were openly opposed, contradicted and condemned by them.

What is already said is, as I conceive, a full and satisfactory Answer to
Roman Catholics, demanding of us some Professors of our Religion before the
Reformation: It being strange, if it be from the Apostles and have been in all
Ages, that we can show no Writings of some eminent Professors of it before the
Reformation; For here we have produced the Writings of Eminent Professors of
it, to wit, of the Prophets, Apostles, Holy Fathers, and many of their own
modern most learned Writers. As to the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
many of their own Writers, Lindanus, Peresius, Soto, Andradius, etc. confess,
Panopl. lib. 3. c. 5.

De Tradit. Cont. Brent. l. 2. c 68.

Orthodox. explic. 1. 2.

Canus Loc. Tom. l. 3. c. 3.


that all or most of their new Trent Articles of Faith, to wit, Seven
Sacraments: Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Indulgences, etc. have little or no
ground at all in Scripture, but are unwritten Verities depending on Tradition
only, to wit, of their Roman Church. We can show what we believe as necessary
to Salvation from the Scripture; which they, as they confess, in many Points
cannot. Yea, what soever we believe as Articles of Faith contained in the
Primitive Creeds, they dare not deny. All our dispute is about Points either
not at all to be found, at least with any convincing evidence, in the Bible; or
plainly contradicted by it.

The Protestant Religion then is the true, ancient, visible, Catholic and
Apostolic Religion professed and taught by the Apostles, in and by their
Writings; Iren. lib. 3. c. 1.

Quod praeconiaverunt, postea per Dei voiuntatem in scripturis nobis
tradiderunt fundamentum and columnam sidei nostrae futurum.


for what they first preached, they afterward by the will of God set down in
their Writings, that so in them we might have a sure foundation to build our
Faith upon, as Irenaeus says. Father, we have produced also the Writings of
the Ancient Farthers, who lived in the Ages near the Apostles, and have made it
evident, that they were either wholly ignorant of the new additional Articles
of the present Roman Catholic Faith, or much doubted of them, or utterly
condemned them. It Is true, these Writers were not known by the name of
Protestants, as some may object, and no more were they known by the name of
Papists. But if they professed, as to be sure they did, that Doctrine or
Religion only, which is delivered and declared in their Writings; Who will
deny that they were, although not nominally, yet really Protestants, and
Professors of our Ancient, not of their new-minted Roman Religion, made as to
some parts of it, to wit, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. and framed in
late Councils, near twelve hundred years after the decease of the Apostles?

To their usual Question then, Where was the Protestant Church or Religion
before Luther? I Answer, First, That it was there, where their whole Religion
cannot, as they grant, be found; to wit, in the Holy Scriptures. Secondly, It
was, Dr. White, sub Papatu, non Papatus.
as Bishop Usher says well, where their Church was, in the same place, though
not in the same state and condition. The Reformation or Protestantism did not
make a new Faith or Church, but reduced things to the Primitive purity; Plucked
not up the good Seed, the Catholic Faith or true Worship, but the after-sown
Tares of Error, as Image Worship, Purgatory, etc. which were ready to choke
it. Did the Reformation in Hezekiah's or Josiah's days, set up a new Church or
Religion different in essence from the old one? Had it not been a ridiculous
impertinency for one that knew Naaman before, whilst he stood by to ask, where
is Naaman? and being answered this is he; for the Enquirer to reply, it cannot
be he, for Naaman was a Leper, this man is clean: Was not Naaman formerly a
Leper, and now cleansed the same person? A Field of Wheat in part weeded, is
the same it was as to ground and seed, not another. In like manner, the true
visible Christian Church cleansed and unclean, reformed and unreformed is the
same Church altered, not as to Essence or substance, but quality or condition.

That the true Visible Church of God may be generally overrun with corruptions
in Worship, Errors, yea Heresies; we see not only in the Jewish but Christian
Churches of Corinth, Thyatira, etc. and all the Eastern Churches, yea almost
the whole World in Athanasius his days, is so undeniable a truth, Ad ann. 358.
Totus mundus abiit post Pelagium.

Bradwardin de causa Dei in praefat.


that Baronius and others of our Adversaries are forced, as we have seen above,
to grant it. Why should it then seem to them impossible or incredible, that the
Church of God in the blind and unlearned Ages before Luther should in like
manner be overrun with many pernicious Errors in Doctrine and corruptions in
Worship: If so, as Nicolas Clemangis, Alvarus, Pelagius and others of their own
Church confess and bewail; V. Caranzam de Conciliis, p. 786, 789.
why might not the King of England, as well as Hezekiah or Josiah, redress
these Abuses, and suppress these Errors in his own Dominions? Why might not
other States and Princes do the same? especially when Reformation of them by a
free General Council, (not enslaved to the Popes will and pleasure) though
promised, could not be obtained. V. Council. Pisanum Sess. 16. and 20.
Was it necessary for fear of making a new Church or Religion, that the Church
of God must for ever lie under those defilements and corruptions? If not, may
not our Reformers justly say, What Evil have we done?

Not to be too tedious: This Question, Where was the Protestant Church in the
Ages before Luther, arises from several mistakes: First, From want of
distinguishing betwixt a true visible Church and a sound one. The Roman Church
from which Luther and others received their Baptism and Ordination, We grant to
be a part or member of the Catholic Church, but it was unsound and subject to
many Diseases, i. e. corruptions in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, which
like ill humors endangered its very life. The Reformation wherein Luther with
many more were instrumental, was not Poison to destroy its Vitals, but
purgative Physic to remove its distempers, and to preserve them. Secondly,
It Is a mistake, that they will not distinguish betwixt the avowed and
universally owned Doctrines of a Church, and the Opinions or practices of some
few or many in it. In the Churches of Pergamus or Thyatira there were some, and
possibly not a few, who held the Doctrine of Balaam, and were seduced by that
wicked Jezabel, pretending to be a Prophetess and infallible; yet these
Doctrines were not properly the Doctrines of those Churches, but of a party in
them. The like we say of the Errors in the Church of Rome, that they were
never universally owned and allowed, no not by many eminent Professors and
Writers of her own Communion, as we have made evident. Thirdly, It Is a great
mistake when they demand that we show the Protestant Religion and Church
distinct and separate from the Catholic in all Ages, when we affirm and prove,
that not only in the Apostles days, but for near five hundred years after, the
true Apostolic Faith was, at least as to substance, kept pure and incorrupt.
Would they have us to show Protestants protesting against the ancient and
Primitive Faith? As for their New Tridentine Articles of Faith, they were to be
sure, not some of them then in being to be protested against. Fourthly, It Is a
gross mistake to think, that all who live in a true but corrupted Christian
Church, are either bound to approve of those corruptions, or at all times
necessary to separate actually and personally from the Church for their sake.
See Bull against Can.
This Protestants condemn in Donatists and Brownists or Separatists. The Errors
and corruptions of the Roman Church were a long time growing in or upon her.
The Tares were not seen as soon as they were sown, but after they were grown
up. God forbid we should condemn to Hell all our Forefathers, that lived and
died in the Communion of the Roman Church. In the Prophet Elijah's, Isaiah's,
Jeremiah's days the true Visible Church of God was corrupted, both Princes,
Priests and People severely reproved, yet the Prophets advised none to separate
therefore from the Temple and Worship of God, although no doubt their mind was
that all, as far as was possible, should keep themselves free and undefiled
from those prevalent corruptions. Likewise, our Blessed Savior forsook not the
Temple; and although he warned them to take heed of the leaven, i. e. false
Doctrines, of the Scribes and Pharisees, yet in regard they sat in Moses his
Chair, he commands the people to do as they said ( i. e. according to the Law)
and consequently to go and hear what they said. Much, very much, as Austin and
other Fathers tell us, is to be born rather than to make a Schism in the Church
of God. On this ground no doubt many of our Forefathers before the Reformation
continued till death in the Communion of the Roman Church, that so they might
enjoy the benefit of the Word and Sacraments; although they mourned for and
groaned under the overflowing predominancy of many Errors and superstitious
Observations in their days, heartily desiring, yea openly requiring a removal
of them, but could not obtain it.

The Jesuit whom Dr. White answered acknowledges, that the Church is not
actually seen at all times, Page 379.
yet it may be discerned with prudent and diligent enquiry, in regard even in
times of its greatest obscurity or persecution there were always some Eminent
and known Members of it. He ands, although it have not always an outward and
illustrious Estate, and cannot, where persecution rages, practice publicly
the Rites of Divine Worship, yet the Church never did or shall want an inward
Estate or subordination to Pastors, etc. If this be, as he grants, sufficient
to make good the perpetual visibility of the Church, we can easily evince the
Visibility of the Protestant Church and Religion under Papal persecutions from
the Writings of those times, as the Reader may in part discern from what we
have collected. But in regard they so vehemently urge us to show some
Professors of the Protestant Religion divided and separated from the Roman
Church, we (though it be no way necessary, as we have seen above) mention the
Wicklevists, Lollards, Bohemians, Waldenses, See Bishop Usher, de success. Eccl.
and Albigenses, who were vastly numerous and had Pastors of their own,
resisting Popery even unto blood. Only I must mind our Adversaries, these
persons were rather fugati, violently driven out of the Roman Church by
Excommunications armed with Fire and Sword, than fugitivi, fugitives or
voluntary Separatists. As for their condemning them as Heretics, it signifies
little or nothing, for that is the matter in question, and seeing the Pope and
Court of Rome, as Saint Bernard, Pope Adrian, Bernard de Council.

Adri. in legatione ad Principes Germaniae.

Polycrat. lib. 6. cap. 24.


Sarisberiensis and others acknowledge, were in those days charged as the
source and original cause of all disorders and abuses in the Church, it is most
unreasonable their known Enemies should be admitted as their Judges in their
own cause. The truth is, some of the Popish Writers of those days have accused
Wickcliffe, the Waldenses and Albigenses of such inconsisting, horrid and
self-contradicting Opinions, Usher de Success Eccl.
that no ingenuous and impartial man can possibly believe any thing they say of
them. I verily think their great fault or Heresy was, that they were victus
populus Dei, as they said, conquered, quelled and subdued by force of Arms, not
Arguments: So were the Catholics under the Heathen and Arian persecuting
Emperors. Certainly no prudent Christian will take Prosperity, Victory,
outward Pomp and Power to be certain notes or perpetual properties of the true
Church and right Believers: nay Adversity and persecution rather, as our
Savior intimates, when he assures his Apostles, they should be hated of all
men for his Names sake, and that the time would soon come, when whosoever
killed them should think, (as the Crusadoes and their Military Saint Dominic no
doubt thought) they did God service. It Is sufficient to our present purpose,
that we show some who held with us against the present Doctrine of the Papacy.

But here I expect their usual Objection: That many of the Writers and Persons
we alledg did not in all things agree with the Protestants, though in some
particulars they consented.

True, no more did they in all things agree with the present Roman Church. If
some who believed not the Popes Supremacy, the Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass,
Merits, Purgatory, etc. were yet Members as of the Catholic, so Roman Church
and were saved (which I suppose no Papist will deny:) Why are we Protestants
condemned as Heretics to Hell for believing as some of their Infallible Popes,
and Canonized Saints have done? I challenge any Papist to show me one National
or Provincial Church (I might go farther) in the whole World, that for at least
twelve hundred years after Christ, did in all points believe as the Trent
Council have decreed; or professed that Catholic Religion, which Pope Pius
has summed up in his Creed: We may ask them, Where was your Tridentine Faith
and Church before Luther? Was Pope Leo the Great for receiving the Communion in
one kind? Was Pope Gregory the Great for worshipping of Images, or for that
proud, profane, Antichristian and foolish name (as he calls it) of Universal
Bishop? Were Cyprian, Saint Austin, the Council of Chalcedon, the Affrican
Bishops for Appeals to the Bishop of Rome, and subjecting all Churches to the
Popes Universal jurisdiction? Were these Tridentine Papists? Was P. Gelasius
for Transubstantiation? Were they in all things agreeing with our present Roman
Catholics? Who has so hard a forehead as to affirm it, or so soft a head as
to believe it?

I shall only add, That it is no wonder, if many good Men and learned did not
at once see and discover in an Age wherein Ignorance and Superstition abounded,
all these Errors, Abuses, and corruptions which infected the Church of God,
but did in some things, not altogether so gross and palpably wicked as others,
errare errorem seculi. follow the current of the times.

To end, I hope Sir, by what has been said, you plainly perceive that those
Doctrines and Practices Protestants have rejected, were never any part of the
true, Primitive and Catholic Faith contained in the Scriptures or the Writings
of the Ancient Fathers and Councils. Yea, that in the later, and as is
confessed, worst Ages of the Church, were never received and visibly professed
by all true Catholics, whether of the Grecian or Roman Communion. See
Brerewoods Enquiries.
The most and best that can be said, is, that at first some of them were the
private Sentiments, and doubtful Opinions of some Worthy Men; as Invocation of
Saints, Purgatory, etc. in the fourth or fifth Century: Which after many Ages
by the Policy and Power of the Pope and his Party were obtruded by the Councils
of Lateran, Constance, Florence, Trent, etc. as Articles of Faith, on this
Western part of the World, but not without visible opposition and open
contradiction. I have shown how multitudes of learned and pious Men did
complain of them, and write against them; and others, as the Waldenses and
Albigenses, forced by violence, and persecution separated themselves, (as the
Orthodox Christians did under the prevalence of the Arians) actually and
personally from them, besides others who cordially, yet for fear of persecution
more privately and secretly, i. e. in some sense or degree invisibly renounced
and detested them.

I shall here add, that indeed this is more than we are in reason bound to
show; for it was sufficient to prove the perpetual existence or visibility of
the Catholic Church, and to denominate the Roman a true, though corrupt, part
or member of it, V. Augustine. de Baptismo contra Donatist. l. 1. c. 8. and 10.

B. Usher's Sermon. before King James of the Unity of Faith.


that she professed the fundamentals of Christian Faith contained in the
Apostolic, Nicene, Athanasian Creeds, although she superadded, as Hay and
Stubble thereunto many additional or traditional Points and erroneous
practices, whereby consequentially the foundation of Faith was much shaken and
undermined; yet so, as some amongst them not erring wilfully, upon a general
repentance might be saved, yet so as by fire, i. e. with much danger and
difficulty. However, undeniable it is, that many Eminent Writers and Professors
in the Ages before Luther never owned them as Theological truths, much less
Articles of Faith, but visibly, openly and courageously resisted them, even
unto blood. These, and not the Popish domineering Party (termed by some the
Court rather than the Church of Rome) were, August. Epist. ad Vincent.
as the persecuted Catholics under Liberius and the Arian Emperors, in the
strict and most proper sense the true, visible, Catholic Church, which
remained discernible, though more obscurely, in firmissimis suis membris, as
Saint Austin speaks, in these her most firm and invincible members. Others
who maintained, promoted and tyranically imposed these Errors as points of
Faith, were in respect of these introduced corruptions like an impostumated
Wen, growing by little and little on the body of the Church, or like a
Gangrene, or Leprosy spreading it self by degrees over it; the cutting of this
Wen, the curing this Gangrene, the cleansing and removing this Leprosy, our
Adversaries most unreasonably and absurdly condemn, as destroying the ancient
Catholic Faith and setting up a new Church under the Banner of Luther; which
we detest and abhor. Contrarily we, not they, contend earnestly for the ancient
true Catholic Faith once and once for all, delivered to the Saints, in
opposition to their late subintroduced Novelties of Transubstantiation,
Image Worship, Purgatory, etc. which, as we see by Pope Pius his new Creed,
they will needs add as Articles of the Ancient, Primitive and Catholic Faith,
to the Nicene Creed, necessarily to be believed and professed by all Christians
under peril of Heresy and Damnation. If the Pope and Church of Rome may make
as many Articles of Faith as they please; surely in time we may have a Creed as
large as Aquinas his Sum. I shall only add my earnest Prayer, that God would
enlighten you with his Holy Spirit that you may see the truth, and renouncing
all secular ends and private interests, cordially embrace it, Theodoret de
curand. Graecor. affect. Sermon. 1.
in regard (as an Ancient Father long since said,) It becomes not wise Men
rashly to give up themselves to their Fathers Customs, but to endeavor to find
out the Truth. Amen.

Your faithful Friend.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for James Adamson.
I. A Treatise of the Celibacy of the Clergy, wherein its Rise and Progress are
Historically considered. In Quarto.

II. A Treatise proving Scripture to be the Rule of Faith, writ by Reginald
Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, before the Reformation, about the Year 1450.

III. Doubts concerning the Roman Infallibility: 1. Whether the Church of Rome
believe it. 2. Whether Jesus Christ or his Apostles ever Recommended it. 3.
Whether the Primitive Church Knew or Used that way of Deciding Controversies.

IV. The Salvation of Protestants asserted and defended, in Opposition to the
Rash and Uncharitable Sentence of their Eternal Damnation pronounced against
them by the Romish Church; by J. H. Dalhusius, Inspector of the Churches, In
the County of Weeden, upon the Rhine, etc.

V. The present State of the Controversy between the Church of England, and
the Church of Rome: or an account of the Books written on both sides, in a
Letter to a Friend. In Quarto.

VI. Two Discourses of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead. In Quarto.

VII. Clementis epistolae duae ad Corinthios. Interpretibus Patricio Junio,
Gothofredo, Vendelino, and Joh. Bapt. Cotelerio. Recensuit and notarum
spicilegium adjecit Paulus Colomesius, bibliothecae Lambethanae curator;
accedit Tho. Brunonis Windsoriensis dissertatio de Therapeutis, Philonis. His
subnexae sunt Epistolae aliquot singulares, vel nunc primum editae, vel non ita
facile obviae. In Quarto.

VIII. Pauli Colomesii Observationes sacrae, Editio secunda, auctior and
emendatior; accedunt ejusdem Paralipomena, de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, and
passio sancti Victoris Massiliensis, ab eodem emendata, editio quarta and
ultima long auctior and emendatior. Octavo.

IX. The Travels of Monsieur de Thevenot into the Levant, in three Parts, viz.
1. Into Turkey, 2. Persia,, 3. The East Indies. In Folio.

A brief Historical Account of the Behavior of the Jesuits and their Faction
for the first twenty five Years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, with an Epistle of
W. Watson a Secular Priest; showing how they were thought of by other Romanists
of that time. Quarto.

The Argument of Mr. Peter de la Marteliere Advocate in the Court and
Parliament of Paris, made in Parliament in the Chambers thereof being
assembled, An. Dom. 1611. for the Rector and University of Paris, Defendants
and Opponents, against the Jesuits Demandants, and requiring the Approbation of
the Lectors Patent which they had obtained, giving them power to read and to
teach publicly in the aforesaid University, translated out of the French Copy,
set forth by public Authority, and printed at London 1612. Quarto.


