

THE OLD ROMAN CATHOLIC, As at first he was taught by PAUL: In opposition to
The new Roman Catholic: As of latter he is taught by the Pope.

The one being Apostolical, the other Apostaticall.

Descrived and proven only out of the Epistle of PAUL, TO THE ROMANS.

Whereunto is added a clear probation, that the same also was the doctrine of
the Primitive Bishops of Rome, for the space of five hundredth years, and above;
and chiefly of Gregory the first: whom they Surnamed The Great.

Discovering to all clearly the Apostasy of that Church, from the ancient
Roman Faith, and Purity thereof, to the Noveltie of Gross Heresy and
Idolatry, and sufficient to convince, if non convert any Papist, that is not
wilfully obdured.

REV. 18. 4. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins; and that ye receive not of her plagues.

By W. GUILD, Principal of the kings College of Old Aberdene.

Printed in Aberdene, by E. Raban, 1649.



The Epistle Dedicatorie, To the Right Worshipful, and Worthy of all Honor,
Sr THOMAS BURNET Of LEYES, KNIGHT BARONET.
IT is no small admiration to the Professors of the Christian name in common,
that the Jews who have the Old TESTAMENT amongst their hands, and daily
therein reads the Prophesies of the true MESSIAH; but that they may see them
in every particular long ago fulfilled in JESUS CHRIST, whom they did crucify,
were not that it is playnlie told us, that there is a veil over their hearts;
and until the time that this be taken away, and the fullness of the Gentiles be
brought in, that of the Prophet shall be accomplished in them; that they shall
have eyes to see, and not see, ears to hear, and not hear; and hearts to know,
and yet not understand: Even so amongst these again, who are called Christians
in common. It is no small admiration, in like manner, to such who profess the
Truth, in the Reformed Churches of EUROPE, that these of the Roman Church,
having both the Old and New Testament in their hands, and reading the doctrine
contained therein: Especially in that Epistle written of old, by the Apostle to
the Romans. But that they may, in like manner, clearly see how grossly in every
point of Controversy between them and us, they have swerved from that Ancient
Truth delyvered therein, to the Noveltie of latter sprung up Error quyte
controdictor thereto: (whereby, as Isaiah speaks, [Chap. 1. verss 21.] the
faithful City, is become an Harlot.) Were not, in like manner, that there is
a veil over their hearts; and (as is fore prophesied of such;) That their
Error is not only the deceavableness of unrighteousness in them that perish:
but such a strong delusion, [2 Thessalonians. 2.] that they are inebriated, or made
drunk therewith: And so the delusion being strong, is not easily overcome, nor
can they be made sinsible thereof; so long as their drunkenness is upon them,
more nor Naball could be of his trespass against David, (as wise Abigail well
knew,) til his wine was gone from him. [1. Sam. 25.] The same being also a
mystery of Iniquity; and mysteries not being known, (as David tells us,)
till the eyes be opened: [Psal. 119. 18.] Even so, no marvel that this
mystery be not seen by deluded soulls; although (as at Saul's conversion) the
light shine as bright about them, as at noon day: [Act. 9.] till likewise the
LORD open their eyes, and make the scales of their former ignorance and error,
in mercy, to fall off. And, as in curing of Saul's blyndness, it pleased the
LORD to use the Ministry of a Disciple Ananias, rather than a great Apostle:
Even so, it has pleased the LORD, sometimes, for curing the blyndness of poor
seduced soulls, by Popery, to use the Ministry of some who are but weak
instruments: That so the greater glory may be his own, amongst whom as one, (as
it has pleased GOD before now to have blessed my weak endeavors for that end:)
So I have taken the ensuing pains, to see as yet if by HIS BLESSING, I may
reclayme but one poor soull, to come out of Babell, and gayn it to CHRIST;
wherein if the success be according to my hearty and charitable desire, I
shall bless the LORD, whose only work is the bringing back of the strayed
sheep, and conversion of a simple soull. But, if it be otherwise, and that the
wilful ignorant and seduced, say as their predecessors did when the LORD, by
His Prophet, [Ierem. 6. 20.] did exhort them, to stand in the ways, and see,
and ask for the old paths, which is the good way, and walk therein; and they
should find rest to their soulls: But they said, we will not walk therein; then
it shall be sufficient to me, that my work is with my GOD; although with Jeremy
[chap. 6. 29.] I may say, that the bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed in
the fire, the founder has melted in vayn, and they have proven reprobate
silver.

These pains then (Sir) which I have taken herin, I have dedicated to Your W.
as for diverss other reasons; so for this as a main one, that You have joined
with piety, and the verbal Profession of the Truth, such Fruits of Charity,
and real expression of a true Faith, as is rare, now-a-dayes; In founding
three Burses of Philosophy in that Universitie wherein You had Your breeding,
and whereof I have the Charge; which will tend next to GODS Glory, the Poors
Comfort, and enlargement of that Seminary, to the Eternal Honor; Likewise,
and Memory both of You, and of Your Honorable Houss, whereof You are Head: So
that as Your Arms are the Ever-green Holline Leaves, with a blowing Horn, and
this Diton, VIRESCIT VULNERE VIRTUS. So shall this Your Munificence, sutablie
be Ever-green and fresh to all ages in memory, and while this Houss stands,
Your Praise and Commemoration amongst Her chief Benefactours, will ever alowd
be sounded therein, with this Diton, VIRESCIT MUNERE VIRTUS. Go on, then, Sir,
in an Happy Progress of Well-doing: And, as You sow in Righteousness, You shall
reap in Mercy; Which with the Addition of all Honor and Happiness here, shall
be the hearty wish of

Your Worships, in all respective and affectioned duty, W. GUILD.

THE EPISTLE, To the Ingenuous and Impartial Reader.
IT it not without cause, that the Whore of Babylon Rev. 17. 4
spoken of in the Revelation, is said to have her abominations, and filthiness
of her fornications, covered in a golden cup; Rev. 13. 11.
and that the Beast that speaks like the Dragon, the more cunningly to
deceive, takes upon him, to be horned like the Lamb; yet being his direct
opposite. Also, That devouring wolves are foretold to be found most dangerous,
when they are in sheeps clothing, Satan ever that Prince of Darkness,
prevailing most when he changes himself into an Angel of Light: and foulest
practices being most usually masked, (like these of Simeon and Levies, Ioabs
and Iudases,) with fairest pretenses; which may be seen most clearly, by all
who have eyes to see in the crafty seduction of many poor souls, going after
that Antichrist spoken of in the Revelatio^, as the seduced Israelits did after
Absolon, in the simplicity of their hearts: being drawn away, and held on in
the way of damnable Error, and gross Idolatry, by this principle and
pretense, that the church can not err. And that this infallible church, is the
Roman only: and again, that this Roman Church, is that same for integrity and
stability of truth, which it was in the Apostles time, (when for her faith
she was famous throughout the whole world,) and in the times of their
immediate Successors. Which, indeed; if it were so, and that the faithful
City had not become an Harlot, (as Isaiah speaks:) yea, a mother of harlots,
Isai. 1. 20
as she is called, Rev. 17. 5. It were for any, a sure and short courss for
resolution, to know unto what society, (amidst so many differences,) any should
betake themselves and adhere, as to the only true Church: out of which, there
were no Salvation. And in all points of Faith and practice of worship, without
farther hesitation to embrace the breasts of such a Mother, and chaste Spouse to
her Husband CHRIST, believing and practicing as such a Church does: of whose
infallibility there were so great certaynty and evidence.

But if after due trial, and impartial witnessing, it be clearly found, and
no less clearly may be seen by all, who wilfully, (as it were at noon day,)
will not close their eyes against enforcing light; that de facto she has left
that Primitive Truth, that either PAUL taught her, or her Primitive Bishops
Successors to the Apostles, for diverss hundreths of years, did likewise
preach and profess: and so that of Bethel the houss of GOD, she has become,
since that time Bethaven, the houss of Vanity, Error, and Idolatry;
forsaking her first love, and cleaving to Baall. I hope, then, that there are
none who would not perish with her, but will leave her, in so far as she has
left ANCIENT TRUTH, and embraced the Noveltie of after succeeding Error, like
the super-semination of the Tares in the LORDS Field, by that envyouss man,
while the Servants were asleep: and that as our Savior reduced Math. 19 8.
these that were misled by the Pharesees corrupt doctrine; to consider that
which was ab initio, or from the beginning, Jude 3. 4.
which the Apostle calls that Faith which was once delivered to the saints:
Ier. 6. 16.
So they will according to the Prophets advyse, and exhortation, ask for the
OLD WAY, which is the GOOD WAY, and walk therein; that they may find rest to
their souls. That is, ask and try what was the doctrine which was taught from
the beginning by PAUL to the Romans; and to the Church of CHRIST there in His
time, and the times of her next primitive and succeeding Pastors in these
points controverted, now-a-dayes: and accordingly adhere thereto, disclayming
all contrary, if they would be accounted true Roman Catholics: that is, the
Professors of that Apostolical Truth and Religion, which was Universally
then taught to the whole Church of CHRIST in general, and to the ROMANS at
that time in particular.

For which end, I have set down in this short Treatise, the sum of that
doctrine collected only out of the Epistle of PAUL TO THE ROMANS: as also out
of the writs of one for all of their ancient Bishops, beyond all comparison of
greatest account amongst them, Pope Gregory the first, for his Piety and
Learning, surnamed by them The Great; who lived in the six hundredth year of
CHRIST. To which if they adhere, then they must quyte that doctrine of the
Church of Rome, now-a-dayes: because it is in direct terms as contrary
thereto, as Light to Darkness, GOD and Beliall; as shall be shown here-after.
Or if they wilfully will adhere to that doctrine of the Roman Church,
now-a-dayes, (which is Apostaticall and false,) then they must quyte that
doctrine of the Church of Rome, which was taught by PAUL TO THE ROMANS, and by
her primitive Bishops, (which was Apostolical and true:) For as Eliah said to
the people of Israel; They can not halt 1. King. 1^ 21.
between two opinions: If the LORD be GOD, then follow Him: But if Baal be
god, then follow him. Even so say I; If Paul's doctrine be true which he taught
the Church of Rome, then follow it: but if they will be that absurd to think
the Popes doctrine to be true which he teaches, and is contrary to Paulls,
(as the ensuing particulars proves,) then follow him. For there is no midst,
neither let them think it strange or improbable, (let be impossible,) that the
Church of Rome, who pleads such infallibility, should make Apostasy, and
fall from the truth, (as Jerusalem far more privileged and renowned than
she, of a faithful city became a harlot:) elss, what needed the Apostle, Romans
11. 20. to set before her eyes the example of the cutting off, of the Jewish
Church, who were the natural branches for their Apostasy: and therefore, to
exhort her who yet stood by faith, not to be highmynded, but fear. Which
exhortation had been altogether unnecessary, if by her privilege of
infallibility, (which is greatest high-myndedness,) she had no cause to fear.

Again, what needed him to use this fore-warning of her, verss 21. 22. Behold
GODS Goodness toward thee, if thou continue: otherwise, thou shall be cut off:
which commination also had been unnecessary, if she had this privilege, that
she could not err, but continue. And, therefore, for any Apostasy could
never be cut off, neither should he have spoken conditionally, or doubtinglie,
after this manner, (if thou continue,) but particularly excepted her as one,
that could not but continue in the faith, and not err therefra.

Next, if without contradiction it be evident that both in head and members,
she has erred de facto, and fallen from the faith, by the witnessing of
Romanists themselves. It will be much more than evident, that de jure, she may
err, and fall from the faith. But that de facto she has erred, is clear by
these few instances.

1. Pope Gregory the great, speaking of the title of Universal Bishop, he
calls the assuming of it by any who-so-ever, to be the assuming of a new,
proud, profane, perverss, and Antichristian style; and a name of Blasphemy,
which he, nor none of his predecessors, would ever assume: and that, In isto
scelesto vocabulo Greg. l. 4. regist. epist. 39.
consentire, nihil aliud est, (says he) quam fidem perdere: that is, to
consent to this most wicked style, it is no other thing, than to lose the
Faith, or Platina in vita Bonifacii. 3.
make Apostasy therefra. But so it is, that from Boniface the third, his time,
who by great opposition to him by sundry, (says Platina the Popes
Secretary,) obtained from the Emperor Phocas to be styled so, all the latter
Popes hitherto, have usurped the same, (the whole latter Roman Church,
consenting thereto.) Whence it follows, That according to Gregory's own
words; Fidem perdiderunt; or they have fallen from the faith, both the Pope,
and the Church under him.

Again, the Pope, (as Pope,) whom they call the Virtuall Church, de facto has
erred: Ergo, he and the Church following him, may err. The Antecedent is
proven by the testimony of many famous Romanists themselves, as Nilus, Card.
Cus. l. 1. de Co^cordan: cathol. c. 15. Amb. cath in Gal. 2. Lyra in Mat. 16.
Erasm. in 1. Cor. 7. Consil. Basil. ep. synod. 3. Alf. a Castro, adv. haeres.
l. 1. cap. 4.
Gerson, Almain, Alfonsus a Castro: and (which is to be noted,) Pope Adrian
himself, (as Bellarmine acknowledges, lib. 4. de Pontif. Romans c. 2.) The like
does Cardinal Cusanus witness, Ambrosius Catharinus, Lyra, Erasmus, and the
Council of Basil: who in their 34. Session, deposed Eugenius the fourth, as
heretical. So did the sixth General Council of Constantinople, condemn Pope
Honorius, as a Monothelite, (as Bellarmin confesses, lib. 4. de Pont. c. 11.)
That Pope Liberius also, was an Arrian; and Pope Anastasius, an Nestorian, no
man will doubt, (says Alfonsus a Castro,) who has read histories: also that
Vigilius was an Eutychian, that Zepherin was a Montanist; See the History of
the Popes lives; Turrecremata, l. 2. de ecclesia, c. 103. Occum part. 1. l. 5.
c. 28. Card. Cus. concord. cath. l. 2. c. 5.
and that John the 23, denied the Resurrection, is evident by most famous
Histories of their own witnessing.

2. Likewise, to come to points of Doctrine, wherein by their own confession,
they have erred, and departed from the Ancient Faith: I will instance first,
the Roman Churches prohibition of the people to read the holy Scriptures. And
if it be asked, whether in this point she has erred, and departed from the
faith and practice of the Primitive Church? Their own Bishop Claudius
Espencaeus, on Titus 2. will tell them, saying; It is manifest by the doctrine
of the Apostle, Col. 3. 4. And, by the practice of the Church, (says he,)
that of old the use of the Scriptures, was permitted to the people. Here, then,
a confessed departure from the Ancient Faith.

3. The Roman Church has decreed, That all public Prayers and Worship, be in
a tongue unknown to the people. And if it be asked, Whether herein she has
erred, and departed from the Ancient Faith? Their own Cardinal Cajetan, will
tell them, saying; By the doctrine of Saynct Paull, it is to be held; that it
is far better for the edifying Cajet. in 1. Cor. 14.
of the Church, that the public Prayers which are uttered in the hearing of
the people, be said in a language that is common and known, both to Clergy
and people. And, that this was likewise, the practice of the Primitive Church.
This both Lyra and Aquinas testifies. Here then again, a confessed Lyra and
Aquin. in 1. Cor. 14.
departure from the Ancient Faith and practice of the Primitive Church.

4. The present Roman Church, teaches Invocation of Sayncts. And if it be
asked, Whether in this they hold the Ancient Faith, taught by the Apostles, or
has departed therefra? Their own Eckii Enchirid. c. 15.
Eckius, Luthers great Antagonist, will tell them, saying; Besides that we have
nothing hereof in the Old Testament. In the New, likewise, the Apostles nor
Evangelists, neither taught by word, (says he,) nor left any such thing by
writ, that the Sayncts departed, should be invocated; nor would the holy Ghost
by whose inspiration they spoke, suffer them so to do, (says he:) and yet (as
Paull testifies,) they taught the whole Council of GOD. Whence it follows,
Act. 20. 27.
that the Invocation of Sayncts, is no part thereof: And consequently, a
departure from the Ancient Catholic and Apostolical Faith, and practice.
Justly accursed by GOD; For if an Angel from Heaven (says the Apostle,)
teach any Gal. 1. 8.
thing beside that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

5. The Church of Rome now teaches, That the people should not participate of
the consecrated cup in the Communion. And if it be asked, If herein they follow
CHRIST'S Institution, or the practice of the Primitive Church? Not only does
their own Lyra and Aquinas Lyra in 1. Cor. 11. Aquin. in Ioh. 6.
ingenuously confess, That she has departed therefra: But also the whole
Council of Constance, holden anno 1414. Sess. 13. confesses clearly, That
CHRIST indeed instituted this Venerable Sacrament, in both kynds of bread and
wine; and gave it so to His Disciples. As also, that in the Primitive Church,
(say they) the same was received by the Faithful in both kynds. And yet for
certain causes, the Roman Church has ordained the contrary. Here, then, a
clear confession of a gross departing from the Ancient Faith, and practice of
the Primitive Church.

6. The present Roman Church, teaches Transsubstantiation of the bread into
the Body of CHRIST in the Sacrament of the LORDS SUPPER. And if it be asked,
If this be the Ancient Catholic, and Apostolic Faith? 1. The Apostle [1.
Cor. 11. 26.] will teach them the contrary; affirming, That after Consecration,
the bread remains in substance: Even when it is eaten. And if next to the
Apostle, they will hear one of their most ancient Popes, (whom they say cannot
err.) Gelasius Gelas. co^t. Eutychen. de duabus Christi naturis.
will tell them plainly, saying; tho the Sacrament be a divyne thing, becauss
therein we receive the body and blood of CHRIST; yet the substance and nature
of the bread and wine ceasseth not still to remayn, (says he.) And as for
the Words of CHRIST, whereby they would prove Transsubstantiation, if they will
hear the exposition of them out of their Popes Canon Law, De Consecra. did. 2.
c. 6. 2. hoc est, in glossa.
it will tell them, saying, The Heavenly Sacrament, which truly REPRESENTS
CHRIST'S FLESH, is called, CHRIST'S BODY, but improperlie. So that in this mayn
point, we see they have departed from the Ancient Faith, which was taught by
the Apostle, and believed by their own ancient Popes and Canonists.

7. The present Roman Church, teaches; That after this life, for souls of
them that are saved, there is a fire of Purgatory. And if it be asked; If
this was the Ancient Faith of the Catholic Church? Their own Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, will tell them, That in the Western Roffensis cont. Lutheram, art.
18.
or Roman Church, it is but Sero cognitum, or lately only known. And as for the
Eastern or Grecian Church, even unto this day, (says he,) they never did
believe Purgatory. Here, then, a clear confession that the present Roman
Church holds not the Ancient Faith of the Catholic Church, Eastern nor
Western: but has swerved therefra.

8. And, if by farther witnessing, they would be informed of the defection of
the Church of Rome, by Fathers, and others, (a matter indeed wherein they are
like to Thomas, hard of belief,) let Ierom testify, what progress it had made
even in his time, (which was a mystery of Iniquity, working even in Paul's
days,) who about the four hundredth year of CHRIST, writing to Paulinus, says
2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
thus; When I was in Babylon, (calling Hieron. ad Paulim. in lib. Didymi. de
Sp. sancto praef. tom. 9. ad fine^.
Rome so,) and lived an inhabitant of that Purple Whore, I desired, as it were,
to prattle somewhat of the holy Ghost, and to dedicate my work to the Bishop of
that City, (to wit, Damasus:) and behold the Assembly of the Pharisees, there
cried me down: amongst whom there was not any learned Scrybe; but the whole
faction of ignorance conspyred against me; as if I had proclaimed some
Doctrinall War against them, etc. Which words (even unto admiration,) calling
Rome Babylon, the Scarlet Whore. The Clergy whereof were a faction of blind
Pharisees; who cried down all Godly and Learned Men, for advancing themselves
only, and their own credit, would seem rather to be a Protestants speech of
Rome, nowadays, Fran. Petrarcha, l. 1. epist. rerum seniliu^. epist. amico,
cui titulus, calamitatem vrbis Romae describit.
than Ieroms words of Rome in his time.

To whom I will adjoyn (amongst many others) but one of latter times, that
famous Florentine, and so much extolled Petrarcha, who lived in the 1300 year
of CHRIST; and who out of experience speaks thus of Rome, writing to his
Friend, saying; Behold, now, thou see with thine eyes, and groapest with
thine hands what a City, this last spoken of Babylon is, hot and burning in
Lust, etc. And thereafter there thou may see a people not only an enemy to
CHRIST: but which is worss, under the Banner of Christian Profession, rebelling
against CHRIST, and militating for Satan, drunk with the blood of the Members
of CHRIST: for what (I pray thee) is not daily done amongst these enemies of
CHRIST, and the Pharesees of our times? For do they not here on earth buy and
sell, and make merchandise of CHRIST Himself; whose Name night and day they
with high praises extol, whom in His images they cloathe with Purple and Gold,
decketh with precious stones; and whom they salute and worship: and yet they
blyndfold (as it were) the same CHRIST, as if He could not see, they crown Him
with the thorns of their ill gotten goods: they pollute Him with the spittinges
of their most unclean mouth; with their viperous mockings they persecute Him:
they pearce Him again with the spear of their poysonable actions: and so far
as in them lies (says he,) mocked, naked, poor, whipped: they draw Him
again to Calvaerie: and by a wicked conspiracy, they crucify Him over again.
O, shame! O, grief! O, indignity! Of such men consisteh Rome this day, as I
have said. Where Judas himself shall be admitted, if he bring with him the
thirty pieces of silver, the price of blood; and poor CHRIST shall be thrust
out of doors: which thing to be notourlie true, there is no Christian but may
know; and yet none lamenteth it, and none revengeth CHRIST'S quarrel. And where
the head thereof the Pope, acts not (says he,) the part of an Apostolic,
but of a robber, nor is famous for signs of virtue or miracles; but for
military ensigns, and is stored with threatening legions; as if thou would
think him another Hanniball, nor a successor of PETER. With which Petrarcha
notably jumpeth, also Platinae the Popes own Secretary, speaking of the Popes
and Roman Clergy, in the life of Marcellinus, Gregory the fourth, and Paull
the second: where he says, That by Envy, Pride, and Malice, they exercysed
rather Tyranny, nor the Office of Priesthood, altogether having forgotten
Christianity, and profaning holy mystery. And unto whom I could adjoyn a
cloud of mo witnesses, of their own most famous writers; as Baptista Mantuanus,
de calamitatibus temporum; Nicolaus Clemangis, de corrupto Ecclesiae statu;
Marsilius Patavinus, in his Defensor Pacis, AEneas Sylvius: Afterward, Pope by
the name of Pius secundus, in his Epistolae familiares; and of late Claudius
Espencaeus, a Spanish Bishop, and others. But what has been adduced, may be
sufficient to such, who without a prejudice against Truth, have not wedded
themselves so to Error, that like Babell they will not be cured: being so
inebriated with that bewitching cup of the Filthiness of the Whores
Fornications: that (as the Apostle says;) GOD has sent them strong delusion,
to believe a lie; because they would not 2 Thessalonians. ^. 10. 11.
receive the love of the truth, that they may be saved.

But as for others, concerning whom the LORD has a purpose in Mercy, to call
out of Babell, (as he had to Abraham, whom he called from idolatrous Ur of the
Chaldees,) I doubt not but such (following the Berean practice,) without
prejudice will yield an obedient ear to hear, and heart to believe that Ancient
Roman Faith; which they find so clearly set down in Scripture: and, especially,
that Epistle written to the Romans; that so they may be, truly esteemed,
Catholic and Apostolic Romans, indeed: and no more followers of that Beast,
horned like the LAMB, but who speaks like the Dragon, to their own perdition.

And, as for us, to whom the LORD has revealed His Truth, and preserved from
the deceavableness of Error, (as the Apostle speaks,) we are bound always
to praise the LORD; That He has chosen us from the beginning unto Salvation,
through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth; whereunto He
has called us by the Gospel of CHRIST. Of the which Blessing, the LORD grant
we may walk worthy, adorning our Profession, by an holy lyff, to the Glory of
GOD, good example of others, and the Salvation of our own souls, in the day of
our account:

AMEN.
The Old Roman Catholic Religion, taught to them by PAULL; In opposition to The
New Roman Catholic Religion, taught them by the Pope.
The one being APOSTOLICAL, the other Apostaticall.
CHAP. I. OF SCRIPTURE.
SECTION 1. That the Apocrypha books, are not Canonical Scripture.
ROMANS 3. 2. Unto them (to wit, the Jews) were committed the Oracles of GOD:
That is, (as all expound) the Canonical Scriptures of the Old Testament: which
CHRIST comprehends only in Moses and the Prophets wrytings, Luke 24. 27. of
whom Malachi was the last.

But unto them were never committed these Books, as the Oracles of GOD, or
Canonical Scripture, which are called Apocrypha: nor were they ever
acknowledged by the Jews to be such: as Bellarmine and others confesses;
being Bellar l. 1. de Purg. c. 3.. ad primum.
written after Malachi, who was the last of the Prophets, (as is already said.)

Therefore, it follows; That these Books are not Canonick Scripture.

Whence it is, That Ierom said in his Hieron. praef. in Proverbia.
time; The Church indeed reads these Books, (says he,) but receaveth them
not amongst Canonical Scriptures.

2. That people should not be debarred from reading of the Scriptures.
ROMANS 15. 4. What-so-ever things were written aforetyme, were written for our
instruction; that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, may have
hope.

Whence it follows: If the Scriptures were written for the instruction of all
Christians, and that they may attayn by them to Patience, Comfort, and Hope:
that, therefore, for this end, they should be read and perused by them.

But so it is; That they were written, (as says this Text,) for that end.

Therefore, for the same end they should be read by GODS people, and perused
diligently.

Again, Romans 1. 7. The Apostle directs his Epistle, To all that be in Rome,
(says he,) beloved of GOD, called to be Saints.

Whence it follows: If the Apostle directs his Epistle, as a part of divyne
Scripture, To all Christians in common, that were at Rome. Therefore, that all
such were permitted to read the same; and, consequently, that no Christian
should be debarred from reading holy Scripture.

Wherefore, (says Chrysostom,) say Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Matheu^.
not, that it is the part only of religious persons, to read the Scriptures;
for it is the part of every Christian so to do.

3. That the Authority of the Church, is not above the Scriptures.
ROMANS 11. 32. It is said, That GOD concluded them all under the sin of
vnbelieff. Whom else where, Gal. 3. 22.
the Scriptures are said to have concluded under sin.

Whence it follows, That the Authority of GOD, and of the Scriptures is all
one. Therefore, if GODS Authority be above the Church, then the Scriptures
Authority must be so likewise, and not the contrary. And who believes not
GOD speaking in the Scriptures, otherwise then for the Authority of another.
That is, the Churches, he believes the Church more than GOD, and so believes
not GOD simply for himself: but as is said, 1. John 5. 10. makes GOD a liar.
Therefore, (says Augustine,) being sure and secure Aug. to^. ^. Epist. 19.
of the Truth of holy Scripture, I will read the same, as being placed in the
very highest, and most heavenly top, or pinnacle of Authority.

4. That the Scripture is perfect in it self, without unwritten traditions.
ROMANS 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written aforetyme, were written for our
instruction; that we through Patience and Comfort, of the Scriptures, may have
hope.

Whence it follows; That if the Scripture serves, (as says the Text,) both
for instructing in things intellectual, and begetting in us all saving
graces; as things moral, and which are able to uphold us in deepest
distresses: as is Patience, Comfort, and Hope. That, therefore, the same is
perfect, containing all doctrines in it, needful to Salvation.

Whence it is, (says Augustine,) in Aug. l. 2. de doctr. Christiana, c. 9.
these places, which are clearly set down in Scripture, All these things are
found, which contayn both Faith and Manners.

CHAP. II. Of the CHURCH.
SECTION 1. That the holy Cotholick Church spoken of in the Creed, is only of
them who are predestined to eternal glory.
ROMANS 8. 30. Moreover, whom He did predestinate, them also He called: and whom
He called, them also He justified: and whom He justified, them also He
glorified.

Whence we reason thus: The holy Catholic Church of CHRIST is that which at
last is to be glorified: But none are to be glorified, but the predestinate,
etc.

Therefore, the predestinate only are the holy Catholic Church of CHRIST.

Whence it is, That Pope Gregory the first, says well: The Church is
rightly Greg. in Cant. 4.
called a Garden enclosed, (says he;) because on all sides it is fenced with
the hedge of Charity, lest any reprobate should enter in amongst the number of
the Elect. And yet for this point was John Huss condemned, and burnt, at the
Council of Constance; because he defyned the True Church of CHRIST, to be the
company of these who are predestinate and elect unto Eternal Life.

2. That the Church of true Professors, is not always, and to all conspicuous.
ROMANS 11. 2. 3. 4. Wot ye not what the Scripture says of Eliab? how he
makes intercession to GOD against Israel, saying; LORD, they have killed thy
Prophets, and dug down thine Altars; and I am left aelone: and they seek my
life. But what says the answer of GOD unto him? I have reserved to My Selff
seven thousand, who have not bowed the knee to Baall.

Where we see, that the true Church in Israel that consisted of such a number
of true worshippers, was not visibly conspicuous, even to the true Prophet of
GOD, let be to her persecuting enemies Ahab and Iesabell.

Whence it is, That Augustine says; Sometimes the Church like the Moon, Aug.
de Baptisma, contr. Donat. l. 6. c. 4.
may be hid and obscured, that her own very members, may not know one another.

3. That true doctrine, is the essential note of the true Church.
ROMANS 16. 17. Now, I beseech you, brethren, mark them who cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them. For
they that are such, serve not the LORD JESUS.

Whence it follows; If they should be avoided as no true servants of CHRIST
JESUS, or members of His Church, who teah or practice Contrary to true
doctrine; That on the contrary, these, therefore, who teach and practice
conform to true doctrine, contained in the Scriptures, are the true servants of
CHRIST JESUS, and members of His Church: and consequently, that true doctrine,
and practice in GODS worship conform, is the essential note to know CHRIST'S
Church thereby. Therefore, there is the true Church, (says Ierom,) where true
faith is, and they are good Hieron. in Psalm. 133. Aug. l. de vera Religione, c.
5.
catholics only, (says Augustine,) who follow the right faith.

4. That unity is no note of the true Church, except in the truth, and
profession thereof.
ROMANS 15. 5. 6. Now, the GOD of patience and consolation grant you to be alyke
minded one toward another, according to CHRIST JESUS; that ye may with one
mind, and one mouth, glorify GOD.

Whence it follows; That the unity which the Apostle prays, that it may be
in this Church of Rome: and whereby they may be known to be the true Church
of CHRIST, is the Unity of truth, according to CHRIST JESUS; being of one
mind in believing, and of one mouth, in professing the same, to the glory of
GOD.

5. That Multitude is no Note of the True Church.
ROMANS 11. 3. 5. LORD, they have killed thy Prophets, and dug down thine
Altars; and I am left alone; and they seek my life, etc. And even so at this
present time, also, there is but a remnant according to the election of grace,
(says the Apostle.)

Whence it follows; If at this time whereof the Prophet speaks, in this
Church of the Jews, there was such a paucitie of true worshippers, that Elias
thought that he only was left alone, (the multitude having made defection to
idolatry.) And, that at this time also, whereof the Apostle speaks, in the
Christian Church, was but a remnant only according to the election of grace, in
comparison of others. Therefore, it follows clearly, that multitude is no
evident note of the true Church. Wherefore, (says Ierom,) the multitude of
associates, Hieron. dial. contr. Pelag. l. 3.
shall no wise show thee to be a Catholic, but rather an Heretic.

6. That the Church of Rome is not infallible, but may err.
ROMANS 11. 20. Because of vnbelieff, they were broken off, (to wit, the Jewish
Church;) and thou stand by faith: be not highmynded, but fear.

Whence we see: 1. That any such highmyndedness, is forbidden to the Church of
Rome, as to say, that she cannot err: and 2. Although for the present she stood
by faith; yet she is exhorted to fear; lest she fall from the Faith. Which
exhortation, were altogether needless, if she could not err, or fall from the
Faith. And again, (says the Apostle.)

Romans 11. 21. 22. For if GOD spared not the natural branches, take heed, lest
he spare not thee. Behold therefore, the goodness and severitie of GOD: on
them which fell, severitie but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his
goodness; otherwise, thou shall also be cut off.

Whereby the Apostle shows, That the Church of Rome may fall away from the
Truth, and be cut off, as well as other Churches; otherwise, if she only had
been privileged with infallibility, this exhortation forenamed, and this
commination subjoyned had been altogether needless: neither should he spoken
conditionally, thus; If thou continue: but particularly excepted her as one
that could not but continue, by reason of her infallibility, (and of her heads
especially.) But on the contrary, he reasons from the more to the less; that
if this befell the Jewish Church, to fall away from the Truth, and be cut off,
being the natural branch; much more may this befall Rome; being the wyld olive
only, as indeed de facto, it has proved so.

7. That separation from an heretical church, (as Rome,) is no scisme; but a
commanded duty.
ROMANS 16. 17. Now, I beseech you, brethren, mark them who cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have received, and avoid them.

Whence it follows; That if (according to the Apostles command,) we should
avoid them, who do contrary to the Apostles doctrine, and separate our selves
from them, as it is said of Mystical Babylon, come out of her my people. Rev.
18. 4
That, therefore, this avoiding of such, and separation from them is no schism;
but obedience to Divyne Precept, and duty commanded. Wherefore, (says
Ambrose;) If any Church reject the Faith, Ambr. in Lucam, lib. 6. c. 9.
and retayn not the foundamentall points of Apostolic Doctrine, she is
altogether to be forsaken.

CHAP. III. Of the Head of the Church.
SECTION 1. That CHRIST JESUS allanerly is the only Head of the Church and
Husband thereof in like manner, and no Pope at all.
ROMANS 12. 5. So we being many, are one body in CHRIST; and every one, members
one of another.

Whence it follows; That if all are but Fellow Members only of CHRIST'S
mystical body: Therefore, that none is head of that body, but Himself
allanerly.

Wherefore, (says one of their Popes, Gregory the first; It is satanicall
pride by an arrogant title of head so to subject all Greg. l. 4. ep. 36. and 38.
CHRIST'S Members to one man, which cohereth to one head CHRIST JESUS
allanerlie. And again says The Apostle;

Romans 7. 4. Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law, by the
body of CHRIST, that ye should be married to another; even to Him who is raised
from the dead.

Whence it follows; That if we be dead to the law, that we should be married
to CHRIST: therefore, that CHRIST only is the Husband of His Church, as the
same Apostle shows, Ephesians. 5. 23. Whrefore, (says Bernard, to Pope
Eugenius,) call not CHRIST'S Bernard. epist. 237.
beloved Spouse, thine, but His Spouse; thou challenging nothing as proper to
thee over her.

2. That the Pope, as Bishop of Rome, is not Peter's Successor: and so thereby
can neither claym infallibility nor the power of the keys.
ROMANS 11. 13. For I speak to you, Gentiles, in as much as I am the Apostle of
the Gentiles, I magnify my office.

Whence we reason thus: If Paull was properly the Apostle of the Gentiles, or
uncircumcision, as Peter was of the Jews and circumcision: as elss where he
says, Gal. 2. 7. When they saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, (says Paull,) as the Gospel of circumcision, was
committed to Peter. Hence, (I say,) it will clearly follow, That Rome, (the
Bishop thereof,) was within Paul's Charge; and that can nowyse claym, to be
Peter's successor there; or any infallibility by his chair, nor power of the
keys, (as they allege,) given to him only: But rather that he is Paul's
successor, (as indeed he is in his first condition: to wit, Before his
conversion, when he was a cruel persecuter of the Church of CHRIST.)

Wherefore, the very Rhemists themselves speak so on this place; It is plain by
this place and others, (say they,) that to them; (to wit, Peter and Paull,) as
the most renowned Apostles the charge of all nations was given, as divyded into
two parts: that is, Jews and Gentiles.

3. That the Pope ought to be subject to the Civil Magistrate; without
exemption, and all his inferior Clergy.
ROMANS 13. 1. 2. Let every Soull be subject to the higher powers, etc.

Whence it follows, If every soull ought to be subject to the higher powrs:
to wit, Magistracy, as the Apostle there shows: Therefore, also the Pope,
and his inferior Clergy.

Wherefore, thus says Chrysostom on this same Text; Let every soull be
subject to the higher powers, although thou be an Apostle, (says he;) although an
Evangelist, although a Prophet; or who-so-ever thou be: For Piety or Religion
subverteth not this subjection. Therefore also thus concludes Bernard, from
this Universalitie, Bernard. epist. 42.
who-so-ever would exempt any, (says he,) he seeks to deceive.

CHAP. IV. Of the Churches right worship.
SECTION 1. That GOD only is to be invocated, and neither Saynct nor Angel.
ROMANS 10. 14. How shall they call on Him, in whom they have not believed?

But to subsume; We must believe only in GOD, as these Scriptures teach us,
John 14. 1. Ior. 17. 5. Therefore, it follows; That we must incall upon GOD
only.

Hence it is, That their own Master of Sentences, Lombard, on this Text, Romans
4. 3
says, We believe Peter and Paull, (says he,) but not in Peter nor Paull.
Wherefore, if we may not believe in them, we conclude rightly; Therefore, we
may not incall upon them. Again.

Romans 8. 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage, again to fear,
(says the Apostle;) but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we
cry, Abba, Father.

Where we see, That being GODS adopted children, we are exhorted not to fear,
(as if we were going only before a king, or judge;) but to go to Him as a
loving Father, with confidence to be heard, (as our Savior shows us;) and
that His Spirit in our hearts, teaches us to cry, or incall upon Him, as a
Father, and upon none other. Again.

Romans 8. 27. He that searches the heart, knows the mind of the spirit,
(says the Apostle.)

Whence it follows; That He must be the searcher of the heart, and know the
sincerity of Prayer; on whom we must incall: seeing oftentimes neither are
our distresses visible, nor our prayers vocal. But so it is, That to search
the heart, is GODS only prerogative, as we have it, 2. Chron. 6. 30. Therefore,
it follows, That GOD only is to be incalled upon; and neither Saynct nor
Angel.

Wherefore, says Augustine, (speaking of the practice of the Church in his
Aug. lib. 22. de Civit. DEI. cap. 10.
time,) the names of the Sayncts or Martyrs, are in their own order, (says
he) rehearsed amongst us; but not invocated by us.

2. That in Heaven CHRIST only is our Mediator or Intercessour for us.
ROMANS 8. 34. It is CHRIST that died, yea, rather that is risen again; who is
even at the Right Hand of GOD, and makes intercession for us.

Whence it follows; Seeing that He who makes intercession for us, is He that
died for us, and is risen again; and now sits at the Right Hand of GOD: and
that none has done this, but CHRIST only for us.

Therefore; That CHRIST only is our intercessour; which more expressly 1. Tim.
2. 5.
the same Apostle elss where shows, saying; That, as there is but one GOD,
(and not many:) So also, there is but one Mediator between GOD and Man,
(says he;) even the Man CHRIST JESUS. And therefore, not many. For as the
word, One GOD, excludes all other gods beside: So does the word, One
Mediator, exclude all other mediators beside.

Wherefore, (says Augustine;) As for all Christian men, they commend each
August. Tom. 7.
other, in their Prayers to GOD: But He contrae Epist. Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 8.
for whom no man prays: but He Himself for all men, this is the only and true
Me diatour CHRIST JESUS.

3. That all Images made to represent GOD, are heathnish, and idolatrous.
ROMANS 1. 23. They changed the glory of the incorruptible GOD, into an image,
made like to corruptible man, (says the Apostle of the idolatry of the
heathen Gentiles.)

But so it is, That the Papists do the same, while as they represent GOD the
Father, by an old gray haired man. etc. Therefore, they are guilty of the like
^dolatrie.

Whence it is, That Augustine gives his as the reason; Why it is not lawful
for any Christian to make any such Image of GOD: Lest we fall into that same
Aug. de Fide. and Symbol, cap. 7.
Sacrilege, (says he,) whereby the Apostle makes them execrable; who
change ^he glory of the incorruptible GOD, into ^he similitude of a
corruptible man.

4. That to bow the knee to any Image, or any other creatures, in a religious
act, is mere and gross idolatry.
ROMANS 11. 4. But what says the answer of GOD to him? (to wit, Eliah,) I have
reserved to my self seven thousand, who have not bowed the knee to the image of
Baal.

Where we see, That the bowing of the knee to an image, is counted idolatry.
Exodus 20. 5. Levit. 26. 1.
And, therefore, all such bowing before, or to any image what-so-ever, is
expressly forbidden in the Word of GOD.

Romans 14. 11. For it is written, Every knee shall bow to Me, and every tongue
shall confess to GOD: To wit, in the act of religious worship, and the
religious bowing of the knee, is as proper to GOD only; as the confessing of
sins to Him, for pardon.

Wherefore, (says Theodoret;) The Theod. in Exodus 20. 5. vt eitatur in
Catenae Lipomani.
LORD shows here, that both are impious: (to wit, to make an image to
represent GOD thereby, and to bow down, or worship it;) Seeing he says, Thou
shall not bow down before them, nor worship them.

5. That the sort of religious worship, which the Papists call, DULIA, or
SERVICE, is due to GOD only; and to no creature.
ROMANS 1. 25. Speaking of the heathen their idolatry, the Apostle says; Who
changed the Truth of GOD into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature,
etc.

Where we see; That the religious service, which they gave to the creature, is
counted a doctrine of lies; and the practice thereof, grossest idolatry. And
therefore, the same doctrine and practice amongst the Papists, of giving
religious service to creatures, must be counted in like manner, the same
sin: to wit, a doctrine of lies, and practice of idolatry; contrary to which
the Apostle teaches, saying;

Romans 1. 9. For GOD is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit, in the Gospel
of His Son, that without ceassing, I make mention always of you in my
prayers.

Where we see; That this religious Service, is given by the Apostle unto GOD
allanerly. Which he challenges frequently, as an idolatrous act, when it was
given to any other, saying to the Galations, before their conversion, when they
knew not GOD, that they Gal. 4. 8.
did service to them which by nature were no gods.

And thereby implying; That no religious service is to be done, but to Him only
who is the true GOD allanerly. Wherefore; (says Augustine,) Let religious
Aug. d^ vera relig. 8. 55.
service tie you to the Omnipotent God only. And so, to no saint or creature.

CHAP. V. Of the Churches True Doctrine.
SECTION 1. That Concupiscence in the regenerate, is sin properly, and not
improperly only, (as the Council of Trent has decreed,) because it comes of
sin, and inclyneth to sin.
ROMANS 7. 7. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not known
concupiscence, except the Law had See also, verss 17. and 23. Also, Ro^. 5. 12.
19
said, Thou shall not covet.

Whence we reason thus: That which expressly is forbidden by the law, and is
properly a transgression thereof, is sin properly; and so called by the
Apostle, even in himself being regenerated, as verss 17. But such is
concupiscence in the regenerate.

Therefore it is sin properly. Wherefore, (says Augustine,) Concupiscence
Aug. cont. Julian. pelag. lib. 5. cap. 3.
of the flesh against which the good spirit warreth, is sin; because it
rebelleth against the law of the mind; (whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.
23.)

2. That all Sins, are Mortal, by Nature; and no Sin venial.
ROMANS 6. 23. For the wages of sin, is death.

Whence we reason thus: What deserves death, as the wages thereof, is
mortal. But sin deserves death, as the wages thereof: if it be once sin
by the nature thereof, (of what-so-ever sort, or degree it be,) as the Apostle
affirms. Therefore, the same is mortal.

Wherefore, (says Ierom,) These which we think to be smallest sins, do
exclude us Hier. in Galat. 5.
from the kingdom of GOD.

3. That the Virgin Marie was not conceaved without sin.
ROMANS 5. 12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin: and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Where we see; That of all man-kynd procreate by ordinary generation, none are
excepted from being free of original sin: and therefore, neither the Virgin
Marie. Wherefore, (says Bernard,) She can not be free, except one would say,
That she was conceaved of the Holy Bern. epist. 174.
Ghost, and not of man, and so we should attribute as much to the Mother, as to
the Son. But this were not to honor the Mother, (says he,) but to
dishonor her. And, therefore, he concludes thus, saying; Therefore, our LORD
JESUS alone is such, being conceaved of the Holy Ghost; and because he was holy
even before his conception.

4. That our Election is neither for our foreseen faith, or good works.
ROMANS 9. 15. For He says to Moses; I will have mercy, on whom I will have
mercy; and I will have compassion, on whom I will have compassion: so that it
is not of him that wills nor of him that runs; but of GOD that shows
mercy.

Whence it follows; If the LORDS Election of us be so free, that there is no
reason to be given thereof, on our part; but only His own free grace, and
goodwill: because it pleases Him to have compassion, and show mercy upon us.
Therefore, that there is no foreseen faith or works, on our part, that is the
cause thereof. Wherefore, (says Fulgentius,) If the cause be asked of the
Predestination Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Minimum, f. 10.
of the godly, there is none other; but the only free mercy of GOD to be found.

5. That there are no foregoing preparations in us naturally, unto our
effectual calling by grace, as merits of congruitie.
ROMANS 8. 7. For the carnal mind, is eninimitie against GOD; for it is not
subject to the law of GOD, neither indeed can be.

Whence it follows; If the carnal mind of the unregenerate man be such an
eninimitie, how can it prepare it self to GODS calling, to which it is
eninimitie, or sit it self to be subject to the law of GOD; to which it is so
repugnant, That it can not be subject? or what foregoing preparations in him
were, (I pray you,) to this same Apostles conversion? Act. 9. 1. 2. Wherefore,
(says Fulgentius,) the elect, GOD preventeth with grace, being otherwise
altogether unworthy of mercy. Fulg. l. 1. ad Monimum, f. 5.


6. That the first conversion of a sinner, is a work only of GODS mere grace;
and not partly flowing from man's Free Will.
ROMANS 7. 18. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, (or unregenerate
part,) there dwells no good thing, and if no good thing.

Then it follows; That in the unregenerate and carnal man, there is no
inclination of his will, to be subject or obey GODS will; because as is said,
The carnal mind, is eninimitie against GOD, and is not subject to the law of
GOD, nor indeed can be, till GOD work in us, (as the Apostle speaks
elsewhere;) Both to will, and to do. Phil. 2. 13


Wherefore, (says Bernard,) they Bern. tract. de gra. and lib. arb. near the
end.
are not my words, but the Apostles, that any good that can be, whether to
think, or to will; or to do the good which he wills, he ascryveth all to
GOD, and no wise to his own free will.

7. That we are not justified before GOD by works, or any inherent
Righteousness in us; but of GODS free Grace, and by Faith only.
ROMANS 3. 24. Being justified freely by His Grace, through the redemption that is
in JESUS CHRIST. Romans 11. 6. And if by Grace, then it is no more of works:
otherwise grace were no more grace, etc. Romans 3. 27. Where is boasting then? It
is excluded. By what law? Of works? Nay, but by the law of faith. Romans 3. 20.
Therefore, by the deeds of the law, shall no flesh be justified in His sight.
Romans 3. 28. Wherefore, we conclude, (says the Apostle,) that a man is
justified by faith, without the deeds of the law.

Behold, then, here by this deduction of the Apostle, and his conclusion in
end: That the point is clear, that we are not justified by works, but of
grace, and by faith only.

Whence it is, that thus says Ambrose; This is my good, that we are not
justified by works: Therefore, I have not whereof Amb. l. 1. de Jacob. and vita
beata, c. 6.
to glory in my works. And therefore, I will glory in CHRIST. I will not
glory then that I am righteous; but that I am redeemed: and not that I want
sin, but that my sins are forgiven me, etc.

8. That Faith is a sure Confidence in GOD, and a full persuasion of the
performance of His Promises; and not an uncertain conjecture.
ROMANS 4. 12. Walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he
had being yet uncircumcised. And what a faith this was the Apostle subioyneth,
saying;

Romans 4. 20. 21. He staggered not at the promise of GOD, through unbelief; but
was strong in faith, giving glory to GOD: being fully persuaded, that what He
had promised, He was able to perform.

Whence it follows; That the nature of a true and saving Faith; where unto we
are exhorted, after the example of the godly before us, is not an uncertain
conjecture, or probable opinion only; but a full persuasion, without
staggering, or doubting; (which the Apostle calls unbelief, as contrary to
faith:) and which full persuasion of the performance of GODS Promises, to a
penitent believer, is so far from sinful presumption, whereby GOD is
offeuded: That on the contrary, the Apostle declares, that GOD is thereby
glorified, and acknowledged true in His Promises. And that on the other side,
doubting of the performance of GODS Promises to us, is rather presumption: for
thereby we make GOD a liar.

Wherefore Augustine speaking of this persuasion, says; Neither is this
presumption, Aug. Sermon. 20. de Verbis DOMINI.
but faith, (says he,) for to tell what thou have gotten, is no presumption,
but devotion.

9. That the godly, therefore, may be assured of their Salvation; and should
not doubt thereof, (as Romanists teach them to do.) Howso-ever through
infirmity they may so often times.
ROMANS 8. 16. The spirit it self bears witness, with our spirit, that we are
the children of GOD. (The Apostle speaking here not of extraordinanary
revelation, but of GODS ordinary dealing with His Sayncts.)

Whence it follows; If the Spirit of GOD witness, to our soul or spirit, that
we are GODS children; then he witnesses, that we are heirs of Salvation: and
consequently, if he witness this, we should believe his witnessing; and rest
assured of the certainty thereof: because He is true. Which is not
presumption, (as Papists teach,) but (as has been said,) it is rather
presumption, to doubt of the Truth of this witnessing of the Spirit. Again.

Romans 8. 38. I am persuaded, (says PAULL,) that neither Death, nor Life, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, etc. shall be able to separate (not me an
Apostle, but) us, (speaking of all the Godly,) from the Love of GOD, which is
in CHRIST JESUS, our LORD.

Remark, then; The Apostles full persuasion of his own salvation, and of all
the Godlies; without any doubting, or staggering, in his faith. And yet, (I
hope,) no man will call this Persuasion, Presumption in the Apostle Paul.

10. That no implicit Faith does save.
ROMANS 10. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth, the LORD JESUS, and shall
believe in thy heart, that GOD has raised Him from the dead, thou shall be
saved, etc.

Whence it follows; Seeing we must believe with the heart, and confess with
the mouth, the express Articles of the Christian faith: Especially CHRIST'S
Death, and Resurrection, if we must be saved. Therefore, what we believe, we
must distinctly know, and not rely on an implicit faith, to be saved thereby.

11. That no man can perfectly keep GODS Commandments; let be to
Supererogate.
ROMANS 7. 13. But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my
mind; and bringing me into caeptivitie, to the law of sin, which is in my
members. O miserable man then, that I am; Who shall deliver me from this body
of death?

Whence it follows, That if so great an Apostle, could not perfectly keep
GODS Law, and so be free of sin; Then, what is he, that can claym to a
greater then Apostolical Perfection? Wherefore, (says Ierom,) If thou can
show me but a man who has fulfilled the Hier. l. 3. adversus Pelag.
Commandments; Then thou may show me a man, that needs not GODS mercy.

12. That our good works, are not meritorious, of Eternal Lyff.
ROMANS 6. 23. For the wages of sin, is death: But Lyff Eternal, is the free
gift of GOD, through JESUS CHRIST, our LORD.

Where we see; That death is called the wages of sin; because merited
thereby. But so is not lyff everlasting called, the wages of righteousness: But
the free gift of GOD, that thereby, (says Augustine,) we may understand,
that it is not for our merits; but according to Aug. de gra. and lib. arb. c. 9.
His own Mercy; that GOD brings us to Eternal Lyff. Again.

Romans 8. 18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

Whence it follows; That if the ve^ie sufferinges of Martyrs, meriteth not
Eternal Lyff: Much less can the actions of the Godlyest merit the same.
Agreeable whereunto, (says Bernard,) we Bern. sermon. 1. in annunc. Beatae
Mariae.
know that the sufferings of this time, are not worthy to be compared with the
future glory: No, not if one did sustayn them all, for the merits of men, are
not such; that for them Eternal Lyff, should be due of right, (says he,)
or GOD should do any injury, if He did not give it. Mark this, to be close
contrary to the Rhemists, on Heb. 6. 10


13. That there are no Penal Satisfactorie works, in this lyff.
ROMANS 5. 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with GOD,
through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Whence it follows; If in justification, our peace be made with GOD, through
the perfect satisfactory sufferings of our LORD JESUS CHRIST: that therefore,
there is no place left for any penal or satisfactory works, on our part, to
procure the same.

Wherefore, by what payns, and what Ambr. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 20. Bern. de
verbis, lib. Job. in sex.
fastinges can we wash away our Sins? (says Ambrose:) for the only
paynfull suffering of the second Adam, (says Bernard,) purges them, whom the
only sin of the first defiled.

14. That there are no satisfactory sufferings to GODS justice for our sins,
in, or after this lyff, sustained by any.
ROMANS 5. 10. For, if we were reconciled to GOD, by the death of His Son;
much more being reconciled we shall be saved by His Lyff.

Whence we reason thus: GODS Love is no less to us, being reconciled to Him,
by the death of His Son, then when we were enemies and unreconciled, but
rather greater. But when we were enemies, He reconciled us to Himselff, by
the Death of His Son, perfectlye saving us; both from the guilt of sin
here, and all Satisfactorie punishment for the same here, or here-after; as the
Apostle testifies, Heb. 7. 25. and 10. 14.

Therefore, being reconciled; much more shall He perfectly save us; both from
the guilt of sin here, and all Satisfactorie punishment what-so-ever, that it
deserves here, or here-after: Elss, CHRIST could not be to us a perfect
Savior: But we, in part, (by our satisfactorie sufferings here, and in
purgatory,) should be saviors to our selves.

Wherefore, (says AUGUSTINE,) CHRIST by undergoing the punishment, Aug. Sermon.
37. de verbis DOMINI. Durand. cited by Bellar. l. 1 de indulg. cap. 4. S.
tertia.
and not the guilt, has abrogated both the punishment, and the guilt, and the
sufferings of CHRIST, being of an infinite value, to join therefore the
sufferinges of the Godly thereto, is altogether superfluous, (says DURANDUS.)

15. That the Sayncts can not totally nor finally fall away.
ROMANS 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the Love of CHRIST? Shall Tribulation,
or Distress, or Persecution? etc. Again.

ROMANS 11. 29. For the gifts and calling of GOD, are without repentance.

Whence it follows; If nothing can separate the Godly, from the Love of
CHRIST, (seeing whom He loves, He loves to the end, John 13. 1.) and that
His saving gifts, and effectual calling, are without repentance. Therefore, it
is impossible that such totally and finally can fall away, or perish.
Wherefore, (says AUGUSTINE,) this thing GOD has promised, saying; I will put
My Fear into Aug. tom. 7. de bono persever. cap. 2.
their hearts; that they shall not depart from Me, which what other thing is
it: But My Fear shall be so great, which I will put into their hearts, that
they shall constantly adhere to Me.

16. That no Meats are to be abstayned from, for Conscience sake.
ROMANS 14. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not
him that eats not, judge him not that eats. And again, verse 14. and 17.
For, I know, and am persuaded, (says The Apostle,) by the LORD JESUS, that
there is nothing unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any thing to be
unclean, to him it is unclean. And, the Kingdom of GOD, is not meat and drink;
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

If, therefore, one should not judge, nor despise another, for eating any fort
of meat, because nothing of it self is unclean; and that the Kingdom of GOD
consists not in the like.

Therefore, it follows, That the commanding to abstayn from meats, for
conscience sake, is an overthrowing of Christian liberty; and contrary to the
APOSTLES Doctrine. And, therefore, may justly be called Antichristian; or, as
the Apostle calls it. 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. a doctrine of divils, and speaking
lies in hypocrisy: For every creature of GOD, is good, (says he,) and
nothing is to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.

Wherefore, (says Augustine,) we learn that in eating, it is not in the sort
Aug. lib. 16. de Civit. DEI, cap. 37.
of meat; but in the immoderate gluttony, that any man is to be blamed.

CHAP. VI. Of the SACRAMENTS.
SECTION 1. That SACRAMENTS confer not grace on the receavers, ex opere
operato.
ROMANS 4. 11. And he (to wit, Abraham,) receavedthe sign of circumcision, a
seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised.

Whereby we see, That this is the nature of Sacraments: to wit, That they are
signs for representation, and seals for Confirming, or Obsignation. And as
seals confer not the gift upon any, which they serve to confirm: Even so
Sacraments ex opere operato, or by the mere receaving, conferreth not grace, or
salvation on any, but only GOD, who is the giver of all grace and glory.

Wherefore, (says Augustine,) without Aug. quaest. in Levit. l. 3. q. 84.
the sanctification of invisible grace, what avayleth the visible Sacrament?
For the visible Baptism of Simon Magus avayled him nothing: because he wanted
the invisible grace of Sanctification. Which, doubtless, he had received with
Baptism, if Sacraments of them selves had conferred grace.

2. That Baptism is not absolutely necessary to infants for Salvation.
ROMANS 9. 11. 12. 13. For the children being not yet born, neither having done
any good or evil, that the purpose of GOD according to Election might stand:
not of works, but of Him that calls. It was said unto her, (to wit, Rebecca,)
the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated.

If Jacob then who was elected and loved of GOD, before he was born, could not
be prejudged of Salvation; although he had died in the birth, or shortly
thereafter, for want of circumcision, which was only to be on the eight day.

Then it follows, That even so neither can the children of faithful
Christians, who are elected and loved of GOD, before they be born, be
prejudged of salvation; although they, in like manner, die before they receive
Baptism, which succeeds in place of Circumcision.

For this cause therefore, (says Bernard,) our Savior when He said, He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, warily Bern. Epist. 77.
and watchfully He says not: but who is not baptized, shall be damned: but
only this, Who believes not, shall be damned. What nature, or reason, then,
(says he,) teaches this, That none can attayn to internal or eternal
Salvation, whose body is not outwardly sprinkled with the visible element?

3. That in the LORDS Supper there is no Transsubstantiation of the Bread into
CHRIST'S Body.
ROMANS 1. 3. Concerning His Son JESUS CHRIST, (says Paull,) our LORD, who
was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh.

Whence it follows; If CHRIST'S Body or flesh is made only once of the seed of
David, that it is absurd: therefore, and contrary to Scripture, that His body
or flesh is only made by Transsubstantiation of the seed of wheat, or substance
of bread, in the holy Sacrament: and that this Transsubstantiation, is as it
were CHRIST'S second birth, or begetting, as the late Jesuits affirm: For so
says Cornelius a lapide, on Isai, 7. 14. By the words of Consecration, as the
bread is truly and really transsubstantiate, (says he,) so CHRIST is brought
forth, and as it were, begotten upon the Altar, as powerfully and effectually;
as if CHRIST were not as yet incarnate. Therefore, (says he;) The Priest is
as the Virgin that bare Him, the Altar is the Manger, and the little Emmanuell,
which he bears, is CHRIST brought forth under the little hostie. A most
monstrous and blasphemous speech: whereby they will have CHRIST, not once, but
daily to be born: not of the substance of the Virgin, but of the substance of
bread: and His body, not once, but daily also to be broken, and His blood
shed in their idolatrous Mass.

Whereas, on the contrary, agreeable to Scripture, (says Theodoret, and with
him Pope Gelasius;) The mystical signs Theod. dialogo, 2. Gelas. lib. contra
Eutychen.
departs not from their own nature, but remayn, (says he,) in their former
substance, form, and figure, and may be seen and touched, as they were before.

Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is CHRIST that died; yea, rather
that is risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of GOD, etc. And (as the
Apostle teaches, Act. 3. 21.) Whom the Heavens must contayn, till the last
day, or restitution of all things.

If CHRIST'S Body, then, wherein He died, and rose again, sits now at the
Right Hand of GOD, glorified in the Heavens, till He come again from thence,
at the Last Day. It follows, therefore, that the Body of CHRIST is not by
transsubstantiation everywhere, on earth, between the Priests fingers in the
Mass, or between the teeth of the people, to be chewed in the Sacrament, as is
affirmed in the Popes Decretall Did. 2. de co^secra. c. Ego Berengalius,
Vigil. l. 4. contr. Eutych. fulg. t. 2. ad Thrasimund.
. Wherefore, when He was on earth, He was not then in Heaven, (says
Vigilius, and with him Fulgentius,) and now being in Heaven, He is not to be
had on earth.

4. That the Mass is not Propitiarie Sacrifice.
ROMANS 6. 9. 10. Knowing that CHRIST being raised from the dead, dies no more,
death has no more dominion over Him; for in that He died, He died to sin
once; But in that He lives, He lives unto GOD.

Seeing, then, that CHRIST died but once, and dies no more; and that this His
death was that only Propitiatory Sacrifice once for ever offered on the
Cross, never to be reiterated, (as we are clearly taught, Hbr. 9. 25. and 10.
14.) Therefore it follows; That there is no Propitiatory Sacrifice offered
up in the Mass, but only a commemoration in the Sacrament of CHRIST'S Death and
Passion.

Wherefore, (says Eusebius, and with him Ambrose,) After that CHRIST Eusebius.
demonstra. Evang. l. 1. c. 10. Ambr. in 1. Cor. 11.
had offered up that admirable and excellent Sacrifice to His Father, for the
Salvation of all, He instituted, (says he,) that we should still offer up
the Rememberance of that Benefit, in place of a Sacrifice to GOD: But not as
any Propitiatory Sacrifice properly it selff.

CHAP. VII. Of PURGATORY.
That there is no such Place whether the Souls of the Godly go after this lyff.
ROMANS 8. 1. There is therefore now, no condemnation to them who are in CHRIST
JESUS.

If, therefore, there be no condemnation at all, then after death, (when they
are pronounced presently Rev. 14. 13.
blessed,) and rests from their labors; they are not condemned to any
Hellish and Tormenting Purgatory.

Again.

Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of GODS Elect? It is GOD
that justifies: And who is he that condemns? It is CHRIST that died; yea,
rather that is risen again; who is even at the Right Hand of GOD, and makes
intercession for us.

Remark then, That against any thing that may be laid to the charge of the
Elect, for which they may be condemned after this lyff, to any such Hellish
Place, or Punishment as Purgatory, there are three powerful things opposed:
1. GODS justifying them, by a full and free Remission of all their sins
what-so-ever: and consequently, from any such Hellish Punishment of them
here-after: 2. CHRIST'S Death, or Bloodshed, which (as John testifies,)
purges us from all Sin: and 3. 1. John. 4. 7.
CHRIST'S Intercession in the Heavens, which is sufficiently powerful to save
the Souls of His Elect, after this life, from any such fyrie Torment.

Wherefore, (says Justin Martyr,) Justin. Mart. quaest. 75.
After the departure of the Soull from the body, presently is made a
distinction between the good and the bad: For they are carried to the Places
whereof they are worthy: The Souls of the Godly, by the Angels being carried
to Paradise; where the company and sight of Angels and Archangels is; as also
the sight of CHRIST, our SAVIOR, according to these words, whill we are
absent from the body, we are present with the Lord. But the souls of the
wicked, (says he,) 2. Cor. 5. 8
are carried to Hell.

FINIS.
The Doctrine of the Primitive Bishops of Rome, whill the Faithful City became
not an Harlor; and her Pastors Impostours: And especially, the Doctrine of
GREGORY the first; who lived five hundredth years after CHRIST; and is called
by them, for his Virtue and Learning, GREGORY THE GREAT.
CHAP. I.
Of Scripture: And 1. That the Maccabees, and other Apocrypha books, are not
Canonical.
GREGORY, speaking of the Probation of a point out of the Maccabees, Greg. in
Job, lib. 19 cap. 13.
says thus; De qua no^ inordinate agimus, si ex libris etsi non canonicis,
sed tamen ad aedificationem Ecclesiae editis testimonium proferamus: That is,
Of which matter, we do not disorderly, if we bring a testimony out of these
books; which albeit they are not canonical; yet are set forth, for the
edifying of the Church.

And that this was the judgment and faith, of the whole Western and Christian
Church before; and at that time, Ierom declares, saying; Hos libros legit
quidem Ecclesia, sed inter canonicas scripturas non Hieron. praef. in Proverb.
recipit: That is, The Church, indeed, reads these books; but receaveth them
not amongst Canonical Scriptures.

2. That the Scriptures, without doctrinall Traditions, are all sufficient, for
instruction of Faith and Manners.
WHerein thus says Gregory; In hoc volumine: Omnia quae crudiunt, Greg. l.
1. in Ezekiel. hom. 9.
Cuncta quae aedificant continentur: That is; In this Book of Scripture, all
things that are for instruction, and all things that are for edification, are
contained. But as for dogmaticall traditions, S^pe heretici, Greg. lib. 18. in
Job. cap. 14.
(says he,) dum sua student perversa astruere, ea proferunt quae in sacrorum
librorum paginis non continentur: That is; Often times Heretics, while as they
endeavor to build up their perverss doctrines, they produce things, which in
the Books of Sacred Scripture, are no wise contained.

3. That the Scripture is plain in all things, necessary to Salvation: And,
therefore, is to be read by the people.
IN which point thus says Gregory; Scriptura quasi quidam fluvius est,
planus Greg. Epist. ad Leandru^, c. 4. super maral.
and altus, in quo and ag^us ambulet, and ^liphas natet: That is; The Scripture
is as it were a river, both eb and deep: wherein a Lamb may wade, and an
Elephant swim.

Which thing moved also Augustine, to say, In these places, (says he,) which
Greg. l. 4. Epist. 40. ad Theod. modicum.
are clearly set down in Scripture, are all these things to be found, which
contayn both Faith and Manners, (Lib. 2. de doctrina Christiana, cap. 9.) And
again; For reading of Scripture, (says Gregory,) Quid est autem scriptura
sacra, nisi Epistola Omnipotentis DEI ad creaturum suam? That is; What is the
Holy Scripture, then, but the Epistle of the Omnipotent GOD, sent unto His
creature?

Whence it follows; That, therefore, His creature should read the same.

CHAP. IJ.
Of the Church: And 1. That the Rock (spoken of MATH. 16. 18.) whereon CHRIST
says, He will build His Church; and the Popes would build their
Infallibility, is not Peter, nor his successors, but CHRIST only.
FOR thus says Gregory; Greg. in Psalm. 5. poenitent. and verba initio Tu,
Domine, etc.
Ipse enim est Petra, a qua Petrus nomen accepit, and super quam se
aedificaturum Ecclesiam dixit: That is; For He Himselff is that Rock, from
which Peter received his name: and upon which he said, that he would build
his Church.

And again; In sacriloquio, (says he,) quando in singulari numero
fundamentum dicitur, nullus alius nisi CHRISTUS designatur: That is; In Holy
Scripture when in the singular number, a foundation is spoken of; none other is
thereby to be understood, but CHRIST alone.

2. That the True Catholic Church spoken of in the Belieff, and that can not
err fundamentally and totally, is only the Elect: And so no one particular
visible Church only, as Rome.
WHereanent says Gregory; Christus itaque cum tota sua Ecclesia, Greg. in
Psalm. 5. poenit. in initio.
sive quae adhuc versatur in terris, sive quae ^um co regnat in coelis, vna
persona est, and sicut est vna anima quae diversa corporis membr^ virificat,
ita totam simul Ecclesiam vnus Spiritus Sanctus vegetat and illustrat: That is;
CHRIST, therefore, with His whole Church, whether it be that part thereof,
that is on earth, or that part which raygneth with Him in the Heavens, is but
one person, and as it is but one soull that quickens the diverss members of
the body: Even so it is but one Holy Spirit, which quickens and illuminateth
the whole Church. And a little after; De hoc spiritu non vivit haereticus, non
vivit schismaticus: That is; And by this spirit, neither does the Heretic,
nor Schismatic live.

And again: Intra has mensuras sunt omnes electi, extra has sunt omnes reprobi,
Greg. moral. l. 28. c. 6.
etiamsi intra fidei limitem esse videantur: That is, Within these bounds, are
all the Elect, and within the same, are all the reprobate; albeit they seem to
be within the limits of believers.

3. That no man on earth is Universal Bishop of the Catholic Church, (as the
Pope claymeth:) nor anywyse Head thereof.
NO man battereth more this lofty Babell of Papal Supremacy, more than
Gregory: For, 1. He calls this name of Universal Bishop, in it selff;
which the Patriarch of Constantinople, would have usurped; Novum and prophanum
Greg. l. 4. Epist. 32. 34. 36. and 39.
vocabulum contra statuta Evangelica and Canonum Decreta, Lib. 4. Epist. 32.
That is; A new and profane style, against the Precepts of the Gospel, and
Canons of Counsels: Also, Superbum vocabulum, A proud title, and a perverss,
Epist. 34. Likewise; Diabolica praesumptio; A divelish presumption, Epist. 36.
and nomen blasphemiae, Epist. 32. And a name of Blasphemy; according to that
of Revel. 17. 3. And last, Scelestum vocabulum; A most wicked title, and a
plain Departure from the Faith: For so he says, Epist. 39. In isto enim
scelesto vocaebulo consentire, nihil aliud est quam fidem perdere: That is; To
consent to this most wicked style, is no other thing, than to lose the Faith.

2. He shows; That none, who was ever Bishops of Rome, and his Predecessors
would have any such style. And 1. Peter; Neminem-se vnquam vniversalem Greg. l.
4. epist. 38. Also 36.
vocare voluit, (says he,) Epist. 38. That is; He would not have any ever
to call him Universal. And, thereafter, Nullus vnquam predecessorum meorum hoc
tam prophano vocabulo vti consensit, Greg. l. 6. Epist. 30.
Epist. 36. That is; None ever of my predecessors would consent to use so
profane a title. Hence note this argument; He who being Bishop of the Church
of Rome, denies the title of Universal, or Catholic Bishop, to be properly
belonging to himself; does consequently deny, that the Church of Rome can
properly be called the Universal, or Catholic Church. But Gregory does the
first: Ergo, also the last. Note also; That other two Popes; Pelagius, the
second, and Leo, the nynth, denied this Title, as Azorius witnesses.
Azor-Instit, moral. part. 2. lib. 4. cap. 4.
And for his own practice, when Eulegius, Bishop of Alexandria, had given him
this style in a letter, he says; Ecce in Praefatione Epistolae quam ad
meipsum qui prohibui direxistis, superbae appellationis verbum, vniversalem me
Papam dicentes, imprimere curastis, quod pet^ dulcissima vestra sanctitas mihi
vltra non faciat, quia vobis substrahitur quod alteri plus quam ratio exigit
prebetur. And, there after; Recedant ergo verba quae vanitat inflant, and
charitatem vulnerant, Lib. 7. Epist. 30. That is; Behold, (says he,) in the
Preface of a Letter, which ye directed to me, ye caused put in a proud
Title; calling me Universal Bishop, or Pope; which I did forbid, and which I
beseech your sweetest Holiness, that you do no more any such thing: because
that is withdrawn from you vnjustlie, which against right reason is given to
any other. Away, then, with such words that blows up men with Vanity, and
wounds Charity.

3. He sets down the reasons, why such a proud style should not be usurped
by any. 1. Universa ergo Ecclesia (quod absit) a statu suo corruet, quando is
qui vocatur vniversalis cadet, Lib. 4. Epist. 32. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 32.
That is; For then the universal Church, (says he,) should fall, (which GOD
forbid,) when he falls in heresy, who is Universal Bishop thereof.

2. He shows; That this were to imitate Lucifer, who fell through Pride,
saying; Quis enim in hoc tam perverso vocabulo nisi ille ad imitandum
proponitur, qui despectis Angelorum legionibus secum socialiter Greg. l. 4.
Epist. 38.
constitutis, ad culmen conatus est singularitatis erumpere, vt and nulli
subesse, and solus omnibus preesse videretur, Epist. 38. That is; For who is
set before our eyes, for imitation in usurping so profane or wicked a Title:
but he who despysing the legions of Angels, who in one consociation were
joined with him, would so aspyre to the hight of singularity, as he would be
subject to none; and would be above all others himself alone, as the Popes
since avow in their Decretalls. Extravag. commun. l. 1. tit. 8. c. 1. de
majorit. and obed.


Last of all, he shows, that this Antichristian style, and usurpation
thereof, by John Patriarch of Constantinople, did design no other thing; but
that Antichrist was even at hand; and that he who did vsurp the same, was his
very Forerunner. For thus he says; Sed in hac ejus superbia, quid aliud
nisi propinqua jam Antichristi esse tempora designantur, Epist. 34. And again;
Omnia enim quae Greg. l. 4. Epist. 34. and 38.
praedicta sunt fiunt, rex superbia prope est, and (quod nefas est) sacerdotum
est preparatus exercitus, Epist. 38. And there-after subjoyneth as a sure
conclusion, saying; Ego autem fidenter dico quod quisquis se Universalem
sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrit, qui superbieudo se caeteris praeponit, Lib. 6. Epist. 30. That is;
But in Greg. l. 6. Epist. 30.
this his pride, what other is designed; but that the time of Antichrist, is at
hand: For all things that are foretold, are now performed; and the king of
pride is at the doors: and, (which is worst,) he has an Army of Priests
prepared for him. But I will confidentlie affirm; That who-so-ever he be,
that calls himselff Universal Bishop, or desires so to be called by
others, that in his pride, he is the Forerunner of Antichrist; who out of his
Ambi tion, would prefer himselff, to all others.

Wherefore, writing to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria, he concludes thus;
Propterea sanctitas vestra in suis Epistolis, neminem vnquam universalem
nominet ne sibi debitum detrahat, cum alteri honorem offert indebitum, epist.
36. That is; Therefore, Greg. l. 4. Epist. 36.
let not your Holiness, in any of your letters, call any man what-so-ever at
any time Universal Bishop; Lest ye defraud your felff, of that which is your
due, whill as ye offer that honor to another, which is no wise their due.

In like manner; For the Title, of head of the Church, which the Pope
arrogateth, thus says Gregory, speaking of the forenamed Patriarch of
Constantinople; Ex ea quam pretendebat humilitate, jactantiam sumpsit, ita vt
vniversa sibi tentet ascribere, and omnia quae soli vnicapiti cohaerent;
videlicet, CHRISTO, perelationem pompatici sermonis, ejusdem CHRISTI sibi
studeat membra subjugare, Lib. 4. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 36.
Epist. 36. That is; Out of his pretended humility, he assumeth that pride of
speech: That he would ascrybe all to himselff. And by the Ambition of that
pompous Title, would subject to himselff, all the members of CHRIST, as their
head: Which not-with-standing do cohere to CHRIST, as their only and one head:
Which Title we see then, he calls Pompous, Flowing from Pride, which
comes of the devil, and sacrilegiously blasphemous arrogating to himselff,
that which is only proper to CHRIST.

Moreover; Whereas Bellarmine, (lib. 2. de Pontifice, cap. 31. and 27..
respondeo,) makes this to be another Style of the Popes; that he is called
Generalis Pater: And makes this inference thereon; That all are therefore, his
sons: And consequenlie, he not subject to any; but all subject to him. Of
which Style, thus says Gregory to the forenamed John of Constantinople;
Quid ergo charissime frater, in illo terribili examine venientis judicis
dicturus es, quoniam non solum pater, sed etiam Generalis Pater in mundo vocari
appetis, Lib. 4. Epist. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 38.
38. That is; What, therefore, dear brother, will thou be able to say in that
Dreadful Day of Trial of the Judge that is to come; Who is not only content
to be called Father; but desires to be called in this world, The General
Father of all: Declaring thereby, That none is able to answer before GOD, in
the Day of His Account, for usurping such a proud aad blasphemous Title, proper
only to GOD.

4. That the Pope has such Supremacy, as he claymeth over Temporal Princes,
by any claym or practice, of the Primitive Bishops of Rome.
THis Gregory testifies, both by the Title whereby he styleth himselff,
writing to the Emperor Mauritius, Greg. l. 2. Epist. 61.
saying; Ego autem indignus pietatis vestrae famulus: That is; I, your
Godliness, unworthy servant, as also by his professed obedience, to the
Emperors commandentes: Even in that which he thought unlawful. Therefore,
says he; Ego quidem jussioni subjectus eandem legem per diversas terrarum
parts transmitti Greg. ibidem.
feci: and quia lex ipsa Omnipotenti DEO minime concordat, ecce per
suggestionis meae paginam serenissimis Dominis nunciavi. Utrobique ergo quae
debui exsolui, qui and imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro DEO quod sensi
minime tacui. See, also, frequentlie his profession to the imperial
commandments, as to his Lord and Master repeated, Lib. 4. Epist. 32.) The
English of which former words, is this: I, indeed, (says he,) being subject
to your imperial command, I have caused send your Law, through diverss parts of
the Land: And because the Law it selff, does not agree with the Omnipotent
GOD. Behold, by my Letters, I have declared the same, to my most Excellent
LORD. Wherefore, at all hands I have performed that which I ought to have done:
who both have given obedience, to the Emperor; and have not held my peace, in
that which I thought I should speak for GOD.

So also, did Pelagius the first, profess, saying; Regibus nos subditos esse
sacrae Scripturae Binius, tom. 2. Epist. 16.
praecipiunt: That is; Holy Scriptures commands us, to be subject to kings.

Yea; SO HUMBLE A SUBJECTION, did the Ancient and Primitive Bishops of Rome,
profess to the Emperor; that Binius sets down these Binius, tom. 3. Ep. 1.
to have been the words of ADRIAN first, in his Epistle to the Emperor,
saying; Prostrate on the ground, and falling down groaflinges, at the soles of
your feet, do I entreat your Majesty. Which is far contrary to the practice
now of the Emperoures falling down groaflings, at the soles of the Pops feet,
to kiss them.

The truth of which point is so clear: to wit, That the Ancient Bishops of
Rome, never claymed any such Supremacy over temporal Princes, as the Popes do
now: but were most humbly subject unto them; that Bellarmin himself bears
witness thereto, saying; In temporalibus Bell. lib. 1. de Conci^iliis, c. 13.
quarta ratio.
subjiciebant se imperatoribus, and quia Dominum suum temporalem eum agnoscebat
Papa, supplicabat vt juberet convocari synodum: That is; In Temporal things,
they were subject to the Emperors: and because the Pope acknowledged the
Emperor, to be his Temporal Lord over him; he made humble suit unto him,
that he would command a Coun^ell to be conveaned.

This also testifies the Charter-Monk, Author of Fasciculus temporum, Boniface
the eight, being the first man, (says Fascit. temp. in vita Bonif. 8.
he,) that rose up to that hight of pride, that he called him selff, Lord of
the whole World; as well in Temporal, as in Spiritual things. Of whom it is
by that same Author reported; That he entered like a Fox, he lived like a
Lion, and died like a Dog.

And this was Anno 1294.

CHAP. IIJ.
Of the Churches right worship: And 1. Against Public Prayer, and Service, in
an unknown tongue.
THus decreed; Innocentius tertius, Quoniam ANNO 1198.
in plerisque partibus intra eandem civitatem atque diocesin permixti Lib. 1.
decret. tit. 30 cap. 14.
sunt populi diversarum linguarum, habentes sub vna fide varios ritus and
mores, districte praecipimus vt Episcopi hujusmodi civitatum sive diocesium
provideant viros idoneos, qui secundum diversitates rituum and ^inguarum divina
illis officia celebrant: That is; Because in many parts within one City, or
Diocie, there are many people mixed together of diverss languages; having
under one Faith, diverss rites and manners; Therefore, we straightly command,
that the bishops of such cities or diocies, provide meet men, who according to
the diversity of their Rites and languages, may celebrate Divine Service unto
them. For out of the Doctrine of Saynct PAULL, (says Cardinal Cajetane,) we
have it clearly set down, Cajet. in 1. Cor. 14. See also Aquinas.
That it is better for the edification of the CHURCH, that the Public Prayers,
which are used in the audience of the people, be spoken in a language common,
both to Clergy and People, than otherwise.

Wherefore also, says LYRA; In the Primitive Church, the THANKS-GIVINGS, and
all other Common Lyra, in 1. Cor. 14.
Service, was performed in the vulgar tongue.

Which Custom of the Church, (as yet used in Egypt and Ethiopia;) It is a
wonder, (says Erasmus,) how it became Erasmus, in 1. Cor. 14.
to be changed.

2. Against al manner of Adoration of Images.
THus says GREGORY, in his Greg. l. 9, Epist. 9.
Epistle, to SERENUS, Bishop of MARSILS; (Who because the people worshipped
them, broke down all the images, that were in any Church within his Diocey:
And show they were not to be worshipped at all:) Et quide^ quia eas adorari
vetuisses, Omnino laudamus, (says GREGORY,) quae ad instruendas Solummodo
mentes nescientium fuerunt collocatae. -- convocandi ergo sunt dispersi
Ecclesiae Filii, eisque Scripturae Sacrae est Testimoniis ostendendum quia omne
manufactum adorare non licet, quoniam scriptum est, Dominum tuum adorabis, and
illi soli Servies: That is; And truly in that ye did forbid these images, to
be worshipped; We al-to-gether praise you, which were placed only for
instruction, of the mynds, of the ignorant. -- Wherefore, the dispersed Sons
of the Church, are to be assembled together: And, by the Testimonies of holy
Scripture, it is to be shown unto them: That it is not lawful to worship any
thing what-so-ever, which is made with hands: Because it is written, Thou shall
worship the LORD, thy GOD, and Him only shall thou serve; (Or, give to Him the
worship of DULIA; which Papists give to images, by their own confession.)

Which Practice of Romish Idolatry, (contrary to the Faith of GREGORY,) is
come to that hight of madness, (says Lib. 5. de invent. rer^m, c. 13.
their own POLYDOR VIRGIL,) That this part of Devotion, is little different
from Impiety: For, there are many so exceeding rude and stupide, (says
he,) who worship images, made of stocks and stones, brass and marble. And,
these also, that are painted over with diverss sorts of colors, upon walls;
not as images, to represent; but as if they had sense and feeling; and confyde
more in these, than in CHRIST Him selff.

Yea; They so dote upon images, (says their famous GABRIELL BIELL,) In
canone^ Misso, lect. 49.
that they believe a certain Deity, grace, or holiness, to be in them:
Whereby they are able to work miracles, restore health, and delyver from
dangers, etc. And, if at any time miracles be wrought upon men, who have
recourss unto them, this is not by the virtue of the image, (says he;) but
sometimes by the operation of the Devil, to deceive such Idolatrous
Worshippers, GOD so permitting, and their infidelity, so deserving the same.

CHAP. IV.
Against any Free Will in man unto good by nature, that tends to Salvation.
WHerein thus says GREGORY; Iyse aspirando Greg. l. 1. in Ezekiel. hom. 9.
nos praevenit vt velimus, qui adjuvando subsequitur ne inaniter velimus; 1.
Cor. 15.
sed possimus implore quae volumus, -- quod been paulus brevi sententia
explicat dicens, plus illis omnibus laboravi, qui ne suae videretur virtuti
tribuisse quod fecerat adjunxit. Non autem ego, sed Gratia DEI mecum, quia eum
Coelesti done preventus est, quasi alie^^^m se a bono s^^o opere agnovit,
dicens: Non autem ego, sed quia pr^veniens gratia liborum in ^^ arbitrium
fecerat in bono, quod libero arbitrio ^andem gratiam est subsecutus in opere,
adjunxit; sed Gratiae DEI mecum, ac^ss diceret. In bono opere laboravi, non
ego, sed ego. In hoc enim quod solo DOMINI Dono praeventus sum, non ego. In eo
autem quod bonum voluntate subsecutus, and ego: That is; The LORD by His Grace,
wherewith He inspyreth, preveaneth us; that we may will, who by His Helping
Grace, follows us; That we will not in vayn, -- which the Apostle does well
by a short sentence explayn, saying; I have labored more than you all; Who
lest he should seem to have attribute to his own power, what he had done.
Therefore, he adjoyneth; But not I, but the Grace of GOD, which was with me.
For because He was preveaned by that Heavenly Gift of Grace, he did
acknowledge him selff, before that time as it were averss al-to-gether, from
that good work, saying; Yet not I. And again; Because preveaning Grace, had
made his will to be free unto good. And that by his will, so fred he followed
the same Grace, in working. Therefore, he subjoyned; But the Grace of GOD with
me: as if he had said; In this good work I have labored; and yet not I. For
in this that I am prevented by the only Gift of GODS Grace; It was not I, but
in that my will there-after followed GODS Grace, it was I.

CHAP. V.
Of Justification; and that we are not justified before GOD, by any inherent
righteousness in our selves: But by the Merit and Mediation of our SAVIOR
CHRIST allanerlie.
FOR us in this point also, clearly does GREGORY affirm, saying; Greg. l. 4.
in Ioh, cap. 14.
Ut enim saepe diximus, omnis humana justitia, injustitia esse convincitur, si
districte judicatur, prece igitur post justitiam indiget, vt quae succumbere
discussa poterat, ex sola judicis pietate convalescat. And again; Iustus igitur
advocatus noster, justos nos defendet in Greg. hom. 7. in Ezekiele^.
judicio, quia nosipsos and cognoscimus, and accusamus injustos; non ergo in
fletibus, non in actibus nostris; sed in advocati nostri advocatione
confidimus: That is; As I have often times said; All the righteousness of man,
will be found to be unrighteousness, if it be straytly judged. Therefore,
after our righteousness, is considered, we have need of Prayer; That, that
which other wise being examined, would succumb, by the only Mercy of the
judge, the same may be accepted, and stand. Thereefore, our Righteous
Advocate, will defend us, as Righteous in judgment: Because we both
acknowledge and accuse our selves, as unrighteous. It is not, therefore, in our
Tears, no^ in our works, that we must confyde* But only in the Intercession
of our Advocate CHRIST. Which made Bellarmin also thus to conclude: For the
uncertainty of our own righteousness, (says Bell. l. 5. de Iustif. c. 7.. sit
tertia.
he,) and the danger of vayn glory, it is most safe to put our whole
confidence in the only mercy and goodness of GOD.

CHAP. VI.
Of our Sanctification: And 1. That no man in this life, can perfectly obey and
keep GODS Law.
COncerning which point thus says GREGORY; Nullus homo sine peccato est,
nisi ille qui in Greg. l. 12 in Ioh, c. 5
hunc mundum non venit ex peccato: That is; There is no man without sin,
(which is the transgression of the law;) But He only who came not in this
world with sin. And again; Esse Greg. l. 8. in Ioh, cap. 23.
namque a culpa liberi nequaquam possumus, quousque in corpore mortis tenemur:
That is; For we can no wise be free from sin, so long as we are in this
body of death: Nec ipsi poterant esse sine peccato, qui adhaerebant coelesti
magisterio, Iohanne attestante, qui ait, si dixerimus quia peccatum non
habemus, nosmetipsos seducimus, and veritas in nobis non est. Greg. hom. 30. in
Evang. That is; Neither could they be without sin, who adhered to the
Heavenly Doctrine of CHRIST Him self: John bearing witness hereto; who says:
If we say, That we have not sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us.

Yea, more-over says he; Ipsa nostra perfectio culpa non caret, nisi hanc
severus judex in lance examinis misericorditer Greg. l. 5. in Job, cap. 8.
penset: That is; Even our greatest perfection in this life, wants not sin,
except the severe judge mercifully weigh the same in the Balance of his
Trial, or examination. And, there-after; Sanctus autem vir, (says he,) qui
omne nostrae virtutis meritum, vitium esse conspicit, Greg. l. 9. in Job, cap.
1.
si ab aeterno arbitro districte judicetur, recte subjungit, si voluerit cum eo
contendere, non potest responderi vnum pro mill: That is; The holy man Job,
beholding our most virtuous works, to be sinful, if the same be straytlie
judged, by the eternal judge, does rightly subjoyn, saying; If man would
contend with GOD, he could not answer him one of a thousand.

2. Against any works of Superogation.
BY the two last adduced testimonies, Gregory clearly overthrows the same:
For if a man's best actions be such, that except GOD in mercy look on them, he
can not answer for them; or expect Salvation to himselff: much less can he by
them superogate for others.

CHAP. VII.
Of Humane Satisfactions: And, That nothing we can either do or suffer in this
lyff, is satisfactorie to GODS justice: But medicinal only, for our selves.
FOR thus says Gregory to distinguish between Greg. in Evang. hom. 22.
CHRIST'S Suffering, which was only satisfactorie, and ours which are not so;
Ipse redemptoris nostri passio, long a nostra passione disjuncta est, quoniam
ipse sine culpa pertulit, quod nos cum cnlpa toleramus: That is; The suffering
of our Redeemer, is far different from our suffering: Because He suffered,
being without sin; whereas we suffer; because we are sinful. And, again;
Speaking of that holy revenge: whereof the Apostle makes mention, he says;
Tertia species, id est, vindicta, quasi medicina necessaria est, vt apostema
reatus, quod conversione compungitur, confitendo purgetur, afflictionisque
Greg. l. 6. in 1. Reg. cap. 15. c. 2.
medicina sanetur: That is; The third sort of penitential practice is, that
revenge, which is as it were a necessary medicine, that the boil or sore of
guiltiness, which is lanced by conversion: by confession may thereafter be
purged; and by the medicine of afflicting ones selff may be cured. Wherefore,
he concludes; Non ergo in fletibus, non in actibus nostris, sed in advocati
nostri allegatione Greg. in Ezekiel. hom. 7. in fine.
confidamus: That is; Let us not, therefore, confyde in our tears, nor in our
works; but only in the intercession and pleading of our Advocate.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Glorification: And 1. That our good works, merit not Eternal Lyff.
WHich thing Gregory in these ensewing Greg. in Psalm. 1. poenit. verbo
convertere.
words, clearly affirms, saying; Non de meis meritis confidens vt me salvum
facias supplico, sed de sola misericordia tua praesumens, impetrare quod non
meis possu^ meritis spero: That is; I supplicate not that thou would save
me, Trusting in my merits: But relying on Thine Only Mercy, I hope to
obtayn, that which I can never by any merits of mine.

And, thereafter, he says; Quod si Greg. in Psalm. 7. poenit. verbis, auditum
fac.
illa sanctorum folicitas misericordia est, and non meritis acquiritur, vbi
erit quod Scriptum est, and tu reddet vnicuique secundum opera sua? Si secundum
opera, quomodo misericordia aestimabitur? sed aliud est secundum opera reddere,
and aliud propter ipsa opera reddere. And, there-after; Constat igitur quia
quibus misericorditer tribuit vt in hac vita been operentur, eis misericordius
largitur vt in aeterna beatitudine centuplicato fructu remunerentur: That is;
But if that Felicity of the Sayncts, be mercy, and not obtained by merits;
where is that which is written, and thou will render to every one, according
unto his works? If, then, according to works, how shall it be esteemed
mercy? But, (says GREGORY,) it is one thing to render according to works,
and another thing to render for the merit of the works. It is manifest,
therefore, that to whom GOD Mercifully grants this in this lyff, to do good
works; that much more mercifully, He renumerateth them an hundredth fold, with
Eternal happiness. Which made BELLARMINE him selff, (as before,) thus to Bell.
l. 5. de justif. cap. 7.. sit tertia.
conclude: For the uncertainty of our own righteousness, (says he,) and the
danger of vayn glory, it is most safe to put our whole confidence in the only
mercy and goodness of GOD.

2. That the Godly receive this remuneration of Eternal Lyff, in Mercy,
immediately after death: Contrary to the doctrine of Purgatory.
WHerein thus says GREGORY: Ibi, (id est, in Coelo,) Greg. hom. 27. in Evang.
illa ergo retributio inchoatur, vbi ista, (id est, vita,) terminatur, quisquis
ergo aeterna cognovit, apud ejus animum jam temporales fructus vilescant. Tales
fructus operemur, qui cum mors cuncta interimit, ipsi a morte exordium sumunt.
Nam quod a morte incipiat Psalm. 126
fructus Dei, testatur Propheta, qui dicit, cum dederit dilectis suis somnum,
ecce hereditas DOMINI, quia Electi DEI postquam pervenerint ad mortem, tunc
inveniunt haereditatem: That is; There, (to wit, in Heaven,) that retribution
begins as soon as this lyff ends, who-so-ever then knows things
Eternal, let temporal things be vile in his eyes: And, let us bring forth
such fruit, that when Death comes who destroys all, these fruits may have
their beginning immediately after Death it selff: For that, even, then, they
have their beginning, the Prophet witnesses, who says; When he has given
to his beloved their sleep: Behold the inheritance of the LORD; because the
Elect of GOD when they are come unto Death, even then presently they find
their inheritance.

CHAP. IX.
That CHRIST'S bodily Presence is only in Heaven, against Transsubstantiation:
And that the substance of the Bread remains in the Sacrament, after
Consecration.
COncerning which point Greg Hom. 3 in Evang.
thus says GREGORY; Quando non maneret apud eos qui ascensurus erat coelum,
promitit dicens, Ecce ero vobiscum vsque ad consummationem soeculi; sed Vcrbum
incarnatum, and manet, and recedit, recedit corpore, manet divinitaete, apud
eos ergo tunc se mansisse perhibet, quia qui invisibili semper potestate
presens erat, corporali jam visione recedebat: That is; When He was not to
abide with them, who was to ascend to Heaven, He promised, saying; Behold, I
am with you unto the worlds end. But this incarnate Word, He both abides
with us, and is departed from us; He is departed in His Body, but He abides
in His Deity. He said, therefore, that He should abide with them; Because by
His invisible power, He was ever present, who in His corporal presence; was
to depart out of their sight. As also, That the Bread in the Sacrament of the
Supper, remains still in its former substance, after Consecration.

POPE GELASIUS clearly does testtifie, saying; Certe Sacramenta quae Contra
Eutychende duabus CHRISTI naturis.
sumimus Corporis and Sanguinis CHRISTI, divina res est, propter quod and
divinae per eundem efficimur consortes naturae; and tamen esse non desinit
substantia, vel natura Panis and Vini, etc. That is; Surely, the Sacrament of
CHRIST'S Body and Blood, which we take, is a Divine thing: Because we are
made partakers there-in, of the Divine Nature: And yet, not-with-standing, The
Substance or Nature of Bread and Wine, departs not, or leaves not off to
remayn.

CHAP. X.
Against withholding of the Cup from the People, or Half-Communion.
CONCERNING this, Greg. de consecratione, did. 2. c. 3.
thus says GREGORY; Quid sit Sanguis Agni, non jam audiendo; sed bibendo
didicistis.

And again; Ejus Sanguis non jam in manus fidelium, sed in ora fidelium
infunditur.

That is; What the Blood of the Lamb is, ye have learned now; not by hearing
thereof, but by Drinking the same: And this His Blood is not given into the
hands of the Faithful Communicants; but it is Powered in into their mouths.

Also, thus says POPE JULIUS; Ubi Apostolus corpus and sanguinem commendavit,
De consecrat. did. 2. c. 7.
seorsim Panis, and seorsim Calicis commendatio memoratur.

Last of all, says POPE GELASIUS; Comperimus quod quidam sumpta De consecrat.
did. 2. c. 12.
tantummodo corporis sacri portione, a Calice Sacri cruoris abstineant, qui
proculdubio, (quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur obstringi,) aut integra
Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, quia divisio vnius ejusdemque
mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non potest provenire. That is, says JULIUS;
Where the Apostle recommendeth the Body and Blood of CHRIST, to be taken; He
mentions the taking of the Bread apart by it selff; And the taking of the
Cup, in like manner, apart by it selff, (not having known then Popish
Concomitance.

Also, we find, (says GELASIUS, That there are some, who take only a part
of the Sacred Body of CHRIST* but abstayneth from the Cup of His Sacred Blood;
who truly, (because ^ know not by what superstition they are bound up, and
taught so.) Therefore they must either receive the whole Sacrament, or be
debarred from the whole* Because the division of one, and the same mystery, can
not be without the commtiting of a great Sacrilege.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the Controversies contained in this Treatise.
I. Of SCRIPTURE: Where-in
1. THat the Apocrypha books, are not Canonical Scripture. Page 29. and 75 2.
That People should not be debarred from reading the Scriptures. 30. and 77 3.
That the Authority of the Church, is not above the Scriptures. 31 4. That the
Scripture is perfect, without unwritten Traditions. 32. and 76
II. Of the CHURCH: Where-in
1. THat the Holy Catholic Church, is only of the Elect. Page 33. and 79 2.
That the Church of true Professors, is not ever and alyke conspicuous. 34. 3.
That True Doctrine is the Essential Note of the True Church. 35 4. That
Unity, except in Truth, is no Note thereof. Page 36 5. That Multitude, is no
Note thereof. 37 6. That the Church of Rome, may err. 38 7. That Separation
from Her, is no Schism. 39
III. Of the Head of the Church: Where-in
1. THat CHRIST is only the Head and Husband thereof. Page 40. and 81 2. That
the Pope, as Bishop of Rome, is not Peter's Successor. 41 3. That the Pope
ought to be subject to the Civil Magistrate. 43. and 88 4. That CHRIST only,
and not the Pope, is that Rock, whereon the Church is built. 78
IV. Of the Churches worship: Where-in
1. THat GOD only is to be invocated. Page 44 2. That CHRIST is our only
Mediator. 46 3. That all Images of the godhead, are idolatrous. 47 4. That no
Image is to be bowed unto, nor worshipped. 48. and 93 5. That the worship of
Dulia, or Service, is due to GOD only. 49
V. Of the Churches true doctrine: Where-in
1. OF Sin: That Concupiscence in the Godly is sin properly. Page 5^ 2.
That no Sin is Venial: But all Mortal. 5^ 3. That the Virgin Mary was not
conceave^ without Sin. 5^ 4. Of Election: That it is not for foreseen Faith,
or Works. 53 5. Of our Calling: That there are no Merits of Congruity. 53 6.
That in our first conversion, we have no Freewill. 54. and 95 7. Of
Justification: That it is by Faith only. 55 and 97 8. That Justifying Faith, is
not an uncertain conjecture. 56 9. Of the certaynty of Salvation, against
Popish doubting. 58 10. That no Implicit Faith says. 59 11. Of
Sanctification: That no man can perfectly keep GODS Law: Let be Supererogate
60. and 99 12. Of Glorification: That Good works, are not meritorious of
Eternal Lyff. 61. and 103 13. That there are no Satisfactory Penal Works in
this lyff. 62. and 101 14. Neither any Satisfactory Sufferings, after this
lyff. Page 36 15. Of Perseverance: That the Sayncts can not totally and finally
fall away. 64 16. Of Meats: That none are to be abstayned from, for conscience
sake. 65
VI. Of the Sacraments: Where-in
1. THat Sacraments confer not Grace, ex opere operato. Page 66 2. That
Baptism is not absolutely necessary to Salvation. 67 3. That in the LORDS
SUPPER, there is no Transsubstantiation. 69. and 106 4. That the Mass is no
Propitiatory Sacrifice. 71 5. That the Cup should not be withheld from the
people. 107
VII. Of PURGATORY.
THat there is no Fire of Purgatory, after this lyff. Page 72. and 105
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page lin. for read 11 1 it it it is 42 14 that can that he can 65 13 judge
him not judge him 80 19 within without 88 4 Pope has has not 100 responderi
respondere,


