A MITE Cast into the TREASURY Of the Famous City of London; BEING A Brief and
Methodical DISCOURSE of the Nature, Causes, Symptoms, Remedies and
Preservation from the PLAGUE, in this Calamitous Year, 1665.

Digested into Aphorisms, by THEOPHILUS GARENCIERES Doctor in Physic.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, 1665.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN LAWRENCE Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON: With the Right Worshipful the ALDERMEN his Brethren.
MY LORD,
It shall not be said of me, that I worship the Rising Sun, for this sheet of
Paper comes to kiss your hands upon your declination. And as for ye, Right
Worshipful, my respect has been always such to your Honorable Court in
general, and to all the Worthy Members of it in particular, that the truth is,
I would have done it sooner, but that I expected God Almighty would have been
pleased to remember his mercy, and to stay his avenging hand, and that people
would have been more careful of their own preservation; but seeing the
calamity to continue, and the infatuation of the Vulgar to be such still, as to
suffer themselves to be deluded by every frivolous praescriptions of Physic,
and persuasion of ignorant men, I have here undertaken to rectify their
understanding, and to shem them, there is means in Nature both for the Cure,
and praeservation from this Disease; and to this purpose I have forced my self
to appear upon the Stage, and to do that, which no body has yet attempted,
which is, to give some fea, short and perspicuous rules, whereby every one may
know how to cure himself, and his family with a small charge. My Lord, and
Right Worshipful, You shall find nothing but Truth in this Paper, neither
would I have been so impudent, as to praefixe so many Honorable Names to a
Thing that were illusory, and of this consequence: The only aim I have in it,
is the Public good, and that ye may know I am

Your most humble, and affectionate Servant, GARENCIERES.

A Mite cast into the Treasury of the famous City of LONDON, etc.
Aphorism I.
THE Plague is an acute, contagious, epidemical and poisonous Fever,
accompanied with either a Botch, a Carbuncle, or Red-spotts, like Flea-bites,
vulgarly called the Tokens.

II.
That it is Acute, is seen by the effects; for it kills within four or five
days, at the most; it is Contagious, because its poison is easily imparted, and
communicated from one to another; it is Epidemical, because it seazeth upon all
kind of people indifferently; it is Poisonous, because it slighteth all
remedies by which other diseases are cured, that proceed either from intempery
obstruction, or putrefaction.

III.
Thoughthe Plague comes unawares, and seaseth upon a man on a sudden, yet such
is the infinite mercy of God, and the providence of Nature, that it gives
always warning enough to any one that will be curious to observe it.

IV.
The warnings are either a sudden Headache, or a Vomiting, or a Faintness,
with a chillness, or a looseness.

V.
Each of these Symptoms shows, what part of the body has been first
infected; the Headache indicates the Brains; the Vomiting the Liver, because
of its proximity to the Stomach; the Faintness, the Heart; and the Looseness,
the Stomach and the Gutts.

VI.
When therefore any one upon a sudden, and without evident cause, finds
himself seized with either of these four Symptoms, let him conclude he is in
infected, and fly to remedies without the loss of a moment of time, Nesero
sapiant Phryges.

VII.
The Plague is one of the easiest diseases in the world to be cured, if it be
taken within four hours after the first invasion, otherwise, and for the most
part mortal. This is the chief, and principal cause of so many men's loss. If
people would observe this rule, I would undertake by the grace of the Almighty,
and without bragging (I believe most men that know me, will believe me) to cure
nineteen of twenty; and therefore I say, that people perish not so much by the
difficulty of the cure, as because God Almighty has taken away their judgment,
that they should not see, nor believe the means he has appointed for them:
Quos perdere vult Jupiter, prius dementat.

VIII.
The causes why so few escape are these. The scarcity of able Physicians
willing to attend that disease, the Inefficacy of common remedies, the want of
accommodation, as clothes, fire, room, diet, attendants, the wilfulness of
the patient, his poverty, his neglecting the first invasion, and trifling away
the time till it be too late; A vapouring Chemist with his drops, an ignorant
Apothecary with his blistering plasters, a wilful Surgeon, an impudent
Mountebanke, an intruding Gossip, and a careless Nurse.

IX.
Is it not a strange infatuation for people so to flight their lives, as to
cast them credulously upon the trial of a drop of I know not what; of a water
of I know not whom, and to neglect those remedies, which for the space of 1600
or 1700 years, have been found grounded upon reason, authorized by the best
Physicians in all ages, and approved certain by a constant experience?

X.
Let every one beware of those that set up bills for the curing of this and
other diseases; Good wine needs no bush; the wonders they promise, lay an
ambush to your purses, and their care of your health, is less then that of
your wealth.

XI.
Let no body think that the causes of the Plague proceed from any Intempery in
the elementary qualities of humane bodies, or from any ordinary putrefaction:
It is either the immediate will of God, who sends us that scourge for the
punishment of our sins, as appears in the holy Scripture, by the Egyptians
and the Jews; or from a peculiar and mediate disposition, and configuration of
the Stars and Planets.

XII.
He that shall consider that the seasons of the year are not always equal, but
some summers are cool, others hot, others moist, and so of the rest of the
seasons; That some years bring forth one kind of vermin, others another; Some
a peculiar murrain to horses, others to sheep, which will not hurt mankind;
will not deny but that also some diseases may happen to mankind, which will not
be hurtful to beasts; and that some position of Planets and Stars, may bring
Wars, others inundations, others pestilences, etc. which changes are most
commonly preceded and forewarned by some extraordinary Meteor, as this sad
Plague has been by the last unhappy Comet.

XIII.
If the Stars and Planets being in a benign position do cheer up and
preserve the life of all things, why then being in a malignant aspect, shall
they not produce and send forth things that are enemies to our life's? Therefore
let it be concluded, that from whence comes first the safety and preservation
of all things, from thence also proceeds their death and destruction.

XIV.
As there is a peculiar disposition in the heavens, which causes, and sends
forth the seeds of Pestilence; so there must also be a special preparation in
Countries, and bodies to receive it. Hence it is that some are more apt to
receive the infection then others. The causes of both these dispositions, are
above the knowledge of humane understanding.

XV.
This malignant and occult quality of the Plague, lies chiefly in the spirits,
or spiritual parts of the blood; hence it is that the patients are neither
thirsty, nor their urine altered, unless there be some other distempers joined
with it.

XVI.
In a pestilential constitution of the air, there is scarce any other disease
reigns, but the Plague, or some few others that will turn into it, by reason
of the contagion and infection: therefore most part of the diseases mentioned
in the bills of Mortality, as Fevers either simple or spotted, griping of the
Gutts, Surfeits, Toothaches, and Worms in Children, Looseness, bloody Fluxes,
etc. let them be accounted pestilential, and so be proceeded against
accordingly.

XVII.
This pestilential Fever being of different nature from all others, and
killing only by its malignity, and poisonous quality, and not by any
preternatural heat, or Intempery; requires also a peculiar way of cure, which
is by cordials, sudorifick Antidotes, all other evacuations, as purging,
bleeding, vomiting, clystering, etc. either procured by art, or accidentally
happening being mortal. The reason of it is, that the intention of Nature for
the cure of this disease (as of all others, which proceed from poisonous
qualities) is to thrust, and expel the disease from the center to the
circumference, and so to preserve the heart, which is the fountain of life.
What can therefore a Physician (who is but a minister, and servant of Nature)
answer for himself, if while she is busied about her work, he goes by his
revulsions of purging, bleeding, clystering, etc. to disturb her, and take her
away from her intention, and so to compel her in a manner, to bring the
disease back again from the circumference to the center? Does not even common
experience teach us, that if you broach a barrel of Beer whilst it is working,
you destroy the intention of Nature, and the Beer will never be good for any
thing? What I say of the Plague, let it be said also of the small pox.

XVIII.
Therefore as soon as any one finds himself stricken with any one of the
foresaid symptoms, viz. a Head-ake, Vomiting, Faintness, or looseness, (now
that the times are contagious) let him presently repair to a clean and warm
room, and let a light fire of wood be kindled in the chimney, to consume and
destroy all the infectious vapors, that proceed both from the air, and the
infected party. Let the patient be presently put into a warm bed, himself
wrapped in a sheet and blanket, having first put off his shirt; that when he
comes to be dried, you may not be put to the trouble of pulling of his we t
shirt, then give him one dragme of our Antidote dissolved in four ounces of
Carduus posset, and covering him with clothes very warm all over, leaving only
his respiration free, and putting a warm brick to the soles of his feet, and
another to his knees, let him sweat as long as he is able, or at least for the
space of three or four hours, and be not afraid he should faint, if he has
breath enough.

XIX.
If it should happen, as it does commonly to those that are first taken by a
vomiting, that the patient should cast up the Antidote, you must give him
another dose, and if he should cast this also, give him a third, and so
continue still, till he keeps it once; for he will never cast it up
afterward, and though he should, yet by having taken it so often, some of the
qualities of it will remain behind, that will work their effect.

XX.
Children, that cannot, or will not take the remedy, must be compelled to it by
pouring it into their throat, with an instrument called by the Greeks (...),
which is a kind of a spoon with a cover having a spout to put into the mouth,
and power it down.

XXI.
The patient having sweated three or four hours, (the more the better) you must
give him a little more breath, and begin to take off the clothes by degrees,
and when you have dried him very well with warm cloths (which all this while
must hang by the fire with his shirt) then pull away the wet sheet and blanket
from under him, then give him his shirt, and after that dry his head, and take
heed by all means, that any cold air should come into the room. After you have
dried his head sufficiently, and that the party begins to cool, give him to
drink leasurely two ounces of our Cordial water, which is of an admirable
virtue in this case, and also in all faintnesses, surfettings and poisons. This
will refresh him so speedily and wonderfully, that he will presently forget the
tiresomnesse of his sweating.

XXII.
When he is quite cold, give him to eat any thing he has a mind too, so that
it be of good juice, and easy digestion. Let his drink be strong Beer
lukewarm, or some generous Claret Wine; for as we have said before, this Fever
differs from all others, and whereas in others we substract meat, and strong
drink as much as we can, we must in this allow them, it being only a malignant
quality, in which good meat and drink cannot hurt, but rather allay it; as also
because the patient would not be able to sweat twice a day in this manner
(which of necessiry he must do if he will save his life) unless his strength
be repaired with good nutriment.

XXIII.
This course of sweating twice a day, must be continued for four days together,
or five at the most, in which space of times all the pestilential poison will
expire, and if this be carefully done, and attended, there is no Plague so
stubborn of any kind whatsoever, but must yield.

XXIV.
Seeing therefore that this way of cure is so easy, so cheap, and so quick: I
cannot but wonder at the impudence of many, qui impune ladentes de corio
humano, promise the cure with a few Chemical drops, Mineral Bezoart, and such
like trumperies, and at the credulity of those that believe them.

XXV.
But because in reprehending others we our selves should not be found faulty,
and thought in this public calamity to seek our own interrest, by concealing
what our Antidote is, we do ingeniously and publicly declare, that it is
nothing but the Treacle of Andromachus, vulgarly called Venice Treacle, so much
celebrated by Galen, and so much authorized by the constant experience of all
subsequent ages, to which we have added a little of the tincture of Saffron,
for their sakes chiefly that have contracted the Plague by a fright, and whom
we have always found the hardest to be cured, because of the sudden and deep
impression it makes upon the vitals. Saffron being one of the most noble
Cordials, and of the most quick and sudden dilatation.

XXVI.
This noble remedy, called Venice-Treacle, being taken in time, is the only
Antidote against all Plagues, Poisons, bitings, and stingings of venomous
Beasts, a present help to the Falling Sickness, and Apoplectical fits, to the
Palsy, Tissick, spitting of Blood, Jaundies, Dropsy, Colic, and all kind of
Melancholy, the Gout, Madness, etc. It procures the natural courses in Women,
opens obstructions, expels dead children out of the Womb, strengthens the
Brains, the Liver, the Stomach, the Heart, and (in a word) the whole body, and
preserves it from all contagion and putrefaction.

XXVII.
Our Cordial and miraculous water is thus made. Take of Venice-Treacle one
pound, of the roots of Cypress, Tormentill, Enula Campana, Dictamnum, of each
one ounce, Angelica, and Carduus-Benedictus, leaves of each one handful, of
the four Cordial-Flowers, of each a quarter of an ounce, of Saffron a quarter
of an ounce, cut the roots and leaves small, and dissolve your Treacle in a
pint of Rose Water, then add to all that four quarts and a pint of the best and
strongest Claret Wine you can get. steepall in a vessel close stopped a whole
night, in the morning still it in Balneo, and draw two quarts of the first
water and keep it for your use; you may draw the rest of the liquour too if you
will, but keep it by it self, and sweeten the first pottle of water with half a
pound of loaf Sugar, and keep it in a glass well stopped for your use.

XXVIII.
Whereas we have said before that the pestilential Fever was always, or most
commonly accompanied with either of these three Symptoms, to wit, a Botch, a
Carbuncle, or the Tokens: We say now, that for the Tokens, they require no
particular cure, but only the general one of sweating; but the other two must
have a peculiar one for themselves, besides that of sweating; and therefore
first concerning the Botch.

XXIX.
A pestilent Botch, is a swelling or tumor growing most commonly in the
Emunctories of the body, as behind the ears, in the armpits, but most
frequently in the groin. Its figure in the beginning is oblong, with (as it
were) a string or a sinew along in the middle of it, but by degrees it grows
round, and of the breadth of some times 2. or 3. or 4. fingers. The cure of it
is first with a Cupping-glass to draw it forth as much as you can, and then
bring it to maturitie and suppuration, with either a drawing pultis or plaster.

XXX.
The pultis is thus made. Take of roots of Cumfrey and Lilies, and of Onions,
of each one ounce, of the leaves of sorrel one handful, fry them tender with
sweet butter, then stamp them altogether, and add some oil of Lilies, Hoggs
grease, Mithridate, and Yest, and make a pultis to be applied warm upon the
Botch, and to be renewed once every twelve hours. It will speedily draw forth,
maturate, and break the Botch. As for a plaster, you shall find none better
then that which is made of equal portions, of Pitch, Galbanum, and Diachylon
cum gummi, melted together upon a soft fire. The Botch being broken, the common
ointment called Basilicon will suffice for the cure and cicatrization of it,
dressing it twice a day, till it be quite whole.

XXXI.
A pestilential Carbuncle appears at first like a tumor or pustule, as if
the flesh had been burnt in that place, and is at first about the bigness of a
pins head, or a little pease, but sometimes grows to a fearful bigness; it
is of a round and sharp-pointed figure, and sticks so fast to the part, where
it grows, that the skin cannot be loosened from the flesh. There is a great
heat, burning and pain, as if the part was pricked with needles, with an
unsufferable itching. When the tumor grows bigger, there appears in the
middle of it a pustule, like those that appear where the flesh has been burnt;
Any body would think there is some matter in it, but when it is open no matter
comes out, but the flesh under looks black and crustie, as if it had been
burnt with a hot Iron. Round about it the flesh is of several colors, as the
rainbow, red, purple, black, and always shining as pitch or seacoles In every
Carbuncle there is a feeling as it were, of a great weight, as if the part was
crushed with a heavy lump of lead, and tied too hard with a string. Those that
go back again into the body after they have appeared, or being brought to
suppuration do grow dry on a sudden, are mortal. These Carbuncles proceed from
an adust* choleric and melancholic blood, and are more frequent in hot
Countries, as the botches are in the cold ones.

XXXII.
The cure of a Carbuncle is to bring it to a softness and suppur^tion:
therefore first take Mallows and Violet leafs, the roots of Lilies, Linseed in
powder, Figgs sliced, Plantain, Hemlock and Housleeke, boil all in a sufficient
quantity of running water, and make a fomentation to be used four or five times
a day, and after the fomentation apply this pultis lukewarm; Take of Mallows
and Violet leafs, Sorrel, Housleeke, of each two handfulls, fry them in sweet
butter, and stamp them afterward with the yolks of Five Eggs and and four
ounces of honey of Roses and make a pultis to be renewed every 12. hours.
Pultises in this case are always to be preferred before plasters; because
plasters stop the pores of the body, and hinder the expiration of the
pestilential venom.

XXXIII.
Let it be observed for a most material thing, that the pulse in the Plague is
always Quick, Small, Obscure and Intermittent.

XXXIV.
Having now in a few lines expressed the nature and cure of the Plague, and its
symptoms, it remains also we should give some praeservative against it.
Therefore take of Sage, Rue, Angelica, and Carduus Benedictus, of each one good
handful, stamp all, and boil them gently in a close pipkin with three quarts
of very good Claret, till it comes to two, adding to it three penny weight of
long pepper, three quarters of an ounce of ginger, half an ounce of nutmeggs
beaten in powder; when the liquour is boiled, strain it, and dissolve in it
half an ounce of Mithridate, and as much of Venice treacle, and one dragme of
good Saffron, and keep it all in a close Glass for your use. The dose is two
spoonfulls in a morning, fasting one hour after, and then go to breakfast,
which is never to be omitted in infectious times.

XXXV.
The short compass of two Sheets of Paper admitting no more, I shall conclude,
assuring all the Readers, that I have said nothing here, but what is most true,
and I am able to justify by Reason and Experience, as those will find, who
shall be pleased to employ me.

From my House in Clerkenwell Close, near the Church, the 14. day of September.
1665. GAKENCIERES.

FINIS.

