er Dkrua.

Ecclesiae Anglicanae Suspiria.

THE TEARS, SIGHS, COMPLAINTS, AND PRAYERS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND: Setting
forth Her former Constitution, compared with Her present Condition; ALSO The
visible Causes, and probable Cures, of Her Distempers.

In IV. BOOKS.

By JOHN GAUDEN, D.D. of Bocking in Essex.

Jer. 8.28. Is there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? Why then
is not the health of the Daughter of my people recovered?

DEPRESSA RESVRGO
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1659.

ECCLESIA ANGLICANA
PROTEGE

PASCE

DUX MEA IN TENEBRAS ET GAUDIUM IN MEROREM VT PELLICANA IN DESERTO
Proprio vos sanguine pasco



Nunquam CHRISTO Charior quam sub Cruce gemens



Illustrissimis ANGLICANAE GENTIS Nobilibus, Omniumque Ordinum Generosis and
ingenuis, Qui Natales Eruditione, Eruditionem Virtute, Virtutem Fide, Fidem
Moribus Vere Christianis (Sanctitate Suavitateque conspicuis) Vel exaequarunt
vel exuperarunt, (...) omnibus, Religionis Christianae, Tam a Romanistarum
Faece and Scabie Quam Fanaticorum Spuma and Rabie Reformatae, Professoribus,
(Hoc est, verbo vitaque vindicibus) Haec ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE, MATRIS, Olim
Florentissimae, nunc Afflictissimae, (Lugentis, Languentis, Suspirantis, Et
tantum non Expirantis) Lacrymas, Suspiria, Planctus, Preces, Summa cum
Reverentia, Debitaque Observantia, Pro Charitate and Sympathia Qua decuit
Humillimum in Christo Servum, D. D. D.

J. G.

THE CONTENTS.
The Preface or Address. p. 1
BOOK I. Setting forth the present Distresses of the Church of England.
CHAP. I. THE Name and Thing: the Title and Truth of the Church of England
asserted. p. 23 II. Primitive Piety and Prudence utterly against Schismatic
dividing or mincing of Churches into small bodies or parcels. p. 35 III. The
present afflictions of the Church of England no argument against Her National
and well-Reformed Constitution. p. 46 IV. The Church of England's Complaint. p.
51 V. The cruel and unjust enmity of some against the Church of England. p. 60
VI. The causeless malice and ingratitude of the Church of England's enemies. p.
64 VII. Of the excellent Constitution of the Church of England, and her
undeserved calamities. p. 68 VIII. A furt^^^^ scrutiny and discovery of the
Church of England's miseries and enemies. p. 73 CHAP. IX. A general Vindication
of the Church of England's former excellent Constitution, although it be now
afflicted. p. 76 X. Mr. Hooker's Defense of the Church of England unanswered,
and unanswerable. p. 83 XI. The excellent Constitution of the Church of
England, as to its Doctrinals. p. 86 XII. The Devotionals of the Church of
England asserted. p. 87 XIII. The Ceremonies of the Church of England no
meritorious cause of Her miseries. p. 96 XIV. A second Objection against the
Church of England from Church-mens personal failings. p. 114
Book II. Searching the Causes and Occasions of the Church of England's Decays.
CHAP. I. HOW far they conveniently may not, and how far they may be
searched into. p. 137 II. Inordinate Liberty in religious affairs the chief
cause of miseries in the Church of England. p. 139 CHAP. III. What Christian
liberty is desirable and tolerable among people. p. 143 IV. Of Plebeian
rudeness and licentiousness in Religion, if left to themselves. p. 150 V.
Instances of abused Liberty in the vulgar neglect of reading the Scriptures. p.
153 VI. Vulgar neglect and scorn of Ancient Forms of wholesome words, in the
Decalogue, Creed, and Lords-Prayer. p. 156 VII. The Innovations, Usurpations
and Vastations made by some upon the Order, Office and Authority of the
Evangelical Ministry. p. 159 VIII. The pretensions of Intruders to excuse their
wants. p. 167 IX. Of Ministerial sufficiencies, real or pretended. p. 171 X.
What caution Christians ought to use, as to those Ministers with whom they
entrust the care of their souls. p. 175 XI. Of late new models for making
Ministers of the Gospel. p. 181 XII. The false and foolish pretensions urged
against the Ministry of England. p. 188 XIII. An impartial balancing of the old
and new Ministers. p. 190 XIV. A charitable plea for the ancient Clergy of the
Church of England, against the ingratitude and indifferency of some men. p. 193
CHAP. XV. The best of the new Teachers compared with the Ministers of England.
p. 195 XVI. A farther sifting of these new Teachers. p. 197 XVII. The modesty,
gravity, sanctity and solidity of true Ministers, etc. p. 200 XVIII. The
designs and ends of fanatic Libertines fatal to the Reformed Religion. p. 202
XIX. An humble and earnest expostulation in the behalf of the people and Church
of England. p. 204 XX. The rudeness and irreverence expressed by some in
religious duties, as a part of their Liberty. p. 211 XXI. The sad exchange
people make of their old Religion for new Raptures. p. 212 XXII. The foul
mistakes and abuses of Christian liberty in vulgar spirits. p. 214 XXIII. A
further discovery of mischiefs from abused liberty in Religion. p. 217 XXIV.
The contagion of abused or mistaken Liberty spread among Ministers, to the
dividing, debasing and destroying of them. p. 221 XXV. Unavoidable contentions
among Ministers of different ordinations. p. 224 XXVI. The folly and factions
of Ministers evidently seen and punished in their common calamities. p. 233
CHAP. XXVII. The great diminutions of all sorts of Ministers in England as to
all civil respects. p. 235 XXVIII. The sordid envy and grudging against
Ministers Tithes and Glebes. p. 240 XXIX. Ministers condition not to be envied,
but pitied. p. 243 XXX. Experimental instances how petulant some people are to
their Ministers. p. 245 XXXI. The personal sufferings of Ministers, after all
their pains, merits and troubles. p. 248 XXXII. Discouragements to ingenuous
men to be made Ministers in England in aftertimes. p. 254 XXXIII. A worthy
Ministry not expectable, unless there be a worthy usage and entertainment. p.
257
BOOK III. Setting forth the Evil Consequences felt or feared from the
Distractions of Religion in England.
CHAP. I. DEcays in Godliness as to the former generation of Christians. p. 261
II. ^ Decays of godliness as to the new brood and later offspring of meaner
Christians. p. 267 III. The evil consequences infesting Christians of better
quality. p. 270 CHAP. IV. Profaneness the fruit of unsetledness in Religion.
p. 273 V. Ministers molested by endless and vexatious disputes. p. 275 VI. The
endless bickerings with Anabaptists, etc. now in England. p. 278 VII. The
perverse disputings of Anabaptists aganst Infant Baptism. p. 281 VIII. The
weakness of Anabaptists grounds against Infant Baptism. p. 283 IX. The
Catholic strength for Infant Baptism. p. 286 X. Of right reasoning from
Scripture. p. 289 XI. Of the Churches Catholic custom and testimony. p. 291
XII. The sin of presumptuous delaying and denying baptism to Infants. p. 295
XIII. The dangerous effects and principles of Anabaptism. p. 297 XIV. The
Romish advantages by the divisions and deformities of the Church of England. p.
300 XV. The wide and just distances between the Reformed and Romanists. p. 305
XVI. Irreconcilable differences between Reformed Truths and Romish Errors,
which are manifest and obstinate. p. 308 CHAP. XVII. Necessary separation and
distance from Rome, without uncharitableness. p. 313 XVIII. Two grand
Obstructions of all Christian accommodation in these Western Churches. p. 317
XIX. The equity and charity of severe and sacrilegious Reformings. p. 322 XX.
The excuses and pleas for sacrilegious excesses answered. p. 325 XXI. Sacrilege
a great pest to Religion, and stop to Reformation. p. 327 XXII. The
insatiableness of sacrilegious spirits unrepressed. p. 335 XXIII. Pleas for
sacrilege answered. p. 338 XXIV. The Romanists discouragements as to the
Reformed Religion by Sacrilege. p. 343 XXV. A plea for Paul's, and other
Churches in England. p. 348 XXVI. Of pious munificence becoming Christians. p.
353 XXVII. The main hindrances and unlikelihood of a conjunction between
Protestants and Romanists. p. 355 XXVIII. Roman interests advanced by the petty
factions of super-Reformers of Religion. p. 362 XXIX. The danger of divided
parties in Religion as to the civil interests of England. p. 370
BOOK IV. Setting forth the Sighs and Prayers of the Church of England in order
to its Healing and Recovery.
CHAP. I. THE design and method of this fourth Book. p. 389 II. The difficulty
of repairing a decayed Church. p. 393 III. Grand motives to a public
restitution and fixation of the Reformed Religion. p. 400 IV. Sense of true
Honor calls for the establishment of Religion. p. 411 V. The hopeful
possibility of restoring true Religion to unity and setledness in England. p.
422 VI. Of means to recompose the differences of Religion in England. p. 427
VII. Of the late Associations projected by some Ministers. p. 436 VIII. Of
civil Assistance from Laymen to restore this Church and Religion. p. 442 IX. A
scrutiny of what is good or bad in all parties. p. 447 X. The reconciling of
the real interests of Episcopacy, Presbytery and Independency. p. 452 XI. True
Episcopacy stated and represented to its Antagonists. p. 458 CHAP. XII.
Objections against Episcopacy discussed. p. 468 XIII. Earnestly exhorting
Ministers of all sides to an happy composure and union. p. 479. XIV. Humbly
exhorting Magistrates to assist in so good a work. p. 485 XV. Councils or
Synods the proper means to restore lapsed Religion. p. 492 XVI. The method of
restoring a settled Church and united Ministry. p. 502 XVII. Of the well-being
of the Clergy or Ministry. 1. In point of maintenance and support. p. 518
XVIII. Of meet order, Government and subordination among the Clergy. p. 527
XIX. Several Pleas in behalf of Episcopacy. p. 539 A first Plea, from the
Catholic Antiquity of Episcopacy. p. 540 XX. A second Plea for Episcopacy,
from its Evangelical temper as to civil subjection. p. 556 CHAP. XXI. A third,
Episcopacy most suitable to the genius and temper of the English. p. 581 XXII.
A fourth plea for Episcopacy, from their true piety and orderly policy. p. 600
XXIII. A Review of our late English Bishops. p. 616 XXIV. Bishop Usher, Primate
of Armagh, an unanswerable vindication of Prelacy, not Popish, but pious. p.
639 XXV. Commending this Church of England, with the Reformed Religion, to the
piety and wisdom of all persons of honor and honesty. p. 651 XXVI. A further
Caution against Sacrilege, upon the occasion of D. B his case lately published
about purchasing of Bishops lands. p. 665 XXVII. Further commending the unity,
honor and support of the Religion and Ministry of this Church. p. 685
The Catalogue of the Bishops in England and Wales. 693 The Emblem of the
Trees explained: in which is briefly set forth the History and Chronology of
Episcopacy, Presbytery, and Independency, as pretenders to Church Government;
their first planting, growing and spreading in the Christian world. p. 22.
Revel. 3.2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things that remain, which are
ready to die.
Lam. 1.22. My sighs are many, and my heart is faint.
Synes. (...).
Ferreus est, non fidelis, non Christianus, sed crudelis, quem MATRIS Lacrymae
non molliunt, Suspiria non movent, Planctus non mordent, Preces non vincunt,
Vulnera non cruciant.

J. G.

Ecclesiae Anglicanae Suspiria: THE SIGHS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, Humbly
presented to my Honored and Beloved Countrymen: Persons of true Honor, Piety,
and Prudence; Who have a just Gratitude, Love and Pity for HER.
I Am not so ignorant of YOU (Honored and worthy Gentlemen) or of my Self,
The Preface or Address.
as to think, That you need be put in mind by Me, (or any private Monitor) of
that Justice, Moderation, and Prudence, which you owe to your Country; in
reference to those Civil Interests of Peace, Plenty, Safety, Honor, Liberty,
Settlement, and the like: Which, I know, do usually fall under the first cares
and counsels of men; ( Momentary concernments giving us poor Mortals quicker
summons and resentments, than those that are eternal: These being the objects
of our Faith afar off; Those of our senses nearer hand:) For the just
establishing and prudent managing of which, if Gods Providence either has, or
ever shall, give YOU any opportunity, worthy of YOUR abilities and integrity, I
have no more to do or say (as to any of these secular accounts) save only to
crave, in all humility, of the Supreme Wisdom, and Mighty Counselor, Isa.
58.12.
That he would make you Repairers of those Breaches, relievers of those
burdens, and dispellers of those fears, which we owe, not so much to the
impotence, or violence of other men's passions, as, each of us, to our own sins
and personal impieties: Those importune soliciters of Gods Judgments; which by
a strange vicissitude, and unexpected retaliation of vengeance, do testify to
our faces, against the crying iniquities of all estates in these British
Nations: Which have provoked the just Judge of Heaven and Earth, to punish some
of us, by sore adversities; Tunc severissime punit Deus, quum poenalis nutritur
impunitas. Aug. Hos. 4.17. Isa. 1.5.
others by severe impunities; justly letting us alone, and smiting us no more:
Our Sins then becoming Gods greatest grievances, when they are less ours (as
to Contrition, Confession and Reformation) than they should be; And possibly
would be, if we felt their burdens in our afflictions. Hence they also grow at
last our greatest penalties and infelicities; even then, when Prosperity
betrays us most to Impenitency; setting us farthest from Amendment and
Remorse; our earthy hearts (usually) most hardening, when we enjoy the warmest
beams of that Sun, which Providence makes to shine upon good and bad, Mat. 5.45.
the just and unjust.

As for those pecuniary and politic pressures, which most men fancy to be
their greatest grievances, (having a quicker sense of what pincheth their
purses, than what wounds or pierces their consciences) I have learned after
twice seven years experience, to be a Christian Stoic; Not utterly stupid,
and improvident; but yet, not so impertinent, as to complain of any common
charge, or burden; which seems necessary to the present Polity, under which I
may have leave to live a godly and peaceable life; 1 Timothy 2.2.
much less, so discontent, as not to be thankful to God and man, for any
moderate blessings I enjoy; The least of which, Genesis 32.10.
I may say with Jacob, is beyond my greatest deserts. I am of opinion, That, No
price is too dear to purchase civil peace, except only that, which pawns, or
sels the peace of a good conscience for it; That the Liberty, Vide Tert. Apol.
cap. 30, 31, 32. and 39.
and security of a private Christian, under any Government and Governors, to
whom God has subjected him, is, First to pray, 1 Timothy 2.3. Next to pay, Romans
13.6.

I am no stranger to the domestic defeats of humane policies, pretensions,
protestations, presumptions, which have by their frustrations not only
confuted the light and vulgar confidences of some men and their parties; But
they have even non-plussed and confounded the most pregnant hopes, and assured
expectations of many, both too credulous, and too presumptuous Christians: Who,
looking too much upon the (supposed) meritorious virtues of some men, and the
enormous vices (as they thought) of others, have allowed less freedom to the
wonderful operations of God, Romans 11.33, 34.
and the intricacies of Divine Providence, than is fit to attend the Abyss of
Sovereign power, and the Majesty of Infinite Wisdom. In which only, a wise
man, and good Christian, (who lives by Faith, not Sense) may safely rest, Hab.
2.4.
and glory, even then, when he is most posed, Jer. 9.23.
and least understands the riddles of Gods ways, or the depths of his
unsearchable judgments; whose, fathomings and unfoldings are reserved to make
up the eternal admirations and beatitudes of patient and humble Christians in
another world.

I know we live in a querulous Age; where few men are so modest, as not to
think, they deserve larger enjoyments and better preferments than they enjoy;
Or so content, as not to think, they suffer more pressures than they have
deserved. You might (no doubt) have many importune monitors, and would have
infinite earnest Suppliants (if YOU were in place, and Petitions were in
fashion) from every County and Corporation in ENGLAND; Where the mere
vulgarity (like Swine) are prone to cry out more, for a little bite by the
ear, than for all the sordidnesse of sin, and irreligious faedities, into
which they shamefully fall; and in which they securely wallow, if left to
themselves, by the cruel indulgence of their betters and superiors: The
outcries and complaints of the Commonalty, in civil regards, if you should
every way effectually satisfy; (which is no easy matter; It being as equally
hard to please, as it is base, to flatter, the Populacie) And yet should leave
the concernments of their souls, as to the true Christian and Reformed
profession of Religion, to that loose, licentious, and languishing posture,
whereto some men's distempers and indifferencies already have, and farther seek
to reduce this Nation, as to any settled doctrine, uniform profession; Catholic
order, and National combination, best becoming this, as all such famous and
ample Churches of Christ; Certainly Your secular agitations, complyances and
successes would as little commend your fidelity, and discretion, much less
your Christian zeal and charity, as those cures would do the skill of any
Physicians, who should take care to mend the clothes, or heal the scratches of
their raving and distracted Patients; without any regard to their fevers and
frenzies, which are their greatest maladies, and (uncured) will be their
greatest miseries.

I presume you well understand, That true Religion is the chiefest ingredient,
not only to make up men's spiritual and eternal peace; but even their civil
and temporal tranquillity: (...) Is. Pela. eth. l. 3. ep. 249. Jer. 6.14. Job
13.4.
That no men can be good Patriots, who are not good Christians; That men heal
but slightly (as Physicians of no value) the hurts of the daughters of their
people, if they do not apply seasonable and sovereign medicines to those
((...), and (...)) pestilent distempers, which disaffect the heads and hearts
of men in matters of Religion; whose Body is Truth, whose Soul is Love; Its
Beauty is Good Order; Its Health is Peace with God and good men. The
indication, crisis or judgment of its maladies are to be made, not only by
that total defect, or absumption of Religion, which is naturally incident to
the profaner sort of men: but many times it has dangerous symptoms and
effects arising from Pleurisies of piety; from Surfets of Sanctity; from the
too hot Livers, and over-boylings of Religion; even in those, that are (as
Solomon calls them) righteous overmuch; Eccles. 7.16.
of too high and plethorick constitutions in Piety: For (as a wise and witty
man once said) The heads, even of Gods children, are as prone to breed nits and
lice, as other men's. Infinite odd opinions, like the itch, and scabs, or boils
of Egypt, arise from the rankness and luxuriancie of some men's crude and
indigested godliness. The best and most generous Vines, even of Gods own
planting, Isa. 1.5.
will soon run out by their luxuriancie, not only to sowrenesse, but even to
barrenness, as to good grapes, unless they be carefully pruned, and orderly
bound up, by those holy severities of Christian discipline, order, government
and communion, which are necessary to every Church, especially those that are
grown to so large a size, to so numerous an extent as that of England.

Christian Counselors and Statesmen (such as YOU either are, or may be) will
then prosper most in their politic counsels and designs, when they suffer not
Policy to overlay Piety; when secular projects are neither the sole, nor
principal objects of their endeavors: But primarily, and impartially seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness; Mat. 6.33.
Not putting that in the rear (to be brought up in the fag end of a Civil war,
when both Church and State are sore and circumcised) which should have been in
the Van, or front of all Parlamentary counsels and proceedings: Nor setting
men's heels above their heads; Or (which is more deformed) preferring their
Bodies and Estates before their Souls and Consciences.

Which preposterous methods do often make, not only Parlaments of State, but
even Church-Councils, and Assemblies (as Greg: Nazianzen complains) to become
Nehustan, Jer. 22.28.
broken idols, and despised vessels; while Christian men act more like cunning
and pragmatick Politicians, than charitable and sober Christians; Passionately
intending humane designs; and Divine only with partialities, and factious
byassings. In such cases, who can wonder, if their results and conclusions be
as wretched and ridiculous, as their premises are unworthy of wise men, and
ingenuous Christians? Who should never so remember they are Men, as to forget
they are Christians; Related in Sacred and Religious, as well as Civil and
Natural bands; not only to one another, as Men, as Brethren; but also to one
God, their Father; one Savior, their Elder Brother; one holy Church, both as
Catholic and National, their common Mother.

I cannot but observe the solicitous counsels, the sequacious complyances, the
vigilant cares, the resolute endeavors of my Countrymen, to preserve the
civil unity, and ancient polity of this Nation: Not to suffer any part of this
Commonwealth to be dismembered; or under pretense of either natural Liberty, or
a secular Independency, to dissociate, sever and withdraw it self from that
grand community, and National subordination, which is justly esteemed, by all
wise men, and therefore exacted by wise Governors, as most necessary for the
safety, peace, strength and honor of the Nation.

And can it (I beseech YOU) be thought by any wise and honest men, to be less
safe, honorable and necessary for the people of England, (who were all
heretofore professedly Christians and baptized) to live in an Ecclesiastical
unity, in a Catholic order, in a National, religious polity? Is there no
weakness, deformity, or danger to be observed, feared and avoided, in all
these breakings, dividings, shatterings, schisms, separatings, sidings,
strifes, envies, animosities, contempts, cruelties, factions and furies,
(whence grow confusion, and every evil work, as S. James tells us, Jam. 3.16.)
with all which this Church, and so the whole Nation, is now much overgrown, as
to matters of Religion, past all private help and recovery; Requiring no less
public care, united counsels, and authoritative endeavors, to compose and
heal these Ecclesiastique or Church-distempers, than those civil disjoyntings
and disaffections do, under which this State has long labored, and which are
yet scarce fully healed; After so many cuttings and lancings, blisterings and
blood-lettings; which I do not think proper remedies for such religious
maladies as are not yet ulcerated to immoralities.

It Is true indeed (as Optatus speaks) That each particular Churches welfare is
much concerned in that of the Civil State or Commonwealth where it is
imbarqued: Non est Respublica in Ecclesia, sed Ecclesia in Republica. Optat. l.
3.
Yet it is as true, Reipublicae Christiana constitutio ea quae est in Deum
pietate praecipue nititur; multaque inter Ecclesiam and Rempublicam cognatio
intercedere solet; ex se invicem pendent, and utraque prosperis alterius
successibus incrementa sumit. Tom. 1. Council. Bin.
which the Emperor Theodosius said to S. Cyril, That the happiness of these
does no less depend upon the purity of Religion, and peace of the Church, in
which they are so bound up, as Jacobs soul was in Benjamins, that they live
and die together.

As some of your Forefathers and Countrymen have (in my memory) found it, so
will YOU and your Posterity, That it is no piece of Good husbandry so to look
to your own sieled houses, Hag. 1.4.
as to neglect the Temple of God; yea, that part of the Body of Christ, Ephesians.
1.23.
which is (at least was) in this Nation, under the glorious name and title of
The Church of England; Sometimes famous and flourishing, now grievously wounded
and wasted, torn and mangled, dis-joynted and divided, having many years
suffered the Strapado in England, as to the Christian and Reformed Religion.

In which behalf, as the freedom of my present public Address to YOU (my
Honored and beloved Countrymen) arises from the highest and best motives in
the world, so I hope it confines it self to that Sphere, which is most proper
for Me, as a Minister of the Gospel; Not only a Professor with You, but duly
ordained to be a Preacher among You, of that Christian reformed Religion, which
has been wisely established, and mightily prospered in the Church of England.

In whose honor and happiness, (which chiefly depend upon the continuation
and restoration of the true Christian and Reformed Religion) since I know You
are, as good Christians and honest Englishmen, most highly concerned, both as
to your persons and your posterity; I presume, it will not be either
unsuitable to Me, or unacceptable to You, That I here endeavor, with all
Christian freedom and faithfulness, to present to your serious consideration,
First, The present distresses of the Church of England: Secondly, The causes or
occasions of them: Thirdly, The evil and dangerous consequences of them:
Fourthly, The probable remedies, and preventions of them; So far as God has
enabled me to understand and express them.

Whose gracious assistance in the first place I most humbly implore; Next, I
crave the pardon, prayers and acceptance of all wise and worthy persons. Their
pardon, for my boldness and defects; Their prayers, for Gods gracious
direction; Their acceptance of my honest endeavors; which I chiefly devote
(after the Divine glory) to your service, under the most endearing notions of
my Countrymen, and Fellow Christians.

Whose judicious affections, tender compassions, prudent counsels, and
conscientious endeavors, attended with discreet zeal, Anhelantium animarum
sudores sunt piae lachrymae.
fervent prayers, and unfeigned tears, (which are as the sweat of industrious
and devout souls in their holy labors and agonies) if I may be so far blessed,
as to excite in YOU, proportionable to the Majesty, sanctity, and concernment
of this great Subject, set before you, under the name of The distressed Church
of England, I make no doubt, but I shall (by Gods help) be an happy instrument,
at once to procure some peace and rest; at least some ease and relief to Her,
while she may (however) see her self pitied by so many worthy persons: which
is no small comfort to any in affliction: And (possibly) I may be some means to
stave off, abate or defeat the restless agitations and unreasonable
expectations of Her most implacable enemies both at home and abroad: Who (as
the Dragon that gaped upon the woman in the Revelation) have already swallowed
up (whilst it is yet quick and alive) this Reformed, Rev. 12.3.
and sometime united Church of England, in their malice and presumptions;
between Rome and Babylon; Superstition and Separation; Papal tyranny, and
Popular Anarchy. Hoping, on all sides, to make their advantages, not only by
this Churches sufferings, but by the want of sympathy in her children: Whose
silence and restivenesse, in behalf of this Church, and its Reformed Religion,
must needs prove their sin before God, and their shame before all wise and good
men, in this, and after-Ages; when they shall see, how infinitely this
generation of Englishmen, and Christians, come short of that duty they owed to
their God, their Savior, their country, their own souls, and the good of
their posterity; which are all included in the welfare of this Church; to
which they are nearly related, in a double regard, natural and spiritual,
civil and religious, as they were born and baptized in Her.

And here, because I know infinite prejudices, sinister suspicions, and
undeserved jealousies, are prone (like Flies in summer) to light upon every
thing that is public, and sold (as it were) in the Shambles; I crave leave to
present YOU, and all men, in this Porch, or Preface, with a true Prospect of my
own Integrity, as void of private passions and interests; a qualification
necessary for those that will meddle with Religious concernments.

This my present importunity, and public Address to YOU (my worthy and
honored Countrymen) is, not to give vent to any private discontent, forced by
any such pressures, Eccl. 7.7.
as ( Solomon tells us) are capable to make a wise man mad; nor is it to take,
or seek revenge upon any, that has offered injury or insolency against me in
particular. As for private petulancies and indignities, I thank God, through
his mercy, and my own Integrity, (though I am not wholly without them, yet) I
am as much above them, as Armor of Proof is above the stings of wasps or
hornets. As for my public station, or fruitions, I must ever with all
grateful humility to God, and ingenuity to men, acknowledge the great
experiences I have had of Gods gracious providence, and man's generous
indulgence, (Notwithstanding that I have freely declared my dissent in some
things, wherein I thought my self in a high nature concerned). Hence I esteem
it both just and comely for Me, to use the like candor, equanimity, and
moderation to all others, who fairly differ from me in things Civil or Sacred;
Against whose persons, estates, places, and preferments, I profess to you I
have no private pi^que; no envy, no malice, no animosity. Nor am I much moved
by the various opinions, and different persuasions of any person or party, in
matters of Religion, if their opinions have any thing in them that seems so
dark and dubious, as makes their dissentings venial; or, if the persons be so
modestly scrupulous, as they appear both conscientious and charitable; if they
be not grossly blasphemous, manifestly erroneous, rudely immorall, palpably
injurious, or impudently foolish and fanatic; if they be not of a deep and
scarlet die, as to evil speaking and evil doing.

Of which tincture I confess some men's spirits, opinions, principles and
practices seem to be; who have, and still do, very inordinately endeavor to
divide and destroy, to condemn and contemn, to dishonor and impoverish, to
dissipate and desolate this Reformed Church of England; which was, in all wise
and sober men's judgments, too precious, too polished, and too ponderous (or
burdensome) a stone, Zach. 12.3.
for any private hands to take up, and cast (as the Angel did that mil-stone,
which was the emblem of Babylons fall) into such a sea of blood, Rev. 18.21.
such an abyss of confusion, as some men seem to aim at: Who think, that
Christ cannot sit on his Throne, nor they on his right and left hand, judging
the tribes of England, while any learned, ordained, orderly Clergy, or any
orthodox, uniform, united, Reformed, and National Church remains in England.

I confess I admire that providence of God, and prudence of man, which keeps
these mad men in any Bedlam; which is able to put some chains upon their fury,
and restraints upon their folly. To whose persons though I am generally a
stranger, yet so far a Christian friend, that I wish them the blessings of
heaven and earth, of this moment and of eternity; such graces, as may prepare
them for glory: That doing justice, showing mercy, and walking humbly, they
may rest with God at last. Although they have a long time, breathed out
threatenings against, and sought to make havoc of the whole Church of England,
and the Majesty of it; yet (as the Father of the Prodigal) I rather pity than
despise them, in the rags and husks which they have chosen: I should be glad to
be any means to bring them home to their Fathers house, and their Mothers
bosom: I should joy to see them in their right minds, and clothed with modesty
and meekness, with shamefastness and sobriety; notwithstanding some of them
may feed on the Churches ancient patrimony, and clothe themselves with the
pieces they have torn from their Mothers garments. My aim is not at any man's
being sequestered, proscribed, undone, imprisoned, persecuted, starved or
oppressed. I design no benefit by any Birds feathers; and therefore desire not
they should be plucked so bare, as some Eagles and Doves (excellent Bishops and
Presbyters too) have been in England, with whose spoils some have well
feathered their (heretofore) hard and uneasy nests; while those poor (but
precious) men have (some of them) scarce wherewithal to cover their
nakedness, or where to hide their heads. But if such robbers and destroyers of
this Church and its Clergy, be the only true Israelites and people of God;
and if We (the sons and servants of the Church of England) be the only
Egyptians, (which is a point I desire to search;) we may with the more patience
bear their spoiling us of our jewels, our honors, estates and liberties;
especially if they have an extraordinary mandate and call from God to strip
us, and destroy this whole Reformed Church; which some do strongly pretend and
fancy. Nor is this pretense more than needs; For I am sure, they have no
ordinary call or command so to do; either from the word of God, or the good
Laws of this or any ancient Christian Church or Nation. But by way of
reprisall, I desire not to take from them a shoe latchet; Genesis 14.25.
Though some of them aim to make all the Bishops and true Ministers of this
Reformed Church to go barefooted with their families; and would fain sell
many an excellent Preacher, for a pair of shoes. Amos 2.6.


As for any public and popular advantages to be obtained by my thus
scribbling; I am not so fatuous as to fancy, That the Name of the Church of
England (which is always inscribed on my papers, as well as on my heart) is in
so much favor either in City or Country, what ever it may be in Court. I
know, that Religious unity and national harmony in England, as a Church, may
seem useless, if not dangerous in point of policy, until there be a greater
firmness and stability in civil affairs. All Ladders must have two sides,
besides several staves; and scaffolds must have many stays, while they are
used in the building; though they be all afterward removed, when the Palace of
Power, and Temple of Peace are finished. As for lesser projects, and those
opiniasters which make up plebeian parties, I know my lines to be diametrall
against them.

It were a blind and impotent ambition in Me, or any man of my Coat, Jer. 45.5.
to seek great things for themselves, when they cannot but see how great a
gulf there (now) is between any professed Minister of the Church of England,
and Abraham's bosom: The favors to be expected either from the Populacy, or
the Powers. Alas, we poor and despised Clergy, must not (now) aim at any
earthly heaven; or return to that terrestrial Paradise which our forefathers
enjoyed, out of which the Angels, with flaming swords, have driven us. It is
well, if we escape hell and Purgatory, or keep our selves in Limbo Patrum:
Primitive Poverty, with Liberty. The pulse of the times beats very weakly, as
to any double honor of profit or preferment for men of my profession and
persuasion. Indeed it is no time (as Elisha told Gehazi) for the ruinous and
divided Clergy of the Church of England, to seek or receive vineyards and
olive-yards, talents of silver, 2 King. 5.26.
and changes of raiment. It Is a very great mercy that we have our lives for a
prey, Jer. 39.18.
(as Jeremie told Baruch) That any of us may sit still under those poor vines
and small fig trees, which the storm and hail of the times have shrewdly
battered. It Is well if we can get any decent employment, or any competent
maintenance; for we have enemies that grudge us both these: Though I trust, the
all-sufficient God, through the favor of good men, will ever give us
competencie, and contentedness. A Skuller will carry one to heaven, as well as
a Barge; And one may ride on an Ass to Jerusalem, as well as in a triumphant
Chariot.

Ambitious vanities are never seasonable or comely for any humble Christians,
and least for the Ministers of Christ, (who ought to be crucified to the world,
and the world to them, Gal. 6.14.) especially at my years, and in my condition.
It Is honor and grandeur enough for Me, if I may (next the advance of Gods
glory) promote Your, and my Countries common good, which, I must tell you, does
not a little depend upon the good order, unity and government; the honor,
peace and safety of the Reformed Religion, duly established in this Church and
Nation of England: Of whose festred scratches, and deep wounds, since I cannot
but have a great sense, both of Grief and Shame; and toward whose healing,
since I am (indeed) very ambitious to drop one drop of sovereign balsome
before I die; I have here endeavored to seek Your face, Jer. 8.22.
and to recommend Her distress to Your compassions.

It is for Her sake, and for Yours in Her, that I again adventure (for truly it
is an adventure, and no small one in this age) thus to appear in public,
possibly with more forwardness and zeal, than prudence and discretion, in
some men's censure; Who (it may be) have not so much charity or courage in them,
as to own an afflicted friend, an impoverished father, or a distressed mother.

Yet to justify my discretion, this may be said, That nothing seems to me (in
Policy as well as Piety) more rationally and religiously necessary, than a
public tender regard to the state of the Reformed Religion in this Church and
Nation. To me, Noblemen, and Gentlemen, Citizens, and Yeomen, all sorts in
their private and public capacity, seem, if not to want, yet to expect
something in this kind from some of us Ministers of the Church of England,
which might handsomely excite to honest industry, those sparks of piety and
generosity which heretofore flamed in their Forefathers liberal breasts,
toward this Church of England, as Christian, and as Reformed. Nor are they (I
presume) quite extinct in yours, who now succeed them; whom I do not
arrogantly instruct, as if I thought you ignorant; but humbly provoke to do
what you know, when opportunity shall answer your abilities and good will.

Not, but that I have (also) pleasing speculations (many times) of that silent
safety and secure latencie, in which I see others, my betters or equals, hug
themselves. I know there are men (otherwise of good worth and parts) who dare
not speak one good word, either of, or for, the best Bishops, the best
Presbyters, or the best National Church in the world, (as this of England
was.) These (over-bred, and too much Gentlemen) may consider, That a good man
may be more wary than wise, more fearful than faithful, more cautious than
conscientious. The Prophet Jeremie resolved, Jerem. 20.9.
by reason of the danger and ingratitude of the Jews, to speak no more to them
in the name of the Lord: but the word of God was as fire in his breast, he
could not hold his peace, and keep peace in his soul. I could as easily wrap
my self up in silence and privacie, as some others do, if I did not fear sins
of omission, as well as commission; which was the jealousy a most learned and
godly person had of himself, lately dying; who yet had been an earnest
intercessor for the relief of many distressed Ministers in England.

I would also covet the reputation of a wise man, Amos 5.13.
by keeping silence in an evil time, if I had not many and great stimulations,
while my life is declining, and my death approaching, to give what further
constant and comely proofs I may, to this and after-ages, of my zeal for God,
of my love to my Savior, of my communion with his Catholic Church, of my
particular respect to this noble part of it, The Church of England; and in
this, of my due observance to my Reverend Fathers, and beloved brethren, the
godly Bishops, and orderly Presbyters of this Church; yea and lastly, of my
charitable ambition to heap coals of fire (not scorching and consuming, Romans
12.20.
but melting and refining) even upon the heads of those, who still profess to
be remorslesse enemies to my calling, and to the whole Church of England: who
seem to me, as if they sought totally to debase the Clergy of England, yea
utterly to destroy the ancient Catholic order and government, succession and
authority of the Evangelicall Ministry in this Reformed Church; while they
endeavor to remove able, ordained and autoritative Teachers into corners; and
to obtrude I know not what vol^ntiers, Jerem. 30.20.
new and exotic intruders into that holy function. These will, certainly, (in
a few years) make the Sun go down upon England at noonday; Amos 8.^.
bringing upon this Nation the shadows of the night, Superstition, ignorance,
profaneness, irreligion and confusion; leading Posterity to Popery, by the way
of popularity, poverty, parity, despiciency, and Anarchy, falling upon the
Ministry, and the Reformed Religion of this Church. In which blackness of
darkness (debasings and disorders) the Seers of this people will in time grow
blind; the guides unguided; the teachers will be untaught; the Pastors unbred;
the flock unfed, by a mushrome and novell Ministry, multiforme, miserable,
mechanic Grows-up, neither duly ordained, nor decently maintained, nor much
deserving either of them; being crest-faln in themselves, and contemptible to
others.

I cannot be satisfied in Reason or Religion, in honor or conscience, in
policy or piety, how it can be happy for You, your Posterity, and this whole
Nation, to live after a vagrant, loose and indifferent way of Christian
administrations and profession, according to every man's private fancy, choice
and humor, without any such National settling and combination, such public
Ecclesiastical union, as has in all Ages and Nations best edified and
fortified, counseled and corrected, excited and increased both gifts and
graces in a most comely and most Christian order; with such harmony, unity,
majesty, and authority, as best becomes the Disciples and Churches of Christ.

I confess I am ashamed to see and hear any Gentlemen of honor, or other
persons of commendable qualities, of good estates, of ingenuous parts and
breeding, poorly and meanly to forsake the waters of Siloah, and to follow the
brooks of Teman; to discountenance at least (if not quite discard) their
learned, grave, godly, and experienced Ministers, who are of the true metal
and stamp too, which a Minister of the Gospel ought to be, (that is, really
enabled, and duly ordained or authorized to that great work.) And this most
what not out of any serious advice and conscientious choice, becoming
Christians in so great a concernment; but rather out of easiness, levity,
curiosity, popularity, or some pitiful complyances with novell upstarts, and
rude intruders into that Sacred office.

Among whom, if they do save their purses, (which is by some deserters of
their lawful Ministers much looked after) yet I am afraid they too much
venture their souls, I am sure they lose much of their credit both in present,
and after-ages, among learned, godly, and wise men. Nor do I believe, that in
point of conscience, they have hitherto found any great improvement of piety in
themselves, their families, children and servants. Yea, I cannot but think,
they must be very sensible of those many breaches, flawes and leakings, which
daily grow, as upon their Country, so upon their Parishes and Families, by the
extravagancies of their children, strangeness of their acquaintance, and
irreligiousnesse of their servants, besides the factiousnesse of their
neighbors, and coldness of their very kindred: who all affect (according as
they are cunning, proud, or simple) the name of LIBERTY in Religion; that is,
(in some men's sense) neither much to fear God, nor to reverence Man.

However I wonder, that any persons of great worth and prudence, can with
indifferency see the public, National interests of Religion sinking, (which
are the greatest jewels, ornaments and honor of any Nation) so as themselves
may but have liberty to swim or paddle in what new pond, puddle or plash of
Religion, they list to fancy. It Is strange to me, that any persons of steady
and sober brains, should not easily foresee, that these strange vertigo's,
these tempests, and continual tossings of Religion, will in a short time, if
they have not already, make the whole Nation quite giddie, and as it were
sea-sick, even to a vomiting up of its Reformation.

But if there be (indeed) a Liberty indulged to every one, for the picking and
choosing what way of worship, Religion, Church and Ministry best likes them;
sure, it will be the greatest honor, and noblest freedom of all true English
Christians, to own and adhere to that, solidly, soberly Reformed Religion,
which was duly settled in this Church of England, by better heads, and (I think)
as honest hearts, as any, either brochers or abetters of novelties, can justly
pretend to: who (as I conceive) come vastly short, in all their variations, and
new inventions, of that Scripturall verity, Catholic antiquity, yea and of
that Parlamentary authority and majesty, which had once happily reformed and
established Religion in this Church of England, by the full counsel and free
consent of all Estates, Princes and People, Clergy and Laity.

What is of late by Novellers pretended of an Apostolic rudeness,
plainness, illiteratenesse, and simplicity, which ought to be in Ministers of
the Gospel, is ridiculous, unless these new Teachers could show us their
special gifts and extraordinary inspirations, better than yet they have done;
which were indeed miraculously bestowed upon the Primitive Planters and
Preachers; but very superfluous in a Church so full, and blessed with the
ordinary endowments of pious literature, and all good learning, both Humane and
Divine, as England was. How childish an affectation were it in the Gentry of
England, to forbear to ride on good horses, because Christ once rode upon an
ass? Joh. 12.15.
(showing, that the greatest triumph of all Christians, is humility,
lowliness, and meekness.) How silly were it in them to expect, that Asses
should always be able to instruct them, Numb. 22.28.
because Balaams ass did once with great justice, and a prodigious gravity,
rebuke his masters madness? Much less should Gentlemen of worth and breeding,
be such silly sots and children, as to fancy, that every jingling hobbyhorse
will be sufficient to carry them to heaven.

No, the ministry of your souls is a far greater work, requiring greater
ability, and better authority; to convince men of their sins, to encounter
their lusts, to moderate their passions, to purge out their corruptions, to
break and soften their hearts, to terrify and appease their consciences, to
prepare them for God, to graft them by true faith into a crucified God and
Savior, to wean them from the world, to win them to goodness, to pull them
out of hell, and the devils snares, to bring them to heaven, and into the arms
of Christ. All which are the great works of true, able, and authoritative
Ministers, requiring other-gates workmen, than are (now) in many places much in
fashion among common people; though not so in favor with the wiser and better
sort of Christians in England, as to prefer these men's new and various fancies,
before the wise constitutions, the ancient customs, the Catholic and
Religious Orders of the Church of England, established by their pious and
prosperous Progenitors.

All the world at home and abroad sees, that after all the many changes, and
troublesome essays of new-modelling the civil state of this Nation; yet true
reason of State, and public peace do command, yea enforce us to justify the
wisdom of our Forefathers, by bringing back matters of Soveraigntie, power
and government, to the former platform and polity, as to reality; only
changing a few formalities. Truly this makes me not despair, but, when all new
fangles of Religion, and popular models of Churches have been tried in vain,
and are found (as they will be) both impertinent and incompetent for the happy
state of Reformed Religion in this Church and Nation, we may (by Gods blessing)
return to those pristine and primitive forms of sound doctrine, uniform order
and government, which were never taken up by any private inventions here or
elsewhere, but were of Catholic observation; and so (no doubt) of Apostolic
direction, and divine institution.

Which, if all men should silently forsake, and (in so doing) reproach not only
the Church of England, but the very first Catholic and Apostolic Churches;
yet let me cease to live, when I cease to sympathize with them in their unjust
reproaches, and with Her in her great distresses: and it is fit my tongue should
cleave to my mouth, when I forbear, or am afraid to pray for the peace, and
happy restitution of our Jerusalem: I, Ps. 122.6.
who have seen Her in such order, beauty, peace, plenty, honor, prosperity,
and piety: I, who have received in her bosom and tuition so many and great
mercies, not only temporal, but (I hope) spiritual and eternal: I, who
desire my posterity, kindred, friends, and country, may never have other God
or Savior, than what was owned and worshipped in the Church of England; no
other Scriptures and Gospel, than what have here been excellently preached, and
comfortably believed; no other Sacraments, than such as were here duly
administered, and devoutly received; no other Liturgy, or prayers and holy
offices, than such as were here both publicly proposed, and privately used;
no better Bishops and Presbyters, pastors and guides of their souls, both for
learned abilities and exemplary life, than such as I have known frequent and
flourishing in the Church of England; I pray God they may but have as good; for
better Ministers, and better means of salvation, as they shall not need them,
so they cannot have them without miracles, of which God is no prodigal.

I should greatly sin, if I should not daily sigh and weep over the Church of
England; if I should not pour our my soul to the God and Father of Mercies
for Her; since she is now counted, by many, (as Jeremie complains) an outcast
and forsaken; whom no man (in comparison) seeks after; her bruise is almost
incurable, and her wound is very grievous: There are few to plead her cause;
she has no healing medicines; her lovers have forgotten her, since God has
wounded her with the wounds of enemies, and with the chastisements of cruel
ones: who in her dust and captivity require of her to sing the songs of Sion;
commanding her to call her ruins, Reformations, and to account their
persecutions, her perfections.

It is time (then) for all that have any regard to the Church of England, to
cry mightily both to God and man, to give them no rest, till they return to be
gracious to this much afflicted, Isa. 62.7.
impoverished, despised, divided, disordered Church: It is high time for all
honest English Christians to pity her ruins, to favor her dust, to speak
comfortably to her, Isa. 40.1, 2.
to put an end to her warfare, to bind up her wounds, to make up her breaches,
to repair her losses, Job 42.11.
as Jobs friends did his, with their kind and munificent compassions: that
Posterity may not read in the sad ruins, divisions and desolations of this
famous and reformed Church of England, pristine liberality, and modern
sordidnesse; the bounty, beauty and order of former times; the deformity,
sacrilege and confusion of these later. Who can consider without shame and
regret, how much more generous, and large-hearted even those Ages were, which
had some rust and dimnesse of superstition growing upon their Religion, then
these are, in which the English world is filled and confounded with the noise
and shows of brightnings and reformations; in which by new and most
preposterous methods some of our late unlucky Architects, or Antivitruvian
Builders, have endeavored with their axes and hammers to break down more good
Church-vvork in twice seven years, Psalm* 74.6.
than the best master builders can hope to repair in seventy seven: I do not
mean (only) as to the material and mechanic fabrics of goodly Churches,
(which in many places lie sordidly wasted, and shamefully desolated) but as to
that which was the rational, political, moral; the prudentiall, and truly
pious structure of this well-reformed Church of England? of whose ruins I
shall give you afterward a more particular account.

But it is now time for me (in order to work upon your affections) to give over
such tedious Prefacings, and to present You with as true and lively a prospect
as I can, of Her sad posture: There being more pathetick power in your hearing
or seeing one of her own sighs and tears (O what is there in her wounds!) than
in the greatest seas of any man's oratory, to stir up in You those filial
compassions which most become You, to so deserving, and now so distressed a
Mother, as is this Church of England.

The goodly CEDAR of Apostolic and Catholic EPISCOPACY, co^^ with the modern
Shoots and Slips of divided NOVELTIES, in the Church.


DENDPOLOGIA.
The Emblem of the Trees explained. In which is briefly set forth the History
and Chronology of Episcopacy, Presbytery and Independency, as pretenders to
Church Government: their first planting, growing and spreading in the Christian
World.
THe design of this Figure or Emblem is to instruct Christians of the meanest
capacities, who have less abilities or leisure to read large Discourses,
touching the due Order, Way and Method of Church-union and Communion: which
Subject is now multiplied to so many parties and opinions, that ordinary people
(as in a Wood, or Maze and Labyrinth) are unable to disentangle themselves of
those perplexed contentions and confusions, which have of late so miserably
divided and almost destroyed the Harmony and Happiness of the Church of
England, upon the disputes, not so much about saving Faith and holy Life, as
those of a Churches right constitution in its Divine Original, Apostolic
Derivation, Catholic Succession, Regular Subordination, and Brotherly
Communion.

First, most people, learned and unlearned, were heretofore prepossessed with
the Catholic use and approbation of Episcopacy, as (ubique, semper and ab
omnibus) ever and only used in this and all other Churches, from the first
planting of Christianity. After this, many weaker Christians came to be
dispossessed of their former persuasions, by the violent obtrusions of such a
Presbytery as challenges Church Government, not in common with Bishops, but
wholly without them. This foreign plant, not taking any deep root in this
English soil, was soon starved and much supplanted by the Insinuations of a
newer way called Independency. At last many, heretofore well-meaning
Christians, finding such great Authorities, even from Christ, pretended on all
sides, for these diversities of Bishops, Presbyters and People, (each
challenging the right of Church Government, Rule and Jurisdiction, as
principally due to them, and from Christ immediately committed to them) have by
long, perplexed and sharp disputes been brought to such doubtings as have
betrayed them to strange indifferencies, as to all Ecclesiastical Society and
Order, (which is the very band of Christian Religion) so far that they care for
no Church, no Christian Communion, no settled Government, no sober Religion.

By this Figure, Type or Scheme, every one may easily see in one view their
rise, growth and proportions, what in the beginning was, what ever since for
above 1500. years has been, and what in right reason ought to be the
authoritative and constant Order, Polity and Government of every particular
Church, as a part of the universal: if we regard either Scripture-direction, or
Christ's institution, or Apostolical prescription, or universal practice of all
Churches in all Ages and places, till of later days, wherein the factious
Ambitions of ((...)) abortive and divided Novelties have, either in too
indulgent or in troublesome times, strangely warped from, or contested against
uniform Antiquity, either usurping upon, or denying those just Interests, which
ought to be preserved jointly in every well-ordered Church to Bishops, to
Presbyters, and to faithful people; who as Members of one Body, and Branches of
one Tree or Root, ought to be but one in an Ecclesiastical harmony, though they
have different uses and offices for the common good.

The Catholic Church of Christ, which all true Christians believe to be
(Sponsa unica and dilecta) the Spouse and Body of Christ, one and entire, as
united to him the Head of all by one Faith, so to one another as Members by one
Spirit, one Baptism, one Bread and one Cup, which are visible symbols or signs
of that invisible Communion in Truth, in Love and Charity, which every true
Christian has with Jesus Christ, and all true Believers in all the world; This
Catholic, one and uniform Chapter is here set forth under the similitude of one,
fair, straight, well-grown, Psalm. 80.9, 10, 11.
fruitful, flourishing, and uniform Tree, as the Cedar of the Lord, full of
sap, rooted in Christ, from whom it derives the spirit, life and radical
moisture of Grace, by such outward means and Ministers as the Lord has
appointed to be workers together with him, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
as some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers,
for planting, propagating, watering, pruning, fencing and preserving this
goodly Tree in its several Branches, which have spread forth to several parts
of the world, but were never quite parted or separated from either Christ or
one another, but grounded in Christ, Ephesians. 4.15.
they have always grown up in him to such an holy Harmony, without any
Schismatical slipping, breaking off, or moral dividing from one another; every
small twigg, every bigger branch, every mainer arm of it, either for private
Christians, or public Congregations, or Episcopal Combinations, still holding
that mutual Communion which became them, both to Christ and his Church in
general, also to each other in particular, according to the several Places,
Duties, Stations and Proportions wherein the God of Order and Peace had set
them, under the Authority, Power and Episcopacy of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
2.^5.
as Lord of all, the King, Priest and Prophet, the chief Bishop and great
Shepherd, the principal Teacher, Pastor and Ruler of his Church.

From our Lord Jesus Christ (whose love to Mankind intended to enlarge the
branches of his Church beyond the Jews, The beginning of Episcopacy Ann^
Christi 30.
even to all Nations under Heaven) this small and tender Plant was afterward,
as a fruitful Vine and flourishing Tree, carefully husbanded and orderly
extended by such workmen as the Lord was pleased to choose and appoint for this
holy care and culture; whom he endued with the spirit of power, both for
Authority, when he solemnly breathed on them, Joh. 20.20, 21. Acts 2.2.
and for Ability, when he powerfully sent the Spirit upon them, enabling them
not only with such ordinary gifts as were necessary for all true Ministers,
and such ordinary authority as was fit to govern the Churches they gathered,
but also with such extraordinary and miraculous endowments, as were meet for
the Apostles to carry on the first plantations of the Gospel to all the world
without any Interpreter, beyond all contradiction; the doctrine they taught of
Jesus Christ being confirmed to be the Will and Wisdom of God, by the
concurrence of his Omnipotency in infallible signs and wonders.

By these twelve Apostles (when their number was completed, and the Apostasy
of Judas made up by the choice of Matthias, Acts 1.26.
to succeed and supply his Episcopal charge and Office for the teaching and
ruling of the Church, (to whom, as a supernumerary help and great additional,
St. Paul was afterward joined) by these, I say) as by so many chief Pastors or
Ecumenical Bishops, (who had the general care and joint oversight or
Episcopacy of the Catholic Church, both Jews and Gentiles) was this Tree
mightily advanced in a few years, both in bigness and breadth, in strength and
extention; so that the Gospel, according to Christ's command, was preached, more
or less, to every Nation under Heaven: and as the beams of the Sun are seen, so
the Evangelical sound of the Apostles was heard in all Lands, Mat. 28.19. Romans
16.^6.
so loud and audibly, Romans 10.18.
that every Nation might have applied themselves to listen and seek after the
Lord, and have heard and found him in the voice of his glorious Gospel, if they
would have followed that news which they heard of, according to the curiosity
after novelties which is in the nature of man.

The news of which, so good and so great, was every where reported to be, as
foretold by so many Prophets long before, so attested and confirmed by so many
Eye witnesses, who not only spoke to every Nation in their several tongues,
but also wrought great miracles in every place where they came, Gal. 2.7.
according to those several lots or portions which they had taken by the Lords
appointment* or by mutual consent, as their particular Bishoprics or Dioceses,
for the more orderly carrying on of the work: some staying at Jerusalem, Gal.
1.18.
as St. James the Elder, and the other James surnamed the Just, where they were
slain; others dispersed themselves, as St. Peter who went to Antioch,
Alexandria and Rome, there planting eminent Churches, and appointing Bishops
over them, as Euodius at Antioch, Mark at Alexandria, Clemens and Linus at
Rome; one for the Circumcision, the other for the Uncircumcision, (which
Churches ever after, even before, the Nicene Council, had the eminence of
Patriarchal seats, as afterward Jerusalem and Constantinople had.) The
Histories of the Church, either Sacred or Ecclesiastical, are not punctual or
exact in setting forth the several Countries to which the Apostles divided
themselves, or where they most resided, and at last ended their days: nor is it
material, it being sufficiently clear, that, as they did not at first so
confine themselves to one place or Country, as to exclude any other Apostles
from coming thither; so they went, some one or more of them, to all chief
parts, to Syria, Arabia, Persia, India, Ethiopia, Armenia, Scythia, Asia the
Less and Greater, all Greece, Illyricum, Italy, Spain, France, Germany, Cyprus,
Britanny, Africa, and all the rest of the grand parts of the then-known World,
Continents and Islands, where, at last, they either fixed in their old age, (as
St. John did at Ephesus) or were martyred; leaving, besides the Monuments of
their preaching and miracles, their Apostolical Seats supplied by an orderly
Subordination and authoritative Succession of such Bishops and Presbyters,
Pastors and Teachers, able and faithful men, as they had Commission to ordain,
and did authorize for their successors in that holy Ministry, spirit and power
of Christ, which was to continue to the end of the World, for the further
planting, propagating and preserving the Church of Christ, by such Doctrine,
Government and Discipline, as they, for the main rules and ends, clearly by
word and practice delivered to them, which was then, as their Faith, Baptism
and Hope, Cum nobis totus orbis comm^rcio ferm^turum in una communionis
soci^tate concordat. Optat. l. 2. Rami erroris p^^te^ti de m^ndacio, non de
radice ve^itatis. Id.
but one among all Churches in the all world: single Christians, private
Families of them, small Congregations, little Villages, greater Cities, ample
Territories, large Provinces, great and small Churches (as to their several
distributions for convenience of actual converse and communicating in holy
Mysteries) had still but one and the same Polity, Order, Discipline, Ministry,
Government and Communion; no Variety, no Difformity, no Deformity in Doctrine
or Discipline, among any Orthodox Christians, but every one observed that
Place, Office, Duty and Proportion, wherein God, by the Apostles and their
successors, had set him or them, in relation to the whole Church, as well as to
that particular part or Congregation of it, to which he was more locally and
personally joined, yet mentally, spiritually, charitably, cordially and
consentiently he still adhered to the Catholic Conformity and Unity, according
to that holy Polity and Economy which the Spirit of Christ in the Apostles
first and for ever established, so far as the nature of times and Gods
providence would permit; that as there was but one God, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, so there might be but one Church, one chaste Virgin, as the Spouse of
Christ, in all places.

The completing of Ecclesiastical Combinations or great Churches by the
Apostles.
For these holy Husbandmen and chief Laborers in Christ's Vineyard, the twelve
or thirteen Apostles, did not think it sufficient to teach, to catechize, to
convert, to baptize, to confirm, to communicate, to admonish, to excommunicate
here and there several Christians and their families, as single Slips and
Off-sets of Christianity, which might grow apart by themselves; but their aim
was, with preaching Verity to plant Unity, and with true Faith to graft
fraternal Charity, which conjoined them to and with Christ and all Christians
in the world. Joh. 13.14, 15 and 15.12.
This being a most visible mark of Christ's Disciples, also a special means for
mutual assistance and comfort amidst the many persecutions which Christians
would meet with, sufficient utterly to discourage them, if, when they were
scattered from each other, they were presently without any joint harmony, and
greater combination and ampler communion of Saints: by which means, wherever
Christians fled from one place to another, if they met with Christians, they
were sure of hospitable friends, bringing, as they ever did, letters of
communication or commendation from their Bishops; which presently made their
way to such a kind reception and communion in all holy duties, as that station
permitted, as Catechumens, or Penitents, or Eucharistical Communicants, in
which they stood wherever they had lived. Therefore as the Apostolical wisdom,
so all their successors, diligently gathered single believers and private
families of Christians into greater Congregations; these they led on to larger
combinations, which comprehended the Christians of many Villages, Towns, Cities
and Territories, according as the Spirit of Christ directed them, for the
greater convenience and benefit of both Ministers and people, who scattered in
small bodies or parcels, must needs be both more cold and more feeble, but so
united in grand Societies, they would be both warmer, stronger and safer, and
besides more eminent and conspicuous in the eyes of all the world.

Such, beyond all doubt, were those Apostolical and famous Churches,
distinguished by the Spirit of God according to the chief Cities, which were
the center of their Religious addresses for Church Order, Authority and
Communion; as the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, Ephesus, Corinth, Sardis,
Smyrna, Colosse, with many more: whose Cities being most-what Metropolitan or
Mother-cities, as to secular power and distribution of civil justice, they were
chosen as meetest for the principal residency of Religious Order, Polity and
Authority; wherein (as was meet) the blessed Apostles did, during their lives,
preside as Bishops, either in their persons, or by those faithful Apostolic
men whom they (as St. Paul did Timothy, Titus, Archippus and others) appointed
as Rulers or Bishops under them, for the carrying on of the service of Christ
and his Church, partly by the common duty and office Ministerial, which was to
preach, baptize, and celebrate other holy Mysteries in an orderly way, even in
lesser Congregations, yea to private Families and single persons, The
Succession of Episcopacy.
as occasion required (which was the work of Bishops and Presbyters in common)
and partly to manage that presidential power and Episcopal Authority over both
Presbyters and people, (united in larger combinations and Churches) as might
best preserve the Purity, Unity and Honor of the Church and Christian Religion
in doctrine and discipline, also derive by way of right Ordination, after the
pattern given to Timothy and Titus, 1 Timothy 3.2: Tit. 1.5.
and others, a continued succession of an holy and authoritative Ministry, by
such an eminent power of Order as was specially delivered to the chief
Apostles, and by them to their principal successors as Bishops in those great,
Apostolical and complete Churches, where, as Christians increased, many
Presbyters were ordained by the chief Pastor or Bishop, to be both Counselors
and Assistants to him in that Evangelical work of teaching and governing the
Church committed to him: First, as appointed immediately by the chief Apostles
while they lived; and after, as chosen by the surviving Presbyters in every
precinct or Diocese, to succeed so far in that Apostolical eminency and
presidential authority, as was necessary for the Churches constant Order and
good Government, according to that precedent Charter and Commission which all
Churches had received from the Apostles, and they from Christ, not as a
temporary Ordinance, but such as for the main end and method the Lord would
have continued till his coming again, by a succession of ordinary Bishops, who
are a lesser or second sort of Apostles, in many things short of their gifts,
yet having the same ordinary power to ordain Presbyters and Deacons, to appoint
them their offices and places in the Churches Ministry, and to see they execute
the same as is meet for the edifying of the Church in Truth and Love, to rebuke
and reject them in case of failing and obstinacy.

As the Church daily thus increased, spreading its boughs even to the utmost
seas, still its Polity or Government, as the bark or rind of the Tree,
enlarged with the body or bulk, being most necessary for the preserving both of
lesser and greater branches, to knit and bind all together, to convey the sap
and juice to every part, and to the whole. This once peeled, or broken, or cut,
wounds the tree, weakens, and often kills that part which is so injured: Trees
may as well thrive without their bark and bodies, live without their skins, as
Churches without settled and united Government. Therefore that all true
Christians might still keep a Catholic Correspondence, Subordination and holy
Communion, between the whole and every branch or member, they had not only
Deacons above the people, but Presbyters above Deacons, and Bishops above
Presbyters: yea and as the borders and numbers of the Church so increased, that
not only Presbyters but Bishops grew many, and so fit to be put into some
method and order, they had Archbishops or Metropolitanes above ordinary
Bishops, and Patriarchs above Archbishops or Metropolitanes, and a general
Council above all; thus still drawing nearer to a center of union and mutual
intelligence.

So that first three, afterward five Patriarchs had the general Episcopacy,
Superintendency and Inspection over all the Christian world. Nor were these
Bishops Metropolitans and Patriarchs, any ambitious affectations or forcible
intrusions of pride or tyranny upon the Churches of Christ, but by a wise and
general consent on all sides, The primitive care of the Union and Communion of
all Churches.
Christian Bishops did so cast themselves into comely rancks of Subordination,
after the Apostolical pattern, as might most suit to the good order,
correspondence and unanimity of all Christians, as but one Church; there being
in the first 300. years of sore persecution, no other motives to these eminent
places and regular orders in the Church, of Bishops, Archbishops,
Metropolitans, Primates and Patriarchs, but only those of Labors and Cares,
of Sufferings and Martyrdoms, which still pressed most upon the Presidents and
chief Governors or Bishops of the Churches: as was evident in the glorious
marks of the Lord Jesus to be seen on the Faces, Hands, and other parts of the
Bodies of those venerable Bishops (318) which met at the first great gaudy-day
of the Church in the Council of Nice, which all made but one Episcopacy, and
were Representers as well as Presidents or Rulers of but one Catholic Church.

After which time, by the favor of Christian Emperors, the Churches Polity and
Government, being carried on by the same Apostolical power and Episcopal
spirit, was highly promoted, even to secular Dignities and Estates; Bishops
being not only every where unfeignedly venerated by all sorts of Christians,
as chief Pastors and spiritual Fathers succeeding to the chief Apostles by an
uninterrupted and undoubted succession, of which every Church had pregnant
Records and Memorials, but they were invested in such civil honors as make them
Peers to the Senators, Nobles or Patricians of the Empire: which was more to
their pomp and luster, but not more to their Episcopal authority, and that
filial respect which was paid to Bishops by all good Christians, even then when
they and their Clergy had nothing to live upon but (the dona Matronarum and
oblationes Communicantium) the contributions and offerings of devout people.

In this fair and sun-shine-weather, The withering, decay and falling of some
branches.
as secular Peace and Plenty increased to the Church, so Christianity spread
very far, as to the Fashion, Profession and Form of it, in branches and leaves,
but grew (among many) less fruitful in the real effects of Piety and Charity:
many now thronged into Christ's Church, Mark 5.30.
but fewer touched him with the hand of Faith, so as to heal their infirmities.
Yea, as in the very first times under the Apostolical Episcopacy, the
Simonians, Nicolaitans, Gnostics, Corinthians and others, afterward, (during
the still-persecuting Ages) the Marcionites, Carpocratians, Valentinians,
Montanists, and others; so in the most prosperous times, the Manichees,
Novatians, Donatists, Arrians and Pelagians, with diverse others, became as
branches either miserably split and slivered by their own schismatic and
separate humors, or quite wholly broken off by blasphemous Apostasies, and the
just sentences of Excommunication, from that one Catholic Church and the
unanimous Bishops of its communion: for whom one Bishop did rightly
excommunicate by the lesser or greater c^nsure, all Bishops, Presbyters and
Christians in all the world did the same virtually. Hence many lesser and
greater branches, even some Bishops with their whole Presbyters and Churches,
grew sometimes scare and withered, twice dead and pulled up by the roots, by
Error and Obstinacy, by voluntary Desertion and Ecclesiastic Abdication, as
many Arrian and Donatist Bishop^.

Yet still by the correspondence and care of the excellently learned, resolute
and unanimous Bishops of the fourth, fifth and sixth Centuries, with their
orderly Presbyters and faithful Flocks, the Church ceased not to flourish, for
the most part, in Verity and Unity, in Piety and Charity, as well as in civil
Peace, Plenty and Honor; the holy and good Bishops every where still clearing
the moss and cankers which grew upon this fair Tree: they pruned the
Excrescencies and superfluities both of Jewish presumptions and Heathenish
superstitions, all and every one being prudently intent, as far as times and
the manners of men would bear, to preserve his lot part or Diocese committed to
him by consent of the people, by the choice of his Presbyters, and by the
comprecation or consecration of his colleagues the Neighbor-bishops, so as
became the relation they had to the whole Church, after the grand patterns and
models received from the blessed Apostles; who first, as Bishops of equal size
and authority, yet as men using an orderly precedence, sprang from that one
Root Christ Jesus, and by their united Ministry spread abroad the Church far
and near.

It Is true, the primitive severity and rigor of Christian discipline much
abated in times of greater peace and plenty: many primitive signs of Christian
love and communion, The laxation of Ecclesiastical discipline.
as the Holy Kiss, their Love Feasts, their Oblations, their Hospitality to
all Christian strangers, and the like, were crowded out by the Wantonness,
Factiousness, Hypocrisy, Luxury and Avarice of some Christians, besides
Churchmens Ambition and Heretical Fury; none of whom would endure the sharp
yoke of primitive Pennances, Abstentions, Castigations, and many ways of
Mortification, by Watching, Sackcloth, Fasting, Prostrating, Weeping,
Confessing, etc. At length Mohammedan poison and power cruelly pressed upon the
divided and debauched Eastern Churches: after this the Papal policy and power
by insensible degrees in ignorant and turbulent Ages so prevailed upon the
blindness and credulity of these Western Churches, (who were much wasted also
with wars in Spain, Italy, Franee, and here in Britanny, by domestic
Rebellions and barbarous Invasions,) that the face of this goodly Tree was much
battered and altered from the primitive floridnesse and fruitfulness; the
Roman Church and its Bishop or Patriarch being, like an Hydropick body, swollen
by secular Pride and Usurpation so much beyond its pristine comeliness and
honor, that in stead of an holy and humble Apostolic Bishop of the same Order
and Authority with his other brethren, he must be owned in a
superecclesiastical, and a superepiscopal, and a superimperial height, as Lord,
and Sovereign, and Prince, above that is called God in Church and State. Yet
still, while this Papal branch presumed thus to grow beyond its proportions, to
the over-dropping and dwindling of all other parts of the Church, its form or
fashion, as a Tree in its winter or less-thrifty state, remained even under
those sad seasons of Papal perturbations and presumptions; God never suffering
the Church to be quite deformed, much less hewn down, because it was never so
barren, even in those days, but it brought forth some tolerable Bishops,
Presbyters and other Christians, yea many of them very commendable ones.
Neither Papal Foxes nor Mahometane Wild Bores had ever power to lay it quite
wast, or overthrow it both root and branch, as to its saving foundations, or
its orderly constitutions, or its authoritative successions in Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons: still holy Mysterys and holy Orders, the holy Ministry
and holy Scriptures, holy Examples, holy Doctrines, holy Duties and holy Lives
were continued in such order and by such conduct, as easily represented the
primitive pattern and Apostolic figure of this Tree, though with many
accressions and some deformities, which time, and ignorance, and superstition,
or humane policy and secular pride, had affixed to some main Branches of it in
these Western parts of the Church; yet the ancient Lineaments and true Model
were very visible in Christian People, Christian Deacons, Christian Presbyters,
and Christian Bishops, directed into several stations, as Helps for the more
orderly carrying on of the Churches Government in grand and national
combinations.

In this posture stood the state of the Catholic Church, The state of
Episcopacy under the Papacy.
as in all other places where the Vastations of Saracens and Turks had left any
miserable Remnants of Christian Churches, so most eminently in this Western
world, which the Providence of God had not yet wholly delivered over to Gog or
Magog: none of these Churches were without their Deacons, Presbyters and
Bishops, until that great Reparation rather than Alteration of Christian
Religion began in these Western Churches about the Year 1520. which was justly
called a blessed Reformation in many respects, as to clearing the corruptions
of Doctrine and Manners which had been contracted every where, which by learned
and godly men, Bishops and other Ministers, were notably discovered, and by
some Christian Princes or States happily amended with great order and by due
authority, as in other places, so no where with more Wisdom, Justice and
Moderation than in England.

Where (as in most of the Churches protesting against the Roman deformities,
especially those of the Lutheran denomination) the ancient Orders and Authority
both of Bishops and Presbyters were preserved, as is evident in the Augustane
confession; which finds no fault with, but highly approves the Government of
the Church by Bishops under Episcopacy, provided Bishops would join in a just
Reformation of those gross abuses which were the Churches intolerable
grievances, as well as the dishonor of Christian Religion and Christian
Bishops, whose deserved Honors, Estates and Eminencies in Authority they saw
no cause to envy, grudge or diminish. So far were these first Reformers from
hewing down Episcopacy, as if it cumbred the ground, that they only dug
about it, and mended it, that it might bring forth good fruit, as it did in
England and elsewhere.

The beginning of the Presbyterian-government Anno 1541.
While the Western Churches Reformation was yet but crude, and in motion by
Luthers means, there arose Mr. John Calvin about the Year 1541. a man of good
Learning, acute Wit, copious Eloquence, great Industry, quick Passions, sharp
Pen, of reputed Piety, and of no less Policy. Him the people of Geneva thought
the fittest man in the world to settle their distracted Church and State, after
they had, with the wonted arts of tumultuating and discontented people, forced
Eustace their Bishop and Prince to fly from his Palace and City, his
Bishopric and his Seigniorie, because he would not presently gratify them
with such a Reformation as they imperiously demanded rather than modestly
desired.

Mr. Calvin's grounds for Presbytery were not against Episcopacy.
Mr. Calvin (as Mr. R. Hooker has excellently set it forth) undertook with much
difficulty and after many indignities (worthy of popular levity, fury and
petulancy) put upon him, to settle their Church Affairs, together with the
civil State, in such order as he thought, not most Scriptural, primitive and
Catholic, but most prudential, plausible and probable in humane reason and
honest policy, to take and hold the tumultuating inconstancy of that people, so
to bring them to something of civil and religious order; acting herein, not
upon any Wiclefian or the after- Presbyterian and Antiepiscopal Principles, as
imagining either Episcopacy to be unlawful, or sole Presbytery to be necessary
as of Divine Institution; neither of which were his judgment, as is
sufficiently and vehemently declared by his passionate approbation of reformed
Bishops, and his esteeming so honorably of regular Episcopacy, that he passes
all Anathemas or curses on those that are against them: so far was Calvin from
laying the Axe to the root of this Tree, which, with Christianity, had ever, as
he confessed, born Episcopacy.

But he rather went upon Erastian principles and politic grounds, looking, it
seems, upon the Government of the Church (as he did upon the Lord's Day, which
is not elder, nor more authentic or Catholic as to the Churches use and
observation, than Episcopacy) to be in their nature mutable, (as of
Ecclesiastic, yet Divine prescription) according as Times, Occasions and Minds
of men might fall out. He well knew, being a learned man, and often confesses in
his Writings, the primitive blessing and universal authority of presidential
Episcopacy in all Churches: yet he neither thought it, nor any form of
Government (any more than clothes) to be essential to the substance and body or
any Church or of the Christian Religion, but variable to several forms and
polities, as prudence might invite, or necessity require: so that he never set
up any sovereign and unepiscopal Presbytery as an Idol or Moloch, to which not
only the children, but the Fathers of the Churches, even very godly and
reformed Bishops, were all sacrificed. He thought it did not misbecome his
policy and prudence to serve the times and humors of the Citizens, so far as to
seem to vary the outward mode of their and all other Churches ancient
government; provided, he served the Lord and that people in settling such a
government as might preserve the Christian Reformed Religion among them in true
Doctrine and good Manners, which was the main work which Calvin seemed to mind
most.

To have reconciled the City and their former Bishop was a matter impossible,
unless he or they had changed their minds in Religion: Mr. Calvin's difficulties
in settling the Church Government of Geneva.
to have persuaded them to elect a new Prince and Bishop of their own
profession and opinion, had been very imprudent, considering either the fair
offers they made to himself, of being, not titularly indeed, but virtually and
really, both the Prince and Prelate, or remembering that strong fancy of Liberty
which had now so filled and intoxicated all sorts of Citizens. In the last
place, to have set up himself in the pomp and formalities of a Bishop and a
Prince, had been an act of too much Impudence and Envy for a person of his
Ingenuity, Policy and Dexterity in public managements: it sufficed his design,
so far to gratify both the Populacy with seeming Liberty, and the Optimacy
with some civil and Magistratick Authority, all of them with such reformed
purity in Religion, as most pleased them, and yet to keep up himself and his
colleagues of the Ministry to such an height of Ecclesiastical Influence and
Church Power, as made them far from being either slaves to the Vulgar, or
ciphers to the Government: for all cases, civil and criminal as well as
religious, were one way or other reducible, and so responsible, either by way
of comprimising, or upon scandal, or repentance, or satisfaction, to the
cognizance and consistory of him and his colleagues, himself being as the
Caesar, they as his Bibuli. In effect, his Wisdom, Reputation, Eloquence and
Courage set him up in Geneva and other places to so high an eminency of respect
and authority, as he equalled, yea exceeded, most Bishops: however his pomp,
train and pension were but small (after the usual bounty expectable from any
State or City that list to make their Reformations of Religion complete by
robbing the Church and Clergy of their ancient Lands and Revenues) which
doubtless in that City had been so great and princely, as upon the confiscation
of them to their Town-box or Exchequer, they might well have allowed Mr.
Calvin, their great Reformer and chief Pastor, and his Associates, a Salary
much beyond an hundred pounds per ann. with a little provision of Corn. But he
wisely dissembled this Indignity, finding that, as Riches, Pomp and Luxury had
undone former Bishops, so a voluntary kind of Poverty and Austerity would now
best conciliate to him and his colleagues a greater Reverence and Authority: nor
was it considerable to have a gay or rich scabbard, provided they had sharp and
well- metall'd swords: their Ambition was rather to intend Gods work in
reforming Religion of its Leprosy with Elisha, than in taking man's rewards
with Gehazi.

In this Presbyterian Prelacy or Prelatick Presbytery, which seemed to bow
Church Government to the ground, and make it, like a Bramble, take root at the
nether end, Mr. Calvin lived and died at Geneva, never either rigid for a
parity of Presbytery as of any Divine Institution, nor against a comely
eminency of Episcopacy, which he owned as a very commendable, useful,
venerable, ancient and universal Order of Church- polity and Government, where
it was paternal, not imperious, as an elder Brother among brethren, not as a
Master among servants. Such Bishops presiding as Fathers among Presbyters, yet
gravely and kindly advising with them, and assisted by them in all the grand
and joint concernments of the Churches welfare, these he never wrote, nor
said, nor thought, nor dreamed to have any thing in them Papal, Antichristian,
Intolerable or Abominable to God or good men, as some hotter and weaker spirits
afterward declaimed. Episcopacy and so Presbytery had indeed (as other holy
Mysteries, Orders and Customs of the Church) suffered very much smut, soil,
darkness and dishonor by the Tyrannies, Fedities, Luxuries, Sotteries and
Insolences of some Bishops and other Churchmen under the Papal prevalency;
but Reformed Episcopacy, which in many Churches continued with reformed
Doctrine, never received the least blame or blemish from Mr. Calvin's Tongue,
Pen or Judgment, no nor from any of his colleagues and successors in Geneva,
who were learned men and of sober minds.

The growth of the Presbyterian way of Church Government.
But from the reputation of Mr. Calvin's name, this new and rather necessitated
than elected project of Church Government and Discipline, under the name of a
Presbyterian parity or Consistorian conclave, grew to be looked upon with very
favorable eyes by other free Cities, petty States and Princes, as their
Interest lead them; each crying it up, together with the reformed Doctrine, to
such an height, as if the new paper and packthred in which Mr. Calv. had
wrapped those old, yet good spices, were of equal value with them. Several
Interests advanced the business, shows of Liberty with the people, parity of
Empire and power with the ordinary Preachers, and hope of gain by confiscation
of Church Lands and Bishops Revenues, with some States and Princes, as in the
Palatinate, Hassia, and other parts of Germany, so in Scotland, with some
Suitzer Cantons and Hanstowns: the zeal for Reformation which was very
plausible, the zeal for Imitation after the copy of so renowned a person which
was very popular, and the zeal of Confiscation, where so opulent and profitable
a booty would fall into some men's purses and Coffers, all these together
carried many men with full sails to Presbytery, and with a strong tide against
Episcopacy, by whose spoils many hoping to be enriched, they rather chose to
ruin than reform it, that extirpating might justify their stripping of it,
which had more Revenues, but not more deformities, than Presbytery had under
Episcopacy.

To make this Transport of some men good, which not only deserted, but
defamed, despised, and in some places destroyed the Ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic state of the Churches polity of old by Episcopacy, hereby varying
even from the Lutheran Moderators and Superintendents, (which were reformed and
qualified Bishops) as well as from all the present Roman, Greek, Armenian,
Abyssine, and all other ancient Churches in the world, to their great and
insuperable scandal, yea and from some eminently reformed Churches, as England
and Ireland were, in which Episcopacy was still continued, as the Honor,
Center and Fixation of all Ecclesiastical Order, Unity and Authority; to avoid
the odium and envy of this scandal, all plausible ways were taken by the great
Admirers and Adorers of the new Geneva-platform, to set further glosses and
titles upon this new Presbyterian-government and discipline, finding that the
watercolors of Prudence, Necessity, Policy and Convenience, which Mr. Calvin
had used, would not hold long; especially where Episcopacy now kept its
pristine power and possession in so many famous reformed Churches and States,
as Denmark, Sweden, Saxony, Brandenburg and others, besides England, which
outshined them all.

All these so asserted the honor of true and reformed Episcopacy, that all
sober men saw Prelacy was no more of kin to Popery, than Regality is to
Tyranny, or Magistracy to Oppression, or Presbytery to Popularity, or natural
Heat to a Fever, or Wine to Drunkenness, or Good cheer to Gluttony, or Good
order to Insolency, or due Subordination to Slavery.

It Is true, great Indulgencies and soft Censures were carried by those Churches
which were Episcopal, Whence the former brotherly correspondency between
Episcopal and Presbyterian Churches.
toward such of their reformed Brethren who were not opinionatively but
practically Presbyterial, pleading for themselves not choice so much as force
and urgency of their present Affairs and Condition, considering either the
pressures even to Persecution which some were under, or peoples impatiencies,
or Princes sacrilegious aims: all which made their deviation from the
confessed Catholic and primitive pattern of Episcopacy so long venial as their
Judgments were right and their Charity candid toward Episcopacy, either
approving of it, or deploring their want of it, or wishing for it as the best
Government, where it might be enjoyed with the Reformed Religion. While
Presbytery continued thus humble and poor in spirit, it was esteemed honest and
excusable upon Christian charity, pleading not pervicacy but necessity; not a
schismatic Faction or Usurpation against Episcopacy, but an humble submission
to a condition which, as Peter Moulin owns, was far short of the happiness
they desired under good Bishops.

But this equable and charitable temper was too lukewarm and cold for some
hotter Zelots for the Presbyterian way; they did not like that their new
platform (which they called the pattern in the Mount) should thus take any
quarter from Bishops any where, but rather be in a capacity to give no quarter
to any Bishops or any presidential Episcopacy.

From private and amicable contests, which began at Franckfort, and so by
degrees were fomented in other Cities, between some reformed Divines, it grew
to higher flames of contention than those between Paul and Silas: at length it
rose to a Rivalry, to Reproaches, Menacings, Fewds, Despites and bitter
Animosities between such as adhered to ancient Episcopacy, and those that
admired the new-sprung plant of Presbytery.

To dig about, to muck and mend this last, the Learning, Wit and Credit of Mr.
Mr. Beza's Patrociny of Presbytery beyond Mr. Calvin's principles.
Beza contributed not a little, who first of any man openly inscribed
Presbytery with a Title looking very like to Divine, as Christ's true and only
Discipline; in which yet he was not so punctual and peremptory as many that
followed him in his supposed Opinion, but came far short of his real Learning,
which still forbad him to deny primitive, paternal and reformed Episcopacy its
due Honor, Use and Place in the Church of Christ, or to demand the extirpation
of it where it was settled and reformed, which he deprecates as an intolerable
arrogance in him or any man. To which moderation if his Judgment and
Conscience had not led him, yet he was shrewdly driven by the notable charges
of learned Saravia, a man of veterane courage, of a steady judgment and
unpopular spirit, who pressed upon his Unepiscopal, much more against his
Antiepiscopal Presbytery so strongly, that he forced his Antagonist to stoop
and subscribe to Primitive and Catholic Episcopacy, yea, and to acknowledge
Bishops, even from the Apostles days, to have been the ((...)^ Presidents or
chief Rulers among Presbyters in all Churches.

Mr. Beza's Essays, not so much to have undermined Episcopacy, as to have
fixed or earthed his Presbytery better, being thus notably countermined, yet
upon his very breaking the earth, and promising, at least pretending, to spring
some rich Mine of Scripture and Antiquity, to prove, if not the sole, yet at
least the concurrent Divine right of Presbytery, on both sides of it, both as
to its preaching and ruling Elders, as stamped with the mark of Christ and his
Apostles, (besides his and others terrifying the world, as if Popery had begun
with Prelacy, and Antichrist had sucked the breasts of Episcopacy) it is not
imaginable what industrious Pioneers and Soldiers followed these charms, this
alarm for Presbytery against Episcopacy; who sifting every name of Bishop,
Presbyter, Elder, Evangelist, Messenger, Apostle, Prophet, Pastor, Teacher,
Ruler, Governments, Helps, etc. in Scripture and Antiquity, found or fancied
upon all of them something that made very much, if not only, for Presbytery,
and very much, if not wholly, against Episcopacy, so far that they would not
allow so much as the twelve or thirteen prime Apostles any Episcopal
Presidency, Eminency or Authority above the seventy Disciples, or any
Presbyters whom they ordained, much less any Bishop after them, above the
youngest, meanest and pettiest Presbyter; rather suspecting, yea aspersing all
Antiquity, even in the primitive and purest times, for Ignorance and Error, or
Falsity and Ambition, in following the Catholic custom of Episcopacy, after
the great Apostolical pattern (which was (in them) given to all Churches by the
Spirit of Christ, and after continued by the Apostles own appointment) than any
way admitting any Innovation, Flaw or Defect to be in their new-formed
Presbytery.

Heats unhappily growing great, and Eruptions many, The heats about
Church Government among some reformed.
from the Etna or Vesuvius of men's passions, the sulphur and ashes at last came
from Geneva, Franckfort and Edenborough, over to England: where at first they
onley fell upon the square Caps and Rochets of our excellent, reformed and
reforming Bishops; but at last they flew in their very Faces and Eyes, without
any respect to their Age, Learning, Piety, Sanctity, and Martyrly Constancy,
besides the honorable places they still held, both in Church and State,
according to our Laws.

For the Undertakers for the Cause (as they called it) of Jesus Christ, first
picking at the outworks of Ceremonies, next at the spiriritual Courts or
Jurisdictions of Bishops, after that at the excellent Liturgy, at last they
laid amain at the whole Body as well as the Branches of Episcopacy, going much
further than ever their first Founders of Presbytery abroad, or the modester
Non-conformists at home ever designed or desired. Thus a bolder Generation of
men (stopping their ears against all the charms of Scripture, Antiquity,
Universality, Prudence, personal Merits, public Blessings, and all proportions
of Government and Polity, only urging a peremptory necessity and a
self-inforcing novelty) perfected that in a dreadful War, which was neither
begun, nor promoted, nor desired by the chief Magistrate, nor by his chief
Council in its pristine fullness and freedom, nor ever before was acted in any
reformed Church whatsoever against their reformed Bishops.

After much bustling and bloodshed in perilous times, The first planting of
Presbytery in England to supplant Episcopacy.
this crooked and low shrub of Presbytery, which having never much thriven or
grown handsomely in Scotland or in any other Kingdom, (where it had been happily
and handsomely grafted by King James with a renewed and well-reformed
Episcopacy) this bitten, mangled and misshapen, was brought over on the swords
point, and wrapped up in the cover of a Covenant (as Plants in Mats) to be set
in this good soil of England, after sweating Smectymnuus and the industrious
Assembly with many Heads, Hands, Tongues and Pens, had dug and prepared the
ground for it, by gaining the minds of some well-affected Members in the two
Houses, and others in other places.

The terrible equipage of Presbytery at first.
About the Year 1649. (the Fasces Imperiales, and the Sacrae Secures) the Holy
Rods and Imperial Axes of Presbytery were displayed to England, in their Ruling
and Teaching Elders, in their High and Mighty Consistories, Parochial,
Classical, Provincial, National, Ecumenical: for the Presbyterian power was in
all the world to prevail against Episcopacy, as Daniels He-goat did against the
Ram, casting him to the ground, and stamping upon him. Every Presbyter, young
and old, ripe and raw, was to have not only a sword in his mouth, but a switch
of correption in his hand; which, lest he should use too rashly and sharply, he
was to be pinioned and surrounded with certain Lay Elders, each of them
furnished also with a Rod of Disciplinarian or ruling power equal to the
Minister. All this dreadful dispensation of Presbyterian discipline was
pontifically and punctually set out by many discourses, to the no small wonder
of all wise men, who knew the disproportions to all Government generally, which
were both in younger Ministers and in most Laymen of plain parts and plebeian
breeding, such as in most places these herds of ruling Elders must be, into
whom the spirit of Government must presently enter. And no less terrible was
this paradox and parado of Presbyterian Discipline and Severity even to
Common People, yea and to the most of the ablest Gentry and Nobility, except
some few, whose itch and ambition of a Lay-elderships place had possibly
biassed them to smile upon their persons and their now* Presbytery, to which
they were invited solemnly to be Gossips.

The activity of Presbytery.
Thus armed and marshalled in its Ranks and Regiments, Presbytery began to
hasten its March in its might, furiously enough, setting up its Conventions,
Ordinations, Jurisdictions, trying the metal and temper of its Censures by
Ebaptizations, Correptions, Abstentions, Excommunications and new Examinations
even of ancient Christians, old and eminent Disciples to whom they had formerly
given the Sacrament twenty times: some of which they sought to win by fair
speeches; some people they persuaded, others they menaced and scared to submit
to their new Scepter. Daily Intelligences and brotherly Correspondencies were
zealously kept every where, very quick and warm among the Presbyterian
Fraternity. Bishops never so aged, learned, unblameable, venerable and
meritorious for their Labors and good Examples, were as Underlings and
conquered Vassals, not so much as pitied, but despised and trampled under
foot, exautorated and vilified by every young stripling that had got the switch
of Presbytery in his hand, which he saw now was beyond the Bishops Keys or
Crosier.

The dwindling and withering of Presbytery in England.
Presbytery thus driving at Jehu's rate for some time, some of its wheels or
pins, like Pharaohs, began to drop off, which forced it to drive more heavily
than its natural genius can well bear, (being spirited, like Ezekiel's wheels,
with so many young Preachers of very active fancy and eager to rule.)

After all this digging and delving this rare plant of Presbytery soon
dwindled, either as having no great depth of good earth, or as not planted by
so lucky an hand as it should have been in so public and grand a concern as
Government is in any Church or State, or as watered so much with Christian and
Reformed blood. In fine, its very Bark grew straight and hide-bound, its soft
branches and sudden shootes grew weak and withering, its junctures loose and
infirm, its top too heavy for its body, and its bulk for its roots; as an
Epidemick terror at first, so now a nauceous scorn befell most people, some
laughing at, others despising these new Undertakers to govern all sorts of
Christians great and small in England, without the leave of the chief Governor
in Church and State, to whom they had sworn to be subject, as to the supreme
Governor in Church and State.

In a few years the breach which these Trojans had made in the walls of their
own City, this Church of England, to bring in this wooden Horse of Presbytery,
so weakened their own defense, both for maintenance and authority, that when
they thought Town and Country and City had been their own, they saw themselves
much forsaken, as by Prince and Peers, so by the people generally, yea and by
some of their greatest Masters, who listed not to write upon Presbytery ( Jugum
Christi or Sceptrum Crucifixi) the Yoke or Scepter of Jesus Christ.

After this damp and coldness had fatally come upon most men, who were now as
willing not to be governed at all by any Presbyters, as Presbyters were
unwilling to be governed by their lawful Bishops; no Agitating, no Stickling,
no Preaching, no Praying, no Fasting, no Printing, no repeated Crambes of
Christ's Discipline, of Elders and Elderships, of Helps and Governments, of the
Necessity of the Divine right, of the Aarons Rod of Presbytery, which had been
kept hid (it seems) in the Ark of the Covenant for 1600. years, no splendid
Names of Mr. Calvin, Mr. Beza, Mr. Farel, Mr. Knox, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Baines,
Mr. Brightman, Mrs. Smectymnuus; no urging the Covenant, the Votes, the
temporary Ordinances, of two Houses; no engine was capable to buoy up
Presbytery, which was either leaky, as built of green timber in have, or
overloaden beyond its bulk and capacity.

Many sober and good Christians, bred up under Episcopal prudence and gravity,
had already felt, and others feared the Pertness and Impertinency, the
Arrogance and Emptiness, the Juvenility and Incompetency, the Rusticity and
Insolency of some ruling and teaching Elders too. Sober men disdained, till
they saw better reason from God and Man, to put their necks thus into a new
Noose, and their hands under the Girdles of their either Equals or Inferiors:
no ingenuous man or woman thought that High-shoes and the Scepter of
Government, yea of Church Government, yea of Christ's Government, could well
agree together.

So that the decoy and fallacy, the sophistry and shooing-horn of bringing in
Lay Elders by Divine right, with some show of Common-peoples having an
influence in the new Church Government, was soon discovered and despised; it
being most apparent, that Ministers must be very silly Scholars and less
Politicians, not to over-bear by florishes of Words and Wit, or shows of
Reason, Learning and Religion all his Lay Elders o^ ruling partners; so that he
would (upon the point) enjoy the sole government of his parochial Principality
or petty-Episcopacy, which would make the little-fingers of Presbytery in time
heavier than the loins of Episcopacy ever were, by so much as many poor men's
Oppressions and young men's Follies are like to be more ponderous than one rich
and aged persons power.

The soft and gentle rise or springing up of Ind^pendency, An. 1641.
At this stand and maze, some Ministers and people (who could not for shame
return to Episcopacy, not yet well persist in promoting Presbytery, which they
saw a lost game) very notably betook themselves to a new Invention of
Independency; of which the first five famous Planters and Commencers in
England, were men, as of prudential parts, so of good esteem for their piety
where they were known, and some of them were reputed for their learning. These
(Quinqueviri) with very modest Applications and humble Insinuations first
begged leave and liberty, not only to dissent from Presbytery, (with more
brotherly tenderness than that had done from Episcopacy) but to attend the
further completing of that Church Way, which they called Congregational or
bodying of Christians, of which they already had some general light and model
in their heads, as most- scriptural, though least discernable in any track or
practice of former Churches.

Independency supplants both Presbytery and Episcopacy.
Their grand postulate or principle was (as Jacob) very smooth, popular and
pleasing, probable enough to gain Disciples in a more gentle way than
Pre^bytery had done, which was red and rough handed like Esau, the Independent
planters owning people to be the first and chief Receivers and Dispensers of
all Church Power. Both of them agree and resolve, having shaken hands for
fashion-sake as brethren, utterly to leave their aged Father and old stock
Episcopacy, which they thought (like Isaac) now blind, superannuated, doting
and quite spent, having no more blessing for them. These, as young and lusty
striplings, for a while socially apply to shift for themselves, without
interfering each with other: the one, as eldest, hoped to live by Hunting, by
using arms and force to compel people to bring them provision; the other, as
yet of a milder nature, gently applies (in a more furtive way) to gather
Churches, like little flocks of sheep, from any Fold whence they listed to
stray, to feed them by their own will, and to rule them according to their own
pleasure, because by their own power and popular commission, making the flock
to be above the Shepherd, and the ruled above the Rulers in an absolute,
complete and supreme power under Christ, being immediately authorized from him
to choose and to depose, to make and to reject, to reprove and to remove their
Officers to Presbyters, Elders, Pastors or Bishops as their menial servants,
and Christ's Messengers as their dependent and manual Ministers, elected and
ordained as well as nourished and maintained by them.

The body of the people thus congregated or congregating themselves being the
measure of all Church Power to it self, and to all its members great and small,
neither appealing to others, nor requiring others appeals to them, neither
ambitious to Rule over others, nor enduring to be Ruled by others; but wrapping
up it self in small volumes, every Church carries (like a snaile) its shell and
all it has with it; not troubling poor people with tedious and long journies,
with vexatious citations and appeals from one Classis or Court to another;
which were, they say, the burdens attending both Episcopacy and Presbytery,
which last mended (as they truly tell the world) them atter very little, in
point of peoples Ease, Quiet and Liberty, after it had so quarrelled with
Episcopacy, and with many sleights as well as violence wrested the staff out
of its hands: Presbytery seeming like the plant called Touch me not, which
flies in the face, and breaks in the fingers of those that press it; but
Independency, as the sensible plant, rather yielding to, then resisting any
hand that is applied to it.

This later and softer plant no sooner (almost) began to be set on foot in
England about the year 1650. but it soon gained much ground of Presbytery,
which had been an old bitten shrub, ill rooted, and never very flourishing or
fruitful, and less apt to be now at last transplanted: But Independency, as a
new slip or full-shoot, springs up apace, spreads its roots and branches
without any noise, erects its Churches as fast as Presbytery could its
Consistories, out of the ruins of Presbyterians Parishes, as well as of
Bishops Dioceses. Independency has no great line or out-work to maintain, and
so can do it with fewer numbers and less noise: it desired only in Peace to
enjoy it self; affecting no forced ambition or unvoluntary Rule over others as
did Presbytery: it professes to aim at nothing, but a nearer and greater
strictness of Sanctity, Unity and Charity among Christians in their Church Way
than it thought could well be had among the larger combinations of Presbyterian
or Episcopal Churches, which they think are not easily managed without much
labor and toil, besides offense and complaint; because they urge many things
as of duty, and by constraint, when this is only by every ones free will and
consent.

Nothing is more soft and supple than Independency in its first render branches
and blossoms; nor is it other than a little Embryo of Episcopacy in a little
Parish or Diocese: For Bishops, Presbyters and People, did of old and at first
so nearly correspond, as Fathers, Brethren and Sons of a Family, when they were
but few, and scarce made up one great Congregation in a City; where one
Minister at first was both Pastor and Teacher, Bishop and Presbyter, who, as
Christians increased, ordained them Presbyters, to carry on the work, and yet
to keep a filial Correspondency with him and respect to him, as became them.
The pomp and solemnity of Independent Episcopacy is less, but the Power and
Authority Ecclesiastical is, though broken and abrupt, yet full as great and
absolute as to all Church-uses and intents as ever Bishops challenged. How far
this willow will grow an oak, more rough and robust, as it grows Elder,
Bigger, Higher and Stronger, no man knows. I presume it cannot have better
beginnings of Order, Unity, Purity, Piety, Charity, Meekness and Wisdom, than
Episcopacy had in its first Institution; which is owned by all learned men to
be at least Apostolical, both as to the enlarged Churches, made up of many
Congregations, and the enlarged Authority of one Bishop placed by the Apostles
over many Presbyters and Congregations, so gathered by them into one
Ecclesiastic Society or Combination, as those Primitive Churches were in the
Scripture. Nor can it have more specious and modest beginnings for Purity and
Sanctity, than some former sects have professed, such as were the Novatians and
Donatists; of which St. Cyprian and Optatus, with St. Austin and others, give
us liberal accounts; whose procedings did not answer their beginnings, either
in Modesty, Charity or Equity, but from rending from, they fell to reviling and
ruining all Churches but their own.

From the rise and advantages which these two new, and now almost parallel,
plants in England, Presbytery and Independency, neither of which are yet any
way grown up comparable to the Procerity, Height and Goodliness which
Episcopacy had, and yet has, as in many Churches of Christ, so in many English
men's minds, (notwithstanding that both of them, as notable suckers, strive all
they can to draw away all sap and succor from the old root of Episcopacy, that
it may quite wither and be extirpated every where, as it has been lately with
Swords and Pickaxes terribly lopped and almost quite stubbed up in England;)

The advantages that other parties make by Presbyterian and Independent
sticklings against Episcopacy, and Ecclesiastic unity.
From these two (I say) which have so much pleased either some Ministers or
People with shows of Novelty, Liberty, and share of Authority, other Parties,
Sects and Factions have began to set up their scaling ladders, and (for a time)
staying one of their feet either on the standards of Presbytery or
Independency, they fall amain with their hatchets to hack and hew down the
remains of all Episcopal order and Communion in Churches, to cut off the
battered, stripped and bare branches of that Ancient and goodly Tree, which
contained once the Catholic Church under its boughs and shade.

Thus these petty planters begin their new plantations, that every one set up
new Churches and Pastors after their own Hearts, Opinions and Fancies, making
use of what sear, barren and Schismatic slips or abscissions they are able to
break or cut off, aiming still to plant (as they say) further off from the root
and bulk of Episcopacy (as a notable character of more perfect Reformation)
than either Presbytery or Independency seem to have done, who sometime profess
they can comply with something in Episcopacy.

Hence, first Erastians or Politicians begin to resolve all Churches into
States, all Ministry into Magistracy; making no other origin of Church Power
than that of the Commonwealth, nor of any Ministers, Bishops or Presbyters
Authority than of a Justice, or a Captain, or a Constable.

After this Anabaptists, Quakers, Enthusiasts, Seekers, Ranters, all sorts of
Fanatic Errors and lazy Libertines, pursue their several designs and
interests under the notions of some newfound Church Sprigs and better
plantations, filling all places in England like a wood or thicket with Bushes
and Briers, and Thorns of Separations, Abscissions, Raptures, Ruptures,
Novelties, Varieties, Contentions, Contradictions, Inordinations,
Reordinations, Deordinations, and Inordinations, no Ordinations scarce owning
any Church or Christians which are not just of their way and form, as Optatus
tells us the Donatist Bishop Parmenian and his party did.

All of them agreeing with Presbytery and Independency in this one thing
(however differing in others, as in the matter of Tithes, which these are
reconciled to) that they are enemies against all Diocesan Ruling Episcopacy,
quarrelling even the Honesty and Credit of Primitive Churches on that account,
despising all the Fathers, and all the Councils and Canons of all Churches, as
levened with Episcopacy. The reason in all of them is one and the same; because
true Episcopacy was a notable curb, and restraint, and remedy, equally against
all Schisms and Innovations in the Church of Christ, as St. Hierom tells us.
And further, by its venerable Authority, so Famous, so Ancient, so Universal,
so Primitive, so truly Apostolic, it infinitely and intolerably upbraids all
their Novelties and Extravagancies: besides they are conscious that they shall
hardly ever (one for a hundred) either equallize or exceed in many Ages the
useful and excellent Abilities, Gifts, Graces and Miracles, or the Benefits and
Blessings, which by and under regular and holy Episcopacy the Lord was pleased
to bestow (if ever any were bestowed) on his Church in all the world, who never
(till of later years) knew any thing of other Church-governments, besides that
of Episcopacy, any more than they saw new Suns or new Moons in the Heavens.

It may be these Parelii or Paraselenes, these Meteors, Comets and blazing
Stars, that now appear in despite of primitive Episcopacy, will not be so long
lasting, nor so benign to this or any Church as that was; though they seem to
emulate, yea and strive to eclipse, nay quite to extinguish the shining of
those ancient lights to which they owe their best light of sound Knowledge and
Religion, Episcopacy joined with an orderly Presbytery.

Mean time what Inconveniences, yea Mischiefs and Miseries have or may attend
these Fractions, Diversities, Divisions and Confusions upon the account of
religious forms and Church-ambitions in this and other Churches, between both
Ministers and other sorts of Christians, what spoil and havoc they may be
tempted in time to make upon one another, while they seek either to overdrop or
to destroy each other, as they have done (beyond all moderation and mercy) upon
Episcopacy, how little hopes there is that any, or many, or all of them can
ever thrive and ascend to any height, not of secular glory, but of Christian
proficiency in Truth and Love, comparable to the pristine or modern Beauty,
Fruitfulness, Usefulness and Goodlinesse of a right Episcopacy in England or
any other Church, is left to the sober judgment and prudent presages of all
wise and worthy Christians that list to be spectators and Readers; before whose
eyes this Scheme is with Truth and Love plainly and impartially set forth, as
to the historick and politic Description of these several and unproportionable
Figures, which are lively Emblemes of the Catholic and ancient Unity and
Uniformity under Episcopacy, compared to modern Diminutions, Divisions and
Deformities, as to Ecclesiastical Polity, Order, and Government, since
Presbytery was planted in blood, and Independency self-sown of late years in
England; whose Honor, as a Church Christian and Reformed, will then be most
advanced, together with its civil Peace, when both Presbytery and Independency,
as to the just Interests of godly Ministers and people, are re-ingrafted or
re-incorporated with those of primitive Episcopacy, which is, beyond all
dispute, and ever was, in the best and worst times, the best Conservator, as of
Bishops Apostolic Authority and Succession, so of Presbyters worthy
privileges, and of all faithful peoples comely advantages, so far as they are
jointly concerned in Ordination or Approbation of Ministers, in Consecration
and Communication, in holy Mysteries, in mutual Counsels, Supports and
Assistances both private and public. The just ballancing or even twisting of
which three together, makes Christian Churches and States at once ample,
honorable and happy, both in Order and Unity, in Strength and Beauty, in
Unanimity and Uniformity, which are the best constitution and complexion of any
Church that desires to thrive in Piety and Charity, in Truth and Love; which
the wise and blessed God in mercy restore to us.

BOOK I. SETTING FORTH THE Present DISTRESSES OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND.
CHAP. I.
LEst any one should stumble at the very threshold of my Discourse, and by
their too much prejudice, The Name and Thing: the Title and Truth of the Church
of England asserted*
coyness and easiness, to take offense from Names, should frustrate my whole
design of doing them good, by forbearing to read what I write upon such a
subject; I am at first, as briefly and plainly as I can, to assert the Name of
the Church of Engl. Which Title is (certainly) the crown of our Country, the
honor of our Nation; the highest, holiest, and happiest band of our society;
the surest foundation of our peace with God and men; which under this name, and
in this relation, becomes sacred as well as civil, religious as well as
rational. It was a very sad and bad exchange, if this Nation then began to be
no Chapter of Christ when it began to be a Commonwealth; if it ceased at once to
be an earthly, and heavenly kingdom: which last, as the Emperor Theodosius
said, was the greater honor of the two.

We eat, and drink, and sleep, we beget our like, we die, or kill and devour
one another, as beasts* we build and plant, we buy and sell, we rule and obey,
as mere men: But we believe, and worship the true God; we profess the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ; we are partakers of the gifts and graces of the blessed
spirit; we have an holy communion with that adorable Trinity, and with one
another in love and charity, as Christians, that is, visible members of Christ
our Head, and of his Church, which is his mystical body; our noblest life,
sweetest society, Ephesians. 3.30.
and divinest fraternity is, as we are Christians, that is, Emulators of the
holy Angels, Imitators of God, children and servants in the family of Christ,
candidates of heaven, expectants of happiness, partakers of grace, and daily
preparing for eternal glory. All which are the dispensations, capacities, and
privileges of that nation and people only, which are and own themselves the
Church of Christ.

A title of so much honor, and real advantages, that in earnest, no Nation or
people once called and converted to be Christians, and by public vote or
profession owning themselves to be such, should ever be patient to be robbed,
or under any specious pretenses and novel fallacies deprived of it, since the
Empire of the whole world, and the riches of both Indies are not equivalent to
this honor, Hos. 1.10.
for a people to be called Gods people which were not his; and for a Nation
which sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, to be professedly and
really the household of faith, the Church of Christ, as this of Engl. was
heretofore owned to be, by the solemn and public profession of its Kings and
Princes, its Nobles and Peers, its Parlaments and Synods, its Magistrates and
Ministers, by the consent, suffrages, and submissions of all estates and
degrees of people, ever since its first conversion; who never thought it any
impropriety or barbarity of speech, (much less any disgrace) to call
themselves, according to their joint and declared profession of the name and
faith of Christ, The church of England.

Which Title I use, according to the good old style and general phrase of all
learned, godly and wise men, both at home and abroad, Ancient and Modern. With
which Inscription, that excellent Bishop Jewel set forth his just and accurate
Apology, full of honest learning, potent reasonings, and unfeigned Antiquity,
besides Scripture-demonstrations: which got It and this Church so great an
applause, both at home and abroad, that all Reformed Churches and Divines
admired it, both this Church and that Book. The more learned and modest
Romanists either found they had not abilities to confute it, or not confidence
enough to despise it; nor did any Non-conformists then boggle at this Title of
The Church of England, when they found it convenient to enjoy the benefit of
Her shadow and protection, however in some things they then quarrelled at Her
garb and fashion.

If any of these be now grown so wilfully ignorant, that they need to be
informed in this point, they may please to know, That the Name of the Church of
Engl. is more ancient, more honorable, and every way as proper, as the new
style and title of the Commonwealth of England. Which denomination imports,
not the agreement of all private men's aims, desires, and interests in all civil
things (any more than the other does all men's agreement in every opinion and
point of Religion:) But it denotes the declared profession of far the major
part, which is esteemed as the whole; whose consent is declared in the Laws and
public constitutions.

So by the name of the Church of Engl. it is not imported or employed, that we
judge every particular person in this Nation to be inwardly a good Christian,
or a Romans 2.28. Asserimus, Ecclesiam visibi^e^ in S Scriptura descriptam, non
tantum fuisse parochialem, seu particularem; sed esse etiam Ecclesiam quandam
Nationalem, unius gentis aut regni; quae constatex diversis and multis
Eccles^is Parochialibus uno regimine Ecclesiastico junctis, mutua communione
and societate Ecclesiastica visibili inter se devinctis. Apollonius Consid. c.
3. Ass. 2.
true Israelite, that is, really sanctified, or spiritually a member of Christ,
and his mystical body, the Church Catholic, invisible: No, we are not so rude
understanders, or uncriticall speakers. But we plainly and charitably mean that
part of mankind in this Polity or Nation, which having been called, baptized,
and instructed, by lawful Ministers in the mysteries and duties of the Gospel,
makes a joint and public profession of the Christian faith and reformed
Religion, in the name, and as the sense of the whole Nation; as it is grounded
upon the holy Scriptures, guided also and administered by that uniform order,
due authority, and holy Ministry, for worship and government, which, according
to the mind of Christ, the pattern of the Apostles, and the practice of all
Primitive Churches, has been lawfully established by the wisdom and consent of
all estates in this Nation, in order to Gods glory, the public peace, and the
common good of men's souls.

I know there are some supercilious censors and supercriticall critics, who
cavil at, disown, disgrace and deny this glorious Name of the Church of
England: allowing God no Title to any such National Church, nor any Nation
such a relation to God, since that of the Jews was dissolved; nor do they much
approve the Name, or believe the Article of the Catholic Church.

The truth and property of both which titles and expressions I know there is no
need for me largely to vindicate, among judicious, sober and well- catechized
Christians, Suam utilitatem potius considerantes, quam unitatem Ecclesiae, etc.
Iren. l. 4. c. 62.
who do not drive on any design by the fractions, parcellings and confusions
of National Churches, as those seem to do, who are still affectedly ignorant
(for this subject has been fully handled and cleared by many late excellent
pens in England, besides the ancient and foreign writers) that the name of
Church of Christ, next to the highest sense, which denotes all that holy and
successionall society in heaven and earth, who are or shall be gathered into
one, as the mystical invisible body of Christ, that is purchased, sanctified
and saved by him, which is never at one intuition visible in this world; this
is also, in a lower sense, not more usually than aptly, applied to express
that whole visible company of Christian Professors upon earth, whose
historical faith, declared profession, and avowed obedience to the Gospel of
Christ, like a great body or goodly tree, in its several extensive parts and
branches, stretches forth it self throughout the whole world. This
collectively taken, as derived from one root, or bulk, is called the visible
Catholic militant Church of Christ, being to particular Churches, not as a
genus to the species, but as an integrall or whole to the parts of it.

Besides these, the name of the Church of Christ serves to express any one of
those more noble parts, or eminent branches belonging to that Catholic visible
Church; which being similary, or partaking of the same nature by the common
faith, have yet their convenient limits, distinctions, and confinements, as to
nearer society and local communion, for their better order, unity, peace and
safety, either in particular Cities or Countries, Provinces or Nations; each of
which, holding communion of faith and charity with the Catholic Church, were
in that respect anciently called Catholic Churches: so were their Synods and
Bishops called Catholic, (long before the Bishop or Church of Rome monopolized
that name) as that of Smyrna is styled in its commendatory Letter, Damasus of
Rome, Aurelius of Carthage, Calinicus of Pelusium, are called Bishops of the
Catholic Churches in those Cities, by Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, etc. (...).
Eusebius. l. 4. Hist. c. 16.
touching their holy Bishop and Martyr Polycarpus.

I deny not but the name of the Church of Christ, is in Scripture, and in
common use may be applied, in the lowest, and least proper or complete sense,
to particular congregations, and small families, Romans 16.5. Col. 4.15. 1 Cor.
16.19.
especially where others met to serve the Lord: which may in some sense (as
Noah's family in the Ark) be called Cities, Commonwealths, Kingdoms, Ubi tres
Ecclesia est, licet laici. Tertul. Ecclesiae entitativae, non organicae:
materialite^, non formaliter ecclesiae.
Nations, as well as Churches; being the Substrata, Seminaries and Nurseries of
both: yet this in a defective, improper and diminutive sense only, as apart
from, or compared to those larger combinations and ampler Communions, which all
reason, besides the express wisdom of Christ's Spirit, and the practice of the
blessed Apostles followed by all the Primitive Churches, invites all Christians
in any nation or polity unto, for mutual peace, good order, safety and
edification, both as to Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government; far
beyond what can be enjoyed or expected in smaller parcels, or separated
societies: whose mere local advantages, by neighborhood or neerness of
dwelling, and actual meeting together in one place, make them not any whit more
a Church of Christ, Paroeciarum in quibus convenitur numerus accidentaria res
est, nihil ad ecclesiae particularis essentiam pertinens; quae uni Presbyterio
subjuncta, sacros conventus pluribus locis aut uno potest agitare. Bucer. de
gubern. eccl. p. 10. Corpus sumus de conscientia religionis, and disciplina
unitate, and spei foedere. Tertull. Apol. c. 39.
or in and of a Church, than it makes them men or citizens; but only gives them
some conveniences for the exercise of some of those duties and privileges,
which they enjoy, not as Members of that single Congregation, but as Branches
of the Catholic Church of Christ; to which Mystical Body they were admitted,
when they were baptized, and to whose head, Jesus Christ, they are related and
united, so far as they are believers either in profession or in power: Being
further capable to enjoy all those benefits and advantages necessary for the
public Peace, Order, Government and well-being of a Church; All which Christ
intended it, and which are not to be had in the small parcels of Christians,
but in the joint authority of larger combinations.

Such sober Christians as live above capricious niceties, captious sophistries,
and popular affectation of novel forms and terms, do well understand, That,
as little slips grow great trees, and small families multiply to populous
Cities and Nations, whose strength, honor, safety and happiness consists, not
in their living apart, reserved and severed from one another in their private
houses, or parishes and Townships; but in their joint counsels, large
Fraternities, and solemn Combinations, under the same public Laws and
Governors; without which they cannot attain or enjoy Peace and Safety, the
noblest fruits and highest ends of humane Societies and civil Polities; whose
Dangers, Mischiefs and Miseries are such, as cannot be avoided or resisted,
save only by united Counsels and Assistances, to which just appeals and
addresses may be made, for redress of such mischiefs as small parties cannot
avoid or remedy:

In like manner Christians have in all ages grown up, from the first
Apostolical Plantations of Christianity, which were in particular persons and
private families, to such holy Associations, Charitable Combinations, and
regular Subordinations, as reached not only to the first Families, or less
Congregations and Neighbourhoods (which, as I said, may be called Churches in
their Infancy, Youth, and Minority;) but they grew up, spread and increased, by
the spirit of Prudence, Peace, Order, Love and Unity, even to great Cities,
large Provinces and whole Nations. To all which more public and extensive
relations, Christians finding themselves obliged by the ties, not only of
their common faith and love, but of their own wants and mutual necessities for
Order, Safety and Peace; they ever esteemed themselves so far bound in duty to
every relation, both greater and lesser, as the general good, and more public
concernments of those Churches of Christ did require of them; which were ever
esteemed as (Ecclesiae adultae) Churches in their full growth, beauty, harmony,
procerity, vigor and completenesse, both as to the good to be enjoyed, and the
evils to be avoided, by all Christians, not only in their private, but public
and politic capacity.

It Is happy indeed, when one Sinner, or one Family, one Village or
Congregation, give their names to Christ; at which the Angels in Heaven
rejoice: But how much more august must their joy be, Luke 15.10.
how much more magnificent must the glory of Christ, and the renown of his
blessed name be, when whole Cities, Countries and Nations willingly 2 Cor. 8.5.
give themselves, and Zach. 2.11.
be joined to the Lord, and to his Ministers, or Ambassadors? This carries
more proportion as to the merit of Christ's Sufferings, price of his Blood, and
power of his Spirit; so to the accomplishment of those many clear and
munificent promises, foretold with so great pomp and majesty by the Prophets,
of Gods Ps. 72.11, 17. All nations shall serve him. Isa. 52.10, 15. c.
66.20.65.1. He shall sprinkle many nations. Zach. 2.11. And many nations shall
be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people. Isa. 55.5. Thou
shall call a nation whom thou know not, and nations which knew not thee
shall run unto thee. Mat. 21.43 To. 10.19.
giving in the Nations, with the glory and fullness of their multitudes, to
Christ, for his Inheritance; so far that many and mighty Kings and Queens
should be nursing Fathers and Mothers to the Churches of Christ: which should
be not only diffused and scattered according to the latitude and extent of
their civil Dominions; but piously owned, prudently governed, and orderly
preserved by their princely and paternall care, in their several
distributions, and orderly jurisdictions, according as all true prudence and
polity, Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, does require of wise and good men.
Namely, to such a grandeur, beauty, comeliness and safety, as was and is
infinitely beyond any of those modern Models and petty Inventions, which seek
to slip goodly Boughs into small Twigs or Branches; to reduce ancient Churches,
of long growth, of tall and manly stature, to their pueriles, their long coats
and cradles.

Such famous and flourishing Churches (for instance) were those in the Apostles
times and long after, which received their denomination or distinction from
those great ^^ties of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Philippi, Thessalonica,
Corinth, Rome, and the like Mother-Cities: According to whose latitude and
extensions, in point of civil distinction and proconsulary jurisdiction, the
union and communion of Christians there first converted, and formed into
several Churches, did extend, by the holy and happy Ecclesia in Episcopo and
clero, and in omnibus stantibus est constituta. Cyp. ep. 27. Radi^ Christianae
societatis per seeds Apostoloru^ and successiones Episcoporum certa per orbem
propagatione diffunditur. Aug. ep. 42.
Association of their respective Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and people, into
one Ecclesiastical polity: whose orderly and united influence contained in it,
not only some one particular Congregation, whose number might fitly meet in
one place to worship God; but it comprised all Christians and Congregations in
that city, how numerous soever, yea, and extended, not only to the walls of
that city, but to the suburbican distributions, yea, to their several
Territories and Provinces appertaining to them: in which, although there were
(no doubt) many thousands of Christians, who were divided into several
Congregations, according to the nearness of their dwellings, and conveniences
of their meetings in one place to serve the Lord; yet were they still but one
Church, as to that Polity, Order, Authority, Government, Inspection and
Subordination which was among them; which cast and comprehended them by a
native kind of right, and spiritual descent, as children to fathers, under the
care, rule and guidance of that Apostle or Apostolic Teacher, who first taught
and converted them; 1 Timothy 1.3. I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, that
thou might charge, etc. Tit. 1.5. For this cause I left thee in Crete.
which Apostle afterward committed them, together with his own ordinary
Authority over them, to his Vicegerents, Suffragans, or Successors in that
chief city, who residing there, was called the Angel, 2 Phil. 25. (...). 2 Cor.
8.23. (...).
Apostle, Bishop, President, or Father of that Church, even by the Apostles
themselves, and by the Spirit of Christ, Rev. 2. and 3. chapter See the Primate of
Armagh's discourse of the Lydian or Proconsular Asia.
writing to the seven Churches of Asia, Ephesus, Sardis, Pergamus, Thyatira,
Smyrna, Philadelphia and Laodicea. All which were ever reckoned by Pliny,
Strabo, Stephanus and others, as chief Cities, or Proconsulary Residencies; to
which many other Villages and Towns, yea some lesser Cities and Countries, were
subordinate and united; as first, in civil dependence and jurisdiction, so
afterward in Ecclesiastical Communion and Subjection.

So that it is most evident, by Scripture-dialect, by the wisdom of Christ's
Spirit, by the Apostolic prudence, and the subsequent practices of all famous
Churches, (as at Alexandria, Constantinople, Carthage, and many other
instances) that the compleatnesse and perfection of Church-polity, order,
union, power, and authority, was never thought to be seated or circumscribed in
every particular congregation of Christians, as they were locally divided in
their lesser conventions, which would make all Churches as small twigs, both
feeble in themselves, and despicable to others; but it was placed in those
great branches, those strong and extensive boughs, which had in them the united
power or authority, not only of many Christians, but of many congregations, in
which were many godly people, many grave Deacons, many venerable Presbyters,
and one eminent Bishop, or Father, Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis
dignitate pendet, cui si non exors quaedam and ab omnibus eminens detur
potestas, tot in Eccles^is efficientur schismata quot sacerdotes. Hier. advers.
Lucis.

Quia principali successione absistunt. Iren. l. 3. c. 40.


who continued in that Presidentiall authority, to water, propagate, increase,
preserve, and ^overn, in order, peace and unity, those Churches which the
Apostles had so planted, fixed and established in their several polities and
limits, as to Ecclesiastical union, order and jurisdiction; In which the chief
Pastor, President, or Bishop so presided in the place, power, and spirit of the
Apostle, (yea, and of Jesus Christ) that no private Christian, no Deacon, no
Presbyter, yea, no particular congregation might, as Ignatius and other
Ancients tell us (regularly) do any thing, in public doctrine, discipline,
worship, or ministration, without his respective authority, consent, and
allowance. Yea all good Christians did ever make great conscience of dividing
from the principal succession, seat and Pastor, who was the center and
conservator of that Church-union and government, which was first settled by the
Apostles in Primitive Churches, and imitated by all others, which grew up after
them.

Primitive Christians ever esteeming it as the sin of schism, Neque enim
aliunde Haereses obortae sunt, aut nata schismata, quaminde, quod sacerdoti Dei
non obtemperatur; nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, and ad tempus judex,
vice Christi cogitatur. Cyp. ep. 55.
the work of the flesh, a fruit of pride and factious arrogance, for any
Christian, or any company of Christians, to dissolve, to divide from, and so to
destroy that great bond of Christian communion, and subordination, into which,
by the wisdom of the Apostles, the providence of God did at first, and ever
after, cast his Church, in its several parts, throughout all the world, for
their greater safety, strength, comfort, counsel, honor, peace and stability,
which are then most like to be enjoyed, when Religious power and the Churches
authority run not in small and shallow rivulets, which are contemptible, and
soon exhausted; but in great rivers, with fair and goodly streams; in the
united counsels, and combined strength of many learned, wise, grave and godly
men.

Nor may it be thought, in any probability of reason, that when the Spirit of
Christ wrote by Saint John to the seven Churches in the lesser Asia, which was
about ninety years after the birth of Christ, and above fifty after his
Ascension; or when the Apostle Saint Paul wrote to the Churches eminent in
other great Cities, that there were (then) no Christians, or no congregations
and assemblies of them in the other cities, towns or villages of those large
countries and spacious territories; or that those Christians were not at all
considered by the Spirit of Christ, or the Apostle, as to their further
confirmation, instruction, regulation, order and government: No, but all those
Christians and congregations, in those respective limits, territories, or
towns, belonging to such a principal city or renowned Metropolis, were
comprehended and included in the dedication or direction given to the Angel, or
Bishop and chief overseer (under, or after the Apostle) of that whole Church
which was contained in that Precinct or Province. Which method and form of
uniting, constituting and governing such ampliated and completed Churches, was
Primitive and Apostolical: whence it also grew Catholic in all Nations and
Churches without exception: no Christians or Congregations (till these last and
worst times) ever seeing any cause to think themselves wiser than the Apostles,
or the Spirit of Christ; nor ever either finding, or feigning, or forcing any
necessity, to alter that constitution, order and subordination, by any
unwarrantable breakings, Schisms, Separations; which are the ready way to
weaken and waste the Churches of Christ in their order, safety and majesty, by
unbinding and dissolving what was once and ever well combined, breaking the
staff of Beauty and Bands; of Unity, Defense and Stability.

Certainly, as no Reason, so much less Religion, does persuade any men to
shrink themselves from their manly stature and full growth, to become dwarfs
and children again: who but children, madmen or fools would rend a goodly and
fair garment into many beggarly shreds and tatters, which are good for nothing
but to trim up Babies? How savage a cruelty is it in any (as Medea did her
children) to cut a fair, strong, and well-compacted body into several limbs,
bits and mammocks? which thus divided, are both deformed and dead. It argues no
less a fierce and ferine nature in any men, to ravell and scatter themselves
from all civil fraternities and sociall combinations (which strongly twist the
joint interest of mankind together) merely out of a lust to return to their
dens and acorns: or out of a fancy to enjoy such liberty as exposes men, by
their own infirmities and others malice, both to necessities, wants and
injuries. Who, but mutinous and mischievous mariners, will cast their wise
Pilots and skillful Masters over-boord, or shipwreck and cut in pieces a fair
and goodly Ship, in which many men being sociably and strongly embarked, they
were able to encounter with, and overcome the roughest seas and storms; merely
out of a cruel wantonness and dangerous singularity, which covets to have
each man a rafter or plank by themselves; or out of a vain hope, to make many
little skiffs and cock-boats, in which to expose themselves, first to be (
ludibrium ventorum) the scorn of every blast, tossed to and fro with every
wind; next, (after a little dalliance with death, and dancing over the mouth of
destruction) to be overwhelmed and quite sunk by such decumane billows as
those small vessels have no proportion to resist? Alike madness and folly
would it be in the Soldiers of an Army, to scatter themselves into several
troops and companies of fifties and hundreds, that should be absolute of
themselves, under no General or Commander in chief, as to joint discipline:
united they may be strong and invincible, divided they will be weak and
despicable. The Polity, Wisdom, Stability, Authority and Majesty of those
ancient, ample, and Apostolic Churches was such of old, that all good
Christians had infinite comfort, relief, safety and support in their communion
with them: if any injury were done by any private Minister or particular Bishop
to one or many Christians, remedy was to be had by appeal to such whose
judgment was most impartial, and whose authority as well as wisdom was least
to be doubted or disputed by any sober Christian. Such as were imprudently
erroneous, or impudently turbulent, Innovators of true doctrine, forsakers of
Christian Communion, disturbers of Peace, or despisers of Discipline, either
they were soon cured and recovered by wholesome applications, from the
authoritative hands and charitable hearts of many, not only Christians, but
Congregations, and their united Presbyters, with the joint consent of their
respective Bishops, so far as the evil and contagion had spread in particular
persons, Congregations or Churches: or in case of obstinacy, they were not
only silenced and infinitely discountenanced, by the notable censures and just
reproaches of many; but they were (at last) as it it were with the thunderbolts
of heaven, so smitten, bruised, astonished and disanimated by the dreadful
Anathema's, which from the concurrent spirit of those great Churches and Synods
were solemnly denounced in the name of Christ, by the chief Pastors or Bishops
succeeding in the authority and place of the Apostles, that every good
Christian feared and trembled; they wept and prayed for such sinners
repentance; Summum futuri judicii praejudicium. Tert. Apol. c. 39.
and in case of desperate contumacy or incorrigiblenesse, they gave them over
to the Devil, as certainly, as if the sentence of Gods eternal doom had passed
upon them.

This, this was the pristine polity, unity, beauty, majesty and terror of the
Churches of Christ in their ample and Apostolical combinations; when each of
those Churches were (as sometimes in England) fair as the Moon, bright as the
Sun, beautiful as the tower of Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, a city of God, at
unity in it self, also terrible as an army with Banners: for so they are
prophesied, of and described, Cant. 6.4, 1^.
under the name of the Spouse of Christ.

Can any Christian, that is not utterly fanatic and wild with his
Enthusiastic fancies, ever expect such harmony, weight, luster, authority and
efficacy from any of those petty Conventicles and pigmy Churches, into which
some men seek first by Independent principles and practices to mince all
Episcopal and National Churches; next, by Presbyterian policies, to mould and
soulder them up again (as Medea did Jasons-limbs) either to partial
Associations, or to parochial Consistories, or little popular Conventicles;
where either Piety, or Prudence, or Learning, or Gravity, (besides authentic
and due authority) yea Civility, and all good manners (many times) are prone to
be very much wanting; or if they be there in some few, yet a thousand to one
but they are quite overborn, routed, silenced, over-voted and cried down by
the plebeian confidences of those many, whose ignorance and rudeness delights
in nothing more, than either to smother and crowd to death by numbers, or to
assassinate by downright clamours and brutish violence, any thing that looks
like sober Reason, holy Order, just Restraint and due Authority; all which the
vulgar esteem as their implacable enemies, and intolerable burdens.

So little do those men seem masters of true Reason, pious Policy, Christian
Prudence, or sociable Charity, who advise, endeavor, or encourage to divide,
and consequently to destroy, Episcopal, Metropoliticall and National
Churches, by dissolving the noble frames, the ancient and harmonious junctures
of them, only to make up small Independent bodies, or Presbyterian Classes,
and Parochial Consistories, as the sole and supreme Tribunals or ultimate
Judicatories, beyond any remedy or appeal, in Church Affairs; which is much
like the digging down of Mount Lebanon, with a design to make it into many fine
mole-hills: In which a few poor, yet pragmatick Christians (like so many ants)
may busy themselves solely and absolutely about themselves; as arrogating to
themselves (though but two or three, or seven at most) the perfect name,
complete nature, entire power, and highest emphasis of a Church of Christ, to
all uses, ends and purposes, without any regard to any other higher authority,
or to any greater and completer Society, further than they list to advise or
associate with them for a time, as occasion serves, and till some new invention
offers it self.

Mean time they are not ashamed, or concerned, as to that rude and ungrateful
violation of those duties which they owe, and those relations which they ought
to bear as Christians, Qui non participant Spiritu^, neque a mamillis matris
autriuntur in vitam, neque percipiunt de corpore Christi procedentem
nitidissimum ^^ntem, etc. putidam bibu^t aquam, etc. Ir^n. l. 3. c. 40.
by the right of an holy propagation, spiritual descent, and ecclesiastical
derivation of their baptism, faith and religion, to that Church which was
their Mother, and to those chief Pastors or Shepherds which were their
spiritual 1 Cor. 4.15. Summus sacerdos qui est Episcopus. Tert. de bap. c. 17.
Fathers, by an Apostolic title, designation and succession, both in place,
order and power. Which spiritual relation certainly imports no less duty,
love, thanks, reverence and submission, than those of natural and civil
relations do: since the blessing is at least equal, if not far beyond, to
those that value their souls or their Savior; who will not easily abdicate
their ghostly parents, or renounce their spiritual Fathers, though they should
see many infirmities, and some frowardness in them.

I shall not need to instance in the many defects, inconveniences, disorders,
and mischiefs incident to these ( Ecclesiolae, and Congregatiunculae) little
Churchlets and scattered Conventicles: Tot in Ecclesiis effic^e^tur schismata,
quot sacerdotes, nisi Episcopo exors quaedam and ab omnibus eminens detur
potestas. Hieron. adv. Lucif.
which cannot but be (as S. Jerome observes) the Seminaries of Schism,
Nurseries of Faction, strife and emulation; since the Sire of them seems to be
Ignorance and Weakness, or pride and arrogance; as the Dam of them usually is
faction, private ends and popularity: Nor will their Issue fail to multiply
and swarm in a few years, with gross ignorance and rudeness, with all manner
of errors and heresies, accompanied with vulgar petulancy, atheism,
irreligion, anarchy, confusion, and barbarity, which (like vermin) will
devour both themselves, and those completer Churches, from whose communion,
order, light, strength, discipline, integrity, and safety, they have withdrawn
themselves, by needless divisions, to the weakening, shaking, subverting and
endangering of the faith, charity, and salvation of many thousands of poor
souls: the strength, beauty, honor, safety, and comfort of particular
congregations, Judicabit Dominus eos qui schismata operantur, qui sunt immanes,
non habentes Dei dilectionem, suamque utilitatem potius considerantes quam
unitatem Ecclesiae, propter modicas and quaslibet causas magnum and gloriosum
Christi corpus conscindunt and dividunt, and quantum in ipsis est interficiunt,
pacem loquentes and bellum operantes, very liquantes eulicem, and camelum
deglutientes. Nulla enim ab eis tanta potest sieri correptio, quanta est
schismatis pernicies. Iren. l. 4. c. 62.
as of private Christians and families, consisting in that orderly conjuncture,
as parts with the whole body politic, which may best preserve both It and
themselves: there being not only more virtue in the whole than in any part;
but more vigor in each part, while it is continuous to the whole, than when it
is divided. Which as all Reason and Religion, so most sad experience in the
Church of England, sufficiently assures us.

For, however private Christians have indeed some power, as to counsel,
admonish, reprove, comfort, pray for, and by charitable offices to help and
edify one another; C^imus in coetum and congregationem, ut ad Deum quasi manu
f^cta pr^ca^ionibus ambiamus ora^^es. Tertul. Apol. c 39.
also private congregations have yet more advantages, being many in their
number, to join in public duties, to comprobate and execute Ecclesiastical
censures; further, each single Minister, or lawful Presbyter, has yet greater
authority in his place and office, to administer holy things, by preaching,
baptizing, consecrating, binding, loosing, exhorting, rebuking; likewise every
Bishop has still an higher order and authority, regularly to ordain, to
confirm, to examine, to censure, to rebuke, to suspend, Ecclesias vocat
Tertullianus etiam eas, quae ordinis consessum non habebant: ubi quisque
sacerdos erat sibi; quorum erat (...), etc.

At excommunicare non commune est; sed proprium coetus habentis ordine^. Grot.
Appen. de Antichrist.


to absolve, to excommunicate any private Presbyter or other Christians under
his inspection: Yet, where the Bishop is assisted with the desires, consent,
and approbation of many Christian congregations, also with the joint assistance
of many learned and godly Presbyters, yea and with the united suffrages and
authority of many Bishops, (as in cases of great and general concernment in
matters of doctrine, censure, and discipline is requisite;) O how ponderous,
how solemn, how celebrious, how powerful, how Apostolic, how divine, must the
majesty and authority of such transactions be in any Church, thus combined,
established and fortified, against both secret contagions and violent
incursions of any mischiefs, which easily grow too hard for private Christians
and petty Congregations; yea many times for particular Presbyters and single
Bishops! Nor can the remedy expectable from these in their solitary capacities
and small proportions, either cure or encounter the pregnancy and potency of
those maladies which many times infest the flock of Christ; as was evident in
those Epidemick pests of Arianisme, Nestorianisme, Donatisme, Pelagianisme, and
others: which malignities required not only the influence and authority of a
few private Presbyters with their Congregations, or of particular Bishops and
their Churches; but of Provincial Synods and National Churches, yea of the
Catholic Church, as much as could be, united in those General Councils, which
were as grand Ecclesiastical Parlaments, by their majority, deputation,
inspection and authority, representing all Churches in all the World; that so
the salve might still be wisely commensurate to the sore. The danger of a
divided Church being no less than that of of a divided State or Kingdom,
which our Savior tells us cannot stand; Mar. 3.24.
it must not be imagined that Christ has left his Church destitute of defense
and help in such cases of distraction.

These grand combinations of Christian people, Si duo unanimes tantum possunt,
quid si unanimitas apud omnes esset? quid si secundum pacem quam Dominus nobis
dedit, universis fratribus conveniret? Cyp. ep. 8.
Presbyters and Bishops, convening (as occasion required) not only to serve
God in the piety of his daily worship, but for the right ordering and guiding
of themselves and others in such public concernments as Christian polity and
gubernative prudence required; these made Christian primitive Churches appear
in their Synodicall, Provincial, National and Oecumenicall Assemblies, as the
fairest sides and goodliest prospects of the Temple and city of God were wont
to do, to the joy or amazement of all Spectators, so grand, so stately, so
august, so amiable, so venerable, so formidable, that no man could with any
modesty despise them, or with any ingenuity refuse their sense and sentence.

Whereas Schismatic scraps and scambling separations of Christians, either
in their persons or parties, as disjoined and Independent from these Primitive
polities and Catholic integrations of Churches, make their scattered fractions
and unsociable societies appear not only to the scornful world, and to
perverse minds, but to all sober Christians and rational men, like so many
poor Cottages, or like the late ruined pieces of our Cathedralls; like a flock
of Sheep or Pigeons, scattered by Wolves or Kites; or like the parts of a Lamb,
or Kid, which a Lion or Bear has torn; without that Grandeur, Majesty,
Authority and Efficacy, which ought to accompany Ecclesiastical judicatures
and Christian Churches.

In which pitiful posture, so feeble, so desolate, so despicable, if the wisdom
of our blessed God and Savior had intended to have always kept his multiplied
Church and numerous people, which were to beas the Stars of the Firmament, Genesis
26.4.
that they should ever be like the small parties of wild Arabs and wandering
Scythians; certainly, those Primitive and purest Churches, nominally
distinguished and locally defined by the Word of God, the Spirit of Christ, and
the Pens of the Apostles, would never have grown, by an happy diffusion and
holy coalescency, to such great and goodly combinations, such vast, yet comely
statures and extensions; to so large combinations and harmonious
subordinations, as contained great Cities, Provinces, and whole Countries: For
such Churches those are which are signally described and punctually
circumscribed in the New Testament, as well as in all other records of the
Primitive Churches.

Which fair and firm models of Churches, comprehending many Christian people,
Deacons, Presbyters and Congregations under one chief Pastor, Bishop, Angel, or
Apostolic ^resident (who was as the nave of the wheel, the center of Union,
the anchor of Fixation) I make no doubt but the Spirit of Christ in the
Apostles (which so framed and settled them) did intend to have them so
preserved, as much as morally, prudentially and providentially they could be;
yea rather to have them ampliated and enlarged (as time, 2 Samuel 10.4.
use, and the Churches occasions required) than curtailed (like the garments of
David's messengers) or pared and divided into small shreds and shavings. The
reason is evident: because the life and spirit, the truth and charity, the
honor and vigor of Christian Religion and Church-polity (like Wine) are
better preserved in great quantities, than in small parcels; in Tuns, than in
Terces. Christian people, Presbyters, Congregations and Bishops, like
live-coals, united, glow to a more generous fervor; scattered, they cool and
extinguish themselves: unless in cases of persecuted Churches, where Martyrly
fervencies are kept high and intense by the Antiperistasis of persecution; the
most heroic love and ambition of suffering and dying for Christ and his
Church, then uniting Christians spirits most, when their persons are most
scattered.

BOOK I. CHAP. II.
THe Primitive Piety and Charity so perfectly abhorred all fractures and
crumblings of Churches, Primitive Piety and Prudence utterly against
Schismatic dividing or mincing of Churches into small bodies or parcels.
that we see they kept for many hundred of years, as Ignatius, Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Cyprian, Eusebius, and all Ancient
both Fathers and Historians tell us, their respective Combinations,
Fraternities, and Subordinations to their Bishops, Patriarchs, and
mother-Churches; according to those ( Seeds principales, Age jam qui voles
exercere curiositatem in negotio salutis tuae, percurre ecclesias Apostolicas,
apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur; apud quas
ipsae Authentic^ literae recitantur. Tert. de praes. c. 30. Ecclesia, ab ipso
Christo inchoata, per Apostolos provecta, certa successionum serie usque ad
haec tempora toto terrarum orb dilatata. Aug. l. 28. cont. Faust.
Cathedrae Apostolicae, or (...)) limits or boundaries, which were laid out and
distinguished, either by the Act. 1.17, 20
Apostles first lots and Episcopal portions, or by their chief residencies,
and settled inspections governed either by themselves, or their Vicegerents and
Successors, most of them Primitive Martyrs and Confessors: which was done even
till the famous Council of Nice, which in the point of distinguishing Churches,
and keeping their several Dioceses or bounds, took care to preserve to
after-ages and successions of the Church, those ((...)) ancient customs,
measures, or dimensions; some of which, begun by the Apostles, and carried on
by their Successors, had passed through and endured the Episcopi per omnes
provincias and singulas urbes ordinati sunt, in aetate antiqui, in fide
integri, in pressura probati, in persecutione proscripti, etc. Cypr. ep. 52.
hottest persecutions, without ever being so melted and dissolved, as to run
into any such new moulds and fashions, as this last Century, in these Western
Churches, and these last seventeen years in the Church of England have
produced; to such ( frustula) fragments, chips and fractions, as look more like
factious confederacies, and furtive subductions of yesterday, than like those
Primitive combinations, and that ancient and ample Communion of Christians and
Churches. The endeavor of many People and Preachers too being (now) like that
of Plagiaries, to entice and steal children from the care of their mothers, and
the custody of their fathers, to Hoc negotium est illis, non ethnicos
convertendi, sed nostros evertendi: Ita fit ut ruinas facilius operentur
stantium aedificiorum, quam extructiones jacentium ruinarum. Tert. de praes.
ad. Hae.
ruin (as Tertullian speaks) rather than to edify themselves or the Churches
of Christ, to that full measure, and complete stature, which the love of
Christ, and the wisdom of his Apostles, first designed and assigned to the
Church of Christ, in its several limits and distributions.

In order to preserve which Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
not only as to private veracity and charity, but as to public polity and
harmony, for strength and safety, we find the Primitive Bishops and Presbyters
forewarned by S. Paul of grievous Wolves, Acts 20.28, 29, 30.
who first divide, then devour: such as should be authors and fautors of
Hereresies and Schisms too; affecting to lead Disciples after them, apart from
the Churches settled order and communion. The Roman Christians are commanded to
mark with the black brand of schismatic pride, those that caused divisions
among them, Romans 16.17.
not only as to private differences in judgment, opinion and affection (which
are of less danger, and easily healed among Christians, where the health and
soundness of the whole, as to public order and entireness, is preserved;
which (as the native Balsam) easily heals green wounds in any part of the body;
1 Cor. 1.10.3.3.
) But the Apostles caution, as to the Corinthians, seems chiefly against those
that divided the public polity, and unity of the Church of Corinth; which
having many Christians, many Congregations, and many Preachers in the city and
country adjacent, was united by one Church Communion, under some one Apostle,
or such a Vicegerent as (in the Apostles absence) was over them in the Lord: To
break which holy Subordination, Harmony and Integrality, the simplicity or
subtilty of some factious spirits made use of those Names which were most
eminent in that Church, as Planters, Waterers, or Weeders of it, such as Paul,
Apollos, Cephas were; seeking by factious sidings and adherings to those
principal Teachers, to withdraw themselves into several Churches or Bodies,
from that grand Communion and Subordination, which they received first from the
Apostle converting them; next, from that chief Pastor or Bishop, which had the
rule, inspection, and authority over them by his appointment.

Which practices in the Churches of Christ were ever esteemed the fruits of 1
Cor. 3.3.
carnal, not Christian minds; of such as had more Sophistae magis verborum,
quam discipuli veritatis. Irenaeus.
subtilty than sanctity in them. As the Apostles, so their Primitive successors
ever looked upon the mincing and mangling of Churches, as the reproach, pest,
poison and deformity of Religion, being diametrally opposite to those holy
customs ((...)) which Qui a principali absistunt successione, quocunque loco
colliguntur, suspectos habere oportet, ut vel haereticos and malae sententiae,
vel scindentes, and elatos, and sibi placentes; omnes isti decidunt a veritate,
sophistae magis verborum esse volentes, quam discipuli veritatis. Irenae. l. 4.
c. 43. and lib. 3. c. 40. Jampridem per omnes provincias and per singulas urbes
ordinati sunt Episcopi, in aetate antiqui, in fide integri, ^n pressura
probati, in persecutione proscripti. Cypr. ep. 52.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and, sixty years after him, the great Council
of Nice, so command and recommend, as Ancient, Primitive and Apostolic. For
they were not such children, as to fancy those to be ancient customs and usages
in the Catholic Church, which were not older than their own beards, or the
Gibeonites bread and bottles; which a late Writer of Schism seems to suspect
of those renowned Fathers, who were not above three descents from some of the
Apostles. Some Bishops in the Council of Nice might very easily know Irenaeus,
as Iren. l. 5. c. 33. Irenaeus vir Apostolicorum temporum, Papiae discipulus,
Polycarpi amicus, and Episcopus ecclesiae Lugdun. Hieron. Catalog.
he tells us he did Papias and Polycarpus, who both knew St. John: so that the
traditions and customs so evident by matter of fact to all the world, could
neither be dark nor dubious; nor justly called Ancient then, if not Primitive.

The greatest glory, and most conspicuous character of the first famous
Churches was (as Ignatius tells us) for Christians to love one another, to be
of one mind and one heart; for their lesser Congregations to be subject to
their several Presbyters or Preachers; for their People and Presbyters to be
meekly subordinate to their respective Bishops; for their Bishops to correspond
with one another (and all Christians by them) in their joint Councils, and
public Conventions; (...), 2 Cor. 3.1.
also by their ((...)) commendatory letters and testimonials, which presently
admitted every good Christian to communion with any part of the true Church, or
any congregation in all the world, upon the testimony and account of their
Baptismal covenant, and orderly conversation, or profession of the same faith,
once delivered to the Saints; and that one hope, or common salvation, Jude 3.
by which they stood related to the whole Church as one Body, Ephesians. 4.4.
and to Christ Jesus as the only Head of it; without any new imposition or
exaction of any other explicit covenants, and formal professions, or private
engagements, to any one Congregation or Preacher: which must be renewed so often
as a Christian changes his abode, and may (for ought I see) as well be
required by every private Family, before they will pray, or eat, or drink with
any stranger-Christian, as by every particular Congregation which lists to
call it self a Church, and so fancies it self to be absolute, sovereign,
independent, without any communion with, or subordination to those greater
Ecclesiastical polities, which in the primitive style and esteem were called
and counted the only regular, politic, organized and completed Churches; the
privileges and benefits of whose communion every Christian was in charity
presumed capable of, and so allowed to enjoy, who having been duly baptized,
instructed and confirmed in Christian mysteries, did continue to profess the
same by word and deed; neither justly excommunicated out of that particular
Church, to which he was orderly joined, nor excommunicating himself by
voluntary Schism, declared abscession, separation, or Apostasy.

To such Christians as thus profess the true faith, and keep that comely
order, communion and subordination, which is publicly professed and maintained
in their respective national Churches, and the several parts and lesser
Congregations contained in them (to which private Christians are (more
immediately) for order sake related) there is no doubt, but a just right and
claim belongs, according to their several aptitudes and capacities (as younger
or elder, catechized or fuller instructed, novices or veterane and old
Disciples) to partake (in due order) of any ordinance and institution given by
Christ to his Catholic Church, as a mark and privilege of his Disciples. Nor
can it seem less than a petulant and partial, if not a proud, Schismatical
and sacrilegious practice, for any Minister or people to deny or rob any such
approved Christian professor of the comfort of partaking such Christian rights
as he duly requires, merely because he will not gratify such a Minister, or
such a little Congregation, in a new exotic way of bodying, that is formally
covenanting and verbally engaging with them and to them, beyond the baptismall
bond and vow: Thereby owning first a greater right and privilege to be
received by him from such covenanting with them, than he had before as a
Christian baptized, and in Catholic communion with Christ and his Church;
next, he must own an absolute, sovereign, and entire Church Power among them,
to the prejudice, division, and discarding of those higher relations, by which
he stands united and subordinate to the Church of Christ in order to higher
ends and uses, under greater notions and denominations; as they are
distinguished into several bounds and orders both for Episcopal inspection,
and national correspondency, or communion; which are of far greater virtue,
and more public concernment and benefit, than that congregating or meeting
together, Corpus sumus de conscientia religionis, and disciplinae unitate, and
spei foedere. Tert. Apol. c. 39.
which is (only) local, and only follows the aptitude of a Christians
residency or particular station in one place. Undoubtedly, the grand
ecclesiastical relations and sacred general bands of Christianity in Ephesians. 4.4,
5, 6.
one Body, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism, one Lord and Father of all, etc.
are of a far higher and nobler nature, than those which arise merely from
cohabitation, or personal convention; which are very variable, humane and
uncertain; whereas the other are fixed, divine and immutable, except through
men's own default, by Infidelity, Apostasy, and Immorality: Christian people
owing to their Bishops or chief Governors (as subjects do to their Princes) a
duty of love, Heb. 13.17.
reverence and subjection; also of due acknowledgement and holy obedience,
although they never see their faces, nor meet them in any particular place; as
thousands of Christians never did at all, Col. 2.1. Acts 20.38.
or not for a long time, and never any more, after the Apostle S. Paul's
departure from them; who yet were subject to his orders and mandates,
instructions and traditions, according to the mind and spirit of Christ,
declared by his own Epistles, or such other Messengers and Apostles, Bishops
and Governors, whom the Apostle sent to them and set over them; as he did
Timothy among the Ephesians, Titus among the Cretians, Epaphroditus among the
Philippians, Archippus among the Colossians.

Sicut Smyrnaeorum ecclesia habens Polycarpum a Johanne constitutum refert;
sicut Romamanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit; perinde utique and caeterae
exhibent (ecclesiae) quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatu constitutos Apostolici
seminis traduces habent. Tert. de Praes. c. 32.
These, and such like, with, under, and after the Apostles, as eminent Pastors,
Bishops and Governors of such Churches and Christians, as were contained in
one great city, and its Territory or Province (which were called (...), and
(...)) did take care, that every Christian, every Congregation, every Presbyter
or Preacher in those precincts, should both do their duties, (...). Clem. ep.
ad Corinth. 1. p. 53.
keep their stations, preserve the private and public order and unity, enjoy
the privileges of safety, peace and assistance, as parts or members of that
Polity or Ecclesiastical Body, which still stood further related, and so was
subordinate to the Counsel, Communion, and conjoined Authority of those
integrall and maine or nobler parts, which made up the Catholic visible
Church, and sometimes convened in general Councils.

Of all which rights, blessings, privileges, and advantages, both for
direction and protection, which are best preserved in, and vigorously derived
from these ample combinations of Churches, which are commended by the
Apostolical wisdom and spirit (which was Christ's) for any Christian or
Congregation needlessly to deprive themselves, or to withdraw and divide others
from them, must needs be, First, their Infelicity, exposing and betraying
solitary Christians and small separate parties of them, to many dangerous
temptations and disadvantages, of weakness, contempt, subdivision, animosities
among themselves; also injuries and indignities from others; and at last,
dissipations and utter desolations, still dividing to Atoms, and mouldring
themselves to nothing.

All which, like continued ploughes and harrowes, make long and fruitless
furrows of deformity upon the backs and faces of such Congregations and such
Christians, who foolishly forsake or refuse those remedies and assistances
which arise from the larger combinations of Churches: which are easily had,
when as whole Cities, Provinces and Nations profess the faith of Christ, and
resolve to assert it.

Next, it is their great sin, called in Scripture by the odious name of
Schism, Concision, Sedition, Separation, withdrawing from, Gal. 5.20. 1 Cor.
12.25. Phil. 3.2. Heb. 10.25.
forsaking and dividing of the Churches unity; judged by the Apostle to be the
works of the Flesh and of the Devil, when they arise from, and are carried on
by wilful weakness, ignorance, pride, arrogance, popularity, levity,
animosity, despite, study of revenge, covetousness, ambition,
uncharitableness, or any other base lust, unholy distemper, inordinate
passion, sinister interest, and secular design, under never so specious
pretensions, of Church- Reformation, of setting up Christ in greater power and
purity: which I am sure is not yet done in Old England, nor like ever to be
effected by such strange methods of new churching men and women; which begins
the first step with spurning at the mother that bred them, and the fathers that
begat and nourished them; laying the first stone of their new building in the
ruin of that Churches both Superstructures and Foundations, out of which
Quarry they were hewn, and to whose Fabric they were once orderly and
handsomely conjoined for many years, as many thousands of good Christians still
are, whom they endeavor to scare and seduce, with all the scandalls they can
cast before them upon this Church of England.

Which they having once learned boldly to reproach and abase, they must make
good their words with deeds; that their schism may not savor of malice or
ambition, but conscience and Religion. Hence m^^y have fallen to tear
themselves quite off from any communion with, or relation to the Church of
England, and from all resemblance, in the point of polity, with any other
ancient, or modern, and reformed Churches of any renown; making not only rents
in them, and objections against them, but total ruptures and abscissions from
them, and the Catholic form of all Churches, no less than from this of
England; not modestly forbearing the use of some things, in which at present
they are less satisfied, but haughtily forsaking, yea wholly disdaining
communion and subordination in any things or Ecclesiastical order and holy
ministration.

And all this credulous Christians must needs do with the more confidence, when
they are furnished by potent Orators with such Apologies, as may either silence
their own consciences, when they accuse them; or plead, as they think, their
excuse before Gods tribunal, when they shall be there charged for the
scandals, defamations, discouragements deformities, divisions and vastations,
made or occasioned by them in such a Christian, Reformed and united Church, as
England sometime was.

It is not amiss to hear the ground of their plea; which is with as much
reason, 1 Cor. 12.15.
as if the hand or foot should think themselves not to be of the body, because
in a fit and humor they so say and fancy.

I find the tenor of their Apology runs thus: I am by many men of seeming
gravity, learning and piety, accused of the sin of Schism; but very unjustly,
because very falsely. I did not, I do not make any division or rent in the
Church of England, which is properly and critically the sin of Schism; but I
have totally chopped and quite lopped my self off from it, by Abscission or
rupture: I never troubled my self to reform or abstain from what I thought
offensive and amiss in the old, but I have wholly erected a new Church: I was
not as a wedge to cleave a little, but as a saw to cut all quite in sunder,
past all closing with any such society, as the (reputed) National Church of
England was, which I do not so much as account to be any Church, but rather a
Chaos or colluvies of titular Christians; out of whose mass I have by a new
percolation of Independency extracted some such pure materials, as are formable
into a new and true Church Way.

Yet have I not made any formal Schism: for my work was not to rend the coat,
or scratch the skin of Christ's Spouse, but to break her very bones, Magnum and
gloriosum Christi corpus conscindunt and dividunt, and quantum in ipsis est
interficiunt. Irenae. l. 4. c. 62.
and quite dismember that so diseased and deformed body, which pretended to be
a national Church, in its several overgrown Limbs or Dioceses; on each of
which I saw a Bishop or Prelate sitting and presiding, which I took to be a
mark of the Beast, and denoting a limb of Antichrist; which I know should have
no place or influence in any true Church or body of Christ.

So that to become a perfect Christian, I became a perfect Separatist; I hung
by no string, sinew, ligature, skin or fiber, to the so-cryed-up Church of
England: no, I aimed not to divide it, but destroy it; my design was, not to
weaken its integrity and unity, but to nullify and abolish its very name and
being, its polity, ministry, p^^r, and Ecclesiastical authority; if (at least)
these amounted to any thing more than the Chimaera, fancy and mere fiction of a
Church. However, I chose rather to deprive my self of all the good in it, than
to bear with what seemed evil.

I did not carry my self to that Church (in which after a superstitious fashion
I was (indeed) Baptized and educated a Christian) as became a son to his sick
mother; much less as a servant to Christ's Spouse, which might have her
faintings: But I counted her (when I came to misunderstand her and my self) as
a deadly enemy; I treated her as an Adulteress, I proclaimed her a putid
Strumpet; I withdrew from her as from a dead and noisome carkase, which had
long layen dead and buried in the old grave of Episcopacy these thirteen or
fourteen hundred years, even from her very nativity: therefore I condemned and
abhorred Her with all her Scriptures and Sacraments, her Bishops and Preachers,
her Tithes and Universities, her Books and Learning, her Fathers and Histories,
her Languages and Sciences, her seeming Gifts and specious Graces, her Religion
and Reformation.

Notwithstanding the show of all these, I abhorred Her as a Synagogue of Satan,
a den of Thieves, a cage of unclean birds, a very Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.13.
worse than that Church was from which Peter wrote his first Epistle; I called
Her sacred things execrable; I counted her Ministers no better than the
Magicians of Egypt, and Baals Priests. Her ministrations as Magic
enchantments; Her Sacraments insignificant; neither sanctified, nor
sanctifying.

So far am I from being a poor and sneaking Schismatic which (like a viper)
secretly gnawes the bowels where it is bred and lodged; That out of an higher
spirit of Zeal and Reformation, I have (like Saturn or Time) quite devoured the
old, and wholly begat a new Church; notwithstanding that I saw heretofore many
seeming notes of a true and reformed Church in England; many specious fruits of
Christ's holy Spirit, in many formal good words and works of his seemingly
gracious servants, in Doctrine, Faith and Manners: by which temptations I
sometimes had been a great Zelot and eager Professor, having an high esteem
both of the Ministers and Ministrations of the Church of England.

But afterward (a new light breaking in upon me) I first began to scruple some
things in the Church of England; after, to suspect more, at last I was jealous
of all things (but my own heart.) From jealousy I soon fell to enmity, from
enmity to a divorce; from being divorced to prostitute the name, honor, peace
and patrimony of that Church to the most insolent spoilers, profaners and
persecutors; from cavilling I fell to calumniating, then to condemning; at last
to contemning all its professed Christianity, and noised Reformation, as mere
nullities, incapable to invest any man in the privileges, honor and
happiness of a true Christian Church, or holy Society.

Thus bogling cruelly at the too great authority and revenues of Bishops;
scared also with some ceremonial shadows, and no less frighted with the late
Presbyterian rigor and severity, I was so driven by I know not what impulse,
(but I am prone to believe well of it, because I have got well by it) that I
(at last) fled from the very substance, show and name of the Church of England;
choosing rather to be a rank Separate, a mere Quaker, an arrant Seeker, or
nothing at all of an old-fashioned Christian, than to continue in any visible
communion with so corrupt, so false, so lewd, so no Church: by which high-flown
resolution all this while (I thank God) I am become no Schismatic; because
neither being nor owning (and therefore not being because not owning) my self
as any member of that Church; from which I rather chose boldly to separate,
than poorly to schismatise in it.

Having a while wandered alone (as Lot when he fled out of Sodom; Isa. 65 5.
) and standing by my self, as holier than others, finding none meet to join
with me in Church Fellowship; but growing weary, and a little ashamed of my
solitude, (neither hearing, nor praying, nor receiving with any Christians for
many months, nay years,) at last I had an impulse to preach and prophecy,
that so I might erect and create a pure and perfect Church after my own heart,
and call it after my own name.

In which though I began but with a little handful, whom I gleaned (most-what)
out of the Presbyterian late harvest, (which proved too big for their barns,
Mat. 18.20.
and so was never yet well inned;) yet we (two or three) met together in
Christ's name, though upon our own heads, and by our own authority, expecting,
yea challenging his promise to be in the midst of us, with all that plenitude
of his spirit, with those clear illuminations and assurances, with that divine
power and supreme Church Authority, which next and immediately under Christ we
judge to be in and among us, as the first subject capable of it, and is by us
to be dispensed to what Pastors, Members and Officers we list to choose. Being
thus happily agreed as men, we further covenanted as Saints, to live together
in this Church Fellowship: we organized our body with all Church Officers; some
of us ordained our selves to be Ministers of the Gospel, others of us begat our
Fathers, and formed our Pastors; we equally exercised Church Discipline upon
one another, so long as we could hold together: some indeed went out from us,
because they were not of us; the remaining faithful Members of Christ's little
flock still cemented themselves, and kept together as a So Tertul. of the
Marcionite Churches: Habent ecclesias, sed suas, tam praeposteras quam
adulteras: Quarum si censum requiras, sacilius Apostaticu^ invenias quam
Apostolicum; Marcione scilicet conditore, vel aliquo de Marcionis examin^:
faciunt favos and vespae, faciunt ecclesias and Marcionitae. Li. 4. c. 5. adv.
Marcion.
Church, where was prophesying, and dipping, and breaking of bread, and
excommunicating, and all manner of censuring and discipline; to far better uses
and effects than ever were in that spurious, as well as spacious and
overgrown, Church of England.

All this I have ordered and done by a power of Christian liberty, with my
Church or Body, without any check or control from any above us; in a way
(indeed) new and strange to the world, but more pure, free and perfect, than
ever was used, or known in this of England, or any other pretended Reformed
Church; which were all grossly deformed: yea, we are gone beyond any of those
famous Primitive Churches, which were by some called pure; but I find them
leavened with the mystery of iniquity, universally governed by Bishops our
bitter enemies, and Presbyters our not very fast friends. The Lands of Bishops
are now happily sold, and some of us have bought a good part of them: the
Livings, Tithes and Places of Presbyters we now gape for, and crowd into; yet
are we neither guilty of sacrilege nor schism, (the two Prelatick
scare-crows, or Episcopal bug-beares,) because nothing could be sacred which
was never consecrated or devoted to the true God in a right way; as nothing
could be, which was given to maintain Episcopacy with, and Presbytery; a mere
Idol, which we, and so God (no doubt) perfectly abhors, however it got footing
so early in all Churches, and immediately perked up in the place of the
Apostles.

This seems to be the summarie sense of that pious Apology, lately offered in
behalf of all through-pac'd Separates, and perfect Apostates from the order and
constitution of the Church of England: where either these men extremely
dissemble; or they first learned Christ, and became Christians, at least in
profession, many years, being baptized and instructed, confirmed and
communicated, in this Church: from which being now totally divided, they thus
(most ingeniously) seek to wipe off the shame, ingratitude, levity, sin and
suspicion of Schism, by their owning no true Church at all in England, and
declaring plenary Separation, or Independency; fancying, that he is less
blameable who quite burns up his neighbors coat, than he that only sings
it; and he that flayeth off ones skin, is less insolent and injurious than he
that only scratcheth it; as if every Schism were not a partial Separation,
and every Separation a plenary Schism.

How justifiable the ground of such a plea is, I leave to wiser men, to their
own more cool and impartial spirits, Judicabit Dominus eos qui schismata
operantur, non habentes dilectionem, suamque utilitatem potius considerantes
quam unitatem ecclesiae. Iren. l. 4. c. 62.
and to the great judge of all hearts; whose Word has much deceived his Church
in all ages, if his prohibition be not against Separation, Apostasy, and total
forsaking of the Churches communion, both in Discipline and Doctrine, in Polity
and Verity, as well as against Schism. The difference is not much between S.
Paul's censure of Schism and division as 1 Cor. 3.3.
carnal, and a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. and that of S. Jude, against such
as Jude 19.
separate, as being sensual, and not having the Spirit; especially where such
communion is offered and required by a Church, Christian, and Reformed, as is
no way against the Word of God, the Apostles example, and the Primitive
Catholic practice of all Churches: such I believe (and hope to prove) that of
the Church of England was and is, as to those main essentialls of Religion
which constitute a true Church both in the being and well-being.

But I needed not (and therefore I crave your pardon, worthy Gentlemen) have
spent so much breath to blow up and break the late thin bladders or light
bubbles, these new Corpusculas of separate Churches, compared to the Catholic
eminency, unity and solidity of the Church of England, and others of like size.
An easy foot will serve to beat down such new-sprung Mushromes, of late perked
up in this English soil (through the licentiousness of times, and luxuriancy
of men's humors) since it has been watered with Humane and Christian blood:
whose ambition seems to be, not only to divide and share, but wholly to
possess and engross this good land; or else to leave desolate that field out of
which they are sprung, which bare far better fruits than now it does, long
before their name was heard of, under the new titles or style of bodyed and
congregated, associated or independented and newfangled Churches:

Who have now the confidence to cry down the Church of England in its late
visible polity, harmony, order and unity, as a mere name and notion, an
insignificant Idea, and empty imagination, as if it were neither ( bonum nor
jucundum) good nor pleasant for Brethren in Christ to dwell together in unity,
or for men in one nation to be Christians in one Church; Psalm. 133.1.
as if bonds of civil polity reached farther than Ecclesiastic. Some are so
vain and vulgar, as to boast, that all Church Fellowship in England is no
better then floten milk, when once they have taken off the cream of some
Saintly professors, which they think worthy to make up and coagulate into their
new and small- bodyed Churches; which are carried on by some with so high an
hand and brow, that a young master of that sect has been heard to say, not
more magisterially than uncharitably, he would sooner renounce his Baptism,
than own the Church of England to be a true Church.

And this, notwithstanding that it is evident, these new Rabbis have added
nothing new and true to the Doctrine of the Church of England; nor yet to the
divine Worship, and holy Ministrations or Duties used and professed in it, with
as much solemnity, judgment and sincerity, I believe, as they can pretend to,
without blushing, on man's part; and with infinite more spiritual blessings and
proficiency, in all graces, so far as yet appears, on Gods part. Nor have they
ever shown any cause why It should be denied the name, honor, privilege and
comfort of a true Church of Christ, both in its principal parts, and in the
whole visible community or polity; afflicted (indeed) at present, but sometime
famous and flourishing, as in favor both with God and good men: nor did it
ever recede from its love, or apostatize, by any public act or vote, from such
a profession of Christian and Reformed Religion, as gives her a good Title to
be, and to be called a true Church of Christ, in spite of men and Devils.

If any still list to quarrel at the name of a National Church, the same
schismatic sophisters may as well slight all those proportions and
expressions used in all the grand Combinations and visible Constitutions of
such ancient Churches, throughout all descents of Christian Religion; which
never doubted to cast themselves into, and continue in such Ecclesiastical
forms, and parallel distributions, as they found laid out by the blessed
Apostles, and the Spirit of Christ; which (without doubt) most eminently guided
those Primitive Churches.

When these new projectors have answered the Scripture style, and the
Apostolic patterns and pens followed by all antiquity, which call and account
all those Christians conjoined in one Churches communion (in point of
Ecclesiastical polity, subordination, chief power and jurisdiction) who (yet)
were dispersed in many places, and so distinguished (no doubt) into many
congregations, as to the duties of ordinary worship throughout their Cities and
respective Provinces, which, I am sure were many of them far larger than any
one Diocese or Province in England, yea, and (possibly) not much less than all
England; as Ephesus, Ignat ep. ad Romanos.
Crete, Jerusalem, Antioch, whose province was all Syria (as Ignatius tells us)
so Corinth, Philippi, Laodicea, Rome, etc. with their Suburbs, Territories and
Provinces, The Urbicarian Region in which the Praesectus urbis did exercise his
jurisdiction, extended to 100. miles about the city, in which there were 69
Bishops under the Bishop of Rome. Vid. Prim. of Arm. the orig. of Metropolitans.
which extended as far as their proconsulary jurisdictions reached; in one of
which, that learned and pious, but fancifull interpreter, Mr. Brightman,
doubted not to find a prophetic Type, representing the National Church of
England, with much more aptitude than his other Satyrick correspondencies were
applied:

When the wit and artifices of Independent brethren (if they allow me that
relation) have shrunk those great and famous Churches (so distinguished and
nominated by the Scripture line and record) into little handfulls, such as one
man's lungs can reach, at one time, in one place; when the Presbyterian brethren
(who have cast off, yea cast out their Fathers the Bishops) can manifest that
the several Congregations of Christians in those Parishes, Classes, or
Associations which they fancy, had as many Bishops properly so called, and
fully empowered, as there were Presbyters or Preachers; when by their joint
skill and force they can evince out of any Ecclesiastical Records, or
Scripturall, that there was not some one eminent person (as the Apostle, Angel,
Bishop and President, or chief Governor among them, over all those people and
Presbyters) who lived within such large Scripture-combinations as Churches,
(such as was Timothy in Ephesus, Titi^ in Crete, S. Acts 21.18.
James the Just in Jerusalem) either succeeding the Apostles after death, or
supplying their places during their absence from particular Churches, who in
their several lots, portions, Act. 1.20.
or Episcopal charges and divisions, had (while they lived) the chief
inspection, rule, authority and jurisdiction:

When (I say) these grand difficulties are cleared and removed, as scales from
our eyes who still honor the Church of England; then we shall be willing and
able to turn the other lessening end of the Optic glass, and to look upon the
great and goodly Church of England as fit to be shrunk into decimo sexto
volumes, or to be divided into small pamphleting Congregations, and bound up in
Calves leather: which heretofore, by an happy deception of sight, appeared to
us at home, and to all the Christian world abroad, as a Church in folio; as a
fair Book of royal paper written with the finger of God and Apostolic
characters, well bound up and nobly adorned* as an holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a royal Priesthood, publicly owning it self to be Gods people, taught by the
Word of God, sprinkled with the blood of the Son of God, that immaculate Lamb
slain for us, and partaker of that holy Passover, which gives us of Christ's
flesh to eat, and his blood to drink. All which Christian profession,
privileges, and practice of this Nation, are (I conceive) sufficient without
vanity or falsity to denominate and distinguish it, with the glorious Title of
the Church of England; which was the thing I had to prove against the peevish
Schismatics, envious Scepticks, and rude Separatists of these times.

CHAP. III.
The present afflictions of the Church of England no argument against Her
National and well-Reformed Constitution.
NOr may the Church of Englands present afflictions eclipse or diminish its true
glory in this point, any more than Jobs misery did lessen his innocence; nor
may they abate your value, love and honor to Her, who are her loyal children,
because she needs your pity. It Is true, it has sadly suffered the late
dreadful tempest which came from the Jer. 1.14. Ab aquilone exardescent mala
super omnes habitatores terrae: Septentrionalis regio, officina hominum,
Gentibus Australibus infesta; unde in proverbium exiit, Omne malum ab Aquilone.
Hiero.
North (which has ever been, as the magazine of men, so the fatal scourge of
the Southern parts of the world: hoping to mend their condition by changing
their climate, they never wanted occasions to quarrel and invade. Thence the
Assyrians invaded Syria, Palestina and Egypt; the Goths and Vandals swarmed
into Italy and Africa; the Gauls into Greece; the Normans into France; the
Picts, Saxons and Danes into England; the barbarous Scythians and Tartars into
Asia.)

This Hyperborean impression has (indeed) beyond any Civil War that ever was
in this nation, grievously peeled, barked, shattered and defaced the Church of
England, as to its pristine strength, peace, unity, order, beauty, riches,
sanctity and glory, (when Isa. 49.23.
Kings were its nursing Fathers, and Queens its nursing Mothers:) yet is its
condition such, as makes it not so much the object of your despiciency or
despair, as of your, and all good men's compassion, prayers, and real endeavors
for Her relief. Her calamitous state is not like that of the object of David's
pity, 1 Samuel 30.13.
the sick servant of the Amalekite, from innate distempers; but as his, Luke
10.33.
whom the good Samaritan found stripped, wounded, and half dead, an object
capable to stir up the bowels of any good Christian; while her enemies, who
have sought to cast her down to the ground, Psalm. 74.4.
who sometime roar in her Sanctuaries, and hope to set up their banners for
ensigns of an absolute victory, do contemn her as a dead carcass, and have
long ago cast her off as an unclean thing, fit to be abhorred of God and man.

Yet this is the Church (most worthy Gentlemen) which has been, Gal. 4.26.
and is the mother of us all. To this, you and your forefathers, for many ages,
have owed (under God) your Baptism, your Christian institution, your holy
communion with Christ and his Catholic Church; to this you owe your virtues,
your graces, your faith, your charity, your hopes, your evidences and
preparations for Heaven, your Christian privileges, characters and seals, by
which you are distinguished from Heathens and Aliens, as much as their natural
reason, morality and humanity distinguishes them from Beasts.

This is the Church, this the Mother, which some children of Belial would teach
you, by most preposterous ways of piety and rude reformation, to divide, to
debase, to despise, to destroy: this (now) craves your compassion: Nor do I
doubt, but you are infinitely sensible how much it has deserved (as it
extremely wants) your filial gratitude, relief, comfort and countenance, as
testimonies of your love and duty, better becoming you than anything you can do
under heaven, most worthy of your most generous piety.

Nor may your Christian charity, holy courage and ingenuity be discouraged,
because you every where find so many of your and mine unhappy contrymen
rejoicing to see the Church of England brought to so broken and infirm, so poor
and despicable, so mean and miserable a condition, as she now appears and
deplores her self in. Psalm. 35.16.
I know there are on every side of her busy mockers, who gnash upon her with
their teeth ((...), and (...)) evil-speakers, false accusers, Zach. 1.15.
bold calumniators, delighters in her destruction. These have helped forward
her affliction, when the hand of God was against her, as Edom did against Judah
in the day of Sions calamity; these cry, down with her, Psalm. 137.7.
down with her even to the ground; now she is fallen let her rise up no more;
raze the very foundations of her, let not one stone be left upon another; no
Bishops, no Presbyters, no Catholic Succession, no right Ordination, no true
Ministers, no Baptism, no Confirmation, no Consecration, no Liturgy, no
Polity, no Church; let her destruction be like that of Sodom, and her
desolation like that of Gomorrah, that there may be room enough for Ijim and
Ohjim, for Owls and Dragons, Isa. 34.4.
for rough and deformed Satyrs to dwell in the ruins of her palaces and
Sanctuaries, her Pulpits and Temples.

There are (I know) too many such proud scorners, who laugh and triumph at what
your and all sober minds deplore, both at home and abroad, with infinite grief
and astonishment: through whose pious hearts a very sword daily pierces, when
they behold, how the Church of England is fallen from being the beauty of the
Western world, and chief among all, both Christian and Reformed Churches, to be
like Babylon, full of licentiousness, divisions, confusions, and many
abominations, both as to men's practices and opinions; some of which are so
petulant, so fanatic, so putid, so impudent, so blasphemous, so inordinate, so
unbeseeming the gravity of men, or sanctity of Christians, that the ancient
Heretics and Schismatics (of all ages, sorts and sizes) would be ashamed, if
they could revive, to see themselves so outvyed in ignorance, despite, malice,
monstrosity, impiety, impudence. The Gnostics, Valentinians, Cataphrygians,
Marcionites, Montanists, Manichees, Novatians, Arians, Aerians, Circumcelians,
were tender-foreheaded, and simple-spirited people compared to those
high-crested and Scraphick Sophisters, who study to shake and subvert, to
defile and destroy all that was sacred or settled in the Church of England.

At whose sad aspect proud and merciless men, who (as one said sharply of
them) have guts, but no bowels, mingle their scornful smiles with your, mine,
and other men's unfeigned tears: they triumph in her rubbish, and dance in her
dust; they count her ashes their beauty, her waters of Meribah and Marah
(strife and bitterness) to be their wine and refreshing; they cry up their
rendings of her to be rare Reformations, their rags and patches to be new Robes
for Christ's Spouse; which they pretend to have been dead and stark naked till
the rough touches of some later Prophets happily revived her, and till their
cruel charities revested her; they call the dissolutions of all Ecclesiastic
orders of Primitive Government, and of true ministerial authority, precious
liberties; what sober men count defections from the ancient Catholic and
Apostolic pattern, they boast of as perfections; what plain-hearted Christians
esteem as decayings of the Reformed Religion, and ill omens and presages of its
ruin, these Seraphicks affirm to be edifyings and repairings of that
structure, which since the Apostles times, they pretend, was always decaying
and dropping down to Apostasy, being overladen with the fair roof or covering
of Episcopacy; of which burden some blessed Reformers seek totally to have
lightened this Church, as they have done some Cathedrals of their Leads, that
they may leave this Church and the Reformed Religion, as without any roof and
defense against the injuries of foul weather, so without any band or coping, to
keep the walls and sides together.

What others call Extirpations, these magnify as rare Plantations; in which
they fell down Cedars and set up Shrubs; they root up Vines, and plant
Brambles; rejecting venerable Bishops and orderly Presbyters (who are of the
Primitive Stock and Apostolic descent) that they may bring in a novel brood of
Heteroclite Teachers, equivocall Pastors, and new-moulded Ministers, whose late
Origin (without all doubt) arises no higher (at best) than Geneva or
Frankfort, or Amsteldam, or Arneheim, or New England; some are such popular
pieces, so much (terrae filii) of obscure rise, of base and mean extraction,
that they have no name of men or place to render them remarkable; being like
Mushromes, perking up in every molehill, and in a moment making themselves the
Ministers of Jesus Christ.

To whose strange and novell productions in Old England, the late civil
distractions (finding, it seems, much prepared matter) gave not only life and
activity, but so great petulancy and insolency, that many do not only change
their former profession, and utterly abdicate their Church-standing and
communion in England; but (as mere changelings) they prefer the saddest
Succubaes and Empusa's, the most fanatic apparitions of modern fancies in
their poor and pitiful Conventicles, before the Church of England; as some
children do the Queen of Fairies before their genuine Mothers; instead of whose
sound Doctrine, sacred Order, and Catholic Councils, they betake themselves
each to their private dotages and ravings, to mere nonsense and blasphemies;
which some cry up, as strong reasonings, high raptures, extatick illuminations,
to which all men must subscribe, though no wise man know what they mean: Such
confidence some men have, that Christians in England have lost, not only their
Religion but their Reason; upon whom they hope so rudely and grossly to impose
their most childish novelties and frivolous follies, that, as Erasmus speaks of
some monkish corrupters or interpolators of S. Jeroms works, who had made it
harder for him to find out what that acute and learned Father wrote, than ever
it was for him to write his excellent works: so in England, what was formerly
plain and easy, sound and wholesome, orderly and Catholic as to true Religion,
both in Faith, Manners, Ministry and Government; the modern Novelties,
Whimseys, Factions, Intricacies and Extravagancies of some men, have made not
only perplexed, confused, but contemptible and ridiculous.

Yet these are the trash and husks which some men's nauseo us and wanton palates
in this age do prefer and choose, rather than that wholesome food and sincere
milk of Gods word, with which the Reformed Church of England always
entertained her children, until an high-minded and stiff-necked generation of
rank appetites, like Jews, growing sick of quails, and surfeited of manna,
longed for the garlic and onions of Egypt; legendary visions, fabulous
revelations, and fanatic inspirations.

Which Egyptian diet has of late (by a just anger of Heaven upon men's
ungrateful murmurings, and wanton longings) brought many in England to those
high calentures and distempers in Religion, that like frantic people, they
fly in the faces of their Fathers, and tear the very flesh of their Mother.
Though civil troubles and State-furies seem much allayed, yet these
Clero-masticks and Church-destroyers still maintain a most implacable war
against the Church of England; thinking, yea professing, some of them, that
they shall do God good service, utterly to destroy it, with all its assistants
and adherents. In order to which design they have sought every where to
vilify, and set at naught, to crown with thorns and crucify, or at best to
counterfeit and disguise the merit, worth and majesty of all the sacred
Solemnities and Rites, the Peace and Polity, the Ministry and Ministrations of
the Church of England: yea, and fancying they have a liberty to mock them
first, and after to nail them to the Cross; Good God! how have they buffeted
them! how importunely do they obtrude upon them, amidst their many Agonies,
gall and vinegar to drink! what cruel contempts, what virulent pamphlets, what
scandalous and scurrilous petitions do they frequently vent against all
Churches and Churchmen relating to, or depending upon the Church of England!
some of them ripping up (by a Neronean cruelty) the womb that bare them; others
cutting off (by a more than Amazonian barbarity) the breasts that gave them
suck. Nor do they despair to pierce (at last) this bleeding Church to the very
heart; if ever the power of the sword come into such hands, as are professed
enemies to all other Reformed Churches, as well as this of England: whose
languishing, but living, fate they now behold as with great pleasure, so with
no small impatience; while they see that, notwithstanding all their sedulous
and industrious machinations against learning and Religion, against the Church
and Universities of England, against Ministers and their maintenance, yet there
is still some life and spirit, some liberty and hope left, through the mercy of
God, and the moderation of some men in power, for those Christians that have
the courage and conscience to own the Reformed Church of England as their
Mother, and the Reformed Clergy as their spiritual Fathers.

Whose just Honor and Interests as I must never desert while I live, because I
think them linked with those of Gods Glory, my Redeemers Honor, the Catholic
Churches veracity, the peace of my conscience, and my countrey's happiness,
both as to the present age and to posterity; so I have thought it my duty, in
her deplorable condition, and in the despondency of many men's spirits, to apply
the cordial of this confection, mingled with her tears, and with her sighs,
presented to you ( my most honored Contrymen:) by the help of which you may
both fortify your own honest minds, and oppose that diffusive venom, which you
cannot but daily meet in some men's restless malice, who neither know how to
speak well of the Church of England, nor how to hold their peace. By the
example of your judicious favor and generous compassion, I doubt not to excite
like affections of courage and constancy, in all worthy Protestants and
honest-hearted English, whose duty it is, amidst the pertinacy of all other
parties and factions (who like Burres hang together) to hold fast that holy and
reformed profession, which is truly Christian, ancient, and Catholic; thereby
justifying that mercy and truth, that grace and peace of God, which was
plentifully manifested and faithfully dispensed to the people of this land, by
the piety and wisdom of the Church of England; notwithstanding that the Lord
seems now to hide his face from Her: the want of whose favor, which her great
and sore afflictions have seemed to cloud, is far beyond the triumphs of her
enemies, or the coldness of her friends, the oppositions of many, the
withdrawings of some, and the indifferencies of others, who have all
contributed to her miseries; but none of them have yet convinced her (that ever
I could see) of any sin or error, as to ignorance or iniquity, superstition or
irreligion, dangerous defect or excess.

If the Church of England had as many Mouths as she has Wounds, as many
Tongues as Maims, as many hearty Mourners as she has cruel Destroyers; if
there were as many that durst pity and relieve her, as there are that dare
spoil and ruin her; these would fill, not England only, but all the
Christian world with the bitterness of her Complaints, as a learned and pious
See Mr. R^y his Gemitus plebis, or Mournful complaint in behalf of the poor
people of England, printed 1656.
Minister for his part has lately done.

If the Church of England had many such pious Orators, whose potent and
pathetick eloquence were more proportionable to her calamities, than the
narrowness of my heart and tenuity of my pen are like to be: certainly heaven
and earth would be moved with compassion; flints would melt, and rocks be
mollified with commiseration; the upper and the nether milstones, partial
Presbytery, and popular Independency, between whom she has been so ground to
powder, that Papists, and Anabaptists, and Familists, and Quakers, and Seekers,
and Ranters, with all the rabble of her proud and spiteful enemies, hope to
fill their sacks with her grist; those (I say) might possibly repent (if they
have not much mended their fortunes by this Churches ruins) of their
occasioning her so long and sharp a warfare, so many and sad Tragedies, while
by infinite jealousies, grievous reproaches, and unjust scandals cast upon their
and your Mother (this Reformed Church of England) they have made her implacable
enemies, the Papists and others, to blaspheme her for a mere Adulteress all
this while; to condemn all her Children as a Bastard brood of illegitimate
Christians, from the first Reformation to this day. Her most desperate
deserters of late (in order to take away their own reproach, and to expiate (as
they imagine) the sin and shame of their former profession) have labored first
to destroy the eldest brethren and chiefest sons in this Church; next, to cast
out and exautorate the principal Stewards and dispensers of holy things: after
this they have endeavored to rob her both of her dower and patrimony; hoping
at last to famish the whole Family, when there shall be neither nursing fathers
nor nursing mothers in this Church, neither milk left for Babes, nor stronger
meat for the elder ones, neither plain catechizing nor profitable preaching,
neither ordaining Bishops nor ordained Presbyters.

CHAP. IV.
SUch as have ears to hear, The Church of England's Complaint.
and charity to lay to heart, may with me hear the Church of England thus
lamenting and bemoning Her self, while she sits upon the ground, covered with
ashes, clothed with sackcloth, besmeared with blood, drowned in tears, and
almost buried with her own ruins.

O all you that pass by me, stand and see, Lam. 1.^2.
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, if it has been done to any
Christian and Reformed Church under Heaven as it has to me, in the day wherein
the Lord has afflicted me with his fierce anger. My Wounds, my Wastes, my
Ruins, my Deformities, my Desolations are not by the barbarous inundations of
Goths and Vandals, not by the rude invasions of Saracens and Turks, not by the
severe Inquisitions and cruel persecutions of Papists; I do not ow my miseries
to the incursions of Forrainers, to a nation of a strange Language, of
professed Enmity, of different Interests and Religion. They are not professed
Neroes, Domitians, Diocletians and Julians, Heathen Princes and Persecutors,
that have done me this despite; Psalm. 55.12.
for then (perhaps) I and my children could have born it, with a like heroic
patience and Christian courage, Erat ante in operibus fratrum candida ecclesia;
nunc facta est in cruore Martyrum purpurea: Floribus ejus nec rosae desunt nec
lilia. Certant nunc singuli ad utriusque honoris amplissimam dignitatem, ut
accipiant coronas, vel de opere candidas, vel de passione purpureas. Cyp. ep. 9.
as those did their Primitive Persecutions: the splendor and constancy of
whose Martyrdomes contributed more than all their preaching, to the honor,
advantage and propagation of the Christian Religion; when Churches and
Christians being happily united in love, and only persecuted by professed
enemies, they knew in what posture of defense to cast themselves, so as to
suffer and die, becoming Christians.

But I (alas) am ambiguously wounded by those that are of my own house, family
and profession: Such as have been washed at my baptismall fountain of living
water, such as have freely and fully tasted of my Sacramental Bread and Wine,
feasting at my Table, which is the Lords; Isa. 1.2.
these, these have lifted up the heel against me: Such as have been bred and
born by me, taught and brought up in the same true Christian Faith and reformed
Profession; by these am I hated and despised, by these am I stripped and
wounded, by these am I torn and mangled, by these am I impoverished and debased
below any Church, Christian or Reformed; by these am I scorned and abhorred, by
these am I made an hissing and astonishment to all that see me, by these am I
made a derision and mocking-stock to my enemies round about me, by these am I
in danger to be quite devoured and destroyed, who envy me so much breath and
life, as serves me to complain of my calamities.

Isa. 1.2.
Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth, be not ye also cruel or uncompassionate:
since one of you cannot but behold the deformity of my Sufferings, the other
cannot but feel the burden of my complaints; one of you is blasted with my
Sighs, the other is bedewed with my Tears. Be not ye also accessory to my
injuries by concealing them, or guilty of my Blood by covering it; which cries
aloud against my ungrateful, my unnatural, my rebellious children. Those that
came forth of my own bowels, these have risen up against me; to whom I
liberally afforded milk when they were babes, and stronger meat, as they were
able to bear it; for whom I provided the sacred Oracles of God in a language
they best understood: I furnished them with such forms of wholesome devotion,
agreeable to the mind and Word of God, as might best suit the common
necessities of all, and the capacities of the meanest: I concealed no part of
Gods sacred Counsel from them, nor detained any necessary saving Truth out of
any principle of unrighteous policy: I neither denied, nor diminished, nor
deformed any Ordinance of Christ to them: I colored no errors with shows of
truth, nor disguised any Truth with fallacious sophistries: I set forth to
them, with all plainness and freedom, the blessed fullness and excellencies
of my Lord Jesus Christ, in such a manner and measure as I received from his
Word and Spirit; for I learned not those manifestations of Divine love from any
other Church, Pristine or Modern, so much as the special dispensations and
discoveries of Gods Graces and Gifts to me, in which few equalled, none seemed
to exceed me, in all the world.

From this great and pure fountain of all perfection and comfort (the
sweetness, merit, and fullness of my Savior) I recommended to my children
every Grace, every Virtue, every holy Duty, every necessary Precept, every
precious Promise, every imitable Example: and this was done with all the
advantages of good Learning, of sound Knowledge, of most potent and pathetick
eloquence; which at once was able to inform the weakest capacity, to satisfy
any sober curiosity, and to silence the subtilest adversary.

To this purpose, that the great work of saving their souls might be
effectually carried on, with order, power and authority, I furnished them not
with precarious praters, bold intruders, or pitiful pieces of Plebeian oratory
(in whom ignorance and impudence, inability and inauthoritativeness contend
which shall be greatest;) but I provided and prepared for them, with much study
and industry, with many prayers and tears, with long education and diligent
care, excellent Bishops, orderly Presbyters, able and authoritative Ministers,
workmen that needed not be ashamed; 2 Timothy 2.15.
of a lawful ordination and right descent, of a mediate divine mission after
the Apostolic line and Catholic succession, after the form of an
uninterrupted and authentic commission, duly and truly exemplified in the
consecration of Bishops, and ordination of Presbyters and Deacons, through all
ages of the Church, agreeable to that original Institution, which was from
Christ Jesus the great High Priest, the unerring Prophet, Heb. 5.10.
the sovereign King of his Church, the chief Preacher of Righteousness, and
Bishop of our souls, who instituted first his twelve Apostles, 1 Pet. 2.25.
Luke 6.13. Luke 10.1.
afterward the seventy Disciples; whose commission was not so large, nor their
mission so solemn, as that of the twelve, whose Episcopacy and number was to be
completed, Act. 1.21.2.1.
and upon whom the promised power from on high specially came in the miraculous
and ministerial gifts of the Holy Ghost.

After this pattern (which was ever followed by all Churches in all the world)
I supplied those under my care with such a succession of Bishops and Ministers
of holy things, as for solid learning, for powerful preaching, for devout and
discreet praying, for reverend celebrating, for acute disputing, for exact
writing, for wise governing, and holy living, were no where exeeded in all the
Christian world, and hardly equalled in any age since the Apostles times; whose
ministerial sufficiencies and successes were sometime highly magnified, and
almost deified, by many of those that now would stone them, and destroy me, by
a late transport of malice, as much unexpected, as undeserved, by me; which
looks more like a fascination and fury, than any thing of true Zeal and sober
Reformation.

For no men of any weight or worth for parts and piety, for judgment and
ingenuity, for conscience and integrity, have (hitherto) convinced me, or those
men that were my prime servants, sons and supports, of any Heresy or Idolatry,
of any Superstition or Apostasy, of any just scandal or notable defect. What
some have urged for my not exercising a more severe and strict Discipline,
after the manner of some ancient Primitive Churches, it is not imputable to any
unwillingnesse in those worthy Bishops and Presbyters whom I employed, but to
the general wantonness or refractorinesse of all sorts of people in that point,
who were so far from enduring a stricter discipline to be set up, that many
grudged at any Ecclesiastic authority, exercised over them, though it were
established by their own public consent and laws.

If any of my Bishops, Presbyters, or people, failed to do the duties which I
required, or rather Christ commanded them; it was to be reckoned as the fruit
of men's private temptations and personal infirmities, but not of my
constitutions or directions; which were so pious and perspicuous, that people
could not justly plead invincible ignorance, to excuse their immoralities and
impieties, which indeed they owed to their own negligences or corruptions.

Yea, where the seeds of Religion were thinnest sown, and thrived least in some
parts of this nation, it was not so much from the want of laborers, as from
the laborers wants: the poverty of many places, and barrenness of the soil
was such, that either impropriations, or sacrilege, or both, had not left for
any competent workman a competent maintenance; both my Dower and Patrimony,
Glebes and Tithes, being almost wholly alienated, by hard laws and evil
customs, from my use and enjoyment; that holy Portion (which is Gods) being
often perverted to feed Hinds and Dogs and Horses, which was originally devoted
to feed such Shepherds as might feed my flock in every place: Nor could, in
those cases, either my prayers or tears, the sordid necessities of many poor
Ministers, or the cries of poor peoples famished souls, ever yet move the civil
State effectually to restore, or remit, or to make other necessary supplies for
Pastors and peoples good.

Yet, even in this distress (which befell too many places much against my
will) my care and endeavor was so to keep up the life, health, and soundness
of the true Reformed Christian Religion, that people every where had what was
necessary, wholesome and decent for their souls good; though possibly they had
not (nor was it needful) the same plenty, variety, dainties and superfluity,
in a constant way, Numb. 11.20.
(which some places did so long enjoy) until (as with the Jews) the Manna and
Quails (Sunday Sermons and weekday Lectures) came out of their nostrils:
while the heavenly food was rolling in their curious palates, and wanton jaws,
the wrath of God brake forth upon them and upon me (as upon Moses) for their
sakes; Deuteronomy. 4 21.
who was indeed as jealous of their surfeitings of holy things, as of the
others famishings; both being contrary to my care and desire: which were (God
knows) first to preserve the Foundation of necessary and saving Truth among
them; next, to add the beauty of holiness to humility, to join decency to
sincerity, to maintain the power of godliness, with the wholesome forms of it;
that so Truth and Peace, Order and Unity, the leaves and the fruits of the tree
of life might grow together, Rev. 22.2.
for the nutriment, muniment and ornament of piety.

Nor do I doubt to plead and affirm before Gods Tribunal, That if those
people, who seemed to fare hardliest (though the greatest complainers against
my treatment of them were such as enjoyed most, and fared deliciously every
day, wantonness being more querulous than want,) if they had made so good use
as they might, and ought to have done, of that holy light and rule which was
duly held forth to them in the plain parts of Scripture every year read to
them, in the Sacraments duly administered among them, in the Articles, Creeds,
Homilies, Catechize and Liturgy, with which they were, or might have been well
acquainted; they might even in these (so much nauseated and despised means,
sufficient (I fear) to damn those who despised Salvation by them) have found as
plain and easy, as sure and compendious a way to heaven, through Faith,
Repentance, Humility, Charity, holy Obedience to God and Man, as they are
likely now to do, after they have stirred up so great a dust and smoke as has
put out poor peoples eyes, leading them into endless mazes and confusions,
under the name and noise of a better Reformation and safer Religions.

In this posture of peace and plenty, of piety and prosperity, as to Christian
and Reformed Religion, had the God and Father of my Lord Jesus Christ, the
Founder of his Church, once settled me (out of his abundant mercy to the people
of England) by the patience and prayers, by the preaching and writing of godly
Bishops and other Ministers, who were not only Gods painful Laborers, but
his faithful Martyrs and Confessors some of them: whose great worth drew the
favor of pious Princes to me, who were my nursing fathers; and the love of
peaceable Parliaments, who were my faithful friends: insomuch, that for one
hundred years (next preceding my miseries) I had no cause to envy any Christian
or Reformed Church that ever was or is in all the world; nor had any sober
Christian just cause to complain of me, much less thus to murmur, mutiny and
fight against me, for no other cause but this, That I would not suffer them
rudely to bite off those full and fair breasts, which they had so long sucked,
ingratefully deforming those conduits of plenty, order and peace, which they
had so long enjoyed, both in Word and Sacraments, in Ministrations and
Ministers.

Yet, behold how I am fallen, suddenly, shamefully, ingratefully, indignly, and
almost desperately; my doctrine not duly examined, but rashly condemned; my
Tenets not confuted, but blasphemed by my various adversaries; my public
service and solemn worship of God sharply indeed corrected, even to blood, but
no whit improved or amended, yea infinitely impaired and neglected; my holy
Sacraments (those two great Seals of a Christians Charter and Gods Covenant,
those fair marks and badges of Christian profession, the two poles and pillars
on which all mysterious and spiritual comforts, temporal and eternal joys
do constantly turn) these are (most what) rarely used, in many places either
totally disused, or grossly abused, by the execrable consecrations of unwashed,
unholy, unordained hands.

(...).
Many of my Oratories, Temples and Churches (Houses so called, because dedicated
to the service of the Lord and his Church) are by some men first profaned with
all the sordidnesse of men and beasts; next, they are suffered to ruin of
themselves, while they are robbed of what should repair them; and at last
(that Sacrilege may be the better husband) they are threatened to be sold, and
utterly demolished.

The Sanctity of Christian marriages, which were wont to be solemnized by
prayers, instructions, benedictions, by mutual, solemn and sacred
stipulations, according to the Word of God and Ecclesiastic practice, is
sought to be reduced by some to new ways, either very brutall, and merely
natural, or, at best, but civil and politic. The infants of Christians (who
were ever esteemed as the lambs of Christ's flock) are partially, carelessly,
disorderly, many of them dubiously, yea not at all baptized; neither sprinkled
nor washed, nor marked with any note of Christ's blood, to distinguish them from
the herd of Heathens, the brats of Aliens, Jews, Pagans, Mahometans.

(...).
The sacred, dreadful and venerable Symbols of the Lords Supper, (which I had
happily purged from all rust and rubbish of Superstition) in many places have
been supinely neglected for many years; in others strangely consecrated,
irreverently celebrated, partially distributed, denied to many worthy and
desirous Christians: as if those were not Catholic signs and seals of the
truth of the Gospel, the Covenant of Grace, and those common rights or
privileges which belong to every one that professes to believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and keeps communion with his Church; but only marks to
discriminate sides and parties in Religion, to divide Christians into
uncharitable factions.

1 Cor. 15.18.
As for my Dead, for they are still mine, (as they sleep in Jesus, and are Gods
deposita) these are, in many places, put into their grave, with no other
solemnity than a silent procession, and a demure perambulation; as if all that
attended were as dumb as the corpse, and the dead buried the dead; without any
difference expressed between those bodies that are charitably presumed to have
been Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19.
that are candidates of Heaven, and expectants of a blessed Resurrection, and
the bodies of mere infidells or miscreants; being now treated in many places
like the carkases of beasts, Jer. 22.19.
or the burial of an Ass, for whom men do usually as much as this comes to,
namely, the covering their corpse with earth, to avoid the noysomness and
offense of them, without any further hopes of them. And all this late
supercilious novelty, and neglect of dead Christians, is grounded upon a
strange scrupulosity of some, either silly or superstitious men, who pretend to
boggle at my office, which was more for the living than the dead; not merely
humane and natural, but Christian and spiritual: See B. Ushers answer to the
J^suits praying for the dead.
which they count as a kind of Necromancy, or strange superstition to the dead;
while I only made the dead an occasion of godly instruction and Christian
hope, of comfort, warning, and lawful devotion to the living, which how they
should offend any sober Christian, I could never yet be convinced; and I am
sure came far short of those commemorations, yea comprecations for the dead,
which were anciently used without offense in the Primitive Churches.

All other offices of piety and charity, for the sick and well, the young and
old, the penitent or impenitent, prescribed by me, are (now) either wholly laid
aside, or performed in so various and exotic forms, as common people cannot
easily understand them; their very novelty, obscurity and affected variety,
makes some Ministers prayers a kind of Latin Service to the simple common
people.

Lastly, my whole frame and polity Ecclesiastical, all my ancient constitution,
order and communion, as a National Church of Christ (in which brethren did
happily dwell together in unity) all is by some men not only quite forsaken
and abandoned on their parts; Psalm. 153.1.
but they seek utterly to rout and destroy me, by defaming and discouraging
those that most love, approve and obey me; as if there had nothing been settled
in me with any piety or prudence, reason or discretion, by the wisdom of their
forefathers, who were sometimes esteemed blessed Reformers by most of these
modern Renegers, Separates and Apostates.

How justly they have done me this despite, I appeal to the just and impartial
Judge, before whom I can thus far with truth and comfort assert my innocence;
that as to the foundations of Faith, and rule of Holiness, I have only
adhered to his blessed Word, as it has been delivered to me by the most
credible testimony of the Catholic Church in the books of Canonical
Scripture, truly so called. Nor did I ever teach for Doctrines the Traditions
of men, which some have blasphemed. As for the circumstantial and ceremonial
parts of Religion, I used in Them modestly, cautiously and charitably, that
liberty and power, for order and decency, which, I conceive, Gods indulgence, 1
Cor. 14.40. 1 Cor. 14.33.
who is not the author of confusion, but of peace, allowed me, no less than
any of those Primitive or later Churches, whose best examples I sought to
follow.

If any of my children had discovered something in me less agreeable to that
beauty, order and gravity, which had been desirable by them in a Christian and
Reformed Church; if any matter of real uncomelinesse had been espied in me,
(as what Church is there upon earth so fair, but (as the Moon) it may have some
spots, wainings and eclipses? what state of Christians so complete, Rev. 2.14.
that God may not have a few things against them?) yet it had been their duty,
with the veil of Christian love and pity, modestly to have covered, silently
concealed, and dutifully reformed, what was indeed amiss; and not (like so
many Chams) to have exposed such a parent, such a mother, Genesis 9.22.
to the petulancy and derision both of her enemies abroad, and the plebs at
home, who are as prone as ever the Jews were, to worship any new Calves they
fancy to set up, and to cast off Moses and Aaron, that God and those
Governors, who had done such wonders among them.

If while men slept, the enemy sowed some tares there where my Savior had
plentifully sowed good seed, Mat. 13.25.
was I presently to be trampled under the feet of the beasts of the people, or
quite to be rooted up, burnt and consumed, because some tares appeared? if my
garments were in time a little spotted and sullied, yet was my honor still
unblemished, and the sanctity of my profession, as Christian and Reformed,
unviolated; nor did my garments deserve thus to be rinced in the blood of my
Children: if the ceremonious lace and fringe of my coat were a little unript,
or torn with time, yet there was no cause to rend it quite off, or tear my coat
in pieces: if my garb and fashion seemed somewhat more grave, Catholic and
ancient, than agreed with some men's singular and novellizing fancies, yet did I
not deserve to be stripped and stigmatized, to be thus exposed to shame and
nakedness; much less to have my Flesh thus torn, my Eyes pulled out, my
Throat cut, and my Skin to be flayed off; which are the merciful endeavors of
some of my reforming, that is ruining, enemies.

If some weak or unwise servants (whom I trusted with the management of my
affairs) discharged their duties less piously or prudently than I expected or
exacted of them, as Church Governors and Ministers; if the licentiousness of
others was impatient to be governed so strictly as they should have been (most
men abhorring true Christian Discipline even then when they most clamoured for
it, intending extravagancies when they pretended severities;) yet was I not on
the sudden to have been wholly deprived of all Church Government and order,
once duly established, until such time as my new Discipliners and wise Masters
had found out some fitter way for me, than that Catholic fabric, form and
fashion, which all Churches ever had and enjoyed from the Apostles times and
constitutions. Certainly the failings of Church Governors ought not to have
been so severely avenged upon the Church Government it self; nor are any men's
male-administrations to be laid to the charge of those good laws and
constitutions which are settled in either Church or State. Epist. to Co^. Galat.
Rev. 2. and 3. chapter
The very Apostolic Churches are often blamed, yea and threatened, for their
early degenerations, without any reproach to their first institution, which
certainly was holy and good. It savours too much of humane passion, to pervert
divine order, under pretense of Reforming humane disorders.

Which in me were never so predominant, as to remove me from that posture of
Christian piety, honor, order and integrity, wherein I stood firm and
conspicuous in all the world, as a Christian and well-Reformed Church: hated
indeed, and many times opposed by my foreign adversaries of the Papal
interest and persuasion; but they despaired ever to prevail against me, unless
they first divided my children within me, and armed my own bowels by homebred
and strange animosities against me. These by infinite artifices and undiscerned
stratagems, have by them been heightened of late to such factious petulancies
and furies, as to add scorns to the others thorns, contempt to the others
crosses, gall to my vinegar, scurrility to my agonies.

As if I could not be miserable enough, to satisfy the malice of my enemies
abroad, unless I were made a scorn to my children, and a shame to my friends
both at home and abroad; leaving me few that dare pity me, fewer that can plead
for me, and fewest that are able and willing to relieve me. My spiteful
persecutors are so cruel, that they are impatient to see any sympathize with
me, threatening those my children, that dare (yet) own me for a true Church, or
their Mother; the very name of which they seek to deprive me of, hoping to make
me quite forgotten, who was sometime so renowned among the most celebrated
Churches of the world. Alas, among some Furies it is not safe for sober
Christians to speak one good word of me, or for me; they cannot endure any
should pray for me, no nor weep for me: Tears are offensive, and Charity it
self is scandalous to my implacable enemies, who labor to be my cruel and
total oppressors.

To this dreadful height has the Lord been pleased to afflict me, with my
children, in the day of his fierce wrath; in which He has given me ashes for
bread, and mingled my drink with weeping; filling me with blackness instead of
beauty, with war for peace, with faction for union, with confusion for order,
with impudent patricides and ungrateful matricides, instead of modest,
thankful and tenderhearted children.

Behold He has smitten me into the place of Dragons, Psalm. 44.19.
and given me a cup of deadly wine to drink: But it is the Lord, let him do as
seems good in his sight. If my prayers and sighs and tears cannot, yet
(possibly) the exorbitant and implacable malice of my enemies (who in the end
will not appear Gods friends) may provoke him to remember his tender mercies,
which have been ever of old, and to repent him, as a Father, of the evil he
has suffered to be brought upon me, by those that delight not in His justice,
Micah 7.8.
but in their own sacrilegious advantages. It may be he will return to be
gracious as in former times, and not shut up his loving kindness wholly from
me, Psalm. 136.
since his (oft-repeated) mercy endures for ever: yea, it is because his
compassions fail not, that I am not utterly consumed. Though thou kill me, yet
will I trust in thee, O Lord; who have wounded me very sore: yet heal me, O my
father, and I shall be healed; save me, Job 13.15. Jer. 17.14, 17.
and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise. O be not thou a terror to me,
who art my hope in the day of evil.

CHAP. V.
The cruel and unjust enmity of some against the Church of England.
THus may the Church of England be heard, in every Closet and in every
Congregation, where devout souls either retire or meet, sighing out its
Sorrows, and deploring its great Miseries, sufficient to move the compassions
of all those who have any filial and grateful respect to Her; upon whose
welfare, as to the unity, peace and prosperity of the true Christian and
Reformed Religion, all sober Englishmen may easily foresee, that their own and
their posterity's happiness, spiritual, temporal and eternal (under God)
does chiefly depend.

It is the infinite grief of all good Patriots and true Protestants, to see
this sometime so famous and flourishing Church of England in danger to be eaten
up, not by a Sea Monster, like Andromeda, or by that overgrown Leviathan of
Rome, which takes his pastime in great waters, and rules over many Nations,
People and Languages; but by small vermin, by a company (for the most part) of
creeping and corroding Sectaries, homebred and home-fed: like that (...).
Suet. in vita Tib. Neronis. Erat ei in oblectamentis serpens Draco, quem quum
consumptum a formicis invenisset, monitus est ut vim multitudinis caveret.
tame Lizard or Dragon (as Suetonius calls it) which Tiberius Nero kept at
Capreae, which was eaten up with ants or pismires, to the Emperor's great
grief and astonishment, as an unhappy presage of his own fate by the fury of
the multitude; or like the Lions in Mesopotamia, who are destroyed by gnats;
their importunity being such in those paludious places, that the Lions by
rubbing their eyes, grow blind, and so are drowned, as Ammianus Marcellinus
reports in his History of Julians wars.

Pruritus disputandi scabies Ecclesiae.
If nothing else, yet (as Sir Henry Wotton glories in his sentence) the very
itching and scratching of Christians eyes, the scrupulous doubtings, the
vexatious disputings and endless janglings about Religion in England, both as
Christian and as Reformed, already has, and daily will, bring down such a
Rheum and blood-shottennesse into men's eyes, that (unless some sovereign
eye salve be timely applied) the most people will in a few years be only fit
to play at blind-man-buff in Religion, taking what heresy or fancy comes next
to hand, and changing it the next day; rather groping at all adventure in the
dark, than clearly discerning and conscientiously choosing the weighty matters
of Religion, which are hardly discovered when the blind lead the blind; Mat.
15.14.
and ^s hardly either embraced, when once practicing is turned into prating,
and the power of godliness into pragmatick pomp or popular contempt.

Such is the sad and shameful fate of the Church of England now like to be,
which heretofore never wanted (nor yet does) such champions as durst undertake
her defense against any who bring arguments, not arms; strong reasons, and not
long swords; Scripture-demonstrations, and not Scepticall declamations; pious
Antiquity, and not partial Novelty. But now It has not the honor to be
opposed or overcome by any such Antagonists, whose learning, wit and eloquence
(speciously managed) would lessen the disgrace; but She is in danger to be
overborn by such petty parties, such obscure animals, such mechanic pieces,
and (for the most part) such illiterate wretches, that it is not only a grief,
but a shame, to see so comely a Matron crowded, and as it were stifled to
death, by a company of Scolds and Shrews, a generation of men and women
extremely unbred, of passionate, rude, spiteful, and plebeian spirits; many of
them the very abjects of mankind, viler then the earth, as Job speaks, Job
30.8.
whose manners are much baser then their fortunes (which embase no good man)
who owe most of their stickling activities to their worldly necessities, and
(conscious to their want of real worth and abilities) they seek to revenge
their gross defects, either by their sacrilegious flatteries of others, or by
a rusticall fierceness of their own against the Church of England: as if
flailes, and fannes, and shovels, and spades, were the fittest instruments to
thrash and purge such a Church, or to discuss and ventilate the weighty
matters of Religion, as to a sober Christian Reformation. O happy England, who
art (of late) blessed with so cheap, so easy, so inspired, so rare Reformers;
who get more skill in one days confidence, in one nights dreaming, or one
hours quaking, than modest Scholars, either Divines or other Gentlemen, can
obtain in twice seven years study! O how fruitful is Faction, how spreading is
Schism, when they are fitted with soil and season!

These new-bred Creepers, which are now so numerous and noxious in England, are
(generally) but the spawn or fly-blowings of those elder Sects and Factions,
which a long time have been buzzing and breeding in the bosom of the Church of
England, under the name of Disciplinarians: whose first Authors long ago made
some Essays for their desired Innovations, by modester, indeed, yet very
popular ways of remonstrances and supplications; well knowing that it is ever
welcome to the vulgar, to see any fault found with their betters, or any
project of subjecting their superiors under any more Plebeian rigours and
severities. The next and worse abettors ( pejor aetas) tried how far they might
by scurrilous pamphlets, railing and reviling, like Rabshakeh, unravel the
cords of all government, both the majesty of the Civil, and the authority of
the Ecclesiastic. After such biting Petitions and Satyrick Pasquils, (worthy
of such Martonists) came open menacings of Princes and Parlaments, Priests and
People too, as Mr. R. Hooker observes in his Preface to his Ecclesiastical
polity. At last, words came to be turned into swords: many both at home and
abroad having evil will at the Sion of England, making their advantages of our
unhappy differences in civil affairs, and taking fire from those flames, have
sought by the licentiousness, riot and rudeness of infinite Sects and
Factions, as by so many trains and barrels of gunpowder, utterly to blow up the
whole frame and constitution of the Church of England.

Which unchristian practices and cruel designs, that they might the better
justify or palliate to their credulous followers, they every where, as boldly
as falsely, affirm, that both in the matter constituted, and the form
constituting a true Church in ordinances, duties, privileges, members,
ministrations, Ministry, communion, and all comforts necessary for Christians,
there were few things in the Church of England tolerable, most were blameable,
and many most abominable to their more sanctified senses: yea some men clamor
that there was nothing sound or constitutive of a Church of Christ, but the
whole head was sick, Isa. 1.5.
and the whole heart faint; that not only Schism is commendable, but absolute
Separation is as necessary from the Church of England, as the going of Gods
people out of Babylon.

These are the poisons with which some Serpents have sought to infect the minds
of common people, and to envenom even the better sort with their biting and
bitter invectives, against the purity and peace of the Church of England.

O venerable censors! O severe Aristarchusses, of a more than Catonian gravity!
to whose ploughs, and looms, and distaffs, and clubs, and hammers, it is meet
(as to so many sacred scepters) this later English and Christian world should
no less submit their souls than the Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians,
Romans and Scythians, did to the nets and fish-hooks of the Apostles; who were
authorized with miraculous gifts, and assisted by the special power of the
holy Spirit of Christ, to plant, settle, and reform and purge Christian
Churches.

To whose holy Doctrine and Divine Institutions, delivered in the Old and New
Testament, and followed by all the Primitive Catholic Churches,
notwithstanding that the Church of England did in its first Reformation
diligently and exactly conform it self; if we may believe the integrity of
those Reformers who had the courage and constancy to be Martyrs, whose
learning, worth and piety has been confirmed by the testimony of so many wise
and religious Princes, by the approbation and sanction of so many honorable
and unanimous Houses of Parliament, by the suffrages of so many learned and
reverend Convocations, by the applauses of so many Sister-reformed Churches; if
we may believe the preaching, living and dying of so many hundred excellent
Bishops and Presbyters, or the prayers, praises and proficiencies of so many
thousands of other good Christians; or (lastly) if we may believe the wonderful
blessings and special graces of a merciful God, attesting to the verity,
sanctity and integrity of this Church-Reformation and Christian Constitution
for many happy years:

Yet against all these, some peevish Momusses, some spiteful Caco-zelots, some
evil-ey'd Zoilusses, some insolent and causeless Enemies of the Church of
England, have not so much modesty as to conceal their malice, or to smother
their insolent folly, and intolerable arrogance, which dares to put the
ignorance, giddiness, emptiness, vulgarity, rashness, precipitancy and
sinisternesse of their silly censures, into the balance of Religion, contrary
to the renowned learning, piety, gravity, grace and majesty of all those who
have had so great favor, love, respect and honor for the Church of England.

Whom her spiteful and envious adversaries now presume to follow with nothing
but Contumelies and Anathema's, with pillagings and spoylings, with railings
and revilings, with waste and ruin, to the excessive joy of Her. Papal
enemies, whose deeply-designed policies have a long time desired and hoped to
see that woeful day befall the Church of England, in which her Bishops might
beg, her Presbyters be starved, her Ministry contemned, her Liturgy ejected,
her Unity dissolved and broken, her Ancient and Primitive Government abolished,
her undoubted ordination and succession of Ministers interrupted, her whole
Christian Frame and National Constitution (which was (for the main) truly
Catholic, Primitive and Apostolic) destroyed, dissipated, desolated.

What invincible Armadoes could not atchieve, what monstrous Powder-plots could
not accomplish, what wily Jesuits and other subtle Sophisters despaired to
attain (having been often defeated and repelled by the learned care and vigilant
puissance of wise Princes, sober Parlaments, reverend Bishops, and other able
Ministers of the Church of England) that the weakness, wantonness and
wickedness of some of our own petty Sectaries, Schismatic Agitators, and
super^reforming Reformers, is likely to bring to pass; whom the most admired
and devout Lord Primate of Armagh (a great Prophet of God, and Pillar of the
Reformed Religion) sometime told me, he esteemed no other than Factors for
Popery, and Engines for Roman designs, by divisions and domestic confusions of
Religion, to bring in Popish Superstition and Tyranny. Indeed a prudent
Conjecturer may in this case easily make a true Prophet: For the Roman Eagle (a
watchful, powerful and voracious bird) can never fail (at last) to seize on
these parts of Christendom for her prey, where she shall see Ignorance prevail
against Knowledge, Barbarity against Learning, Division against Unity,
Confusion against Order, People against their Priests, Novelty against
Antiquity, Anarchy against Catholic Authority, and infinite deformities
ushered in, under the title of special Reformations. That cunning Conclave
(which overlooks the Christian world as the greatest constellation of policy in
the West) knows full well, that such feverish distempers in any Church or
Christian State, as now afflict the Church of England, will not fail (if they
long continue) to bring it to such an hectic consumption as will quite destroy
its former healthful constitution, and prepare it for those Italian Empiricks,
who will come then to be in request with common people, when they find no good
to be got by the best-reputed Physicians, the most specious Reformers: when
these are at their wits ends, so differing in their judgments and practice,
that they know not what to do, by reason of the madness, impatiency and
petulancy of people; those foraign Mountebanks will always promise men help
and cure at an easy rate; for they require no more of the most desperate
patients, than to credit their receipts, to be confident of, and reconciled to
the skill and artifice of the Church of Rome their Mother, and the Pope their
Father.

CHAP. VI.
The causeless malice and ingratitude of the Church of Englands enemies.
I Cannot believe, that any of you (who are persons of Learning, Honor, and
Integrity, lovers of your Country and the Reformed Religion) can be wholly
strangers to the sad and dangerous condition of the Church of England. Nor can
you (if rightly set forth to you) be unaffected with it; (unless your designs
and fortunes are to be advanced by the rents and ruins of this Church of
England.)

In which ( as the Lord lives, before whom we all stand) distempers are risen*
not only to Divisions, but Distractions; not only to Injuries, but
Insolences; not only to Obloquies, but Oppressions; not only to Schisms, but
Abscissions; not only to Factions, but Confusions; not only to Lapses, but
Apostacies; not only to rude Deformities, but they tend to absolute Nullities,
as to any Christian Harmony, Fraternity, Order, Beauty, Unity, Strength,
Safety, and public settling of that Reformed Religion which was once professed
in the Church of England: And this by reason of the Envies, Despites,
Rudenesses, Animosities, Seditions, Strifes, Separations, Raylings, Reproaches,
Contumelies, Blasphemies, and profane Novelties, every where pregnant and
predominant among vulgar spirits, and odiously cast upon all things that you
and your forefathers esteemed as religious and sacred in this Church of England.

Ezekiel. 47.4.
The torrent of rebukes and troubles (like Ezekiels waters) is now risen, not
only to the ankles and knees, but to the loins and neck; growing too rapid and
deep for the common people to wade over, or venture into: nor are they safe for
any to engage upon, but those who (as S. Christopher is represented in the
Legendary Emblem) are heightened by their own integrity, and supported by Gods
heroic Spirit: for it is a black and dangerous, a red and dead Sea, upon which
he adventures, who will now seriously assert the Church of England; whose
troubled state is more stormy than those waters were on which S. Peter ventured
to walk, or wherein our blessed Savior slept; with whose Disciples we may well
cry out, Master, save us, we perish. Mat. 8.25.


What tongue, what pen can sufficiently set forth the rudenesses, outrages,
barbarities, despites, diminutions and indignities, which some have offered in
their speeches and writings, in their pamphlets and petitions, in their
restless agitations and implacable malice, against all that was established in
the Church of England, contrary to that duty of Charity they owed, and that
profession of Communion they sometimes professed; being possessed (now) with so
fierce a spirit, that they have broken all cords and bands of Humanity,
Civility, Charity and Piety, both private and public?

I shall not need to mind you or any of them of their many oaths and
subscriptions, of those Protestations, Vows and Covenants which many of these
(now deserters and destroyers of the Church of England) so easily and eagerly
swallowed: by which last threefold cord, most of them (I believe) tied
themselves to maintain the Protestant Religion, as it was established in the
Church of England.

If any of them were so wise and cautious as to avoid such politic gins (which
how far they intended well to Church or State God only knows; this to be sure
all sober Christians see, that they have little advanced the state of the
Reformed Religion in England:) yet still they must know, that themselves, and
all that are good Christians, and honest English, are bound by far higher and
nobler bonds of their baptismall Vow and Covenant to their God and Savior;
from whence do necessarily flow those of Christian gratitude, duty, love and
charity, obliging every good Christian to pray for and preserve the welfare of
this Church, and that Reformed Religion which was once happily established in
it; in which the glory of our God, the honor of our Savior, the good of our
Country, and the salvation of many thousand souls, are highly concerned.

Against all which, for any man, upon small or no account, rashly, proudly,
spitefully, out of envy, covetousness, ambition, or any other depraved lust
and passion, to offend (especially where so great light of Divine Truth and
Grace, such a presence and pregnancy of Gods Ubi ecclesia, ibi and Spiritus;
and ubi Spiritus Dei, illic ecclesia, and omnis gratia. Iren. l. 3. c. 40.
Spirit clearly shines, as does in the Church of England, to the very dazzling
of the eyes of these Adversaries) must needs be such a complicated and resolved
wickedness, a sin of so enormous and transcendent a nature, that Irenaeus
counts it a Judicabit eos (Deus) qui schismata operantur, qui sunt immanes;
suam utilitatem potius considerantes, qu^m unitatem ecclesiae -- propter
modicas causas magnum and gloriosum Christi corpus conscindunt, and dividunt,
and quantum in ipsis est interficiunt. Irenae. l. 4. c. 62.
mangling or killing of Christ again: and in earnest, it seems scarce
pardonable, because it is scarce a repentable sin, or repairable malice;
therefore hardly to be repented of, because few can plead (with S. Paul) they 1 Timothy 1.13.
do it ignorantly, and so hope to obtain mercy, being wilful persecutors and
vastators of such an excellent and illustrious Church as this of England was,
before these spoilers thus came upon it to make havoc of it.

In which Church, if those holy Means and Divine Graces which accompany
salvation were not professed and enjoyed, for my part, I despair any where to
find the way of Truth and Peace, of holiness and happiness. I know nothing
truly excellent and necessary in any Church, ancient or later, which this
Church of England did not enjoy; yea I find, many things which seem less
convenient or more superfluous in others, we were happily freed from. Nor can I
yet discover any material defect in the Church of England, as to Christians
outward polity, inward tranquillity, and eternal felicity. Nothing either pious
or peaceful, moral or mysterious, rituall or spiritual, orderly or comely,
that may contribute to the good of men's souls, but was plentifully to be
enjoyed in the Church of England; whose rare accomplishments and prosperity
(both inward and outward) were (I believe) the greatest eyesore and grievance
in the world, both to evil men and devils; when they saw that Truth and
Holiness, those Graces and Virtues, those spiritual gifts and comforts, which
were here entertained with excellent learning, noble encouragements, ingenuous
honors, peaceable serenity, and munificent plenty: in all which the Reformed
Church of England so flourished many years by Gods and man's indulgence, that
nothing (in truth) was wanting to the perpetuity of its prosperity, but
moderation, humility and charity: these would (on all sides) have kept out
luxury and laziness, pride and envy; the usual moths and worms which breed in
all things that are full and fair, opulent and prosperous.

Which humane defects (justly blameable on man's part, and punishable on Gods)
may no way be imputed to the Church of England, (which afforded so great
advantages of well-doing and wel-being to all good Christians) but to us poor
mortals, who were prone to abuse so great Indulgences of God and man: so
uncharitable, unthankful and unreasonable are those malcontents, who blame
the fullness of the breast, or the sweetness of that milk and honey, of which
they have eat and drank too much; who either from other men's failings and
infirmities, or from their own corrupt fancies and conceits, do take occasion
to blast and blaspheme all that was Reformed, sacred and settled, as to
Religion, in the Church of England; so filling all places with their dust and
clamours against this Church, that the levity and easiness of many people have
quite forsaken it, running, like those that are scared with Earthquakes, out of
their houses, cities and temples, to heaths, woods and wildernesses. Some out
of a sequacious easiness and vulgar baseness (studying to comply with their
leaders interests and their own advantages) affect to appear to the world, not
only neglective and indifferent, but scorners and high opposers of all that
ever the Church of England pretended to, as to the Truth, Reformation, Wisdom,
Spirit, Power, or Grace of Religion; neither caring what they condemn, nor much
minding upon what grounds they do it.

Others taking advantage of the levity, looseness, covetousness, sacrilege,
arrogance, injuriousnesse and madness of some that heretofore professed
special purity and strictness in Religion, do resolve (as those Heathens of
old, who excused their own thefts and wantonnesses, by the lubricities and
pranks of their Gods) fully to gratify their own licentious and native
inclinations, how inordinate soever, utterly casting off and abhorring all
outward form and profession, as well as all inward power and persuasion of
godliness; counting all Religious duties to be no better than consecrated
rattles, which Politicians put into the hands of the common people, to please
and compose their childish frowardness. The ground and rise of all which is,
from those many scandals which loose and unsettled tempers take from those
endless strifes and janglings; the continued disorders and deformities, the
poverty and contempt, the maimes and wounds, the cruelty and uncharitableness,
with which some high-flown Reformers have of late treated the Church of
England, and those that have most constantly adhered to it.

What man or woman, capable of such profound, serious and grave thoughts as
become Christian Religion, whose lusts or interests have not quite decocted all
Humanity as well as Piety, can behold, Job 2.13.
without seven days silence and astonishment (like Job's friends) the rufull
and dismal spectacle of the Church of England? which is like Job or Lazarus,
living indeed, but almost buried in its Sores and Sorrows; not only lying,
but even dying on its dunghill; like the sometime lovely and beautiful
Daughter of Zion, now grovelling in the dust, Lam. 1.
deserving another tenderhearted Jeremy, Jer. 9.1.
who might write the book of England's Lamentations with his Tears, since the
History of her Fall and Ruin is written in blood: Her own brood (like the
young Pelicans) feeding upon her without any pity or remorse, growing daily
fiercer after they have once tasted of her flesh, and more resolute (as
Absalom) by the rapes they have rudely made upon a Matrone, lately so comely,
chaste and honorable, whom Her destroyers dare now to count and call the filth
and offscouring of all Churches; crying down Her holy habitations and
conventions, as cages and flocks of unclean birds; Her holy Ministrations, as
impious and odious; Her holy Bishops and Ministers, as Antichristian usurpers
and impostors; Her whole Constitution, as Babylonish and abominable, worthy of
nothing but their curses and comminations.

CHAP. VII.
Of the excellent constitution of the Chapter of Engl. and her undeserved
calamities.
Has Jer. 2.11.
any Nation changed Her Gods, though they are no Gods? says the Prophet,
expostulating with the inconstant and Apostatizing Jews, who had despised the
Word, forsaken the Law, and broken the everlasting covenant of God, made with
their forefathers. What people (that owns a God, or a Savior, or a Soul
immortal, or any Divine Veneration, under the name of their Religion) was ever
patient to hear their, and their forefathers God blasphemed? or to see that
Religion (wherein, to the best of their understanding, they agreed and
professed publicly to serve and worship their God) vulgarly baffled and
contemned? Was ever any part of mankind so stupidly barbarous, as to behold,
without just grief and resentment, their Oracles and Scriptures vilified and
abused? their solemn Prayers and Liturgies torn and burnt? Ad injuriam Deorum
spectat rerum sacrarum irreverentia. Isid. e Varrone.
their Temples profaned and ruined? their holy Services scorned and abhorred?
their Priests and Ministers of holy Mysteries impoverished and contemned?

In matters of Religion, the light of nature has taught every Nation to be
commendably zealous and piously pertinacious, esteeming this their highest
honor, to be very tender of any diminution, dishonor, or indignity offered to
their Religion; which reflects upon the majesty of their God, whom every Nation
may in charity be presumed to serve in such a way, as they think to be most
acceptable to their God; every man being convinced, that he ought to pay the
highest respects to that Deity which he adores: Deos peregrinos ne colunto. Lex
12. Tab.
from which to be easily moved, by vulgar clamours and inconstancy (without
grand and weighty demonstrations, convincing a man of his own error, and his
Countries mistake) or, contrary to the dictates of conscience, for any man
shamefully to flatter, or silently to comply with any such designs as appear
first reproching their Religion, next robbing their God, and at last
destructive to all public Piety, is certainly a temper so base, so brutish, so
ignoble, so servile, so sordid, so devilish, that it is worse than professed or
avowed Non tam Atheus est qui Deos non agnoscit, quam qui agnitos contemnit.
Sen.
Atheism: for he sins less that owns no God, than he that mocks him, or so
treats him, as the world may see he neither loves nor fears Him.

And can it I beseech you (O noble Christians, and worthy Gentlemen) become the
piety, wisdom and honor of this so ancient and renowned Nation of England, to
behold with coldness and indifferency (like Gallio) the scamblings and
prostitutions, the levellings and abasings, the scorns and calumnies so
petulantly and prodigally cast, by mechanic and plebeian spirits (for the most
part) or by mercenary insolency, upon that Christian and Reformed Religion,
which has so long flourished among you and your forefathers, and which was
first settled among you, not slightly nor superficially; not by the preposterous
policies, passions and interests of our Princes; not by the pusillanimity or
partiality of overawed Parlaments; nor yet by the superstitious easiness or
tumultuary headiness of the common people; but upon learned, public and
serious examination of every thing that was settled and owned as any point or
part of our Religion? There was godly, grave, mature and impartial counsel of
most learned Divines used; there was the full and free Parlamentary consent of
all estates and degrees in this nation; there was a strict and due regard had
to the Word of God, and the mind of Christ, as to doctrine and duties, to the
faith and fundamentals of Religion, without any regard to any such antique
customs or traditions, as seemed contrary to that rule.

As for the rituals and prudentials, the circumstantiating and decorating of
Religion, great regard was had in them to the usages of pure and Primitive
Antiquity, so as became modest, wise, and humble Christians; who (seeing
nothing in the ancient Churches Rites and Ceremonies contrary to Gods Word, or
beyond the liberty allowed them and all Churches in point of order and decency)
did discreetly and ingenuously study such compliance with them, as showed the
least desire of novellizing, or needless varying from, and the greatest care of
conforming to sober and venerable Antiquity.

Against all which sacred suffrages and ecclesiastical attestations for the
true Christian and Reformed Religion once settled in the Church of England, now
at last to oppose either popular giddiness and desire of novelties, or any
secular policies and worldly designs, or any brutish power, that is neither
rational nor religious, but merely arbitrary and imperious, altering and
abolishing, as the populacy lists, matters of Religion (which are the highest
concernments of any nation, and so require the most public counsels, impartial
debates, and serious consent of all estates;) by such pitiful principles, and
the like unconscientious biasses, for a Nation to be swayed in, or swerved from
the great and weighty matters of Religion, once well established, is
(certainly) a perfect indication of present baseness, also an infallible
presage of future unhappiness.

Which I beseech God to divert from this Nation of England, by your prayers and
tears, by your counsel and courage, by your moderation and discretion; who are
too knowing to be ignorant, and too ingenuous to be unsensible of your duty to
God and your own souls, of your respect and deserved gratitude to your
Country, and to this Church of England; which was heretofore loved by its
children, applauded by its friends, reverenced by its neigbours, dreaded and
envied by its enemies: and this not only for that long peace and prosperity it
enjoyed (which alone are no signs of Gods approbation) but chiefly (as Spiritus
Sanctus, Arrha incorruptelae, and confirmatio fidei nostrae, and scala
ascensionis ad Deum: ubi enim Spiritus Dei, illic ecclesia, etc. Iren. l. 3. c.
40.
Irenaeus observes) for those rare spiritual gifts, ministerial, devotionall
and practical, which were evidently to be seen in Her; those pious
proficiencies, those spiritual influences, which preachers and people found in
their own hearts; those gracious examples and frequent good works which they
set forth to others; those heavenly experiences they enjoyed in themselves;
those charitable simplicities they exercised to each other; their numerous
conventions, their fervent devotions, their reverent attentions, their
unanimous communions, their cheerful Amens; those blessed hopes and
unspeakable comforts which thousands enjoyed, both living and dying, in the
obedience to, and communion with the Church of England.

1 Cor. 9.2. 2 Cor. 3.2.
All these holy fruits and blessed effects, as most certain seals and letters
testimonial, were (I conceive) most pregnant evidences and valid
demonstrations of true Religion, and of a true Church, so happily settled by the
joint consent and public piety of this Nation, that it was not in reason or
conscience, in modesty or ingenuity, to be suddenly changed, much less rashly
deserted, and rudely abandoned, chiefly upon the giddiness of common people,
or by the boysterousnesse of common soldiers; whose buff-coats and armor
cannot be thought by any wise and worthy Soldiers, to be like Aarons
breastplate, the place from which Priests and people are to expect the constant
oracles of Urim and Thummim, Exodus 28.30.
Light and Reformation.

Such of that profession as are truly Militant Christians, that is, humbly
wise, and justly valiant (as I hope many Soldiers may be) will think it enough
for them, modestly to learn, and generously to defend, as Constantine the Great
said to the Nicene Bishops, not imperiously to dictate, or boldly to innovate
matters of Religion in such a Church and Nation as England, which was, I am
sure, and I think still is, furnished with many able Divines, many Evangelicall
Priests and Ministers of the Lord, Mal. 2.7.
whose lips preserve saving knowledge, who have (many a one of them) more
learning and well-studied Divinity in them, than a whole Regiment, nay, than an
whole Army of ordinary Soldiers; whose weapons are not proper for a spiritual
warfare, nor apt (as David's hands) either to build or repair a Church,
otherways than as Laborers, who may possibly assist the true Ministers, who
are, and ought to be, the Master Builders of Gods house; whose skill is, not to
destroy men's bodies, but to save their souls; not to kill, but to make alive.

It must ever be affirmed to Gods glory (because without any vanity or
flattery) that the Church of England (for this last golden century) came not
behind the very best Reformed Churches, nor any other that profess Christianity
in any part of the world: which is not my particular testimony (who may seem
partial, because I unfeignedly profess my self a son and servant of it;) but
it is and has been the joint suffrage of all eminent Divines in all foreign
Reformed Churches, who have written and spoken of the Church of England, ever
since its settled Reformation, not with commendation only, but admiration;
especially those who, coveting to partake of the gifts and labors of English
Divines, have taken the pains to learn our hard and untoward language.

Yea, I may farther with truth and modesty affirm, that (saving the
extraordinary gifts of Tongues, Miracles and Martyrdomes) the Church of
England, since its settled Reformation under Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory,
came not much short of the Primitive Churches in the first and second Centuries.

Which had (at least some of them, as I shall after show) rather more than
fewer ceremonies, partly Judaick, partly Christian; yea, far greater errors and
abuses were found among some of them, than were generally among any professors
in communion with the Church of England: witness those touching the
Resurrection of the body, and in the celebrating of the Lords Supper, among the
Corinthians. The first some denied; the other many received covetously, 1 Cor.
15: 1 Cor. 11.
uncharitably, drunkenly, disorderly, undecently in the Church of Corinth.
Besides the scandalous fact of the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5.
with which they were not so offended as became Christians; they were also full
of factions and 1 Cor. 1.11.3.3.
carnal divisions; going 1 Cor. 6.1.
to law one with another before Infidels; undervaluing the blessed Apostle S.
Paul, and other faithful laborers; 2 Cor. 10.11, 12. chapter
preferring false Apostles and deceitful workers, with no less folly than
ingratitude; challenging in many things disorderly and uncomely liberties,
which amounted to clokes of malice, and a licentiousness tending to confusion.

These and other corruptions were among Christians of an Apostolical Church,
newly planted, carefully watered, and excellently constituted. Nor are there
less remarkable faults found by the Spirit of God in six of the seven Asian
Churches, mentioned in the second and third Chapters of the Revelation, while
yet they were under Apostolical inspection. For the Devil, who is a great
rambler, but no loyterer, began betimes to sow his tares in Gods field, by
false Apostles, unruly walkers, deceitful workers, mere hucksters of Religion,
Jude 18, 19.
schismatic Spirits, proud Impostors, sensual Separatists, wanton Jezebels,
curious and cowardly Gnostics, with all the evil brood of Nicolaitans, Rev.
2.20.
Simonians, Cerinthians, and other crafty Hypocrites, brochers of lies, patrons
of lewdness, extremely earthly and sensual; yet vaunters (in proud swelling
words) of spiritual and heavenly gifts; 2 Pet. 2.19. Tit. 1.10, 11.
but more covetous of filthy lucre, and sedulous to serve their own bellies,
than zealous to serve the Lord, or to save souls.

In all which instances of diseases, growing even upon any of those Primitive
Churches, however Christians are commanded to repent and do their first works,
to keep themselves pure from contagion, private or epidemick; yet are they no
where put upon the pernicious methods of reproching, rending and separating
from the very frame and constitution of their respective Churches, as they were
holy Polities, Constitutions or Communions, settled by the Apostles, in decent
subordinations and convenient limits of Ecclesiastical order, government,
authority and jurisdiction; without which all humane societies, civil or
sacred, run to mere Chaosses and heaps of confusion. Which as the God of order
and peace perfectly abhors, 1 Cor. 14.33.
so he no where by any Divine precept, or approved example, recommends any such
practices to Christians (under the name, notion, or intention of reforming
abuses crept into any Churches) presently to rend, revile, contemn, divide,
destroy and make desolate the whole order, polity, frame and constitution of
them, which is very Christian and very commendable.

If the grand example of Divine Mercy was ready to spare Sodom upon Abraham's
charitable intercession, Gen 18.32.
in case ten righteous persons had been found in that city; Jer. 5.4.
and Jerusalem, in case one man could have been found there, who executed
judgment and sought the truth; how little are those men imitators of Gods
clemency, or Abraham's pity, who have studied, and still endeavor by all acts
of power and policy, utterly to destroy such a Church as England was, in which
many thousands of good Christians may undoubtedly be found, who are constant
adherers to the Faith, grateful lovers of the Piety, and most pathetick
deplorers of the miseries of the Church of England?

Whose excellent Christian state and Reformed constitution deserved much better
treatment from those (at least) who were her children, carefully bred, born,
and brought up by her; however (now) they appear, many of them, better fed than
taught, more puffed up with the surfeits of undigested Knowledge, than
increased in humble, sound, saving and practical Understanding.

Whence (then) the present lapses, depressions, diminutions and feared
desolations, are come upon and befaln this Church of England, (which threaten
you, O worthy Gentlemen, and your posterity, no less than they afflict the
despised, divided and dejected Clergy) is a disquisition most worthy of your
serious inquiry; that discerning the causes, which cannot be good, with the
consequences, which must needs be bad, you may endeavor, with all Christian
prudence and good conscience, to advance those counsels and remedies which
become wise men, good Christians and true-hearted English: (which Christian
counsels and pious endeavors, in order to the settling of Religion in this
Nation, Page 16.
his Highness professed in his Speech at the dissolving of the last
Parlamentary convention, to have expected from them.)

Nothing becomes any men or Nation worse, than to own no settled Religion, as
the public rule, measure and standard of peoples piety, except only this
(which is one of the basest pieces of policy that ever came out of the Devils
skull) to profess Religion, yea the Christian and Reformed, with such a
looseness and latitude, as may expose it, with its prime Teachers and
Professors, to vulgar indifferencies and insolences, yea to be profaned,
blasphemed, baffled, beggered, scorned, contemned, according to the dictates,
lusts, disorders and levities of popular humors and the vilest of men. The
first is the temper of sots and beasts, who own no God: the second of
Machiavillians and Hypocrites, who fear no God. It was a good rule of the Roman
policy and Heathenish piety, Dii aut non habentor, aut rite colantu^.
Either pretend not to the Gods, or treat them as becomes Gods.

CHAP. VIII.
THe outside or visible effects of the Church of Englands troubles and
distempers are as manifest as Miriams, A further scrutiny and discovery of the
Church of Englands miseries and enemies.
Uzziahs and Gehazies leprosies on their foreheads, both in respect of secular
contestations, and Ecclesiastical contradictions: in both which this Church
and Nation have been at once so involved, that our miseries are not only the
more complicated, cumulated and increased; but they are the less curable,
because less compliable with any impartial way of public Christian counsels;
men's hearts being so many ways extremely divided and differently biassed, not
only upon civil, but even Religious differences, in which the meanest and
shortest-spirited men do ever affect to appear most cruelly zealous, and most
uncharitably pertinacious.

The Rivalry and competition for Sovereign power between Princes or Peers,
which in former ages for many years, and in various vicissitudes of civil wars,
afflicted this English nation, were (yet) so far tolerable, as men still
preserved the unity of their persuasions and affections touching Religion,
amidst those deadly feuds and different adherencies in respect of civil
affairs, with which they were distracted: which politic contests were capable
of an end, either by the extinction of one party, or the uniting of both; as it
came to pass in Henry the seventh's days, who laid the foundation for uniting
the Families of York and Lancaster, also the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

But (alas) our late distractions, like fire from Hell, have seized not only
our Barns and Stables, our Dwellings and Mansions, but our Temples and
Churches, our Hearts and Souls.

Religion, The Christian Religion, the Reformed Religion, this staff of
national beauty and sociall bands is broken in sunder. Zach. 11.10.
Religion (both as Christian and Reformed) this is torn and mangled, this is
deformed and unchristened. Religion, whose obligations are most strict and
sacred, whose breaches are most wide and incurable, this is wounded, this is
ulcerated, this is gangrened. Religion, whose balsam is most sovereign to close
and reconcile a sinner with an offended God, which professes to worship God
and Man united in one blessed Redeemer and Mediator Jesus Christ, this is fallen
out with it self, and woefully divided. Religion, whose aim is to unite first
God and man in one band of eternal love, next, 2 Cor. 5.20.
all Christian professors in charitable compliance one with another, as members
of the same body, and belonging to one head; this, this is the poniard, 1 Cor.
12.18.
this the sword, this the spear, by which we are (in England) armed and
animated one against another. Not only our heads in policies, and our hands in
power, but our hearts in piety are divided. Most men in England fancy they
cannot be truly godly, or justly hope to be saved, unless they damn and
destroy each other, not only upon civil, but religious accounts. The silver
cord of religious love is ravelled and broken; Rev. 15.6.
the golden girdle and perfect rule of Evangelicall charity is not only much
worn and warped, but quite pulled and snapp'd in sunder^ we war and fight, kill
and slay, we bite and devour, we persecute and oppress each other, James 3.14.
not only upon humane, secular and momentary, but upon divine, spiritual and
eternal pretensions.

So that to find out either our distempers or our cures in England, we must
search deeper than the skin and superficies of things* the poison is profoundly
imbibed, the malignity deeply diffused, rising in its source from, and reaching
in its effects to the very hearts of men: the venom and spite is hidden in the
most retired cells and inaccessible recesses of men's souls: the malice and
mischief are fled for their refuge or asylum to Gods Sanctuary, to the very
spirits and consciences of Christians; which should be the receptacles of most
sacred influences, the very Holy of Holyes, the Heaven of Heavens in the
reasonable soul, in which the Oracles of God, the special presence and
manifestations of his Spirit, are most lively to be heard, seen, felt and
enjoyed: These are either grossly darkened and defiled, 1 Timothy 4.2.
or garnished with false lights, or swept with the Devils broo^, lies wrapped
up in hypocrisy, and strong delusions gilded over with godly pretensions.

Here I find the greatest enemies and destroyers of the Church of England are
very far from confessing or repenting of any folly, pride, levity, ignorance,
lukewarmnesse, laziness, deadness, hypocrisy, malice, presumption,
rebellion, covetousness, ambition, sacrilege, profaneness, coldness,
Atheism, Apostasy, uncharitableness, disorderly walking, disobedience, or
unthankfulness to God or man; all which (possibly) may be in their own hearts
and hands, and so must needs have as great an ingrediency in our public
calamities, as any men's sins in the nation.

They rather employ all their wits and skill, their artifices and oratory, 1
John 3.12.
to anatomize the Church of England, to dissect every part of its constitution;
to observe, not only the practick pulse and outward breathings of its
Ministers and Professors, but the very inward fibers and temper of its heart,
as to all its holy mysteries, religious ministrations and ecclesiastic
constitutions.

Upon the pretended inspection of which, as the vitals and noble parts of
Religion, they daily proclaim to the credulous vulgar, and other amazed
spectators (as the astonished Augurs and Soothsayers were wont of old) that in
these they discern all the portentous omens of our afflictions, all the
prodigious causes and effects of our public troubles and miseries: in these
they evidently see tokens of an angry God, of a provoked justice, of an armed
power from Heaven, which has begun not to chastise as a Father, but to consume
as an Enemy; n^^ to reform as a Friend, but to destroy and desolate as an
Avenger, this lukewarm, this Laodicean Church of Engl. with all the
Antichristian pomp, pride and tyranny, the superstition and abomination of its
whole frame and constitution.

In this point or center of the Church of England's ill-reformed, nay utterly
deformed and desperate state, it is, that these severe Censors fixed the foot
of their compasses, fetching in all Bishops and Presbyters, all Preachers and
Professors, all Duties and Devotions, all Ministrations and Ministers, all
Liturgies and Ceremonies, within the wide circle and black line of their
censorious severity, condemning all but themselves and their own way or
parties; who are called and counted by some of them (in a most Pharisaick pride
and uncharitableness) the only Saints, the called, Elect, and precious of God.

All such as are dissenters from them they have set already at Christ's left
hand, fancying it a great part of piety, magisterially to judge, and
authoritatively to condemn all the members of the Church of England, both
severally and jointly (though never so holy, learned, wise and good) more upon
popular prejudices and sinister presumptions, than upon any just trial and
serious examination; which (alas) few of these censorious Adversaries and
supercilious Destroyers of the Church of England are able to reach in any
proportion, either for parts or prudence, learning or experience, Reason or
Religion; being (for the most part) like Mushromes, of crude, indigested and
dangerous composition, who (yet) think themselves capable to compare with the
highest Cedars of Lebanon, and fancy they are able to overtop the fairest and
fruitfullest trees that ever grew upon the mountains of God in this Church and
Nation.

Alas, they puff at all that ever was accounted pious or prudent, learned or
religious, gracious or godly, comely or comfortable, holy or happy, in the
Church of England; looking upon it with scorn and triumph, as David did upon
Goliath, when he was dejected, grovelling and dead: an object fit for these
worthies to set their feet upon, and by the sharp sword of their zeal utterly
to destroy, that neither head nor tail, root nor branch of the Church of
England may remain.

CHAP. IX.
A general Vindication of the Church of England's former excellent
Constitution, although it be now afflicted.
BUt here, (as Michael the Archangel did) so must I crave leave to contend with
these men about this Jude 9.
body of Moses, this carkase (almost) this Skeleton (as they esteem it) of the
Church of England; which heretofore was thought to have conversed with God in
the holy mountain of vision; whose face was heretofore, not only
well-favoured, but it so shined, that these feeble spectators, the now blind,
blear-eyed, or blood-shotten despisers and destroyers of it, were not then able
to behold its glory without envy and regret.

Though the Lord may seem to have slain Her with Her children, yet I cannot but
believe and profess, that the salvation of God has been both manifested to,
and received by thousands, in the former order, way and dispensations of the
Church of England; that no Christians need, few ever enjoyed more means of
grace and glory, than were piously and prudently dispensed in the Church of
England. While I live I must deny, what is clamorously and injustly
calumniated, fiercely, but falsely, alleged, to justify some men's
advantageous Schisms, profitable Separations, and gainful Innovations; that
our public afflictions and miseries have sprung, as to their inward and
meritorious cause, from the evil and unsound constitution of the Church of
England, as it was once publicly reformed and established in this Nation.

This Calumny I can no more grant, than, that holy Job's sores grew from some
unwholesome air or diet he used, or from the unhealthful temper of his body; or
that Satan's malice was to be justified by Job's want of any right to claim, or
eloquence to assert his Innocence, as to his practice before man; and his
Integrity, as to his purpose and sincerity before God, amidst his bitter losses
and calamities: which were so passionately aggravated by the unjust censures
and misinterpretations of his mistaken friends, because they did not wisely
consider the paradoxes of Gods providence, and depths of divine judgments,
Romans 11.33.
which many times inflict upon whole Churches, as well as upon private
Christians, by the malice of men and Devils, many sharp and sore afflictions;
Flagellat nos Deus, and erudit nos. Dolor medicinalis est, non poenalis. Aug.
de pec. mer. and remis. c. 34. Disciplina Patris, non I^a judicis; amor
corrigentis, non furor conterentis. Greg. m.
not always for penary chastisements, but often for trial of graces, exercise
of patience, and exemplary improvements in all Christian virtues, which usually
grow blunt, dull, and rusty, through long plenty, peace and prosperity, and so
need sometimes the merciful files and furnaces of Gods inflictions, man's
persecutions, and Devils temptations; which are rather purgative than
consumptive to good Christians, and often preparative for greater splendors, both
of inward mercy, and even outward prosperity: of which the Church of England
has not yet any cause to despair, because it has a good cause and a good God.

It is not more necessary than comely, for the Body and Members of Christ to be
conform to Christ their Head in bearing his cross, and partaking of his
agonies; Rev. 3.10.
upon whom the hour of temptation (foretold) is still to come, as it did upon
the Primitive Churches and Christians (with some lucid intervalls) for three
hundred years. There may be as good an omen or prognostic in the scorns and
contumelies cast upon any Church of Christ by its persecutors, as there was in
the dirt of the streets cast upon Vespasian by the command of Cajus Caesar,
Cai. Caesar succensens ei ob curam verrendis viis non adhibitam, luto jussit
oppleri, congesto per milites in praetextae sinum. Non defuerunt qui
interpretarentur, proculcatam quandoque Rempublicam in gremium ejus tanquam in
tutelam deventuram. Suet. vit. Fl. Vesp.
as a punishment for his not keeping the streets cleaner (of which he was then
chief Scavenger or Surveyor;) it was (as Suetonius tells us in the life of
Vespasian) thought by the wise men to portend, that he should one day receive
into his bosom and protection, both the oppressed city of Rome and the wasted
Empire: which accordingly came to pass.

Affliction is part of Gods good husbandry, and is for the Churches mendment no
less, than compost or manure is for the Earths.

Hence the Christian Oracles bid us to rejoice with exceeding great joy, when
we fall into diverse temptations of trial, Jam. 1.2.
when we suffer for righteousness sake: Matthew. 5.12.
the spirit of Glory (as Gods presence to Moses) is oftener seen in the bush or
shrub (which burns, Exodus 3.2.
but consumes not) than in the Oak or Cedar; in the low and mean estate of his
Church, as well as in the more pompous and flourishing. S. Acts 7.55.
Stephen had a clearer vision of Christ in Heaven, when the cloud of stones was
showring about his ears, than ever he enjoyed in his more peaceable
profession. The Lily is not less fair, nor the Rose less fragrant, when they
grow among the thorns. Affliction, Cant. 2.2*
like Gods physic, has that in healthfulnesse which it wants in
pleasantness. Particular parts of any Church may have causticks and corrosives
applied to them, when God, as a wise and wary Physician, intends both their
cure, and the preservation of the whole, which may be still sound and entire as
to the vital, more noble and principal parts.

I well know, that it is not meet for the Church of England, or the most
deserving Member of it, to dispute with Divine Justice; nor is it either safe
or wise, to contest with his Omniscient and Almighty power: but rather to lay
our hands upon our hearts, to put our mouths in the dust, and to abhor our very
righteousness, than to quarrel with Gods judgments, which are always just,
though they are deep and dark, past our finding out.

I think it an high presumption in the saucy Critics of these times, who
pretend to read the handwriting upon the wall, and to have such skill in
sacred Palmestry, as to know the mind of God by the operation of his hands;
conceiting (both vainly and wickedly) That God is such an one as themselves,
delighted with the spoils and deformities, Psalm. 50.21.
the plunder and confusion of Churches: they boldly interpret the meaning of
all the troubles in England, to be no other than this, Gods anger against
Bishops and Ceremonies, against Steeple Houses and Common Prayer, against
Ordination and Ministry, against the whole Polity and Constitution of the
Church of England; which they believe were so offensive and nauseous to God,
that he was forced to spue them out of his mouth; justifying by this great
argument of Gods providence (as their chief shield and defense) all their
Schisms and Separations, their Rapines and Sacriledges, their Reproaches and
Blasphemies, their Insolences and Injuries, committed and intended both
against this Church in general, and against many most worthy and eminent
Churchmen in it.

I do not, I dare not vindicate the Church of England before the most holy God
(whose pure eyes behold folly in his Saints, and darkness in his Angels) as to
the people in it, Job 4.18.
either Preachers or Professors, the Governors or governed, the Shepherds or
the Flock. This is sure, Isa. 5.
that, where God had planted this Church, as a pleasant Vine on a fruitful
hill, where he had watered it with his Word, as with the dew of Heaven, fenced
it by his special power and providence, as with a wall, expecting it should
bring forth good grapes, and good store; there his contrary dealing with this
his Vineyard, taking away the hedge, breaking down the wall thereof, suffering
it to be eaten up and trodden down, to lie thus fa^ wast, without its just
pruning, weeding and digging, to be overgrown with briars and thorns,
commanding the clouds that they rain little or nothing upon it, etc. These sad
dispensations and desolating experiments sufficiently proclaim Gods
controversy with the Land, and complaint against this Church, that when he
looked his vineyard should bring forth good grapes, behold it brought forth
wild grapes in so great a proportion, that there was no remedy, but God must be
avenged on so unfruitful, so ungrateful a Nation, which was second to none in
temporal and spiritual mercies, which are now become the aggravations of its
sins and miseries; it being condemned to punish it self by its own hands, not
for that it wanted the means of true Religion, (for what could the Lord have
done more for his vineyard?) but for not using them, yea, for wantonly abusing
those liberal advantages it enjoyed, equal to, if not beyond any Church or
Nation under heaven. Thus before the Bar and Tribunal of Divine Justice, it is
meet that we all, as men and Christians, confess our personal prevarications,
and cry out bitterly, Woe unto us, Lam. 5.
for we have sinned against the Lord.

Yet as to man's judgment, looking upon the Church of England not in the
concrete or subject matter, as consisting of many Preachers and Professors, in
many things possibly much depraved and deformed, but considering it in the
abstract, in the reformed form and state of it, in its former pious and prudent
Constitution; I must profess to You ( my honored contrymen) and to all the
World, that in the greatest maturity of my judgment, and integrity of my
conscience, as most redeemed now from juvenile fervours, popular fallacies,
vulgar partialities and secular flatteries; yea, apart from the sense of my
private obligations to the Church of England (which are great and many, I owing
to it my Baptism and Education as a Christian, my office and ordination as a
Minister) all these laid aside, and looking only upon the consideration of its
Religion, as grounded upon Scriptures in the main, and guided by the prudence
of Primitive Antiquity, I must profess, that I cannot understand how the Church
of England has deserved to fall under those great reproaches, oppressions and
miseries, which the weakness, wantonness and wickedness of some men has sought
to heap upon Her; whose causeless malice and excessive passions against the
Church of England are (I think) by a fatal blindness, and most heavy judgment
of God upon some men, made the sorest punishers of their own and other men's
sins; their former unprofitableness, ingratitude, despite, disorderliness, and
undutifulness against so venerable a Matron, so good a Mother as the Church of
England was; at least it desired and offered it self to be so, even to Her most
ungracious and unthrifty children, whom neither piping nor weeping, prosperity
or adversity, Mat. 11.17.
she could ever move or affect with such conformities to Her, or compassions
for Her, as she deserved of them.

I do here declare to the present age, and to all posterity, (if any thing of
my writing be worthy to survive me) that since I was capable to move in so
serious a search and weighty a disquisition as that of Religion is, as my
greatest design has been, and still is, through Gods grace, to find out, and
to persevere in such a profession of the Christian Religion, as has most of
Truth and Order, of Power and Peace, of Sanctity and Solemnity, of Divine
Verity and Catholic Antiquity, of true Charity and Martyr-like Constancy in
it; being farthest from Ignorance, Error, Superstition, Partiality, Vulgarity,
Faction, Confusion, Injustice, Immorality, Hypocrisy, Sacrilege, Cruelty,
Inconstancy; so I cannot (apart from all prejudices and prepossessions) find in
any other Church or Church Way, ancient or modern, either more of the good I
desire, or less of the evil I endeavor to avoid, than I have, a long time,
discerned, and daily do more and more, since the contentions and winnowings of
these times have put it and me upon a stricter scrutiny in the frame and form,
the constitution and settled dispensations of the Church of England.

No where diviner Mysteries, or abler Ministers; no where sounder Doctrinalls,
holier Morals, warmer Devotionals, apter Rituals, comelier Ceremonials: all
which (together) by a meet and happy concurrence of piety and prudence, brought
forth such Spirituals and Graces (both in their habits, exercises and comforts)
as are the quintessence and life, the soul and seal of true Religion; those
more immediate and special influxes of Gods holy Spirit upon the soul; those
joint operations of the blessed Trinity, for the justification, sanctification
and salvation of Sinners: in all these I never found (by my reading and
experience, nor do I know where to seek) for any thing beyond, or every way
equal to what was graciously dispensed in the Church of England.

Upon which grounds (appearing to me and all the unpassionate Christian World
most certain) no man can wonder if I so much magnify and prefer the Church of
England, that in the communion of its Doctrine, Worship, Ministry and Order, I
choose to live; in the communion of its Faith, Hope and Charity, I desire to
die. Let my soul be numbered among those Martyrs and Confessors, those renowned
Bishops and orderly Presbyters, those holy Preachers and humble Professors,
whose labors, lives and deaths, whose words, works and sufferings, helped to
plant and propagate, to reform, settle and preserve, to so great a conspicuity
of piety, grace and glory, the Catholic Church of Christ, in all ages and
places, and particularly this part of it, which we call the Church of England.

I am so far from envying or admiring any novel pretenders, who boast of their
folly, and glory in their shame, in their endeavors to destroy and devour this
Church; that I rather pity their childish fondnesses, their plebeian
petulancies, their insolent activities, their unlearned levities, their
ungrateful vanities, who have demolished much, and edified nothing, either
better, or any way so good, as what they have sought to pull down, as to the
order, honor, tranquillity, beauty and integrality of a Christian Church.

So little am I shaken or removed from my esteem, love and honor to the Church
of England, that I am mightily confirmed in them, by all the poor objections
made against it, by the unreasonable indignities cast upon it, which are as
dirt to a Diamond, but the further test and trial of its real worth and
splendour: nor do I conceive, that by those afflictions which are come upon us,
God pleads against the Church of Engl. but rather for Her, against the lewd
manners of her ungracious and ungrateful children, for whose wickedness He
makes so fruitful a Mother to grow barren, so fair an House to become
desolate, so flourishing a Church to decay and wither.

It is no news, where the lives and manners of Christians are much depraved
from the holy rule of Christ evidently set forth among them, to see famous
Churches, like the Moon in the wane or eclipse, clothed with sackcloth, and
turned into blood; to see Order subverted, Unity dissolved, Joel 2.31.
Peace perverted, Beauty deformed, Holy things profaned. It is no news to read
of holy Prophets, blessed Apostles, orthodox Bishops, and godly Presbyters ill
treated, and despitefully used by Heathens, Heb. 11.37. Mat. 5.44. Acts 14.5.
Joh. ep. 3.10.
Heretics, Schismatics. No men (but ignorant and unlettered) can wonder at
Bibles and other holy Books burned; at Church Lands alienated, the houses
demolished, and the Preachers silenced, banished, destroyed.

All Church-histories tell us, it was many times so, even among the Primitive
Churches, even then when their pious and Apostolic constitution was (no doubt)
at best; it was most violently and desperately so just before the Churches
enjoyed the greatest prosperity, and longest tranquillity; the blackest
darkness usually going immediately before the welcomest break of day: as was
remarkable in the serenity of Constantine the Great's time, succeeding the
dreadful storm of Diocletians persecution; which was looked upon and intended
as an utter extirpation of Christian Religion.

Which distressed estate of the Primitive Churches of Christ, Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 8. c. 1.
in all the Roman world, Eusebius Bishop of Caesaria (who lived in those worst
days) describes with so much pious oratory, and so parallel in many things to
the temper of our times, that I cannot but present you (my honored
contrymen) with the prospect of them, because the fury and darkness of that
tempest reached even to the then British Churches in England; under which many
Bishops and Presbyters, Noblemen and Gentlemen perished; and among others that
famous Martyr S. Alban, who, as Bede tells us in his History, l. 1. rather then
he would deliver or discover a pious Presbyter, whom he had hid in his house,
by whom he was either converted or much confirmed in the Christian Faith, chose
to offer himself in the Priests habit to the Inquisitors, and owning himself
for a Christian, though yet unbaptized, he died for that profession. Hereby the
world may see how much poor mortals are prone to mistake in their calculations
of Gods judgments upon any Church, both as to their own sins and other men's
sufferings, where the greatest sufferers are commonly the least sinners, and
the greatest inflicters are the least Saints.

Having in the former seven Books (says Eusebius) set forth that holy
succession of Bishops which followed the Apostles in all the famous Primitive
Churches, in their several limits and proportions, Successiones Episcoporum qui
Apostolos sunt sequuti.
under the various seasons and storms of times; the Churches had (now) in the
Roman Empire so great liberty, serenity and quiet, Under the Emperor Aurelian,
anno Christi 270, etc.
that Bishops in many places were much honored even by the civil Magistrates;
the Temples and Oratories of Christians were every where full and frequented;
new Churches were every day erected, more goodly, costly and capacious: nor
could the malice of men or Devils hinder the growing prosperity of the Churches
every where, while God was pleased to shine upon them with his favor.
Afterward, Res nost^ae nimia liberate in mollitiem and segnitiem degenerarunt.
Eusebius. ib. Tanquam armis and telis. (...).
too great liberty and ease degenerated to luxury and idleness: these betrayed
Christian Bishops, Presbyters and people to mutual emulations and contentions;
these sowred to hatred and malice; these brake out to fury and faction;
Christians persecuting each other with words and reproaches, as with arms and
weapons: murmurings and seditions of governed and governors, justling against
each other, grew frequent, arising from desperate hypocrisies and dissemblings.
At last, being generally less sensible of their sins, than their sides and
factions, and less intent to the honor of the Church and its holy Canons, than
to their private passions and ambitions, the wrath of God overtook them all.

Then (says that Historian) as Jeremy complains, did the Lord bring darkness
upon the beauty of the daughter of Sion; then did He cast down to the ground
the glory of Israel; He remembered no more the place of his footstool in the day
of his wrath; then did he profane the habitation of his honor in the dust, and
made Her a reproach to all her enemies, etc. then were Churches commanded to be
pulled down to the ground, holy Books and Bibles to be burnt; the Bishops and
Pastors, some banished, others imprisoned, tortured and killed; all silenced,
impoverished, disgraced, abhorred by the Emperor with his followers and
flatterers; Christians were forbidden all holy meetings and duties, commanded
and forced to sacrifice to popular Idols, and plebeian Gods, upon pain of death
and torture; seventeen thousand Christians slain in one month; an utter
extirpation of Bishops, Presbyters, Professors, Churches, and Christianity it
self, designed, enjoined and publicly solemnized by a triumphant pillar
erected in Spain, with this Inscription, An Imperial monument of honor merited
by the Emperors Diocletiano Caes. Aug. superstitione Christiana ubique deleta,
and cultu Deorum propagato.
Diocletian and Galerius, for their extirpating Christian superstition, and
restoring the worship of the Gods.

Temporum atrocitas Scriptorum eloquentiam superabat.
No pen (says Eusebius) could equal the atrocity of those times against the
Church of Christ. Yet even then the gracious spirit of sincere Christians (as
the Ark in the deluge) rose highest toward heaven: then godly Bishops and
Presbyters were (as another Historian writes) more ambitious of Martyrdom,
Tunc avidius Martyria gloriosis mortibus, quam nunc Episcopatus pravis
affectibus quaerebantur. Sulpit. Sever. Eccl. Hist. de Diocl. pers.
than now Presbyters are of being all made Bishops: then were Christians more
then conquerours, and true Christianity most triumphant, when it seemed most
depressed, despised, and almost destroyed; as Sulpitius Severus writes of the
same times, in his short, but elegant History.

Thus Eusebius and others describe that horrid storm and black night, which was
relieved by the blessed day star of Constantine the Great appearing. In which
dismal times, learned men do not quarrel at the profession and state of
Religion, but at the irreligion and scandal of Christians lives: the fault and
provocation was not from the Faith, Doctrine, Liturgy, Order and Government
then established in the Churches of Christ, but from the degenerous, depraved
and ungoverned passions of men: as they all blamed these last, whenever they
appeared, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 28.
so they constantly asserted the other; as was evident in the Synod of Antioch,
in which (a little before Diocletians time) the heresy of Paulus Sam^satenus,
denying the Divinity of Christ, was condemned by all, being confuted by
Malchion, a learned man, and an accurate Disputant: The Haeres^os author ^b
Antiochena, and Ecclesia Catholica quae sub coelo est universa, separatus est
and excommunicatus. Ib. Eusebius.
Author or Heresiarch was excommunicated, not only from the Church of Antioch,
but also from the Catholic Church, and separated from all Christian communion
throughout the world, by a just and unanimous severity.

Holy men then rightly judged, that the meritorious cause of all those sore
calamities arose, not from the frame of Christian Churches, which was holy,
uniform, and Apostolic as yet; but from the wantonness and wickedness of
Christian professors, neglecting so great means of salvation, and abusing such
Halcyon days as had been sometime afforded them.

Which censure I may without rashness or uncharitableness pass, as to the
present distresses incumbent upon the Church of England; whose holy, wise,
honorable and happy Reformation must ever be vindicated, as much as in me
lies, against all such gainsayers, as make no scruple to condemn, as all the
generations of Gods children in former ages, so those especially who worthily
settled and valiantly maintained the Christian reformed Religion in the Church
of England, as against all Heathenish and Heretical profaneness, so against
the more puissant and superstitious Papists; also against the more peevish, but
then more feeble Schismatics.

CHAP. X.
IT were as impertinent a work for me in these times, Mr. Hooker's defense of
the Church of England unanswered, and unanswerable.
to insist upon every particular in the frame of the Church of England, or to
cry up every small lineament in Her, for most rare and incomparable; as it is
unreasonable and spiteful in those, that deny Her to have had any one handsome
feature in Her, or any thing grave, comely, Christian-like, or Church-like in
her main constitution and complexion.

Mr. Richard Hooker (one of the ablest Pens and best Spirits that ever England
employed or enjoyed) has (besides many other worthy men) abundantly examined
every feature and dress of the Church of England, asserting it by calm, clear
and unanswerable demonstrations of Reason and Scripture, to have been very far
from having any thing unchristian or uncomely, deformed or intolerable, which
her (then) enemies declaimed, and now have proclaimed; whose wrathful menaces
the meekness and wisdom of that good man foresaw, and in his Epistle foretold,
would be very fierce and cruel, if once they got power answerable to their
prejudices, superstitions and passions against the Church of England; which he
fully proved to differ no more from the Primitive temper and prudence, than was
either lawful, convenient, or necessary in the variation of times and
occasions.

The excellent endeavors of that rarely-learned and godly Divine (so full of
the spirit and wisdom of Christ) one would have thought might have been
sufficient for ever to have kept up the peace, order and honor of the Church
of England; also to have silenced the pratings and petulancies of her
adversaries. But (alas) few of those plebeian spirits and weaker capacities (to
whose error, anger and activity the Church of England now chiefly owes her
miseries, tears and fears) were ever able to understand, or bear away the
weight, strength and profoundnesse of that most ample man's reasonings, and his
eloquent writings.

Others of them, that were more able, were so cunning and partial for the
interest of their cause and faction, as (commonly) to decry for obscure, or to
suspect as dangerous, because prejudicial to their interest, or to bury in
silence, as their enemy, that rare piece of Mr. Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity,
which many of them had seldom either the courage or the honesty to read; none
of them the power ever to reply, or the hardiness so much as to endeavor a
just confutation of his mighty demonstrations.

Yea, I have been credibly informed, that some of the then-dissenters from the
Church of England had the good (or rather evil) fortune, utterly to suppress
those (now defective, but by him promised and performed) books touching the
vindication of the Church of England in its Ordination, Jurisdiction and
Government, by the way of Ancient, Catholic, Primitive and Apostolic
Episcopacy.

Which one word ( Episcopacy) has of late years cost more blood and treasure
in Scotland and England, than all the enemies of Bishops and of this Church had
in their veins, or were worth, 20. years ago: whose importune clamours of old,
and endeavors of late to extirpate Primitive, Catholic and Apostolical
Episcopacy out of this Church, and to introduce by head and shoulders the
exotic novelties and vanities of humane invention, have brought themselves and
this whole Church to so various and divided a posture, as makes no settled or
uniform Church Government at all; by a popular precipitancy ruining an ancient
and goodly Fabric (whose temporary decays or defects might easily and wisely
have been amended) before they had agreed of a new model, or seriously
considered either their skill or their authority to erect a new one, if they
could find out a better, which hitherto they have not done, nor will they, I
believe, ever be able to do; as destitute in this point of any just commission,
direction, power, or precedent either from God or man. I am sure the Supreme
power of regulating all Ecclesiastical affairs, was, under God, by the laws of
England invested in the Chief Magistrate, and Governors of this Church;
without and against whose judgments, consents and consciences, no innovations
were to be carried on, nor indeed begun in this Church: whose events or
successes hitherto have been only worthy of such tumultuary beginnings; the
effects of them being full of dissolution and confusion to all, of injurious
afflictions to many worthy men, besides penal and perpetual divisions among
the Innovators themselves; who varying in this, as in other things, from the
whole ancient Churches constitution, no less than from this of England, are
likely to differ among themselves even till Doomesday, unless they return,
under some new name, and disguised notion of moderators and superintendents, to
what they have rashly deserted, the true pattern in the Mount, that paternall,
Primitive and Catholic Episcopacy, which was the center and crown of the
Churches unity, peace, order and honor, which imports no more (after all this
clamor and terror) than one grave and worthy Presbyter duly chosen in the
several Dioceses and limits, to be the chief Ecclesiastic Overseer and
Governor, succeeding in the managing of that Ecclesiastical power and
authority, which, without an Apostolic President or Bishop properly so called,
Presbyters alone in parity or equality never did enjoy, and so never ought to
exercise in the Churches of Christ, as to ordination and jurisdiction, no more
than Bishops regularly may without the counsel and assistance of Presbyters.

Which ancient Order, and eminent Authority of Primitive Episcopacy, if neither
right Reason, nor the Word of God, either in the Old or New Testament, did
clearly set forth to us as best; if neither Apostles at first, nor the
Primitive Fathers after them; if neither Church History, nor Catholic custom,
nor Primitive Antiquity, nor the approbation of the best Reformed Churches and
Divines; if all these did not commend it, as they evidently do (to my best
understanding:) yet the late mad and sad extravagancies in Religion do highly
recommend it; yea, the great want of it in England shows the great use,
necessity and excellency of it, especially if advanced to its greatest
improvement of counsel, order and authority. I may add the votes of all sober
and impartial Christians, even now in England, who are grown so wise by their
woes, as generally to wish for such Episcopacy, whose restitution would be more
welcome to the wiser and better sort of Christians in this nation, than ever
the removal of it was, or the medlies of Presbytery and Independency is like
to be. Nor do I believe that the restoration of a right Episcopacy would be
unacceptable to many of the soberest men even of those two parties, if any
expedient could be found, to salve and redeem the reputations of some
lay-leaders and popular Primates of those sides; whose credits lie much at pawn
with the people, upon this very score, as having been by them rashly biassed
against all Episcopacy: the abusing of which Apostolic order on one side, and
the abolishing of it on the other side, were, I think, two of the greatest
Engines the Devil used to batter the Church of Christ withal; pride and
parity, insolency and Anarchy, being equally pernicious to Church-polity and
Christian piety.

The overboylings of some men's passions (which the Scotch Thistles (being set
on fire under them) chiefly occasioned) having now almost quenched themselves,
by bringing infinite fedities and deformities upon the whole face of the
Christian Reformed Religion in this Church, as well as otherwhere; these sad
events may save me the labor of further asserting (in this place) the use and
honor of Catholic Episcopacy in the Churches of Christ, which is already
done, Hieraspistes page 259. Answer to the 5. Cavil against the Church of
England.

See M. Hookers Preface to his Eccl. Pol. p. 19. See Bish. Hall, Dr. Hammond,
Dr. Tailor, Bochartus, etc. B. Andrews to P.M.


as by my own, so many abler pens (as it was also done by Mr. Hooker)
sufficiently proving, that the Church of England deserved not, upon the account
of its retaining the Catholic and Apostolic order of Episcopacy, to have
suffered these many calamities which have ensued since the Schisms and
Apostasy of many from this Church, and from that Primitive Government: other
than which was not so much as known or thought of in the Catholic Church of
Christ for 1500 years; nor then when the Church of England began its wise and
happy Reformation, which did not indeed abolish, but reform and continue (as
became its wisdom) that Ancient and Apostolic government of the Church, which
was primitively planted in these British Churches, as in all others throughout
the world, long before the Bishop of Rome had any influence or authority among
them, being highly blessed of God, and honored of all good men; nor has yet
any cause appeared why it should be blasted, or accursed, or scared by
Smectymnuan terrors.

CHAP. XI.
The excellent constitution of the Church of England, as to its Doctrinalls.
AS for the Doctrinals of Christian Religion, this Church of England ever had so
high an approbation from the best Reformed Churches, and so harmonious a
consent with the most Orthodox and Primitive Churches, that it must be extreme
ignorance or impudence (on this part) to esteem the present miseries of this
Church as merited by Her, wherein it was indeed most exact and complete; as
wholly consonant to the Word of God, so nothing dissonant from the sense and
practice of the ancient and purest Churches.

Yea, I find that the bitterest enemies of the Church of England, do in This
least show their teeth or claws (except only in the point of Infant Baptism;)
not for want of ill will, (for nothing more pincheth them then the Doctrine of
the Church of England, which was according to godliness; teaching all men, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, they should live righteously, soberly
and godlily in this present world:) but for want, as of just cause, so of skill
and ability; most of them being such as have no great stock of knowledge,
learning or judgment, nor very capable (on this side) to assault the Church of
England, whose strength and shield is the invincible Word of God rightly
understood.

Therefore the cunning Adversaries and Vastators of the Church of England drive
a lesser trade, of small cavellings and bitings rather, as the serpent, at the
heel than head; not much engaging themselves in any grand controversies of
Divinity, which are (generally) above the reach of their capacities: whose
feeble assaults the Church of England has no cause to fear, against the
Doctrine set forth in Her 39. Articles, Her Catechism, Her Liturgy and Her
Homilies; since She has so many years mightily maintained this post of her
Doctrine against the Learning, Power and Policy of the Roman party, who are
veterane Soldiers and mighty Troopers, weightily armed; in comparison of whose
puissance these light-armed Schismatics and small Skirmishers are like
Pot-guns to Canons, or Pigmies to Giants; seeking to deface the Pinnacles and
Ornamentalls of Religion, but not capable to shake the foundations of it, as it
was happily established and duly professed in the Church of England.

CHAP. XII.
NOr have they had either more cause for, The Devotionalls of the Chapter of Engl.
asserted.
or better success in their disputings against the Devotionals of the Church
of England in its public worshipping of God, by Confessions, Prayers, Praises,
Psalmodies, Romans 12.1.
and other holy Oblations of rational and Evangelicall Services offered up to
God by the joint devotion of this Church: the subject and holy matter of which
ever was, and is, too hard for their biting; therefore most of them contented
themselves to bark at the manner of performing them; chiefly quarrelling at
that prescript form or Liturgy used in this Church, under the title of the
Book of Common Prayer.

Which very Title, (...). Ign. ep. ad. Magnes. (...). Just. M. Apol. 2.
Communis oration voce Diaconi indicitur. Aug. ep. 119. ad Januar.
though agreeable to the style and mind of Antiquity, as Ignatius, Justin
Martyr, and S. Austin use it, yet (perhaps) might in time something abate, as
to our English Dialect, the reverence of common people toward it, which
probably might have been raised and preserved to an higher veneration, if some
Title more august, solemn and sacred, had been affixed to it; as, The holy
Liturgy, or, The form of Gods public worship, or, Divine service, etc. For
ordinary people easily in time undervalue as trivial, even in a religious
satiety, any thing which they are wonted to call and use as common, which ought
to be kept up by all prudent means, to all due majesty, sanctity, solemnity,
veneration, not only in the use, but in the very name and familiar appellation.

As to the substance and matter of this Book, The matter of the English
Liturgy.
the wisdom of the Church of Engl. had first exactly adjusted it to the sense
of Gods word; nothing being there expressed, as the mind of the Church, which
was not thought agreeable to the mind of Gods spirit in the Scriptures: nor do
I know any part of it, to which a judicious Christian might not in faith say
Amen, taking the expressions of it in that pious and benign sense, which the
Church intended, and the words may well bear.

Next, all the parts of it were so fitted (both as to the language, and the
things contained in it) to ordinary peoples capacities, as well as all men's
necessities, that none had cause to complain of it, as hard to be understood,
nor any to disdain it, as too flat and easy.

Indeed, the whole composure of the English Liturgy was (in my judgment) so
holy, so wholesome, so handsome, so complete, so discreet, so devout, that I
cannot but esteem it equal at least to (yea I am prone (with Gilbertus the
German) much to prefer it before) any one Liturgy or public form of serving
God, used in any Church, ancient or later, in Eastern or Western, Greek or
Latin, Romish or Reformed, that ever I saw.

Let any sober Christian, that is able, compare the Liturgy of England, with
those now extant; as the Armenian, the Constantinopolitan, ascribed to S.
Chrysostom; the Greek Euchology, used at this day; that anciently ascribed to
S. James; those used by the Syrian and Egyptick Churches, under the names of S.
Basil or Gregory Nazianz. that of S. Cyril, of which he gives a large account
in his Catechism; the Gregorian or Roman Liturgy; the Musarabick Liturgy of
Spain, composed by Isidore Hispalensis; the Officium Ambrosianum, by S.
Ambrose; that of Alcuinus in England, which Bid mentions; the Dutch, French,
Suevick, Danish, any of the Lutheran or Calvinian Liturgies: he will find
nothing excellent in any of them, but is in this of England: many things which
are less clear or necessary in them, are better expressed, or wisely omitted
here.

As for the English Liturgies symbolizing with the Popish Missall, as some have
odiously and falsely calumniated; it does no more, than our Communion or Lords
Supper celebrated in England, does with the Mass at Rome; or our doctrine
about the Eucharist, does with theirs about Transubstantiation, or our humble
veneration of our God and Savior in that mystery, does with their strange
Gesticulations and Superstitions. In all which particulars, how much the Church
of Enland differed both in Doctrine and Devotion from that of Rome, no man that
is intelligent and honest can either deny or dissemble. I am sure we differ as
much as English does from Latin, Truth from Error, true Antiquity from
Novelty, Completeness from Defect, Sanctity from Sacrilege, the giving of the
Cup to the people from the denying of it; as much as the holy use of things
does from the superstitious abuse of them; as much as Divine Faith does from
Humane Fancy, or Scripture-plainnesse and proportions from Scholastic
subtilties and inventions.

That the Church of England retained many things pious and proper to several
occasions, which the Roman Devotionalls had received and retained from the
ancient Liturgies, is no more blamable, than that we use and preserve those
Scriptures, Sacraments, and other holy Services, which the Church of Rome does
now profess to celebrate and use. The wisdom of the Church of England did
freely and justly assert to its use, and to Gods glory, whatever upon due
trial it found to have the stamp of Gods Truth and Grace, or the Churches
Wisdom and Charity upon it, as what it thought most fit for this Churches
present benefit; finding no cause peevishly to refuse any Good, because it had
been mixed with some evil: but trying all things, 1 These. 5 21.
it held fast that which it judged good, as it is commanded; never thinking
that the usurpations of Error ought to be made any obstructions to Truth; or
that Humane inventions are any prejudice to Divine institutions. It knew, that
though the holy vessels of the Temple had been captive at Babylon, Dan. 5.3.
and there profaned by Belshazzar; yet they might well be restored again, and
consecrated by Ezra to the service of God. Ezra 1.7.


Some men (possibly) as conscientious, others, as curious and captious,
quarrelled perpetually at the Liturgy of the Church of England; some at the
whole form as prescribed, others at some particular phrases and expressions, as
less proper and emphatick. It is now an hundred years old, and able to speak
for it self; justly alleging first the great joy, and devotion, the piety and
thanks with which it was first received as an wholesome form of Prayer, easy to
be understood by English Christians; next, the great good it at first did, and
ever since has done for many years to many poor silly souls, who otherways
had been left in great blindness and barrenness of devotion. Further, it
pleads, that it never intended to offend any good Christian, since it studied
in all things to be consonant to Gods holy will and word: that as its order,
premeditatedness, and constancy of devotion, was never forbidden or dissallowed
by God, or any good men, Jews of old, or Christians of later times, but rather
approved, exemplified and commanded in all their public services, both of
prayers, praises and benedictions; so late experience abundantly teaches, how
much the advantages of true Reformed Religion were generally carried on more
happily by the public and private use of that Liturgy, than has been of late
years by the rejecting of it, as many have done, and introducing in its stead
nothing but their own crude and extemporary prayers; which being much
unpremeditated are many times so confused, so flat, so flashy, so affected, so
preposterous, so improper, so indiscreet, so incomplete, that they grow
oft-times ridiculous, sometimes profane bablings and battologies, Matthew. 6.7.
condemned by our Savior, when those men affect in public extemporary
prayers, who have neither invention for the variety, nor judgment for the
solidity, nor discretion for that gravity, fitness and decency which are
necessary in all our prayers, especially when public and social. For some to
pretend special and immediate inspirations, and divine dictates in their
prayers, is so impudent an imposturage, that they may as well obtrude all they
pray and preach for new Oracles of God, and grounds of infallible verity; for
such are the Dictates of Gods Spirit, not mixed with any thing of our own
abilities.

The verbal dislikes which some had against the words and phrases of the
Liturgy are easily salved, if men will but consider the usual significancy of
them at that time when the pious and prudent composers of it applied them to
express their conceptions to common people. Words, as all things sublunary,
have their varyings and alterations, even as to the benignity and property of
their sense. They are pitiful feeble Christians that stumble at such straws,
for want of so much candor and discretion in their devotions, as must be
allowed in ordinary usage and civility to the changeableness of all Languages;
which occasions so many new translations of the Bible, as to the emendation of
some words, which time at length makes less proper, significant, or comely. It
argues, the enemies of the Liturgy had no great fault to find with the matter
of it, in that they so carped at the words and manner of it; which (considering
the speech and oratory of those plainer times) was not only good and grave,
but very apt and significant, full of holy and pathetick expressions, such as
were most fit, as to inform all peoples understandings, so to excite their
attentions, and quicken their united devotions.

Indeed, the rejection of this Liturgy, as to public use, has deprived
multitudes of poor people of an excellent help, both to prayer and all other
duties of piety, as well private as public; without any valid grounds of
Reason or Religion alleged by any, that I have seen, to justify their so
doing. I believe the greatest fault (in earnest) that the more lazy, wanton and
nauseating tempers of most men and women found in it was, its length and
solemnity, which they thought tedious, as taking up too much of their time; yet
sure not so much as did any way exclude the exercise of Ministers either
praying or preaching gifts; of which some were jealous. But a more soft and
delicate generation of Christians of later years is sprung up, which has found
out a more easy and compendious way of Devotion, which serves their turns, and
must be (now) obtruded upon all others: for instead of so many Psalms,
Chapters, Commandments, Creeds, Collects, Litanies, Epistles and Gospels,
constant and occasional Prayers, which in the Liturgy of the Church of
England were prescribed, men now make up their orisons in smaller cocks, and
bind up their devotions in far lesser volumes than the Ancients used;
contenting themselves (for the most part) either with long Prayers and Sermons
of their own invention and composure, without reading any part of the holy
Scripture, or with such as are not now so prolix and tedious, as the fashion
sometime was, when weak men first affected publicly to exercise and show their
rare faculty that way; which (truly) after the rate of some men's performing, is
so very vulgar, empty and easy, that if a wise, learned and grave man could,
yet for shame he would not so far expose Prayer and Preaching to vulgar
irreverence, as some men have done, by seeking to outdo the Devotionalls of
the Church of England. So that the pride and perfunctoriness of those popular
affectations being now much discovered, the graver sort even of Antiliturgicall
Preachers and people too, either confine themselves to a more constant method
and form of prayer; or they vary so little, so cunningly and so easily, that
the best of their prayers in their greatest latitude for matter and variety, is
not beyond what may be paralleled in the English Liturgy, and was to be fully
enjoyed by its help and constancy.

Whose cold entertainment in Scotland, and disorderly rejection by some in
England, as they did at once highly justify the Papists for their former
Recusancy, and gratify their future designs by reproching the Church of
England, yea openly condemning here all our reformed Predecessors, for serving
God so amiss, that it is not now either longer tolerable or excusable in any
Reason or Religion, Conscience or Prudence: so with unpassionate Christians all
this does not lessen the sacred dignity and real worth of the English
Liturgy, which is, and ever will be famous at home and abroad, among sober,
wise, and impartial Christians, who know how to serve God ((...)) in all
manner of prayer and supplication, Ephesians. 6.18.
disdaining no way, in which God has testified his good pleasure, that we
should or may serve him, as questionless He has in this of public and
prescribed forms both of Prayer and Praises and Benedictions; else neither of
old to the Jews, nor after to the Christians, would the wisdom of God by Moses,
David, and other of the Prophets, or John Baptist the great Prophet, or our
Lord Jesus himself, Matthew. 6.9.
have so taught the Church or Disciples, to have prayed to, or praised and
blessed God after such manners, or in such set and solemn forms of words, as
are evidently recorded in Scripture.

Which Divine warrants, as the ancient Christians in all Churches generally
owned and followed, as sufficient authority for their set Liturgies; according
to which Constantine the Great, as Eusebius tells us in his life, l. 4. c. 19.
prescribed to his Christian Soldiers one solemn form of Latin Service; yea
our late Anti-liturgists thought set forms of prayer might do well at sea,
though not at land: So the Church of England is not therefore to be blamed,
because some men's peevishness or petulancy has pleased themselves in
disgracing as well as disusing that holy and good way, rather answering, I
fear, the wantonness of their own and other peoples hearts, than any way
seriously considering the sad inconveniences following the want of such
wholesome forms, to be frequently inculcated upon common peoples understandings,
the better to inure their memories, and to work upon their affections; whom new
and unwonted petitions rather loose and confound, than so inform and affect, as
prayer should do; few capacities among plain people going so fast as another
man's tongue, where usually a fresh petition crowds out the former, before ever
poor dull people have leisure to understand what it meant, or can in judgment
and faith say Amen.

It is not worth my answering, what some allege against the Liturgy, that
many godly people were weary of it, that they could now go alone, and so might
well cast away their wooden legs, stilts or crutches.

Yet by way of answer I may truly affirm, that this was not, nor ever will be,
the happiness of all or most Christian people in this nation, or elsewhere, to
go upon their own legs, without any stay or staff; which might well help the
weaker, and I am sure could not hurt or hinder the stronger, who may upon the
same pretensions refuse the benefit of any one Ministers most extemporary
prayer, which to the hearers has the same aspect of a crutch or staff, no less
than that set form which by many is composed and proposed to the congregation.

As for the humors of common people, they are an ill compass to steer by in
concernments of Church or State. It is no wonder to see wontedness breed
weariness, and weariness wantonness, and wantonness loathing of the most holy
duties, and heavenly dainties (as of Manna to the Jews) unless the hearts of
men be always humbly devout, and sincerely fervent: and such can (I am sure)
daily follow wonted wholesome forms with new fervours, and give a fresh Amen to
known and oft-repeated petitions, as well as a fiduciary assent to such
precepts and promises as they have heard or read from Gods Word a thousand
times. Without which sacred flames of constant zeal and successive devotion
upon men's hearts (as the holy fire, Lev. 6.13.
which was never to go out upon Gods altar) not only the extemporary varieties
of men's own inventions will prove perfunctory and superficial, but even
Scripture it self, and the Oracles of God, will grow to be mere Crambe; yea,
the repeated Celebration of the most divine and adorable mysteries of the
blessed Sacraments, which Christ instituted as constant solemn Services in his
Church, will prove nauseous burdens, and hypocritical loades to the dull and
indevout spirits of men: whom if they be such in their hearts and tempers, no
variety or novelty will quicken there niauseous and lazy hypocrisy; if they be
not such, no constancy or wontedness will dull their sincere fervency, and holy
fragrancy of their affections.

The late ramblings, barrenness and confusion of some men's sad and extemporary
rhapsodies, their rude and rusticall devotions, are, especially in solemn and
Sacramental Celebrations, observed by many wise Christians to be such, since
the Cadet or younger Brother of the Directory, (if it deserves the honor of
that name, which to many seems but as a by-blow, the illegitimate issue of
partial spirits, Apostatizing from their former conformity to the Church of
England, in that point of its Liturgy) since, I say, it crowded, or as Jacob,
supplanted its elder brother, out of the house of God (though it self be now
little used and less regarded, even by its first patrons and sticklers) that it
makes them and me highly admire and more magnify the wisdom of the Church of
England, in first composing, after perfecting and prescribing that excellent
Liturgy to common people, which contained the very quintessence of all that we
find used by the ancient piety and charity of Churches, agreeable to Gods Word,
which is the only pattern, pillar and support for Christians prayers, both
public and private.

Nor did the Church of England ever intend (as I conceive) by Her Liturgy, so
to stint and confine any discreet and able Minister, or private Christian, but
they might further pour out their souls to God in prayers and praises,
publicly and privately, so as occasion required, and good order permitted:
Ignatius ad Magnes. (...), etc. Ne forte aliquid contra fidem vel per
ignorantiam vel per minus studium sit compositum. Council. Milevit. c. 12.
only it judged (as I do, with pious Antiquity, and all the most learned
Reformers, particularly Mr. Liturgi ac publicas vehementer probo, ut certius
constet omnium inter se consensus, and ut obviam eatur desultoriae quorundum
levitati qui novitates affectant. Calv. ep. ad Prot. Ang.
Calvin) that it is a great and real concernment in every true and Orthodox
Church, that care be taken to settle and preserve wholesome forms and solemn
Devotionalls, for the public celebrating of Prayers, Praises, holy Duties,
Christian Mysteries, Sacraments and Ordinations; next to the care of
propounding and establishing sound Doctrine, or true Confessions and Articles
of Faith. Which care of all Christians good in that behalf, first induced the
Ancient and Primitive Churches, as Ab ipsis Apostolorum temporibus. Aug. de
bono pers. c. 13.
S. Austin and others tell us, next to their laying of Scripture-grounds in
their Creeds and Confessions, to enlarge and fix their Liturgies and Devotions;
finding that fanatic Error and Levity would seem an Euchite as well as an
Eristick, Vid. Canon. 103. Cod. Can. Afric. Eccl. in the fourth Century. De
precibus quae debent fieri ad altar, quae a sapientioribus collecti^ sunt
dicentur. They condemned (...)* Zonar. in Conc. Carthag. Can. 117.
Pr^yant as well as Predicant, a Devotionist as well as a Disputant,
insinuating it self with no less cunning under a Votary's Cowle than in a
Doctors Chair, in Prayers, Sacraments, and Euchologies, as well as in
Preachings, Disputations and Writings.

This I am sure, The Liturgy of the Church of England was so useful, so well
advised, so savoury, so complete, so suitable, so solemn and so significant a
form of public Worshipping God, so highly approved by wise and worthy men, at
home and abroad, as composed by the special assistance of the holy Spirit of
God in the judgment of the first Heroes and Martyrs of this Reformed Church,
so reverently used by many even less conformable (in some things ceremonial)
to the Church of England, that (beyond all question) it deserved a longer
question, a more calm debate, a more serene, serious and impartial trial,
before it should have been so utterly abdicated or expulsed out of the Church,
as Hagar was out of Abraham's family. I humbly conceive that neither Recusants
should have had so great a gratification to their refractoriness, nor this so
famous, flourishing and well- Reformed Church should have had so great a slurr
and aspersion cast upon its Princes, its Parlaments, its Bishops, its
Presbyters, and all its faithful people: as if they had hitherto served God so
far superstitiously, irreligiously and unworthily, that the very Book it self,
containing the method, form, matter and words of their public service of God,
must be first vilified and scorned by the vulgar insolency; next utterly
abrogated and quite ejected out of this Church, by such as passionately
undertook to abett and patronize the present humors and distempered fits of
popular surfeitings and inconstancy, lately risen up, not only against their
own former approbation and practice, but against the piety, wisdom and gravity
of this Nation, and all other settled Churches in the world.

Yea further, the partiality and immoderation of some men seems in this most
excessive; that, to show their implacable despite against the Liturgy of the
Church of England, they cannot endure, nor would, if they had power, permit any
Christians to use it, though they find it (as our Marian Martyrs did) very
beneficial to their souls comfort, and therefore earnestly desire, highly
value, and duly use it. So imperious Dictators would some men be over other
men's liberties and consciences, even in Religion, who are rigid asserters of
their own, impatient to be imposed upon by others; and yet most insolently
ambitious to impose upon other men, how far they may, or may not serve God in a
religious way and manner, fancying, that nothing can please God which does not
please them.

What some men have preached and printed against the English Liturgy, and all
set forms of Prayers, never so good and fit, as if they were stintings and
dampings of Gods Spirit, etc. I must confess I understand rather the jeer and
contemptuousness of their words, than the wit, reason, or Religion of them: for
certainly the same may be said against all Scriptures, Psalms, Sermons,
preached or printed; against Ministers own Prayers, and any other proposed
helps for the advancing of knowledge or devotion in men's hearts. And however
some of these despisers of the day of small things, Z^ch 4.10. Luke 18.11.
may say with the Pharisee, God, I thank thee that I am not as other men, who
need take to themselves the help of their own or other men's prepared
meditations and words to pray or praise God; yet no Charity will permit, that
all others should be deprived of such public helps as they find best for them,
yea and necessary, if we duly regard, not the pretended or real strength of
some, but the general weakness in which the plebs or common sort of
Christians are, and ever will be, as to matter of true devotion; whose
infirmity may not only well endure a well-composed Liturgy (as one said he
could do good music) but, in earnest, they extremely want it: and it may
prove, I fear, not only a great uncharitableness, but a cruelty, besides
imprudence, utterly to deprive the most of Christians of so meet and necessary
an help; since nothing yet is found among them, or offered to them, that can or
does any way recompense the want of such forms of serving God, which were at
least as good, and most-what far better than any private abilities can afford
them. Hence it is that poor countrey-people are grown of late years more loose
and unsettled, so ignorant and idle, so rambling and irreligious, beyond what
formerly they were, when (at least) they were enjoined to attend the wholesome
Liturgy of the Church of England, which offered plainly to them, as I
conceive, all things necessary to entertain any humble, charitable and devout
Christians, in their public services of God; nor could it but be very helpful
to them in their private devotions.

For my own particular, it may be (by Gods assistance) I may as little need
this Liturgy, or any other prescribed form, as any of those Ministers or other
Christians that are most contemners and deserters of the Church of England in
that point, and most gloriers in their own rare gift or fluency in prayer: yet
I must profess, that as I ever highly valued the Liturgy of the Church of
England, and most, since it came most to be despised by some, neglected by
others, and considered by my self; so I cannot but unfeignedly justify the
Church of England's great piety, prudence and charity in that particular;
looking upon such well-composed forms, in public, solemn and constant
Ministrations of the Church, to be (in many regards) before those of any
private man's either serious composing or sudden invention, not only as to the
majesty, solemnity, exactness, unanimity and fullness of them, also as to the
suitableness of them both to all holy public occasions, and to the common
peoples necessities, as well as capacities; but even in regard of that which is
most spiritual in prayer, judicious fervor and fiduciary assent, where the
understanding rightly moves the will, and the will readily follows the
understanding; the devout soul well knowing what it should desire of God, and
earnestly desiring in faith what it knows God allows. It cannot be thought that
the Spirit of the most wise God is seen in the unpremeditated rashness of men's
praying, or such preaching, more than in what is well advised, and deliberately
prepared.

Which in Liturgies was and is, in my judgment, an excellent means (and so the
charitable wisdom of the Church of England judged it) as to settle people in
the true faith, so to keep them in it with peace and unity, by a uniform Way of
instruction and devotion too; which was easy to be understood by the simplest
people, and unanimously both composed and approved by the wisest and best in
this Church. Nor could it but be in that, as in all other respects, well
pleasing to God, who certainly does not change with every new opinion, fancy
and humor of men, be they never so zealous and seemingly devout. So that to
conclude, as to this particular, the Liturgy of the Church of England, I
freely profess, that I do in no sort believe, that either God has afflicted
Her for composing, enjoining and using It; or that she has hereby deserved any
of those rude indignities, reproaches and injuries cast upon Her and It.

The greatest fault and only blame as I conceive, in this part, lies upon men's
own hearts, which were grown so squeamish, so cold, so coy, so formal, so
indevout in the use of the Liturgy, as a part of Gods service: which faults
and defects in themselves ought not to have been by them imputed to, or
revenged so severely upon the book and composure it self, or upon the Church
composing and commending it to its Children. But the insolences of some rude
Reformers, contemning, tearing, burning and abolishing the Liturgy of this
Church, must be venial; since there are those that use the very book of God,
or holy Bible, no better, calling it an Idol, and condemning it to be
destroyed: possibly more because it is in English, than because it is Gods
Book; which if locked up in an unknown tongue, would less discover and brand
with sin their wicked practices and policies, than now it does. The same grand
interest that is most against the English Liturgy, is also against our English
Bibles: both of them were great eye-sores to the Papists, and are now no less
to many factious Separatists, who are the Jackals or Providores for those Lions.

CHAP. XIII.
The Ceremonies of the Chapter of England no meritorious cause of Her miseries.
THere are (yet) two grand Objections which stick in some men's stomachs, never
(they say) to be digested by them, which have driven them utterly to cast off,
and shamefully to spue out of their mouths the Church of England, abhorring the
whole frame and constitution of it, both name and thing.

The first is the enjoining and using of some Ceremonies in Religion, which
some esteem as so many Magic Spells or Charms, superstitious Observations,
humane Inventions, rags of Rome, will worship, vain Oblations, brats of
Babylon, marks of the Beast, brands of Antichrist; fitter for Heathenish
Idolatries, or Jewish Superstitions, than for the simplicity of the Gospel,
where the service of God must be in Spirit and in Truth, not in fleshly
shadows; in power, not in form, etc.

These and the like Rhetorical flowers are often used to gratify men's wits and
passions, rather than their reason and conscience, in the point of Ceremonies,
when they are resolved not to poise in their hands, but to trample under their
feet, every thing they list to dislike; notwithstanding all the counterpoise
and weight which they could not but see was laid upon them by the choice
wisdom and approbation of this whole Church and Nation; in which we may
without vanity presume there were many men as godly and judicious as any of
their opposers.

I will not descend to the particular nature and use of each of them: This work
has been sufficiently done by many of my predecessors. I confess I am not so
zealous for those, or any other Ceremonies (which may be spared without
diminishing the substance of Christian Religion) as to forget that forbearance
and charity which I owe to Christians, who may be weak and conscientiously
scrupulous: nor yet am I so against these, or any other innocent Ceremonies
recommended in any Church, by the joint consent of all parties, and by due
authority, as for their sakes to withdraw my humble subjection to, and
charitable communion with this or any other Christian Church in the world, that
is otherwise sound in the Faith. I do not so affect embroyderies in Religion,
as to have its garments too gay and heavy, with the Church of Rome: nor yet do
I so affect a plainness, as to abhor all decency: Multa toleramus quae non
probomus Aug. (...). Dionys. Alex. ad Novat. ep.
least of all am I of that curiosity or coyness in Religion, as I will rather
rend my garments in pieces, and go stark naked, than wear such an one as may
have possibly some spots or patches, which might be spared, if they could
handsomely be removed, but are better suffered, than to have rude hands tear
and cut them out as they list, to the perturbation and injury of the whole
Church.

As to the general nature of Ceremonies used in the Church of England, it may
suffice, at present, in order to vindicate this Church, to declare in its
behalf, First, that the Ceremonies enjoined and used in the Church of England
were esteemed, See Dr. Burges his Book of the Ceremonies, and what K. James
declared touching them, as the sense of this Church.
and often so declared to be in the sense of the Church, and its chief
Governors, not at all of the essence or necessary substance of any religious
duty, no more than the clothes of their opposers were of their constitution, or
their hair was of their heads; yet both clothes and hair are very comely and
convenient in the sociall living both of men and Christians together, where
neither nakedness (I think) nor baldness would become them.

Secondly, It does no where appear that our blessed God is so Anti-ceremoniall
a God as some men have vehemently fancied and clamoured, rather than proved.
This I am sure, the God of heaven, whom we worshipped in England, did institute
many Ceremonies in the ancient religious services required of the Jewish
Church; which certainly God would not have done, if all Ceremonies had been so
utterly Anti-patheticall against the Divine nature, or contrary to that
spiritual sincere worship, which he anciently required (beyond all doubt) of
the Jew as well as the Christian, Isa. 1.11, 12, etc. Mic. 6.7, etc. Isa. 58.5,
etc.
as all the Prophets witness.

Nor do we find that God has any where forbidden any decent Rites, holy
Customs, or convenient Ceremonies, to any Christians, in order to advance the
decency and order of his service, or Christians mutual edification and joint
devotion under the Gospel; except only such as were like the shadows of the
night or morning, which went before the rising of Jesus Christ the Sun of
Righteousness, Mal. 4.2.
importing Christ's not being yet come in the flesh, or implying the mystery of
man's Redemption not yet completed by the Messiah: such as were Circumcision,
Gal. 5.15.
which was to last no longer in force than the promised seed of Abraham came,
in whom all nations should be blessed; and the Covenant of God should be
declared to the Gentiles as well as Jews, under another sign or seal, which is
Baptism.

The Mosaic Rites and Ceremonies, as the Sacrifices, the Passover, the High
Priest, and other legal Types, as foregoing shadows, justly vanished when the
substance came* but those subsequent shadows, Evangelicall Ceremonies and
Signs, which follow, attend upon, and betoken the Suns being now risen, and
present with his Church, these in point of outward order and decency, also of
inward significancy and edification, may well consist with the Evangelicall
worship of God in Spirit and Truth, however it be not founded on them, or
confined to them, as to the inward judgment and conscience of the worshippers.

We see our blessed Savior, as he conformed to the Judaick Ceremonies, both of
Divine and Ecclesiastic Institution, as in his sitting at the Passover, and
celebrating the Encaenia or Feasts of Dedication, till his work was finished;
so He from the Jewish use adopted or instituted some new Evangelicall
Ceremonies, to be used in a most solemn manner, as Sacraments, or holy
Mysteries in his Church under the Gospel, for visible Signs, Memorials and
Seals of his Love and Grace to us; by which his Christian people may be
instructed, comforted and confirmed in Faith and Charity, both to God and to
one another.

Yea our blessed Savior has, by his Spirit guiding the pens and practices of
the Apostles, sufficiently manifested (as S. Austin observes) that grand
Charter and Commission of Liberty and Authority, 1 Cor. 14.33. and 40. Quod
neque contra fidem neque contra bonos mores injungitur, indisserenter est
habendum, and pro eorum inter quos vivitur societate servandum ^st. Aug. ad
Januar. ep. 15. In rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit Scrip. divina, mos
populi Dei, vel instituta majorum pro l^ge tenenda. Aug. ep. 36.
given to his Church and the governors of it, for the choice and use of such
decent Customs, Rites and Ceremonies, as may agree with godly manners and the
truth of the Gospel, best serving for the order, decency, peace and edification
of his Church in its several states, parts and dispersions: not as annexing
Ceremonies to the nature of the duties, or humane inventions to the Essence of
Divine Institutions (which the Church of England never did, but often declared
the contrary;) nor yet binding the judgment and consciences of those that used
them, to any such persuasion; nor yet invading hereby, or prejudicing the
liberties of other Churches, or any Christians in their respective
subordinations: but allowing other Churches the like liberty, and investing its
own members in the use and enjoyment of that Christian liberty (as to those
particulars) which the Church has chosen and appointed in the name of all its
parts and adherents, for their sociall order, for the solemnity, decency and
mutual edification of Christians.

Which was all that the Church of England intended in its Ceremonies, agreeable
to that indulgence and authority given by Christ to It, as well as to any
Church. Nor have these enemies to the Church of England upon this account of
its Ceremonies, ever proved, that Christ has repealed this grant, or denied it
to this Church more than any others, or that this Church has yet abused its
liberty, or that themselves have any special warrant given them to enter their
private dissent, and put in a public prohibition against the whole Church; as
if it might do nothing in the externalls, ornamentalls and circumstantialls of
Religion, without asking leave of such supercilious censors and imperious
dictators, who scorn to make the consent of the Church in things of an
indifferent and undefined nature, to be their rule and law, as to outward
observance, unity and conformity; and yet arrogate so much to themselves, as
they would make their private opinion and dissent to be a bar and negative to
the whole Church.

For as the Liturgy, so the Ceremonies used and enjoined in the Church of
England, were not the private and novell inventions of any late Bishops, or
other Members of the Church of England; much less of any Popes, or Papists, as
some have imagined: but they were of very ancient choice and primitive use in
the Church of Christ, whose judgment and example the Church of England always
followed by the consent of all estates in this Nation and Church, represented
in lawful Parlaments and Convocations: and this they did then, when with a
Martyr-like zeal and courage they put themselves into the happy state of a
well-reformed Church, paring off many superfluities or noveller fancies, and
only retaining a few such ceremonies as they saw had upon them the noblest
marks of best Antiquity and Decency. Nor may any man, without discovering great
folly and injustice, find fault with those members of the Church of England,
who used those retained and enjoined Ceremonies, agreeable to their judgments,
and in obedience to a public lawful command, in which their own vote and
consent was personally or virtually included: so that He must by condemning
such as were conformable, either condemn himself, and all others who were
authors of this public appointment, or else he must prefer his own private
judgment before them all. The first is fatuous Levity, the second is immodest
Arrogance.

I allow as much as these men demand (and so often impertinently decantate
against the Ceremonies of the Church of England) as to that (...), that
spiritual and inward worship of God in the rational faculties of men's souls,
which the Church of England chiefly intended, and vehemently required, beyond
any outward Ceremonies, of all true and sincere worshippers of God: but withal
It judged, and so do I, that the (...) or (...) of the outward man, which ought
to be conform to the heart, and (being most conspicuous to others) ought also
to be most exemplary and significant in those visible acts which necessarily
accompany the religious, visible and sociall service of God; that this ought
not to be rude, slovenly, negligent, confused, irreverent or uncomely, by
affecting various singularities and inconformities to others, which occasion
scandalls, strifes, factions, divisions, animosities, disorders and confusions
in particular Churches or Congregations: for avoiding of which, every private
Christians spirit ought in Reason and Religion to be subject to the public
prophetic Spirit of the Church in its joint counsels, 1 Cor. 14.32.
consents and determinations; against which a man cannot bring any pregnant
demonstration of right reason and morality, or of Faith and
Scripture-revelation, as S. Austin in his Epistle to Januarius observes; having
learned, as he tells us, that principle of calmness, moderation, humility and
Charity, from S. Ambrose, as an oracle from Heaven.

These considerations moved the Primitive Churches of the first and second
Centuries, in their several grand combinations* and ampler distributions, even
amidst their Martyrdomes and sharp persecutions (while they had no leisure to
be superstitious or superfluous in things of Religion, but only were intent to
Piety, Just. M. Apol. 1. and 2. Tert. de Bapt. and de Coran. Mil. and alibi.
Clem. Alex. (...). 4. Clem. Alex. (...). 7. (...).
Devotion and Charity;) these moved them to use and retain, as they had
received them from the Apostles and their successors, some Ceremonies, yea many
more than were used in the Reformed Church of England: which appears in Justin
Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clem. Alexandrinus, and others.

Who tell us of the holy kiss and love feasts; of Water added to the Wine in
the Lords Supper; of Oil, Milk, Honey, a white garment used in Baptism; of
Christians not washing a week after they were baptized; of constant fasts on
Wednesdayes and Fridayes; of frequent signations with the Cross, both in
religious and civil motions, as Indications of their courage and constancy in
professing Christ crucified. I might add their solemn stations and vigils,
their adorations and prostrations toward the East; besides their strict zeal in
observing Easter, or the time of Christ's Resurrection; also their Quadragesimal
or Lemen fast, preparatory to it; their not kneeling between Easter and
Whitsuntide, nor upon any Lords day on which they were forbidden to fast,
before and at the Nicene Council: besides, their severe forms of exercising
Discipline, and enjoining Penances to such as were scandalous offenders;
Quaest. ad Orthod. Res. 115. of Christian station in prayer. (...), etc. So
Res. 118. of Christians worshipping toward the East; which customs they had
from those that taught them to pray. Tertull. Apol. c. 16. Hence the suspicion
of Christians worshipping the Sun; quod innotu^dit nos ad orientis regionem
precari.
the great respect and observance which Christian people paid to their Bishops
and Presbyters, yea to their Deacons in many things, who all joined in an high
reverence and submission to their Bishops or chief governors in the Church; in
order to which duties concerning the Churches order and peace, most Councils of
the Church spent much of their time, care and pains, next to the keeping of
Faith entire and sound.

If the Ceremonies of the Church of England had been many more in that kind
than they were, yet since they were in their general nature allowed by God,
and left by him to the prudent choice and use of this, Graviter peccant qui
propter indifferentes ceremonias turbant ecclesias, damnant alios, etiam
principes and magistratus. Haeccine pietas quam jactamus? haeccine charitas
quam debemus fratribus and plebi? Zanc. de Redem.
as other particular Churches; certainly, as learned Zanchy and other reformed
Divines observe, they ought not by sober Christians to have been put into the
balance of their Religion so far, as for their sakes to overthrow the peace and
whole state of such an happy and reformed Church as this was, bringing infinite
greater mischiefs upon Religion and the whole Church, by violently removing
such ceremonies as neither empaired the faith, nor depraved the manners of good
Christians than ever could be feared by the sober use of them; which did not so
much as occasion any scandal or inconvenience to those that had knowing,
humble, meek and quiet spirits, rightly discerning the nature of such things,
and that liberty granted to themselves of submitting in them to the
determination of the Church: nor can it be other than weakness of judgment,
or want of charity, or a sign of schismatic and unquiet spirits, that list
to be contentious (rising either from ignorance, or superstition, or pride and
petulancy) for private persons in such cases peevishly to sacrifice to their
private passions and persuasions, the public peace and prosperity of the
Church, which ought to be so sacred (as the learned and pious Bishop of
Alexandria, Eusebius. hist. l. 6. ^. 44.
Dionysius, wrote to the zealous and factious Presbyter Novatus) that it is not
to be violated upon less accounts than those for which one would choose to
suffer Martyrdom: there may be, as Saint Paul confesses, Phil. 3.6.
a zeal in them, and yet they persecute the Church of Christ.

After that Divine justice has further punished and manifested the
supercilious folly and inquietude of some men, Times may come, in which sober
Christians would be glad to enjoy such a state of reformed Religion in England,
as they sometimes happily enjoyed, and despised under these so tedious and
terrible burdens of ceremonies, as some complained, who are greatly wronged, if
they have not since charged their consciences with far greater pressures than
any Ceremonies can be imagined; the least wilful and presumptuous immorality
being heavier than a thousand such formalities, as much as milstones are beyond
feathers, and talents of lead more ponderous than the largest shadows.

Experience has already taught us, that the authentic ceremonies of the
Church of England were either up hindrances at all, or far less, as to the
advance of piety, holiness and charity, than the taking away of them, and the
consequences have been; especially in such a fashion, as instead of ripping off
the lace, has torn the whole garment into rags; and pretending to shave the
superfluous hair, has almost cut the throat of the reformed Religion, as to
its unity, order, stability and constancy, either in doctrine or duty. Sure it
was far better to have the holy, complete and reverent Sacrament of the Lords
Supper administered and received by humble, devout and prepared Christians,
meekly kneeling upon their knees, than to have none at all celebrated for twice
seven years; both Ministers and people willingly excommunicating themselves,
and starving one another as to that holy refection. It was much better and more
Christian-like, Caro signatur ut anima muniatur. Tert. de Res. car.
to have infants baptized with the ancient sign of the cross (as a token of
their constant profession of the Faith of Christ crucified) than to have them
left wholly unbaptized, and so betrayed to the Anabaptistick agitators, who
boldly nullify that Sacrament, when they see others either vilify and wholly
reject it as to infants, or dispense with so great partiality, as if every
petty Preacher were a Lord and Judge, not a Servant and Minister of the Church
of Christ. It was better to have some things less necessary, yea inconvenient,
that looked like order, decency and harmony in the Church, than daily to run
thus to endless faction, ataxie, confusion, and irreligion. Chrysostom
speaking to Presbyters of Antioch, tells them, this is not their chief glory
and crown, (...), etc. Hom. 83. in Mat. Vid. Hieron. in Ezekiel. c. 44. and adv.
Pelag. lib. 1. Quod Episcopi, Presbyteri and Diaconi in administratione
sacrificiorum candida vest processerint.
Better that Bishops and Presbyters, and Deacons officiate, after the ancient
manner in Eastern and Western Churches, in white garments (under which form
Acts 1.10. Rev. 4.4 and 15.6.
Angels, who are ministering spirits, are represented to us, and Mat. 17.2.
Christ himself in his transfiguration) duly administering holy things to the
people of God, than to have no true Ministers, no divine or due ministrations
at all, as is now in many places of England and Wales; where either Churches
and people are desolat^* or pitiful intruders, neither truly able, nor duly
ordained, dare to officiate in their motley and py-bald habits, as they list;
superciliously affecting such odd and antic fashions, as they most fancy to
please themselves, or amuse the people with, over whom they seek to have an
absolute dominion.

If those few ceremonies appointed and accustomed to be used in the Church of
England were not herbs of grace, or of the most fragrant and cordial sorts of
flowers; yet (certainly) they were never found to be so noxious and unsavory
weeds as some pretend: the squeamishness of some people was no argument of any
thing pestilent or banefull in them. There are noses that have Antipathies
against Roses, and some will faint at any sweet smell. If a few modest
Christistians could less bear the sent or sight of them, for my part, I could
willingly indulge them such a connivence and toleration, as might consist with
the public peace, order, and rules of charity: but I can never approve the
counterscuffle of those, who for their private disgusting of one sauce or dish,
rudely overthrow an orderly feast and well-furnished table; who upon the
suspicion of weeds, root up all the good plants in a garden; who jealous of
briars and thorns, destroy the vines and fig trees. Ceremonies, if they bear no
great or fair fruit, yet they may, Sensi saepe, dolens and gemens, multas
infirmorum perturbationes fieri per quorundam fratrum obstinationem, vel
superstitiosam timiditatem, qui in rebus hujusmodi -- tam litigiosas excitant
quaestiones, ut nisi quod ipsi faciunt nihil rectum existiment. Aug. ep. 118.
as hedges, be both a fence and ornament to Religion, which truly for my part I
esteemed them, and so used them; nor did they grow so offensive as now they
have proved, until over-valuing on the one side, and under-valuing on the
other side, pertinacy and obstinacy (as S. Austin expresses his sense and
sorrow) like a pair of alternative bellows, kindled such flames of animosity,
as instead of bearing and forbearing one another in love, sought to consume
each other in those heats and flames, which would not have risen, had both
sides more intended the substance, and less the ceremonies of Religion. There
were infinite more obligations to Christian union by the true faith they
jointly professed, than there were occasions of dividing by the ceremonies
about which they differed. But one sharp knife will easily cut in sunder many
strong cords, if it be in a mad or indiscreet man's hand.

Although Ceremonies of man's invention be no more to be made rivals to
Religion, than Hagar was to Sarah, or Ismael to Isaac; yet it is hard to cast
them out, (having been sons or servants to the Churches family) with scorn,
unless they be found to grow too petulant, either jeering or justling pure
Religion, of whose genuine substance indeed they are not; yet they may (as hair
is to women and men too) be given It for an ornament: nor do they deserve to be
suspected for superstitious, much less irreligious, until Christians make
more of them then they deserve, or the Church intended; either so much
contending for them or against them, as takes them off from intending those
main things wherein the grace and kingdom of God does consist. Romans 14.17.
It does not become the children of God, either so to please themselves with
toys and bagatelloes, as to neglect their meat; or so to wrangle about them,
as to forget either the mutual love they owe as brethren, or the duty they owe
to their parents. But those little scratches, which some Anticeremoniall men's
itching fingers heretofore made upon the Church of England's beautiful face,
would never, I believe, have so far festred and deformed all things of Religion
in this Church, if some men had not mixed of late some things of a more
venomous nature and malignant design, in order to gratify the despite of those
rude Demagorasses of Rome, who have most ill will and evil eyes against the
beauty of this Parthenia, the Church of England.

I know the common refuge of many, who eagerly opposed the Church of England in
this point of its Ceremonies, was, when they could not answer those arguments
which learned and godly men brought to justify the lawful nature of the
things in themselves, also for the Churches undoubted liberty and power in
choosing and using them lawfully; they then flew to that popular and plausible
argument, which is in it self very fallacious, arguing a mind rather servile to
men's persons, and enslaved to their opinions, than enjoying the freedom of its
own reason and judgment: Namely, that some learned and many godly men did
greatly scruple those ceremonies, being so scandalized with them, that they
either never used them, or with very great regret; others bitterly inveighed
against them, petitioning God and man for the removal of them. Thus do most
men plead, who were but coppy-holders under the chief Lords of this Faction
against the Ceremonies of the Church of England.

Ans. I do not unwillingly grant (as having been no stranger to some of them)
that many of those who were no great friends to the Ceremonies, were yet
learned, grave and godly men, such as they are reputed to be by those who
pretend to be their followers, and have rather out-gone them in the rigor of
nonconformity, than kept pace with them in that moderation, gravity and
charity, which those men seemed to have: who were not therefore sworn enemies
against the Church of England, because they were no great friends to
Ceremonies; yea, I am persuaded there were few of them (who truly deserved in
former ages the names of godly and wise men) who would not have born ten times
more such Ceremonies with patience, rather than have occasioned so great
troubles and confusions to this Reformed Church, which they highly honored and
stoutly asserted against those, who under pretense of straining at gnats,
intended (it seems) to swallow down Camels; and under color of battering a few
Ceremonies, aimed at last to overthrow the whole frame of so famous and
flourishing a Church; which has now suffered more from some men's malice or
immoderation, than ever it can hope to recover by the wisdom or godliness of
any of that Anticeremoniall party.

But grant it, that some of their patrons and predecessors, who opposed
Ceremonies, were good and godly men; yet still they were but men, subject to
like passions as others were: Their hearts to Godward (I hope) were sincere as
to the inside of their Religion; but they might (as is usual even in good men)
be much warped as to the rind or outside of their Religion, both in their
judgment and practice of things, by their native tempers and complexions, as
they were either melancholic, dark and scrupulous, or choleric, hot and bold,
or more phlegmatic, dull and easy, or more sanguine, popular and pompous: for
through the tincture of these glasses most men behold even religious forms,
either as more or less agreeable to their Genius and temper: nor are they
seldom less biassed and swayed by the prepossessions and prejudices of their
education, by custom, conversation, reputation, expectation, admiration of
men's persons, addition to particular parties, private relations and interests:
all which (though matters of no rational or moral weight, yet) have a strong
secret tide and influence upon men's minds and professions, especially in cases
disputable in matters of Religion, that are of a skeptical, dubious and
indifferent nature, wherein most men are prone to be so superstitious, as to
imagine that to be most pleasing or displeasing to God, which is so to
themselves. Many things are by some practiced, because they ever did so; and by
many omitted, because they never did use them: men fly from positive
superstition, with a strong rebound to negative superstition. Nor is it less
superstition, I conceive, for men to think it a point of Religion to forbear or
remove such things, than it is in others, to think it necessary to retain and
observe them, upon a religious necessity: which last was not the judgment of
the Church of England, as to any Ecclesiastical ceremonies; which were not
held to be of necessity, but only of decency. The opposers of them (indeed)
pressed an absolute necessity of duty and conscience to remove them. Who then
were in this point superstitious persons, is no hard matter to judge.

If the reputation of men's parts and piety, of their devotions and austerities
of life, signified much in the outward Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, to
make them good or bad, lawful or unlawful; certainly by those marks the Romish
party will be able to produce many instances of exemplary sanctity, severity,
and austerity in outward abstinences or observances, by which to maintain the
concurrent errors and grosser superstitions of their Religion. Persons of
applauded piety are many times, like smooth and ponderous wedges, the Devils
fittest engines to cleave the Church in sunder; the weight of their example
presents all things to the minds of weak and sequacious Christians, as great
importances of Religion. So Origin and Tertullian became the great scandalls
and temptations of the Christian world, Vincent. Lirin. cap. 23.24. Tentatio
est populi error magistri; and tanto major tentatio, quanto ipse est doctior
qui errat.
by the greatness of their parts, piety and reputation, as Vincentius
Lirinensis observes: nor had Novatus, Donatus, Pelagius, and others of old,
done so much mischief in the Church, if they had been men either obscure for
their parts, or infamous for their moralls.

It is not only to be considered, how able men are in any settled Church, but
how peaceable, how humble, how far removed from private passions, secular
designs, worldly discontents, popular and pragmatick humors; all which do often
leaven men (otherwise of commendable parts and piety) especially in their
younger days, when they are most prone to have good conceits and confidences
of themselves. Once on wing in their own fancy, and mounted by the breath of
vulgar esteem, they are loath to light, and afraid to fall, when their fame and
credit are thus at stake (besides the glimmering of some oblique interests of
profit or preferment, which lie within their eye and reach.) Elder years do
morosely resolve to maintain what once they have adopted under the name of
stricter piety and purer Religion. Few men know how to revert or recant, when
once engaged in a party or difference which carries any mark or ensign of a
special way of Religion. Reputation is the bearded hook, which holds most men
faster than conscience to their sides, even after they perceive how delusory
the artificial bait was, which first invited them to entangle themselves.

I have known some Ministers of worth and ability, who in all things material
agreed to the doctrine and worship of the Church of Engl. yet in point of
nonconformity to some Ceremony, rather chose (being once engaged before they
had so well examined all things) to live a scrambling, vagrant, and almost
mendicant life, from one good house to another (by which means some of them
sucked no small benefit) rather than they would take any settled living in the
Church of England; in which obstinacy they persisted to their dying day:
although they grew very calm and cool as to their first heats; and perceiving
in time the weakness of their own and others motives, they durst not in their
maturer years persuade any others, no not their own sons, which were Ministers
in the Church of England, to be non-conformists, only they were ashamed to be
retrograde in their reputation, though they were got well forward in their
better judgments.

Yea, even as to the polle and number of names (which I think to be but the
number of the Beast, if we only tell noses, and not consider reasons) who
knows not but the conformable part both of Ministers and people in England,
were, for many years, twenty to one beyond the Non-conformists? nor did they
more exceed them in number, than they equalled them every way in learning,
piety, gravity, in all good words and works; yea in many things of public and
more generous charity they far exceeded them: the one were, for the most part,
getting and scraping for their private advantages; the other were much more
hospitable, munificent and charitable.

The first and second generation of Non-conformists were more excusable, and
more modest in their dissentings: for, coming newly out of not only the
dungeon of Papal superstition and darkness to a mavelous light of
Reformation, they were jealous of any cloud or shadow which they suspected as
threatening to eclipse that light; but coming also out of the fiery furnace of
Romish persecution, they were jealous of every thing that had once past the
Popes fingers, lest it might be too hot for them. These good and warm men (to
whose martyrly courage much might be indulged) while yet Reformation was an
Embryo (in the formation and birth) were in time much worn out; men afterward
began more coolely to consider the nature of the things, no less than their own
fears or other men's prejudices, especially after they saw those things three
times solemnly determined and settled by the public wisdom and authority both
of this Church and State. The few remains of the old stock of pious dissenters
(which in my time I have known) were grown so calm and moderate, as to the
Ceremonies of the Church of England, that I never found they persuaded others
against them. As for Liturgy and Episcopacy, I am sure they justly asserted
them, as to the main, as wishing only some small sweetning of the first, as to
a few darker expressions; and the softening of the other, as to some more
equable regulations: which were as far from extirpation of either of them, as
wiping the eyes is from pulling them out, and washing the hands from cutting
them off.

Yea, I know by long experience, that when the graver and more learned sort of
Non-conformists perceived how mightily the Reformed Religion grew and prospered
in England, amidst the Liturgy, Bishops and Ceremonies, against which some
fiercer spirits had so excessively inveighed; when they saw what buds and
leaves, blossoms and ripe fruit Aarons rod brought forth, what eminent gifts
and graces God was pleased to dispense by Bishops and Presbyters, that were
piously conformable to the Church of England, they wholly laid aside their
former heats and youthful eagernesses; which sometimes fed high, and were kept
warm by the hopes and flatteries of those who expected that party should long
agone have prevailed; yea many of them, now aged, both repented of and recanted
their more juvenile and indiscreet fervours, advising others, now beginners, to
conform to the good orders, and to study the peace of the Church of England,
which they saw so blessed of God, as none in the world exceeded Her.

Nor did I ever hear of any sober Christian, or truly godly Minister, who
(being in other things prudent, unblameable and sincere) did ever suffer any
penitential strokes, or checks of conscience, either upon his deathbed or
before, merely upon the account of their having been conformable to, and
keeping communion with the Church of England; nor did they ever find or
complain of Ceremonies, Liturgy, or Episcopacy, as any damps to their real
graces, or to their holy communion with Gods blessed Spirit. At last, both good
Ministers and people generally submitted themselves in all peaceableness, for
many years, to the order and uniformity of the Church of England; until the
late Northern Earthquake scared many by a Panick fear from their former
stedfastness in practices and judgments, which had been taken up by many
Ministers, not suddenly and easily, but after serious and mature deliberations:
against which nothing new has as yet been alleged to alter their minds, only
old rusty arguments have been wrapped up in new furbished arms; and the
strongest sword, it seems, makes the best proofs and impressions on some men's
consciences, even in matters of Religion.

Which ( vertigo) excusable giddiness in the vulgar, but shameful inconstancy
in some men of parts and learning, is no news to wise men; since (as the most
renowned Praef^t. ad exercit. in Ann. Baron. Inter caetera mortalitatis
incommod^ illud cens^n^u^, quod ad perniciosa and minus hon^sta ultro populi
accurrunt; ad bona and salutaria rarus and lentus vel bonorum consensus.
Isaac Casaubon observes) the native mutability of men's minds is such, That
they precipitantly run by sholes and troops upon changes, which are for the
worst; but scarce one man of a thousand is to be won by the sense of his own
and other men's miseries, or by the most importune and strongest reasons in the
world, to retract his popular transports; or to revert to the better, by holy
and happy Apostasies. Changes to the worse, like sicknesses, are easy and
sudden; recoveries to the better, like health, are slow and difficult.
Irregular zeal and popular tumults, like storms and tempests, easily drive men
from their anchors into dangerous seas; but they seldom bring them back into
safe harbors. The first is the work of the many, but not the wise; the second
of the wise, who are but few, and who, during the paroxysme or first impression
of vulgar violence, must a little yield themselves either to be carried away,
or oppressed by the rage and precipitancy of such mutations, which diverse sober
men (no doubt) have rather suffered of late years than approved here in
England, who humbly pray to recover that happy port or station, wherein the
Reformed Religion was once, like a well built, well-ballasted, and richly laden
ship, safely anchored in the Church of England; where the ceremonies were but
as the wast clothes, flags and streamers; no part indeed of its precious
lading, but yet not uncomely ornaments, much less such dangerous burdens or
blemishes, as merited the utter sinking and over-setting of so fair a vessel:
which seems to have been the delight of some men; though I do not think it was
or is according to the desire of the most sober and modest Non-conformists, no
more than it was or is agreeable to the mind of the chief Magistrate, nor of
the best Nobility, the wisest Gentry; the learned Clergy, or the better sort
of Commons, if they were left to their free votes and untumultuated suffrages.
Certainly all pious and prudent persons, who ever owned the Church of England,
having now more leisure and clearer light to discern things, than when the
clouds and storms first began, cannot but continually deplore their own
credulity, some men's cruelty, and most men's inconstancy in religion, which have
left this Church in so broken and calamitous a condition, while some oppose
Her, many forsake Her, and few assert Her.

Especially when they find, as they do every where, by experience, that those
eager agitators against the Church of England, upon the old account of
Ceremonies, Liturgy and Episcopacy, do yet, as grand Masters and most
authentic Dictators, take to themselves and their respective parties a most
plenipotentiary power, to teach, ordain, rule, over-see, guide, correct and
excommunicate such as they can get into their severalls, divided or new-erected
Churches, whose divine authority, power and jurisdiction in things
Ecclesiastic, they cry up for absolute, Supreme, Divine. Thus they make, or at
least fancy themselves, mutually Kings and Priests in the majesty and
sovereignty of all Ecclesiastic jurisdiction, amidst their small conventicles,
who wholly deny any such authority to the Grandeur, number and magnificence of
the Church of England; that is the joint consent, united influence, and
combined interest of all good Christians in this Nation, who publicly agreed
with one mind and in one manner to serve the Lord.

Yet in the manner of their Communion, ministrations or worship, who sees not,
that every one of these new Masters affects to be author of his own Liturgy,
persuading people to pray to and praise God, to consecrate and celebrate holy
mysteries, rather after such a form as they shall either suddenly conceive, or
more soberly provide; either keeping for the main to the same matter, method
and tenor of devotion, which was in the Church of England, or, with great
artifice, varying so much, as it may be thought to be new and unpremeditated,
yea and inspired too, rather than from any ordinary gift or common habit
acquired? which sober Christians know full well to be neither an hard nor a
rare matter for any men to attain, who have quick inventions, moderate
judgments, and voluble tongues.

Lastly, even in the point of Ceremonies, (which they have clamoured for
dangerous, and rendered so odious in the Church of England) even these men that
are so impatient to be concluded under any ceremonies upon public order and
injunction, yet many of them use two ceremonies for one, after their own
fancies and inventions; not only by those emphatick looks, dreadful
eagernesses, vehement loudnesses, long and extatick silences, antic actions,
odd and theatrick postures, which they peculiarly choose to personate in,
hereby setting off (as they think) with the greater grace and gusto, their
religious performances before the people: but further, they require of their
Disciples, and all that will be their followers, some things of a ceremonial
nature, besides words and phrases, as special marks and discriminations both
of admission to, and communion with their Churches or parties; who may commonly
be known by those omissions, no less than by those expressions which they
affect to use. It Is Religion with some, not to give the title of Saint to any
but their own party; never to use the Lords prayer, Creed or ten
Commandments. They have also special times and gestures, yea and vestures
too, observed by them in their holy duties: some choose to sit, (...), Luke 22,
14. (...), Mat. 26.20.
others to stand at the Lords Supper; neither of which was the posture of
Christ or his Apostles, which was a leaning or recumbency: some take it after
their own suppers, others before: some familiarly hand the elements one to
another: most of them use such words in consecration and distribution, as they
like best, or as come first to their lips; sometimes such rude expressions
(which I have known by some that were no little Idols of the vulgar) that truly
no wise man or good Christian could approve them. There are that abhor to
appear as Ministers of the Church of England, by wearing any gown, or so much
as black clothes, in their officiatings: many of them, rather than wear a black
cap (which is most grave and comely, in case they need one) choose to put on a
white cap, though they need none, appearing as if they went to execution when
they go to preaching: some love to preach in cuerpo, casting off their clokes,
as if they went like boys to wrestling, when they go to preaching.

How ill would these men take it, if any of those that are lovers and esteemers
of the Chapter of Engl. should so severely circumcise their devotions, as not to
suffer them to use any of those new forms, exotic fashions, or affected
Ceremonies, which they have thus chosen to themselves, as the discriminations
of their factions, the decencies of their profession, and the solemnities, no
doubt, of their devotions? how angry would they be, to hear any men crying down
all their fine new modes (which no doubt themselves think very demure and
Saintly) as very undecent and superstitious, as superfluous and scandalous, as
unnecessary, yea impious, because not expressly commanded by Christ, not
punctually practiced by the Apostles, nor any other holy men in any Church? To
many of whom the strange and affected carriages of some new men in their duties
and devotions, would certainly seem very ridiculous and indiscreet, if not
worse, while they are such imperious and severe censurers of a few Ceremonies,
thought fit to be used by the wisdom of the Church of England.

Whatever these men can plead for those ceremonious customs and observations,
used by them in their religious performances, which have no other signature or
note upon them but only their own fancy, choice and use, that, I am sure, and
much more, may any sober Christian plead in behalf of the Ceremonies chosen by,
and used in the Church of England, as seemed fittest and best for the common
good.

There is a necessity of decency, reverence, order and convenience, for the
adorning of religious duties, that are sociall and exemplary, related not only
to God, but to men in outward profession, quickening thereby and encouraging
our selves, winning and alluring others, yea instructing and edifying all sorts
in some degree; like the flourishings of capital letters, which make them not
more significant, but more remarkable. These are no less lawful and necessary
than discretion is to devotion, or prudence is to piety; though they are not of
the highest and most absolute necessity, which constitutes what these adorn,
gives being to what these only beautify, gives the inward and essential form
to what these add only outward and visible forms to: Ceremonies making
religious duties not more pious, but more conspicuous; not more sacred, but
more solemn; not more spiritual and holy, but more visible and imitable.

In all which things of a circumstantiall and ceremonial nature (for
Ceremonies seem no other but modified or limited circumstances, such as are
time, place, gesture, vesture, posture, action, etc. all which in the general
do attend (as shadows do gross bodies in the Sunshine) all the outward actions
of men, either natural, civil, or religious in this life of mortality) if any
men may lawfully use, as these enemies to the Church of England now do, what
their private fancy, skill and will, list to set up in opposition to, and
derogation from the custom, wisdom, and public consent of such a Church as
England was. Certainly wise and godly men may with much more modesty, safety
and discretion, follow the joint advice and direction of so famous a Church, to
whom, and to its followers, some of these new Reformers will not now allow so
much liberty as to follow their own judgment, and the Churches appointment
too, in matters of Religion, either for substance or ceremony; which liberty
they always boldly demanded, and lately challenged to themselves and their
adherents, as a right or privilege belonging to them, not only as men, but as
Christians; which yet by their good will no Christians should enjoy besides
themselves, and such as receive the Laws of Religion from their lips.

It is possible indeed for one man to be in some things, at some time and
occasion, wiser than many men, (for truth does not always go in crowds, never
in rabbles) as one Layman seemed in the great Council of Nice: Socr. Eccl.
Hist. l. 1. c. 5. Ruff. l. 1. c. 3. hist. Unus ex confessoribus, simplicissimae
naturae vir, and nihil aliud sciens nisi Jes. Christum and hunc crucifixum.
who was, as Socrates, Ruffinus and Nicephorus tell us, a very plain and simple
man; yet he relieved those Fathers, when they were shrewdly perplexed by a
subtle sophister in the point of Christ's Divinity, and the most adorable
Trinity; whose disputative insolency that one plain man (as David against
Goliath) did so rebuke, not by subtilty of his reasonings, but by the majesty of
his faith and confession, that the Philosopher confessed himself evicted,
convicted, converted. Such a solitary rock of Christian constancy was that one
great Athanasius, (deservedly master of an immortal name) because in the sea
and inundation of Arian perfidy, and the Apostasy of most, He, He persisted a
constant professor, a courageous Confessor, a patient Martyr by his sufferings
for so great a truth; which is of greater price than all Christians temporal
lives: better all men die, as to their mortality, than Christ be deprived of
the honor of his Divinity; which is the life of a believers faith, and hope
for eternal life, by the meritorious excellency and infinite goodness of the
blessed Jesus, both God and man.

Notwithstanding these instances in cases of great concernment (which had the
Scriptures testimony, and the consent of all the ancient Churches, to buoy up
their undertakers against all the oppositions of men or devils;) yet in things
of a less nature, which being indifferent in their kind, are best determinable
by public prudence, it argues (as S. Aug. ep. 118. c. 5.
Austin speaks, ( insolentissimam insaniam) no small pride and arrogance (which
is the mother of folly and faction) for any one man, or some few men, whom all
order and polity has made inferior to others, either as their betters, or as
the rulers and representatives of the whole Society, to prefer their own
private opinions and judgments before the well-advised results and solemn
sanctions of those that are far more in number, and every way as eminent for
piety, prudence and integrity, besides the advantage they have of more public
influence and just authority.

Such indeed were the first Reformers and Constituters of the Church of
England, both as to its fundamentals, and what they thought ornamentals, or
ceremonies; who, I believe, had much more religious reason for what they then
approved and appointed, both as to piety and policy, than we at this distance
of times, and different state of things can well discern. I am sure they were
masters of as much learning, and as great searchers of divine verities, as any
of those new masters, who now so much blame them, and pert upon them; yea and,
I believe, they had much more of true zeal and meekness, of humility and
charity, attending their learned counsels and pious endeavors, than will be
(at last) found in those men, who are so far from suffering as martyrs for
Christ and his Church, that they seek to make this Church one of the greatest
sufferers and martyrs that ever was of any Christian and Reformed Church. Those
forenamed gifts and graces, which sowed (by Gods blessing) those good seeds of
Piety and Peace, whence a long and plentiful harvest of Blessings, spiritual
and temporal, did grow, and was reaped for many years in England, by us and our
forefathers; those, I believe, will carry the honest and humble Conformists
sooner and nearer to heaven, than the pride, passion and petulancy of these is
like to do, who now seem the most supercilious and triumphant Non-conformists
against the Church of England: to some of whose violences, immoderations and
imprudencies, (that I name not sacriledges, profanenesses and cruelties) the
Church of England and its Children (next their sins) do now owe so much of
their miseries, dangers and undoings; for which I doubt not but in the day of
impartial doom, they will find, that Gods thoughts were not as their thoughts,
nor his ways as their ways.

To the jealousy and contempt which some men expressed against the Ceremonies
of the Church of England, they added their perpetual quarrelling with those
Festival solemnities which were appointed to be annually observed in a
religious way to Gods glory, and Christians improvement, by fasting or
feasting, by prayer, preaching and communicating: which uses and ends being
sufficient to justify all things that any Church particularly appoints or
observes, agreeable to the general tenor of Gods Word; yet some men's divinity
has been always bent to condemn and discountenance, even the solemn and
special memorials of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and
sending of the holy Ghost, which celebrate no other mysteries or memorials than
those, which the grand Articles of Christian faith do teach us. The wisdom and
piety of the Church having, in all ages, written in Dominicall or great Letters
those most remarkable Histories of our Saviors transactions on earth, in order
to our Redemption; which certainly are never more observed by common people,
than when they are set forth in such Holidayes, and are kept with more than
ordinary solemnity and festivity, or joy, such as becomes sober Christians: for
which we have not only the ancient Churches general practice, but Gods own
command and precedent among the Jews, to prevent forgetting or slighting of
Gods signal mercies.

Against all which some men are so envious among Christians, that they will not
endure either Ministers or Neighbor-christians to benefit their own and others
souls, by preaching upon any of those special days, or occasions and
subjects. They can allow State Fasts, Civil Festivals, and Commonwealths
Thanksgivings, upon petty and inconsiderable accounts (comparatively) but by no
means upon such as are purely Christian, either for mortification or
gratulation: in which they are so peevishly partial, that they superciliously
fancy, their not observing such a day to be a service to the Lord; but they
have not so much charity, as to grant that another observing such a day is an
observing it to the Lord; Rom 14.6.
which affirmative the blessed Apostle allows no less than the others negative:
whose uncharitableness seems in this, not only superstitious as to their own
liberty, but injurious against another, while they count them Jewish and
ceremonious in observing those days, which all the world knows do not look
forward to Christ as yet to come, but backward, as to Christ already come, both
in the Flesh and in the Spirit; having, as to his meritorious part, finished
the glorious work of our Redemption, which ought to be had in everlasting
remembrance; Psalm. 105.5.
and left such a ministerial authority in his Church, as ought to preserve the
memorials of his Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension, until his
coming again, by all such means, both ordinary and extraordinary, which may
with most piety and prudence best attain that great end.

Which the ancient and Primitive Churches undoubtedly did; among whom so early
and eager a controversy rose, as to the punctual day of Christ's Resurrection:
nor have the modern and best reformed Churches failed in these grand
celebrations, to conform, as the Chapter of Engl. did, to pious Antiquity, finding
no reason or Religion why they should in such lawful and laudable customs
affect to vary from the Catholic pattern, so conform to the word and will of
God. From which private Christians would not so easily dissent, if they did not
too much lean to their own understandings, Prove. 3.5. Isa. 5.21.
and so fall under that woe, of being wise in their own conceits: which biasses
easily betray weak and wilful men, to count good evil, and evil good; to think
their own refractoriness to be Religion, and other men's honest devotion to be
but superstition: of which I confess I never thought either this Church or any
other to be in the least degree guilty, while they did observe such holy
memorials, with public celebrity, as were appointed to the honor of God, and
to the imitation of those graces which were remarkable in the eminentest
servants of God, renowned in the Gospel; such as are the blessed Virgin and
Mother of our Lord, as also his prime Apostles, by whose means the light of the
Gospel shone through all the world. Nor do we find our Savior himself
withdrawing in such cases his conformity to the Churches practice, John 10.22.
1 Mac. 4.56.
in those Encaenia or Feasts of dedication, which were thankful and joyful
memorials of the restoration of that material Temple which was to be
demolished; whereas these holiday-celebrations used in this Church, have
respect to such things as are never to be forgotten, abolished, or changed,
while the world continues, and Christ has any Church upon earth; which I
believe he will have to the end of the world, according to his promised
assistance to all his faithful Ministers, who continue in the fellowship and
succession, both for doctrine and authority, of the blessed Apostles.

But I have done with these long and unhappy debates about the sacred
Festivalls, and other Ceremonies authorized by the Church of England; on which
some flesh-flies (mistaking them for galls and sores, when they were but decent
variations of beautiful colors in its garment) have so importunely fastened,
especially in the hotter season of these late dog-dayes, that they have very
much flye-blown the reformed Religion, and endangered not only the
putrefaction, but the utter corruption of the whole state of this Church of
England: whose quarrel and right in these things I should not have thus far
revived or vindicated, if I had not thought it necessary by this salt of sound
speech, to repress those further putrefying principles, which upon this
account are daily suggested to simple and well-meaning people, against the
whole frame and constitution of the Church of England.

Whose public commands and settled constitutions as I always approved and
obeyed, but most readily, since I best understood them in their late fiery
trial; because I have found them, in great and weighty matters, serious,
solid, scripturall; in lesser things, moderate, discreet and charitable: so I
never had either heart or hand, tongue or pen, to assert any thing that was by
private or particular men's fancies brought in, either to a peevish
nonconformity, or to a pragmatick super-conformity. Though I willingly allow
many of my calling to be much wiser and better than my self; yet I cannot look
upon them as wiser than the whole Church of England, which saw with many more
eyes, both forward and backward, than any one Bishop or Presbyter can do: whose
real Innovations in later times, beyond what either the letter or usage of
this Church (which best interprets Its meaning) did enjoin and authorize, I am
no way concerned to maintain; nor was I ever discontent to have them both
gainsaid and removed, as insolences mis-becoming any Churchman, never so wise
or great, to impose upon the Majesty of so famous a Church as England was;
which never needed any other additions, innovations or decorations, either in
Doctrine, or Discipline, or Worship, than those which It self had soberly
chosen as a wise Mother and grave Matron, which justly disdains to be made
gayer or finer by such ribbands, feathers and toys, as any of her Children
shall list to pin upon her.

It had better become, in my judgment, the learning, gravity and discretion of
those men, who most admired and obtruded their own supernumerary and unwonted
ceremonies, to have confined themselves to the Churches known Injunctions and
Customs: for it were endless, if every man, never so good, should be gratified
in his Church-projects and religious inventions; which became the great pest
and oppression of the Western Churches; when the Bishops of Rome, by their own
encroachments and other Bishops connivence, undertook to innovate or regulate
all things in all Churches, which should have been ordered either by general
Councils, or by the Synods of particular Churches, as was most convenient for
them. Nor in England could ever prudent men with reason have do^ed on any of
their novelties, when they plainly saw that even those few sparks of ancient
Ceremonies, with which the Church of England contented her self, (and which
neither made nor marred Religion, being rather spangles than spots on the
Churches garments) even these (I say) have a long time been made, beyond their
merit, not only occasions for some to rail, others to scorn, a third sort to
blaspheme the purity and honor of the Church of England; but also to
schismatize in Her, and separate wholly from Her. Yea from the later obtrusions
of some men's either renovations of things antiquated, or innovations of
Ceremonies never enjoined by the Church, those dreadful conflagrations have
grown, which have almost quite consumed Her; the quenching of which deserves
(as it needs) not only these drops of my pen, but of all your tears and
prayers ( most worthy Gentlemen) who find your selves (as I am) very much
concerned for the honor and happiness of this Church, which was in all points
prudently reformed, and excellently constituted.

CHAP. XIV.
Second Obj. against the Church of Engl. from Churchmens personal failings.
A Second grand Objection, very popular and plausible, which the enemies of the
Church of England have made great use of to decry and destroy, if possible, the
whole frame and constitution of It, is taken from the private infirmities,
personal failings, and male-administrations, which some men have either
suspected or really observed in some of the Clergy, either Archbishops,
Bishops, or Presbyters of the Church of England: against whom it is objected,
that either they were not so warm and voluble Preachers, as those men do most
fancy; or possibly less learned and industrious then was fit for Ministers; or
not so prudent, it may be, and compassionate toward weaker Christians, as
became those that were stronger in the faith; Romans 14.
or lastly, not so morally strict and unblamable in their lives, as indeed all
Ministers of the Gospel ought to be at all times. Hence the Adversaries of the
Church of England do conclude that both head and heart were sick, that there
was no sound part, Isa. 1.5, 6.
that all was full of bruises and putrified sores, that in the Church of
England nothing could be found worthy of a true Church, a true Minister, or a
true Christian.

My answer is, That all the modest Clergy in England desire to be so humble,
so ingenuous and so impartial, as not to forget their own infirmities, while
they co^plain of others injuries. For my self, being conscious how little
removed I am from fallings, as a m^n and Minister, I shall willingly confess,
and strive to amend, what any man's charity shall with truth convince me of and
for others, my Fathers and Brethren, I presume I have (because I humbly crave)
their leaves to give God the glory of his own justice, of other men's malice,
and of our own failings. My design is not to reproach any man in particular, but
to excite my self, with all other Ministers, to such repentance and amendment
as God requires, the better world expects, the malice of our enemies exacts,
our own safety and this Churches distresses command of us.

The Clergy of England of all degrees have endured too many sufferings (beyond
any other rank or order of men) to fancy they have not had many sins. Not to
own our distempers, after the long application of so rough physic, were indeed
to tax the wisest and gentlest Physician, not of severity, but cruelty and
superfluity: whereas the father of our souls never chastises his children so
much for his own pleasure, as indeed for their profit. Heb. 12.5, 6, etc.
Gods judgments are in this very merciful, and his severities the fruits of
his loving kindness, that he chooses rather to punish us than forsake us; and
to afflict us by his own justice, than to betray us to the cruel flatteries of
our own lusts, which would prove ours and his greatest enemies too, if we were
left to our selves.

The smart eye salve which the Clergy of England have endured of late years,
may well clear our sight so far, at least, as to discern and confess those
faults which heretofore (it may be) we over-looked, or slighted, or excused,
upon the common score of humane infirmity; which indulgence may better be
allowed to any men, than to Ministers of the Gospel, especially if persons of
eminency and conspicuity. Of all Clergymen, beyond all other men, the world
justly expects (and so does God) sobriety, gravity, exactness, 1 Timothy 4.12.
even in their younger years, as S. Paul does of Timothy; how much more in
their maturity and age? Little sins in them (if publicated) grow great by their
scandal and contagion: O how ponderous, how immense, how flagitious are the
presumptions, the vicious habits, the wilful, open, obstinate and constant
deformities of Ministers! Psalm. 130.3.
In all which (if the just God should be extreme to mark what has been amiss
among us, both young and old, great and small, who is able to abide it? Before
the Lord who has done it, we must, with old Eli and holy Job, put our mouths
in the dust, and smother our sense in silence.

Nevertheless, we are, and ever must be, pertinacious even to the death (with
holy and afflicted Job) to maintain, not only the innocence, but also the
merit of the Clergy or Ministry of England (as to the greater and better part
of them) in respect of the people of this Nation in all degrees. Although (as
David did, when Shimei reproched and cursed him bitterly, 2 Samuel 16.
disdainfully and injustly) we cannot but be sensible and complain of some men's
excessive malice and immoderation against us* ye^ we cannot but make an humble
submission to, with an agnition and justification of that divine wrath and
justice which seems to be gone out against us: before the Almighty we desire to
be either silent, or confitent, or suppliant, as becomes those that are justly
ashamed, and truly penitent. It Is fit we hide, and abhor our selves in dust and
ashes, before his presence, who only can pity and repair us, by turning the
causeless curses of men into a blessing, making the sacrilegious impoverishings
and indignities, the ungrateful abasings and insole^^ies of some unreasonable
and violent men, an occasion of his gracious favor, and all good men's
compassions toward the afflicted Clergy and Church of England: for where
Churchmen are miserable, the Church cannot be happy; where the Clergy are
distressed, the Laity cannot be prosperous.

We are so far willing to gratify the malice of our bitter adversaries, (to
whom no music is so pleasing, as any evil report brought upon the Ministers of
England) as with S. Austin to make our confession to God, that we may be more
vile in our own eyes before the Lord, and cover our selves with that cloak of
confusion which God has suffered some men to cast upon us, after they have
stripped us of those ancient Honors and Ornaments, with which we were by the
piety, gratitude and munificence of former times happily invested, not more to
our own, than the whole nations great renown in all the world.

Without all peradventure, the most holy and all-seeing God, who walks in the
midst of the golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2.1.
whose pure eyes are most intent upon the Ministers of his Church, has found
out the iniquity of his servants, Genesis 44.16.
the Bishops and other Ministers of the Church of England, not only in our
persons, but in our professions; not only in our morals, but in our
ministrations:

Who being solemnly consecrated, and duly set apart to the service of God and
his Church, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20
in the name, place, power and authority of Jesus Christ, and drawing near to
his special presence, with Moses in the Mount, with Aaron in the Holy of
Holies, in those glorious manifestations of God in Christ to his Church, by
public ordinances and spiritual influences; Numb. 20.12.
yet have not so sanctified the name of the Lord our God by our hearts and
lives, by our doctrine and duties, as we ought to have done.

Many of us doing the work of God (which is a great work, of eternal
concernment to our own and other men's souls) either so unpreparedly,
negligently and irreverently, or so partially, popularly and passionatly, or so
formally, pompously and superciliously, that our very officiatings have been
offenses to God and man, our oblations vain, Isa. 1 13. Eccles. 5.1, 2.
our prayers the sacrifices of fools, our pains in preaching (how much more
our idleness?) has been no better than the foolishness of preaching in good
earnest. Some of us have been prone to place the highest pitch of our
Ministerial care, exactness and duty in ceremonious conformities, which alone
are mere chafe, miserable, empty formalities; neglecting the substance, life
and soul of Christian Religion, which consists in righteousness and true
holiness, while we too much intended the mere shadow, shell and outside of it:
others have so eagerly doted upon their sticklings against what was duly and
decently established in this Church, as to the outward circumstances and
ceremonies, the decent manner and form of sociall Religion, that they feared
not (as far as in them lay) to make havoc of the power of Religion, together
with the peace, unity, order, and very being of this famous Church.

Many of us so over-preached our peoples capacities, that the generality of our
auditors, after many years preaching, were very little edified, nothing
amended, being kept at too high a rack, both of affected Oratory and abstruse
Divinity, for want of plain catechizing, and charitable condescending to them:
others in a supine and slovenly negligence, have sunk so much below the just
gravity, solidity and majesty of true preaching, that the meanest sort of
illiterate people have undertook to vie with them, and to match them: infinite
swarms of mechanic rivals rose up into desks and pulpits, when once they saw
such pitiful preaching serve the turn, which consisted not in study, meditation
and reading, but in a bold look, a confident spirit, and a voluble tongue; so
that neither such preaching nor praying seemed many degrees removed from mere
vulgar prating, from trivial extemporary chat.

It Is true, few Bishops, few Presbyters among us, but may confess, that either
in our accesses to that great and terrible work, unfitted and unfurnished in
great part, or in our converse and exercises in it, with less mortified
affections and less exemplary actions, either by our ambitions, or our envies,
or our covetousness, or our impatience, by our looseness, or luxury, or
laziness, or vulgarity; we have too much abased the dignity of our calling, and
the honor of our profession: whence justly and necessarily follows the
darkning and eclipse of our credit, esteem and reputation among the people;
when they see their Physicians themselves infected, their Surgeons ulcerous,
their Antidotes poisonous, their Ministers helping to fill up the measure of
the sins of the people, doing wickedly in a land of uprightness: Isa. 26.10*
while justice was done to them, while all favor showed them, in plenty, peace,
dignities, honors, while the fruits of Gods and man's indulgence were bestowed
upon them and continued to them; then for Clergiemen and Pastors to wax wanton,
to feed themselves, Ezekiel. 34.2.
and to neglect the flock which was purchased with the precious blood of Christ.

Who can wonder if the wrath of God break out against us, when (as the sons of
Aaron and Eli) the Priests of the Lord adventure to approach the glory of God
with strange fire, with dead and unreasonable, Lev. 10.1. Romans 12.1, 2.
instead of living and acceptable sacrifices? Who of us can doubt or complain,
that we bear the iniquity of our holy things, Exodus 28.38.
while the anger of the Lord is thus gone out against us, and presses sore
upon us in the saddest ways of temporal calamities; loading us at once with
poverty, reproach and contempt, cast upon us by popular fury and plebeian
despite, which knows no bounds of justice, moderation, pity or charity, much
less of any reparation and restitution; which possibly might have been hoped
from the magnificence of Princes and great men, when once their anger had been
assuaged, and their displeasure pacified against the distressed and despised
Clergy?

But vulgar fury, like the fire of hell, is consumptive and unquenchable, when
once it has leave to rebel and rage against their betters, especially such as
have been their Governors and Teachers, the reprovers or restrainers of their
ruder lusts and follies: nothing is more insolent, precipitant, boisterous,
brutish, implacable, inexorable, Numb. 16.
irreparable. It Is like that divine vengeance which was executed by the earths
opening its mouth (as it did upon Korah and his accomplices) scaring all, and
threatening to swallow up the whole Congregation of the Lord, as it does at this
day; still gaping upon the whole Clergy, and the remnant of this Church of
England, which yet has escaped: Jerem. 15.19.
the bayardly blindness of common people being such, that they are neither able
nor willing to discern between what is precious and what is vile, to
distinguish between the use and abuse of things, between persons and their
functions, between divine Authority and humane Infirmity, between the
essential constitution of things, and their accidental corruptions. The
headiness of such Reformers would seek to put out the seeing eyes of all
Bishops and Ministers, because of the weakness or wantonness of some.

Nor do these popular flames know at length how to spare their own Idols and
Teraphims (their Lares and Penates) those Household and familiar Gods, whom they
formerly most dearly embraced, adored and doted upon, but now they have cast
them to the Moles and Bats. Isa. 2.20.
For it is very observable in these times, that the plebeian rudeness,
coldness, mutability, licentiousness, petulancy and ingratitude of some men,
has vented it self against no sort of Ministers more spitefully and
insolently, than those who heretofore were their great favorites and darlings,
because they soothed them up many times, contrary to their own private
judgments, and the Churches public appointments, either in a weak and
wavering nonconformity, or in a wilful and wanton refractorinesse, even to a
despising, calumniating and separating humor, against the whole Church of
England. It Is evident, many Ministers have found those their keenest
persecutours, of whom themselves were sometimes the greatest flatterers, and
compliers; slightly healing or lightly skinning over those raw sores of
nonconformity, even to a greater pain and festring (as now it has proved)
which they should have seriously searched and thoroughly healed, by sound
demonstrations asserting at once both their own judgments, and the Churches
wisdom, in the pious use of its power and liberty. All which Ministers did
then shamefully betray, Ezekiel. 13.11.
when they daubed with untempered mortar, complying for their private interests
and advantages, both with this Churches injunctions, and Its enemies
oppositions: which shuffling, at last, put the common people into such a
confusion and uncertainty of mind, that they knew not what to choose or refuse,
whom to believe or follow, what to preserve, or what not to destroy; severely
punishing even the authors, occasioners and abettors of their irresolutions;
resolving at last to be destructive of all things that had any mark of the
Church of Englands wisdom and authority upon them: not content to prune off
superfluous suckers, they concluded to lay their rude axes to the root as well
as branches of this Church.

Yea, while the Clergy or Ministers of England do justly and humbly, in the
freedom and integrity of their souls, thus make their penitent agnitions to
the Divine Justice, (every one seeing his own sins in his and the Churches
sufferings, and best knowing the plague of his own heart) while they are, with
Daniel, Dan 9.
humbly prostrate before the majesty of God and the throne of his grace; some
people are of such impotent malice, that they make them the more the footstool
for their pride and insolency, thereby to exalt themselves the more against us.
I would have such monsters of cruelty and uncharitableness to know, that
however the Clergy of England do shrink to nothing before God, condemning all
their own righteousness, Phil. 3.9. Luke 17.10.
and themselves as unprofitable servants, that they may be found clothed with
the righteousness of Christ; yet as to the exorbitancies of some men's malice,
revenge, passion, covetousness, cruelty and ingratitude, which has vented it
self beyond all bounds of Christian charity, modesty and equity, against the
whole frame of the Church of England, against all its Ministry and Ministers,
as well Presbyters as Bishops, great and small, good and bad, one and all, no
man can hinder me or them from this just plea for our selves, in the words of
soberness and truth. Acts 26.2.5.


First, whatsoever the Clergy of England (either as Bishops or inferior
Ministers) did enjoy and act according to the laws established, and agreeable
to their own consciences, they are, in those things, not to be blamed in the
least kind by any sober and wife man's censure: yet even for these chiefly it
is, that some subtle and silly people do most bitterly inveigh against them,
and in them against this whole Church and Nation; which must either be guilty
with the Clergy, or the Clergy must be free and unblameable with the
Parlaments and* whole people of the land, who chose, and by law imposed such
orders upon themselves and their Ministers.

Secondly, for the Clergies private failings and personal infirmities, either
immorall or indiscreet, to which, as frail men, they may be subject; in these
they desire to be the first accusers, and severest censurers of themselves:
which ingenuity is sufficient to silence the malice of the worst, to satisfy
the justice of the best, and to merit the pity as well as pardon of all
charitable Christians, who are not strangers to their own excess or defects.

Thirdly, Beyond these (which are but personal and occasional, and so venial
failings) the Clergy of England do defy, and challenge their severest
adversaries, to charge and convince any considerable number of them, either in
private parties and conventions, or in more public Synods and Convocations, of
having at any time conspired to broach or abet any Heresy or false Doctrine,
any gross Error, Schism or Apostasy, any Immorality or Exorbitancy, contrary
to Truth, Faith, and good manners.

That liberty which some of the Clergy conceived might honestly be indulged to
such people as were tired and exhausted with hard labor in the six days, for
their civil and sober recreation on the Lords day, or Christian Sabbath,
thereby to counterpoise those Jewish severities which they saw some men began
to urge and obtrude upon Christians, both as to the change and rest of that
day; (which quarrel is not yet dead in England) this (I am prone in charity to
believe) neither arose from any root of immorality in the advisers, nor
intended any fruits of impiety in the publishers, who were not ignorant how far
in such a Toleration they did conform to the judgment, and practice too, of
some foreign reformed Churches, and to the chief instruments of their
Reformation, who neither did nor do (even in Geneva) abhor, avoid, or forbid
modest, honest and seasonable recreations to servants and laboring people on
the Lords day. Although, for my part, I confess, I approve rather, according to
the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the Homily of the time and place of
prayer, that holy and strict observance generally used by the most cautious
Christians in England, which yet does allow such ingenuous relaxations of mind,
and motions on that day, as are neither impious nor scanlous, being at once far
removed from Judaick rigours, and from Heathenish riots; which medium was the
sense and practice too of the best and most of the Clergy in England, as to
that one point of the Christian Sabbath, or Lords day, which Justin Martyr
calls Sunday, (...), so sharply objected against some of them.

So then, as to any real enormities of opinions, or scandalous practices in
Religion, the Clergy of England (taken in their polity and integrality)
neither are, nor ever were guilty (since the Reformation) either in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, or Manners: which justification is as clear as the
noon-day's light, if not our selves, nor our homebred enemies, but the
Reformed Churches abroad, or the ancient and Primitive Churches might be our
Judges. None but Papists and Separatists, or Anabaptists and Schismatics, have
ever condemned or suspected the Church or Clergy of England of any corruption
in Doctrine, of any flaw in the Foundation, of any fraud in holy Institutions,
of any allowed licentiousness in our Conversations, of any undecency in our
Devotions, of any superstition in our religious Administrations; in all which,
according to the directions of Gods Word, by the assistance of Gods holy
Spirit, through faith in the merits and mediation of the Son of God our only
Savior Jesus Christ, we worshipped the only true God, who is blessed for ever.

As to the point of Church Discipline, wherein some men were so clamorous and
importune, as if there had been no health in this Church, because it did not
take their physic, which it needed not; as the laws had not enjoined all those
ancient severities and strictnesses of penances, because neither the temper of
the times nor men's spirits would bear them; so the wise Bishops, and discreet
Ministers under them, did so manage this point of Church Discipline for many
years, by their care and vigilance, their good doctrine and exemplary lives,
their fatherly monitions and charitable corrections (as far as the laws gave
them leave) that they happily attained to the real use and best end of all
Church Discipline, which is the Churches peace and preservation in purity and
honor, in sincerity and conspicuity of true Religion: whose interests might
(possibly) have been carried higher, as to the point of Discipline, if the
Clergy of England had been furnished with such a latitude of power as
Primitive Bishops and Presbyters both enjoyed and exercised; which the softness
and delicacy of this Age would hardly endure, especially when once the
passions, novelties and ambitions of men were carried on, under the pretexts of
Reformation and new Discipline; in which some men resolved never to be
satisfied, till all things fell under the tuition and gubernation of their own
factions: unless all Church Power be in some men's hands, no Church Government
is worth a button.

Not but that the remissness of some Church Governors, and the rigours of
others (according to their private tempers, judgments and passions) might
(sometime) by their excesses or defects (possibly) displease more calm and
moderate men; as warping too much on either hand, from that medium and
rectitude of charity, discretion, legality and constancy, which the Canons of
the Church intended, Its constitution, health and peace required, especially in
the peevishness and touchiness of those times, when many Philistines and
Dalilahs lay in wait to betray and destroy the Church of England.

Yet amidst these seeming exorbitances of some Churchmen, it may with truth be
affirmed, and is by all experience confirmed, that the state of Christian and
Reformed Religion, for doctrine, manners and government, for piety, charity and
proficiency, was far better, both in England and in Wales, than it now is, or
is ever like to be, under those sad effects to which some men's fury, faction
and confusion seek to reduce this Church. So then the male-administrations
truly charged upon some Church Governors heretofore, had not so bad an
influence upon this Church and the Reformed Religion, as the later want of able
and fit Governors, after the ancient way of Church Government, has now
produced every where.

For the defects and inordinacies of some private Ministers (which can be no
wonder, where there were above ten thousand of them) I neither approve nor
patronize them in the least kind; only I plead in behalf of the whole order
and function, as it stood in this Churches constitution, that a few Ministers
faults ought not, in any justice or reason, to be odiously charged upon the
whole Church or their profession, no more than the fall of some Angels is
imputable to the whole Angelick nature. Nor do I see any reason why the
infirmities or deformities of some Clergymen (and those not many in
comparison) should be more a stain and reproach to their calling, than other
men's misdemeanors are to their either civil or military professions: in which
though there ever will be some Cheats and Pettifoggers, others Quacks and
Mountebanks, a third cowards and traitors; yet these do not diminish the just
honor and use of learned Lawyers, discreet Physicians, or gallant Soldiers,
whose employments are then liberal and ingenuous, when they are honest and
useful to the Commonwealth.

It were a madness to quarrel with all Candles, and put them out, because some
are small, others want snuffing, a third sort burn dimly, and have (as we say)
Thieves in them: the foggs and vapors rising from the earth, and often darkening
the Suns light, are no diminution to its native luster, which is the greatest
visible blessing in the world, as a good Bishop and Ministry is in the Church:
nor may the miscarriages of some Bishops and Presbyters in the Church of
England be cast as reproaches, or made disparagements to their holy orders, much
less to the whole Church; especially when we consider that the defects and
faults of some Clergymen in England were mightily recompensed, yea, and
over-balanced by that learning, piety, industry and virtue, which was generally
competent, and in many of them so eminent, that I believe the whole world did
not exceed them, and few in any Church did match them; yea many, both Bishops
and other Ministers, who seemed less plausible or popular in their preaching,
were yet not less sound in their doctrine, potent in their writing, prudent in
their governing, and exemplary in their godly lives, having that in height and
depth, which others had in breadth and length.

Who but persons of egregious ignorance or profligate impudence, without wit,
modesty, or conscience, can or dare deny, what (blessed be God) is and ever
will be most evident to all the world, that ever since the happy Reformation of
the Church of England, there have been, and still are (though their number
seems now much diminished by death, and other disorders, without any due
recruiting) such Clergymen (both Bishops and Presbyters) who for all worth,
divine and humane, will be had (as they deserve) in everlasting and honorable
remembrance?

After-ages, more remote from partiality, passion and faction, will better know
how to value them by the want of them, than this Age has done, which did
sometime enjoy them, and still might, if having had so liberal experience of
their other Christian virtues and Ministerial abilities, in preaching,
praying, writing and living, it had not sought further to satisfy its
curiosity, by trying the patience and perseverance of many grave and good
Ministers; to which purpose the most heavy log-end of Christ's Cross is laid
upon many of them, (not only supplicia, but ludibria) silence, prisons and
poverty, which have befaln some of them, but undeserved shame, with popular
contempt; and this from their own contrymen, and from many of their own
converts: these now press upon their persons and profession too, threatening an
utter extinction of their ancient order, authority and succession in this
Church and Nation, if their enemies might have their wills upon them; which
(God be thanked) they have not yet obtained to the latitude of their malice,
though it has reached very far, God help us.

I know that the present sufferings of Bishops and other Ministers (as chief
members of the Church of England) have been, and still are, in many men's eyes,
the greatest signs and indications of their sins; vulgar justice ever judging
those men criminous whom they see calamitous: like dogs in a country village,
which are ready to fly upon any strange one, not for any offense he gives
them, but because they see some currs have begun not only to bark at him, but
to bite and worry him. The plebs or common people are first injurious, and then
censorious; Prosperity and Power are their great Idols; they easily trample
upon those Gods whose hands and feet are off; they conclude them unworthy of
any Resurrection, who are once cast down and buried by them. Nothing is more
common with the community of people, Psalm. 73.15.
than to condemn the generation of Gods children, who have generally been
rather passive than pragmatical. Holy Polycarp is called for, as an Atheist, to
be sacrificed in the fire of vulgar zeal; S. Paul not fit to live; Acts 22.22.
Christ himself worthy to be crucified, if the rabble may have their vote;
Curiosum genus ad cognoscenda^ vitam alienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam suam.
Aug. conf. l. 10. c. 3.
the chief part of whose innocence consists in finding fault with others that
are vastly better than themselves. I believe that if the Bishops and Ministers
of this Church had been stoned by none but such as had John 8.7.
not faults and infirmities equal to, nay exceeding theirs, they had to this
day been untouched.

To whose score and account this (now) is added, that they must needs be great
sinners, since they are so great sufferers; they cannot but be murderers, on
whose hands people see such vipers hanging. Acts 28.4.
Thus carnal and sensual Christians are prone to judge, Inde incipit
beatitudo judicio divino, ubi aerumna aestimatur humana. Amb. off. l. 1. c. 16.
who are strangers to the cross of Christ; not understanding that the
afflictions of Christians are mysterious, as well as then faith, and their
Sufferings as well as their Sacraments; that God does, as our heavenly Heb.
12.5.
Father, many times love most where he most rebukes; that they have often most of
his heart, from whom he most hides his face as to temporal prosperity, and on
whom his hand lies heaviest as to visible chastisements; which if they mend us,
they argue not enmity, but love. Nequaquam dolenda est afflictio infirmitatum,
quam intelligimus esse matrem virtutum. Salvian.
It is no token, that because he punishes our faults, therefore he hates our
persons, much less our calling and profession: the Psalm. 23.
rod and staff of God lying upon us, or lifted up against us, is not to drive
us from him, but, as a Shepherds crook, to draw us nearer to him; nor is it
with any design to scare us from our duties, or to make us desert our station,
or to force us to renounce our Ordination to his holy service (as some have
shamefully done) but as with goads to excite us the more to persist in our
office steadfastly, and to discharge our Ministry the more diligently: so that
it is but a plebeian and fanatic fancy from hence to imagine, that the God of
order is now (after 1600. years) grown out of love with Primitive and
Apostolic Episcopacy, or with regular and orderly Presbytery in his Church,
because he afflicts both Bishops and Presbyters; or that Jesus Christ, the
Ancient of days, the Alpha and Omega of immutable wisdom, now designs to set
up a mere novelty of parity and popularity in his Church, which tend
experimentally, and so most apparently, to the fedity, nullity and Anarchy of
Religion in this and all other Churches; whose constitution may be commendable,
although the execution of things may be blameable and punishable upon the merit
of personal defaults, not Ecclesiastical defects.

No Chaldean, no Magician, no Soothsayer, no Astrologer, no Enchanter can spell
any such meaning, as to Gods displeasure against the frame and constitution of
the Church of England, Dan. 5.
out of that handwriting which seems to be directed against the Clergy and
Ministers of England. It Is true, every one ventures to read and interpret it as
they list, to flatter their own parties, opinions, passions and interests: so
did the Philosophers, the Heathens, the Atheists, the Idolaters, the Scoffers,
the Julians, the Apostates, the Heretics, the Schismatics of old, grossly
mistake the meaning of those hot and sharp persecutions, which often befell the
Primitive Christians and Orthodox professors of faith in Christ crucified,
concluding they deserved true Crosses, who so much gloried in the Cross of
Christ; not knowing what Theriak God makes out of those Serpents that sting us,
nor what Antidotes he extracts out of those deadly poisons which destroy us.
The royal Title over Christ's head was never more deserved than when he was
hanging upon the Cross; for on that, as a King on his Throne, he most
conquered, and after triumphed over both his and his Churches greatest enemies:
nor were his sufferings the least of his solemnities and glories, his Father
being never better pleased with him than when he cried out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?

I am persuaded in like sort, that the great afflictions now incumbent upon the
Clergy and Church of Engl. do no way signify, that It or they are forsaken of
God, any more then Christ then was; nor do they import any dislike that the God
of peace and order has against the respective office and subordination of
Presbytery, or the ordination and eminent gubernation of Bishops, as they were
designed and established in the Church of England, according to the Primitive
and Catholic pattern: for both these God has heretofore highly and signally
approved; if employing, blessing and prospering of them in his Church, if
accepting so many holy sacrifices and services from them, be as much a sign of
Gods approving their function, as his now afflicting them is a sign of his
reproving their faults.

But the plain sense of our sufferings is, (as Dominus probari familiam suam
voluit; and quia traditam nobis divinitus disciplinam pax longa corruperat,
ac^ntem fidem, and pae^e dixerim dormientem, censura coel^stis erexit. Cypr. de
lapsis.
S. Cyprian observes) The Lord punishes us, that he may bring us to repentance
for our sins, both personal and professionall; for those disorders by which we
blemished or profaned our holy orders. It Is not the government in it self, but
our own mis-governments, that have offended God: he aims not to consume that
primitive and pure gold that is in this Church, but to refine us from that
dross we had as men contracted. Nor do I doubt but God intends to improve us to
his service in better times; of which we may not despair, if we find our selves
amended by those bitter potions which in bad times, and by evil men, a good God
administers to us for our health.

How glorious will both godly Bishops and orderly Presbyters in England appear
to this Church, and to all the world, when, coming out of this fiery furnace,
they shall shine brighter than ever they did, with the love of Christ, and of
his Church, both as to the care of those private charges and public
inspections committed to them in excellent order, and administered by due
authority, when neither pride nor envy, pomp nor popularity, neither the upper
nor the lower springs of ambition (rising from Prince or people) shall distract
the counsels, or divide the hearts, or cross the endeavors of venerable
Bishops, and worthy Presbyters, and pious people, from that Christian
subordination, unanimity and conjunction, which best becomes them as men and
Christians; which Ignatius so highly commends, and which is so necessary, both
as to counsel and order, government and proficiency, for the good of all sorts
of Christians in any Church?

Mean time it is no small mercy that exacts from some Ministers, and enables
them to give public experiments of true Christian courage, patience,
magnanimity and constancy, which are our highest conformity to Christ; by which
the world may see, that the honor of true Christian Bishops and Ministers does
consist as much (or more) in their sufferings, as in their speaking and doing
well; in their losses, 1 Cor 4 8, 9, etc.
as well as in their enjoyments of all things. Then will Princes, Parlaments
and People, think us most worthy to enjoy the ancient estates, honors,
liberties, privileges and immunities, which the pristine piety, charity,
munificence and gratitude of your and their forefathers bestowed upon the
Clergy, and devoted to God, when they shall see that, without these, we are
not only willing, but zealous to serve God, and solicitous to save their
souls, as the greatest reward and wages of our work: nor will the incumbent
distresses upon the worthy Clergy of England much abate the love and value of
them, with those that are worthy of them: certainly, as men's sins should be
esteemed their greatest afflictions, so no men's sufferings are to be counted
their sins.

If any Ministers have justly suffered, as unable, and so intruders; as
incorrigible, and so unworthy; having had the justice of being accused by two
or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. Tit. 3.10.
and the charity of receiving two or three admonitions, before they were
suspended, silenced, sequestered and ejected, giving no hopes of their being
amended; yet even the grossest defects and immoralities of such Clergymen
(who are indeed the shame and reproach of their profession) may not be imputed
to, or revenged upon the whole calling and Church; considering that the Church
of England, by her good Laws, wholesome Canons, and wise Constitutions, did
strictly require, not only the best minds and abilities, but the best manners
and examples, both from Bishops and Presbyters, agreeable to those respective
duties and instructions set before and charged upon them at their ordination,
which they were not only to know, but to do; not only to believe, but to
live: that so the Ministers of this Church might appear not only the best of
civil men, but the best of Christians; who ought to be holy men, and the
holiest of holy men, as specially consecrated to the service of Christ and his
Church. It was by the Church intended, that Churchmen should be the most
savoury salt in themselves, and careful seasoners of others: if some proved
unsavory, yet I am sure it is most unseasonable and unseasoned rashness to
cast all Bishops and Presbyters, yea the whole order and economy of the
Ministry and Church of England, upon the dunghill of vulgar contempt; among
whom (beyond all dispute) were so many most accomplished Preachers, and
excellent Practisers of true Christianity, whose breath was so good, that their
lungs could not be bad.

But if there had been a visible and general Apostasy in many, or the most
part, yea in all the Bishops and Ministers of England, from their duty; yet (I
conceive) this is no argument to destroy that holy order and Evangelicall
function, from whose declared rules and injunctions in the Church they had
degenerated: for neither the infirmities nor the presumptions of men ought to
annull that office, or abolish that authority which is Divine: Christ's
commission which is given to the Church, must not be voyded or cancelled by
reason of any Ministers omissions. Sacred institutions (such as the Ministry
and government of Christ's Church are) ought to continue, notwithstanding the
intervening of man's ignorance, error, profaneness, or Idolatry. The plagues
and leprosies arising from men's persons, and adhering to them, are not
imputable to that place, power, station and authority which they have in the
Church. Men may be unworthy of their holy function, but the function it self is
not made unworthy; no more than Aarons joining with the people in making the
golden calf, Exodus 32.25.
did disparage the sacred dignity of that Priestly office, to which he was by
the Lord designed. 1 Samuel 2.12.
The enormous folly of Eli's sons did not make the sacrifices they offered of
none effect, nor yet nullify the honor and office of that Priesthood
wherewith they were duly invested. Judas his being an Hypocrite, a Thief, a
Traitor and a Devil, yet did not abrogate that Apostolical office and
Episcopal authority which he had received from Christ equally with the other
Apostles, Act. 1.17, and 20.
until by open Apostasy he fell into open rebellion, desperation and perdition.

Which gross and open Apostasy, either from Christ or his Gospel, from the
Christian faith or their Ministerial office and ordination, cannot with any
truth or forehead be charged upon the Clergy or Chapter of England, who (for the
main) both in the consecration of Bishops and ordination of Presbyters, in the
administration of holy duties, and execution of their offices, generally, and
for the main, kept to the Ancient, Primitive and Apostolic customs of all the
Churches of Christ since the Apostles days: so that whatever blame, charge, or
reproach is cast upon the Clergy or Church of England, must equally lie upon
all Christian Churches, since the first complete and settled constitution of any
Church.

I know the mouths of some men, like moths, and their tongues, like worms, are
prone to corrode by infinite scruples, scandalls and reproaches, all the beauty
of the Church of England, with all the merit and honor of its Clergy: but
(blessed be God) we stand or fall with the Catholic Church of Christ, with the
whole order, race and Apostolic succession of Christian Bishops and
Presbyters: we more fear the rudeness and heaviness of men's hands, than the
sharpness of their wits, or weight of their arguments, which are as spiteful,
and yet as vain, as the vipers biting of the file; when from some Ministers
personal failings, they fasten their venomous teeth upon the whole state and
constitution of the Church of England.

In whose behalf I am neither afraid nor ashamed to appeal to you (my most
honored contrymen) as the nearest and best Judges in the world of this
matter: First, as to the Church of England in its godly care and Christian
constitution, whether you do believe, or really find, that in any thing it has
been wanting which is necessary for the good of your souls: Next, as to the
Bishops and Ministers of England, whether (abating personal infirmities) they
have not generally been, ever since the Reformation, both able and faithful in
the work of the Lord; whether (as Mr. Scio eversionem Papismi, and
reformationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, post Deum and reges, deberi praecipue
Episcoporum Doctrinae and industriae. Pet. du Moulin. ep. 3. ad episc. Wint.
Peter du Moulin confesses) you and your forefathers do not chiefly owe to
them both the beginning and continuance of the Reformed as well as Christian
Religion, next under the mercy of God, and the care of your pious Princes;
whether the tenuity or weakness of some Ministers, who had less abilities, and
perhaps too little encouragements, were not abundantly supplied by the eminent
sufficiencies of many others: and if every Diocese had not an excellent Bishop
at all times, or every Parish enjoyed not a very able Preacher; yet I am sure
neither of the two Provinces in England, nor any one County ever wanted, since
the Reformation, either excellent Bishops or excellent Preachers in them, to a
far greater store than was to be enjoyed in Primitive times, when Dioceses were
larger, and petty Parishes not at all in the Church of Christ.

So then I may justly quere, whether one odious century of Ministers, (branded
(some of them) for scandalous, because they were more exactly conform to the
Laws and Customs established in the Church of England) were a just ground to
reproach the whole Clergy, or to abolish the order, function and succession,
both of Bishops and Presbyters, which some men aim at (officious compilers of
that uncomely Cent^*)

Whether they might not with as much truth and more reason have enumerated the
scandalous livings of England, as so many not convicted but supposed scandalous
Ministers; many of whose maintenance was worse than their manners, and more
unworthy of their profession:

Whether any thing truly objectable against any Bishop or Minister of England
(as scandalously weak, wicked and unworthy) may not with as much more truth be
objected against their severest enemies.

No man in England, not grossly ignorant, or passionately impotent, can deny
what I here affirm and proclaim to all the world, That the Clergy of England,
both Governors and governed (taking them in their integrality or unity, as
they were esteemed a third estate in the Body politic, or as an
Ecclesiastical fraternity and corporation) have been not only tolerable, but
commendable, yea admirable instruments of Gods glory, and the good of men's
souls, in this Church and Nation:

That as they did at first in the morning of the Reformation, so ever since,
during the heat and burden of the day, they have with great learning and godly
zeal, with Christian courage, constancy, integrity and wisdom, every way
asserted, vindicated and maintained the truth, purity and power, also the
peace, order and honor of Christian and Reformed Religion, against Atheists
and Infidels, against the superstitions of the Romanists on one side, and the
factions of the Schismatics on the other. Nehem. 4.17.
Nor have they only built with the trowel, but fought also with the sword of
the Word. What Giantly error, what Papal Goliath has ever appeared defying this
Reformed Church, whom some excellent Bishops, and other learned Divines who
were Episcopal, have not encountered, prostrated, confounded and beheaded? the
spoils and trophies of them are still extant in their works, as eternal
monuments of the incomparable prowess, worth and merit of the English Clergy.

What wholesome, saving and necessary truth did they ever wilfully deprive You
of? In what holy institution and ordinance of Jesus Christ have they ever
conspired to defraud or diminish you? In what holy work or duty have they come
short of any? In what excellent doctrine, gift, grace, or virtue have they been
so defective, as not to give your forefathers, your selves, and all the world,
most illustrious proofs and generous examples?

To which testimony no ingenuous, knowing, and conscientious Christian can deny
his assent, if he has ever made use of their excellent lives or labors; to
which (as I formerly touched) God himself has set to the broad seal, and great
witness of his own Spirit, upon the hearts and consciences of many thousands,
both still living, and long ago dead. These, at the grand Assize, or day of
Gods righteous judgment, will (I am confident) highly justify before men and
Angels the Church of England, and its Clergy or Ministry, as blessed means of
their salvation: these will convince the gainsayers, enemies, blasphemers and
destroyers of this Church, and its Ministry, of their envy, partiality,
blindness, unthankfulness, and malice; also of their unreasonable lusts and
injurious passions: for nothing but such black and hellish clouds, could ever
hinder men, after an hundred years experience, from seeing, owning, esteeming
and enjoying so great and glorious a light of grace and mercy, truth and peace,
as has shined in the Church of England, ever since the Reformation, while the
golden Candlesticks were unbroken, the beautiful order and proportion of their
branches unconfounded, the burning lamps of Bishops and Presbyters in them
either not wholly extinguished, or not snuffed so close as might put them quite
out, in respect of that pristine beauty and luster, love and honor, which they
formerly enjoyed and deserved in this as all well-composed Christian Churches.

What wise and gracious Christian (comparing, as the builders of the later
Temple, former times with these) does not with sadness of soul see and confess,
that the general state of this Church, the visible face of the Christian
Reformed Religion, the tempers of men's hearts, and the pra^^ses of their lives,
were heretofore, both as to truth, order and peace, to piety, morality and
charity, incomparably beyond what now they commonly are, or are like to be,
while so much emulation, faction and confusion prevail among us, which are the
dry nurses of ignorance, Atheism and irreligion? Blessed be God, in former
times, while worthy Bishops presided, and discreet Presbyters assisted them in
the great work of teaching and governing the Church of God in Eng. O what
beauty, what order, what harmony, what unity, what gravity, what solidity, what
candor, what charity, what sobriety, what sanctity, what sincerity, what
improvements, what perseverance, what correspondency, what constancy was there
generally to be seen among Christian Pastors, and true Professors under their
potent Ministry and prudent inspection!

Who is able to express or conceive (unless he had some experience of those
blessed times and tempers) what sound and judicious knowledge, what fruitful
faith, what hearty love, what discreet zeal, what severe repentings, what
fervent prayers, what earnest sighs, what godly sorrows, what unfeigned tears,
what just terrors, what unspeakable comforts, what well-grounded hopes, what
spiritual joys, what heavenly meditations, what holy conversations, what
humble softnesses, what diligent assurances, what longing desires, what
unwearied endeavors, what patient expectations, what tender compassions, what
meekness of obedience, what conscientious submissions were observable in the
general frame of good Christians carriage, as to God and their Savior, so to
their Superiors, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, in order to their own souls
and their neighbors good? And all this blessedness was enjoyed while some
mendid pitifully complain, that a few Ceremonies pinched their consciences;
that a white garment dazeled their eyes; that the ancient and transient sign
of the Cross crucified both the Sacrament and their senses; that kneeling at
the Communion bowed down their souls even to the ground; that the devout
Liturgy loaded their spirits; that grave and godly Bishops pressed
Church Order and Discipline too hard upon them.

Yet then (even then) it was, that Learning flourished, Knowledge multiplied,
Graces abounded, excellent preaching thrived, Sacraments were duly administered
and most devoutly received, the fruits of Gods Spirit were every way mightily
diffused, Justice and common honesty were practiced, hospitable kindness
exercised, Christian charity maintained, plain-heartedness and good works
abounded; without any such crafts and policies, such frauds and factions, such
jealousies and distances, such malice and animosities, such rudeness and
disorders, such insolences and hypocrisies, such indignities and diminutions,
as are now of later years generally cast upon the Reformed Religion, and those
Preachers of it that adhere to the constitution and communion of the Church of
England; who are implacably maligned by those men, who in persecuting and
oppressing them and this Church, do boast as if they had done God very good
service, and highly advanced the interests of Jesus Christ.

Which Themselves will then begin to doubt and disb^^ieve, when the heat of
their passions is allayed, when their popular fallacies and froths are
vanished, when their secular designs are frustrated, when their high metal is
abated, when their strength begins to fail them, when their sectators,
flatterers, feeders and abettors are scattered from them, when the tide of
successes is come to its ebb, when the terrors of death are upon them, when
their consciences shall give them a true and impartial prospect of their
actions and passions, when they shall see how little holy fire there was amidst
so great a smoke, how much dross and trash has been their superstructures, how
much their pragmatick spirits have ruined, how little they have edified, as to
any thing of true, serious, solid and useful Religion, beyond what was
formerly enjoyed to a satiety in England, while they make it their masterpiece
of piety and reformation, utterly to debase the Clergy, to divide Christian
people, and to demolish the whole frame of the Church of England. The great day
of burning and refining will best discover and determine what the hearts and
works, the purposes and practices of such men have been.

Mean time, that I may not be deceived in my own persuasions or prejudices (who
possibly may be partial to my mother the Church of England,) I crave the
favor of your upright judgment, as wise Gentlemen and worthy Christians; who,
remotest from all designs and discontents, have most impartially observed the
rise and progress, the variations and depravations, the folly and fury, the
divisions and confusions of some men's spirits and practices in England (who
have earnestly sought, and still do, to obtrude their fancifull, deformed and
many-formed Reformations upon this Church, as much, God knows, against Her
will, as a loathsome potion is against the stomach of an healthful patient.)

Do you, O my noble Contrymen ( bona fide) (apart from fears and flatteries,
which are below persons of true honor and piety) do you in earnest find the
temper and constitution of Religion, as Christian or Reformed, either its
inward power, or its outward polity, any way bettered and advanced in this
Nation, as to the visible form of it, in essentials or ornamentals, in Doctrine
or Discipline, in faith or good works, in profession or reputation, in order or
peace, in solidity or decency, in authority or charity? Do you find it in your
own present comforts and enjoyments, or in your hopes of after-blessings upon
your posterity?

If I had the opportunity to see your faces (O honored Gentlemen and beloved
Contrymen) I should (no doubt) easily discover by the clouds and dejections
of your looks, what your thoughts, fears, griefs and sympathies are, in the
behalf of the Reformed Religion, and the present state of the Church of England.

While some of Her destroyers walk with haughty looks, triumphant spirits, and
threatening eyes; You are full of tears, sighs and sorrows, to see the Church of
England (sometimes so amiable, venerable and formidable, for the beauty,
authority and majesty of Christian and Reformed Religion in it) so much now
divided, impaired, debased, deformed, and in danger to be destroyed. And this,
after so many public protestations, so many specious pretensions, so many
pious precipitations, so many Parlamentary heats and votes, Ordinances and
Acts, to maintain the true Religion, established in the Church of England.
After all which, little other effects appear, save only these: the hypocrisy,
formality, coldness and unprofitableness of some Christians, have been punished
by the rudeness, rashness, fancifulness and uncharitableness of others; who
neglecting cordially to advance the great and joint interests of Gods glory,
this Churches peace, their own and others souls good, have rather raised,
fomented small factions, and carried on the poor concernments of different and
divided parties, in order to their own private profit and sinister advantages.

Hence, hence these luxations, distortions, dislocations, weaknesses,
deformities, and almost dissolutions, which have befaln the Church of England,
and the Reformed Religion, once happily established, professed and prospering
in it; which pejorations, as to the piety, peace and honor of this Nation, no
man that has eyes to see, and a heart to be sensible of, can behold, without
sad and serious deploring:

While he sees, not only the outward order, polity and harmony of Religion
worsted, torn and shattered; but the inward bands of Christian love and charity
so ravelled, broken and cut asunder, that almost all people in all places, in
Cities, in Parishes, in Families, in Churches, are full of bitter feuds,
envies, enmities, animosities and Antipathies. Christians of different
principles and parties do not love the presence or aspect of each other; they
look with jealous, supercilious, contemptuous, evil eyes upon one another; they
do not willingly meet in one place, nor correspond in civil affairs. As for
religious unity and mutual society, they perfectly abhor (as needles touched
with the different poles of the lodestone) any communion with one another in
any sacred duties and Christian mysteries: they thunder out Anathema's against
each other: they have different Churches or Bodies, different Ministers and
Bishops, different designs and interests, different spirits and principles;
each studying as much to depress and destroy their rivals and dissenters, as to
advance their own sides and parties; which dream much more of swords and
pistels, of fights and victories, of blood and vastation, whereby to set up
that Empire and dominion which each affects in their new ways of Religion,
than of humility, obedience, charity, and other Christian graces.

The Evangelicall exhortations of Christ and his blessed Apostles to all
Christians, John 13.34.
to love one another, to live in peace, to be of one heart and one mind in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 1.10.
to speak the same things, to walk worthy of their holy calling, Ephesians. 4.3.
Coloss. 3.13.
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, to be gentle, meek,
courteous, tenderly affected, forbearing, forgiving one another; these holy
charms, these pious and pathetick conjurings, these divine prayings, and
charitable beseechings, are much forgotten. Those Scriptures which join faith
and repentance, zeal and meekness, righteousness and true holiness, piety and
charity, patience and perseverance together, are practically interpreted, as if
they were mere Apocrypha, unfit rules, blunt tools, weak engines, to carry on
the great designs that some pretend for Christ and His Saints; who take their
model for a new Jerusalem, more out of the dark descriptions of the Apocalypse,
than out of the clear revelations of all the Gospels and Epistles.

So that Christian and Reformed Religion being very much resolved into fancy
and faction, there must necessarily follow great abatings, not only of
Christian charity, but even of morality; infinite degeneratings, as of men's
passions and affections, so of their actions, from Christian sincerity to
hypocrisy, from common equity and humanity, to mutual insolences,
animosities, cruelties. Plead to some men Scriptures or Statutes, laws of God
or man; they reply, Providence, Power, Successes: urge the commandments of
the second Table, the holy Precepts, the humble, meek and orderly examples of
Saints in Old or New Testament; there are that retort new lights, inward
dictates, spiritual liberty, special impulses, extraordinary cases.

In which they hold, as once a person of very supercilious gravity, also of
versute and vertigenous policy, (a true Protestant Preacher, who had passed
through all shapes, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, and is now ready for
the metamorphosis of a Lutheran Superintendency;) he told me as his opinion,
That it is in many cases lawful for Moses to do what Pharaoh may not; and for
the Israelites to do what the Egyptians (as men) might not do: that there are
(after the Gnostick principles, Iren. l. 3. c. 15.
which Irenaeus tells us of) Gospel-liberties, which holy men may sometimes
take upon heroic motions, and extraordinary impulsions upon their spirits and
fancies, which those that are yet under legal bondages and restraints may not
venture upon, nor are capable of, because they (are psychici, not pneumatici,
they) may have principles of law and reason, but have not the privy seal or
warrant of Gods Spirit dictating or moving within them. This was answered to me
by that sage Dictator, whose answers have more of the Heathen oracles
ambiguity, than of divine infallibility; when I sillily urged those fixed rules
of justice, and unflexible bounds of equity and charity, of righteousness and
true holiness, which I (simply) conceived were impartially given in the written
Word of God to all mankind, and specially to all Christians, to whom that Word
is now delivered, and owned by them, as only able to make the man of God
perfect to every good word and work. Certainly it was ever esteemed strange
Divinity among Orthodox Christians, to hold, that there are some special
indulgences and providential temporary dispensations given to some sort of
Christians above others, to act at some times and conjunctures, in such ways
as themselves must needs confess to he, by the clear letter of the Law and word
of God, injurious, unjustifiable and unwarrantable, that is, in plain terms,
unlawful, wicked and abominable: which evils ought not in any case to be done
that good may come thereby, no more than Lot's daughters might lie with their
father, to prevent their barrenness, or the defect of posterity.

Hence have followed those strange rapes, which some men's lusts have
endeavored to commit upon the Christian and Reformed Religion, against the
known laws both of God and man: hence those presumptuous sins, those enormous
impieties, for which no Apology, but made and affected necessity, is alleged,
which none but God Almighty can convince, confute and revenge: hence those
convulsions, faintings, swoonings and dyings, which are befaln the Church of
England, and its holy profession, the Reformed Religion; which heretofore was a
pure and unspotted Virgin, free from the great offense, constant to her
principles and duties both to God and man, always victorious by her patience.
This seems now besmeared all over with blood; this is sick, deformed and
ashamed of her self: so many sanguinary and sacrilegious spirits pretend to
court and engross her; such foul spots are found upon Her, which are not the
spots of Gods children, and which no nitre, no soap, no fullers earth, no
palliations or pretensions of humane wit, policy, or necessity, can wash away,
or make clean, til He plead Her cause, and take away Her reproach, whose love
induced him to shed his own precious blood for his Church; a noble, eminent,
uniform and beautiful part of which, I must ever own the Church of England to
have been.

Of whose former holy and healthful constitution I am daily the more assured,
by those modern eruptions and corruptions, defections and infections, errors
and extravagancies, blasphemies and impudicities, which have so fiercely
assaulted and grievously wasted the Truths, the Morals, the Sanctities, the
Solemnities, the Mysteries and Ministrations, the Government and Authority, the
whole Order and Constitution of the Church of England: clearly evincing to me,
that this Church was heretofore not only tolerably, but most commendably
reformed, and happily established upon the pillars of piety and prudence,
verity and unity, purity and charity. Nor do I doubt but the blessed Apostle S.
Paul, with all those Primitive planters and Reformers of Churches, would have
given the right hand of fellowship to the Christian Bishops, Presbyters, and
people of this Church of England, cheerfully communicating with us in all holy
things, blessing God, Col. 2.5.
and greatly rejoicing to have beheld that power and peace, that stedfastness
and proficiency, that beauty, order and unity, which was so admirably settled,
and happily preserved many years in this Church, by the joint consent and
suffrage of the Nation; Princes, Parlaments and People cheerfully giving up
their names to Christ, 2 Cor. 8.5.
and willingly yielding themselves to the Lord, and to his Ministers. Nor do I
believe those Primitive and large-hearted Christians, Acts 4.34.
who brought the price of their estates, and laid it down at the Apostles feet,
testifying their esteem of all things but as loss and dung in comparison of the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, that these would have ever repined
or envied at the riches, plenty, civil honors, peace and prosperity, wherewith
the Governors and Ministers of Christ's Church were here endowed. No, those
first fruits of the Gospel had too good hearts to have evil eyes, because the
eyes of Princes, Matthew. 20.15.
Peers and people had been good to the Clergy, investing them with that double
honor, which the Spirit of God thinks them worthy of, 1 Timothy 5.17.
while they rule well, and labor in the Word and Doctrine; so as the godly
Bishops and Presbyters of the Church of England did abundantly, Phil. 2.16.
since the Reformation: nor was their labor of love in vain in the Lord.

What was really amiss or remiss in any Ministers, as to their minds or
manners, (as some Errata's we find even in those Pastors and Churches which
were of the Apostolical print, the very first and best Edition) certainly
there wanted not sufficient authority and wisdom, skill or will, in the
Governors of Church and State, to have reformed all things in such a way of
Christian moderation, as should have gratified no men's envies, revenges,
ambitions, covetousness, and the like inordinate passions; but have kept all
within those bounds of piety, justice, charity and discretion, which would have
satisfied all wise and honest men's desires and consciences.

Such an Apostolical spirit and method of Reformation, as would have cleared
the rust, and not consumed the metal, sodered up the flaws, but not battered
down the whole frame of so goodly a Church; this spirit might have mended all
things really amiss in England, at a far easier and cheaper rate, Luke 9.54.
than either calling for fire from heaven, or calling in the Scots to quench
our intestine flames with oil. To purge the English floor from all chaff, there
was no need to raise up such fierce winds, as the Devil did when he overthrew
the whole house, and oppressed all Jobs children with the rubbish and ruin
both of superstructures and foundations. Job. 1.19.


No work requires more wary, wise, and tender hearts and hands too, than
Church-work, or that which men call Reformation of Religion, which easily
degenerates to high deformities, if bunglers, that are rash, rude, deformed and
unskilful, undertake it. Nothing is more obvious, than for Empiricks to bring
down high and plethorick constitutions to convulsions and consumptions, by too
much letting blood, and other excessive evacuations: those are sad purgations
of Churches, which with threatening some malignant humors, do carry away the
very life, spirit, and soul of Religion, the whole order, beauty, unity and
being of a Church, especially so large, so famous, so reformed, so flourishing
an one as the Chapter of Engl. was; which some men's ignorance, malice and excess
has a long time aimed at, impatient not to forsake, yea and quite destroy both
It and all its true Ministers, to whose learning and labors they owe whatever
spiritual gifts, Christian graces, privileges or comforts they can with truth
pretend to. All which, I believe, they have not much bettered or increased
since their rude Separations and violent Apostasies, by which they have showed
themselves so excessively and unthankfully exasperated against the Fathers that
begat them, and the Mother that bare them; more like a generation of vipers,
full of poisonous passions, Mat. 3.7.
which swell the soul to proud and factious distempers, than like truly humble,
meek and regenerate Christians, who cannot be either so unholy, or so
unthankful, as to requite with shame, despite and wounds, 2 Timothy 3.2.
the womb that bare them, and the breasts that gave them suck; not feeding them
with fabulous Legends, superstitious inventions, or mere humane Traditions, but
with the sincere milk of Gods word, 1 Pet. 2.2
as it was contained in the holy Scriptures, which were the only constant
fountain from whence the Church of England drew and derived both its Doctrinals
and its Devotionals, its Ministry and Ministrations.

Of which truth, having such a cloud of witnesses, so many pregnant and
undeniable demonstrations before God and the world, before good Angels and
Devils, before men's own consciences in this Church, and before all other
reformed Churches round about: I suppose these are sufficient Testimonies in
the judgment of You (O my worthy Contrymen) and of all other sober
Christians, to vindicate the Church of England, that it never deserved, either
of Princes, Parlaments, or People, so great exhaustings and abasings, as some
men have sought to inflict upon Her.

Over which no tongue is so eloquent, no pen so pathetick, as to be able
sufficiently to express, eye no so melting, as to weep enough, no heart so soft
and diffusive of its sorrows, as worthily to lament, when they consider that
wantonness of wickedness, that petulant importunity, that superfluity of
malice, that unsatisfied cruelty of some men, who have endeavored to cast
whole cart-loads of injust reproaches, vulgar injuries, and shameful indignities
upon the whole Church of England, seeking to bury with the burial of an Ass,
either in the dunghill of Papal pride and tyranny, or popular contempt and
Anarchy, all its former renown and glory, its very name and being, together
with the office, order, authority, distinction and succession of its Ancient,
Apostolic, and Evangelical ministry, which has been the savor of life unto
life, 2 Cor. 2.15.
the mighty power of God to the conversion and salvation of many thousand souls
in the Church of England.

Whose sore Calamities and just Complaints having thus far presented to Your
consideration and compassion; it is now time for me to enquire after the causes
and occasions of its troubles, miseries, confusions, and feared vastations; in
order to find out the best methods and medicines for Her timely cure and happy
recovery, if God and man have yet any favor or compassion for Her.

The end of the first Book.
BOOK II. SEARCHING THE CAUSES AND OCCASIONS OF THE Church of England's decays.
CHAP. I.
BUt it is now time (most honored and worthy Contrymen) after so large and
just, so sore and true a complaint in behalf of the Church of England and the
Reformed Religion, (heretofore wisely established and unanimously professed in
this Nation) to look after the rise and original, the Causes and Occasions of
our Decays and Distempers, of our Maladies and Miseries, which by way of
prevention or negation I have (in the former Book) demonstrated to be no way
imputable to the former frame, state or constitution of the Church of England;
but they must receive their source from some other fountain. The search and
discovery of which is necessary, in order to a serious cure: (...). Hip. Non
sanant, sed mutan^ morbos. Fernel.
for rash and conjecturall applications to sick patients are prone (as learned
Physicians observe) to commute their maladies, or to run them out of one
disease into another, but not to cure any; turning Dropsies into Jaundise, and
Fevers into Consumptions. The greatest commendation of Physicians (next their
skill to discern) is, to use such freedom in their discoveries, and such
fidelity in their applyings, as may least flatter or conceal the disease.

In this disquisition or inquiry after the Causes and Occasions of our
Ecclesiastic distempers, I will not by an unwelcome scrutiny, or uncharitable
curiosity, search into those more secret springs and hidden impulsives, Mat.
15.19.
which proceed (as our Blessed Savior tells us) out of men's hearts, into their
lives and actions; such as are wrathful revenges, unchristian envies,
sacrilegious covetings, impotent ambitions, hypocritical policies, 2 Timothy 4.3.
1 Timothy 6.4, 5.
censorious vanities, pragmatick impatiencies, an itch after novelties; men's
over-valuing of themselves, and undervaluing of others; a secret delight in
mean and vulgar spirits, to see their betters levelled, exauctorated,
impoverished, abased, contemned; a general want of wisdom, meekness, humility
and charity; a plebeian petulancy and wanton satiety (even as to holy things)
arising from peace, plenty, and constancy of enjoying them.

Ephesians. 6.12.
These spiritual wickednesses, which are usually predominant in the high places
of men's souls, Revel. 2.24.
being ( Arcana Diaboli, the (...) and stratagemata Satanae) the secret
engines, depths and stratagems used by the Devil, to undermine the hearts of
Christians, to loosen the foundations of Churches, and to overthrow the best
settled Religion; being least visible and discoverable, for they are commonly
covered, as mines, with the smooth surfaces and turfs of zeal, sanctity,
reformation, scrupulosity, conscience, etc. these I must leave to that great
day, Revel. 2.23.
which will try men's works and hearts too, when men shall be approved and
rewarded, not according to their Pharisaick boastings, popular complyings, and
specious pretensions, but according to their righteous actions and honest
intentions.

Only this I may without presumption or uncharitableness judge, as to the
distempers of our times, and the ruinous state of the Church of England; that
many men, who have been very busy in new brewing and embroyling all things of
Religion, would never have so bestirred themselves to divide, dissipate and
destroy the peace and polity of this Church, if they had not been formerly
offended and exasperated, either by want of their desired preferment, which S.
Austin observes of Aerius, Doluisse fertur A^rius, quod quum ^sset Presbyter,
Episcopus non potuit ordinari. Aug. de Hae. es.
the great and only stickler of old against Bishops, or by some Animadversion,
which they called persecution; although it were no more than an exacting of
legal conformity, and either sworn or promised subjection, as to Canonical
obedience. Many men would have been quiet, if they had not hoped to gain by
rifling their Mother, and robbing their Fathers. Some at the first motions
might (perhaps) have good meanings and desires, as Eve had to grow wiser; but
they were soon corrupted by eating the forbidden fruit, by the unlawfulness of
those means, and extravagancy of those methods they used to accomplish them.
But God and men's own consciences will in due time judge between these men and
the Church of England, whether they did either intend or act wisely or
worthily, justly or charitably, gratefully or ingenuously. This I am sure if
they have the comfort of sincerity, as to their intent, they have the horror
of unsuccessfulness to humble them, as to the sad events which have followed
preposterous piety.

CHAP. II.
THe chiefest apparent cause, Inordinate liberty in religious affairs the
chief cause of m^series in the Church of Engl.
and most pregnant outward occasion of our Ecclesiastic mischiefs and miseries
(as I humbly conceive) arises from that inordinate liberty and immodest
freedom, which of later years, all sorts of people have challenged to
themselves in matters of Religion, presuming on such a Toleration and
Indulgence, as incourageth them to choose and adhere to what doctrine, opinion,
party, persuasion, fancy or faction they list, under the name of their
Religion, their Church fellowship and communion: nor are people to be blanked
or scared from any thing which they list to call their Religion, unless it have
upon it the mark of Popery, Prelacy, or Blasphemy; of which terrible names, I
think, the common people are very incompetent judges, nor do they well know
what is meant by them, as the only forbidden fruit: every party in England
being prone to charge each other with something which they call Blasphemy, and
to suspect mutually either the affecting of Prelacy, or the inclining to
Popery, in ways that seem arrogant and imperious in themselves, also insolent
and injurious to others; each aspiring so to set up their particular way, as to
give law to others, not only proposing, but prescribing such Doctrine,
Discipline, Worship, Government and Ministry as they list to set up, according
to what they gather or guess out of Scripture, whereof every private man, and
woman too, as S. Jerome tells of the Luciferian heretics, flatter themselves,
that they are meet and competent judges, since they find themselves no way
directed by any Catholic interpretation, nor limited and circumscribed by any
joint wisdom and public profession of this Church and Nation; which
heretofore was established and set forth in such a public confession of their
faith, such Articles and Canons, rules and boundaries of Religion, as served
for the orderly and unanimous carrying on and preserving Christian Doctrine,
Discipline, Worship, Ministry, or Government.

This wide door once opened, and still kept open by the crowding and
impetuosity of a people so full of fancy and fury, spirit and animosity, so
wilful and surly, as the English generally are; besides that they are
naturally lovers, and extremely fond, as children, of new fashions, as in all
things, so in Religion it self; it is not (I say) imaginable (as at the pulling
up of a great sluice, or opening of a floodgate) what ( vortices and voragines
opinionum) floods and torrents of opinions, what precipitant rushings and
impetuous whirlings, both in mind and manners, have every where carried a heady
and headstrong people quite headlong in Religion: not only to venial
novelties, softer whimsies and lesser extravagances in Religion, which are very
uncomely, though not very pernicious; but also to rank blasphemies, to gross
immoralities, to rude licentiousness, to insolent scandals, to endless
janglings, to proud usurpations, to an utter irreligion, to a total
distracting, confounding and subverting of the Church of Engl. All this, under
the notion of enjoying whatever liberty they list to take to themselves, under
the name and color of Religion: which anciently imported an holy Obligation of
Christians to God, and to each other, carried on by a Catholic confession, an
unanimous profession, an uniform tradition, an holy ordination and orderly
subjection; but now, they say, it is to be learned and reformed, not by the old
ways of pious education, and Ecclesiastic instruction, not from the Bishops
or Ministers of this or any national Church; but either by the new ways of
every private spirit's interpreting of Scriptures, or by those new lights of
some special inspirations, which, they say, are daily held forth by themselves
and others of their several factions, or according to the various policies of
Laymen, and those pragmatick sanctions which serve the prevalent interests of
parties.

This, this is the project, so cried up by some men, for propagating the
Gospel, and advancing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, so rare, so new, so
untried, so unheard of in any Christian Church, ancient or later, that it is no
wonder, if neither the Church of England, nor its learned Clergy, nor its
dutiful children, can either approve, admire, or follow such dubious and
dangerous methods, or labyrinths rather of Religion, any more than they can
canonize for Saints those vagrants and fanatics of old, who were justly
stigmatized for damnable heretics, or desperate schismatics, for their
deserting that Catholic faith, tradition, order and communion of the Churches
of Christ, which were clearly expressed in their Creeds and Canons, founded
upon Scripture, and conform to Apostolic example.

The Gnostics, Cerinthians, Valentinians, Carpocratians, Circumcellians,
Montanists, Manichees, Novatians, Donatists, Arians, and others, were esteemed
by the Primitive Churches as Foxes and Wolves, creatures of a wild and ferine
nature, impatient of the kindest restraints, not enduring to be kept in any
folds, or bounds of Christ's flock, which ever had an holy, authentic and
authoritative succession of ordained Bishops and Presbyters, as its Pastors and
Teachers; also it had its safe and known limits for Religion, in faith and
manners, Doctrine and Discipline, for order and government, both in lesser
Congregations and larger Combinations. The true Christian liberty anciently
enjoyed by Primitive Christians and Churches, was fullest of verity, charity,
unity, modesty, humility, sanctity, sobriety, harmonious subordination, and
holy subjection, according to the stations in which God had placed every part
or member in those bodies; they were the farthest that could be from Schism,
Separation, mutiny, novelty, ambition, rebellion, while every one kept the true
temper, order and decorum of a Christian.

Certainly, if either particular Congregations, or private Christians liberty
had consisted in being exposed or betrayed, as Sheep without their Shepherds,
to all manner of extravagancies incident to vulgar petulancy and humane
infirmity; those Primitive Churches and ancient Fathers, those godly Bishops
and blessed Martyrs, those pious Emperors and Christian Princes of old, might
have spared a great deal of care, cost, pains and time, which were spent in
their several Councils and Synods, Parlaments, Diets and Conventions; whose
design was not to make new, but to renew those Scripture-Canons and
Apostolical constitutions, which were necessary to preserve the faith once
delivered to the Saints, and to assert, Jude 2.
not only the common salvation, but also that Catholic succession, communion
and order of Churches transmitted from the Apostles: in which endeavor the
piety and wisdom, the care and charity of ancient Councils, expressed in their
many Canons made for the keeping of the unity of the Spirits truth in the bond
of peace among Christians, were so far (in my judgment) from being mere heaps
of hay, straw and stubble, burying and over-laying the foundations of Christian
soundness and simplicity (which seems to be the late censure of one, whom I am
as sorry to see in a posture of difference from the Church of England, as any
person of these times, because I esteem his learning and abilities above most
that have appeared adversaries to, or dissenters from Her) that I rather judge
with Mr. Calvin (a person far more learned, judicious and impartial in this
case)* They were, for the most part, Tametsi illorum temporum Episcopi multos
Canones ediderunt, quibus plus videntur exprimere quam sacris literis expressum
sit; ea tamen cautione totam suam oeconomia^ composuerunt ad unicam illam verbi
divini normam, ut facile videas nihil fere habuisse hac in part a verbo Dei
alienum. Call. Inst. l. 4. c. 4. sect. 1.
very sober, wise and suitable superstructures, little deviating from, and no
way demolishing any of those grand foundations of Faith, Holiness, or Charity,
which were laid by Christ and his blessed Apostles, which ever continued the
same, and were so owned by their pious successors, however they used that
liberty and authority in lesser matters, which was given them by the
Scriptures, and derived to them by their Apostlick mission or succession, for
the prudent accommodating of such things as concerned the outward polity,
uniformity, order and peace of the Church, or for those decent celebrations and
solemnities of Religion, which were most agreeable to the several geniu'ses,
and civil rites of people, and the mutable temper of times; all which who so
neglects to consider, will never rightly judge of the several counsels,
customs and constitutions of either ancient or later Churches.

The best of whose piety and prudence the Reformed Church of England chose to
follow, as exactly as it could, first in Her decerning, declaring, determining,
translating and communicating to her children those Canonical Books of holy
Scripture; also in the owning, professing, and propounding to them those
Ancient, Catholic and received Creeds, which are as the summaries and
boundaries of Christian Faith, containing those articles which are necessary to
be believed by all: after this it used those discreet limits and rules which it
thought fittest to keep the visible profession of Christian Religion in due
order and decency, according as occasion required, and the state of this
particular Church would bear.

Nor was the Church of England in any of these things ever blamed or blamable,
by any well-reformed Church; nor by any men that impartially professed
Christianity: among whom I cannot reckon either the politic Papist, or the
peevish Separatist; much less those later rude rabbles of libertines and
fanatics, who abhor all things in any Church or way of Religion, which they
suspect to be contrary to their loose principles, and these must be conform to
their several secular ends and interests; which truly in England are now
neither small, nor poor, nor modest, but grand, high, and aspiring, extremely
inconsistent with those public principles and ends of good order, polity,
peace and unity, which formerly were established and maintained in the Church
of England, as they ought to be in all well-ordered Churches: whose work and
design was, not loosely to tolerate different public professions of Religion
in the same nation or community, according as every man lists; but seriously
and impartially to constitute and authorize some one way, grounded upon Gods
Word, and guided by the best examples, as the public standard of Religion, for
Doctrine, Duties, Worship, Devotion, Discipline.

Which methods of Piety and Charity were ever highly commended, and cheerfully
followed by the wisest and best Christian Magistrates in all ages; and possibly
they had been ere this recovered and renewed here in England, if the beast of
the people, getting the bridle of liberty between its teeth, had not so far run
away with some riders, who had too much pampered it, that it is no easy matter
(not to be done by sudden checks, or short turns) to reduce that heady and
headstrong animal to the right postures of religious managing: besides, that
wise men are taught by experience, that nothing so soon tames the madness of
people, as their own fierceness and extravagancy; Schismaticos semper inter
initia fervere; incrementa vero capere non posse, nec augere quod illicite
coeperint, sed statim cum prava sua aemulatione deficere. Cypr. ep. 52.
which at length, as S. Cyprian observes, tires them, by taking away their
breath, and vainly exhausting their ferocient spirits. Time and patience often
facilitate those cures in Church and State, which violent and unseasonable
applications would but more inflame and exasperate. I do not ^oubt but the
greatest patrons for the peoples liberty in matters of Religion, will in time
(if they do not already) see how great a charity it is to put merciful
restraints of religious order and government upon them, which are no less
necessary than those sharper curbs and yokes of civil coercions. No wise
Statesman will think it fit, in honesty or safety, to permit common people to
do whatever seems good in their own eyes, as if there were no King or supreme
Magistrate in Israel: nor can any good Christian think it fit, Judges 21.25.
that in Religion every man should be left to profess and patronize what he
lists, as if there were no Christ, as King, and chief Bishop of our souls, or
as if he had not left us clear and settled foundations for faith; also evident
principles, besides patterns of Christian prudence, and Church-polity, for
order and office, discipline and duty, direction and correction, subordination
and union. What these measures and proportions have been, both as to the
judgment and practice of the universal Church, from the very Apostolical
times, and their Primitive successors, till this last century, is so plain,
both in Scripture and other Ecclesiastic records, that I wonder how men of any
learning can be so ignorant, or men of any honesty can be so partial, as by
their doubting and disputing, to divide the minds of Christian people, and by
rude innovations to raise so unhappy factions, as have at this day overspread
this Church and Nation like a leprosy, which is a foul disease, though it may
seem white as snow, blanched over with the shows of liberty, but betraying men
to the basest servitude of their own lusts, and other men's corruptions as well
as errors.

CHAP. III.
I Know and allow that just plea, What Christian liberty is desirable and
tolerable among people.
which is made by learned and godly men, for Christians mutual bearing with,
and forbearing one another, in cases of private and modest differings, either
in opinions or practices: yea, as S. Ambrose, S. Austin, S. Jerome, and others
observe, there is a great latitude of Charity to be exercised among particular
Churches, in their different methods, and outward forms of holy ministrations,
according as their several polities are locally distinguished by Cities,
Countries, or Nations. I willingly yield to all men, much more to all
Christians, that liberty natural, civil and religious, which may consist with
Scripture-precept and right reason, with grounds of morality and society; which
is as much as I desire to use or enjoy my self, in point of private opinion, or
public profession.

I have other where observed out of Tertullian, that Religion is not to be
forced, but persuaded. I admire the Princely and Christian temper of
Constantine the Great, Eusebius* in vita Constable. M.
who professed he would not have men cudgelled, but convinced to be Christians;
that Religion was a matter of choice, not of constraint; that no tyranny, no
rape, no force is more detestable, than that which is committed upon men's
consciences, when once they come to be masters of so much reason, as to choose
for themselves, and to hold forth those principles upon which they state their
Religion. This indeed was the sense of that great and good Emperor: But then
withal, he professed not to meddle, by any Imperatorian or Senatorian power,
with matters of Religion, either to alter and innovate, or to dispute and
decide them, but left them to the piety and prudence of those holy and famous
Bishops, which were chief Pastors of the Church; whose unanimous doctrine and
uniform practice had carried on Christian Religion amidst all persecutions with
so great splendor, uniformity, authority and majesty, that few Christians were
so impudent as to doubt, much less contradict, and openly dissent from their
religious harmony, public order and profession, which was grounded on
Scripture-precepts, and guided by Apostolical patterns.

Yet amidst those primitive exactnesses, to preserve the public peace and
unity of Churches, nothing was more nourished and practiced, than that
meekness of wisdom, which every where sought to instruct men, not to destroy
them for their private differences in Religion, when they were accompanied with
humility, modesty and charity, not carried on with insolence and injury, to
immorality and public perturbation; in all which men show malice and pride,
mixed with, and sowring their opinions, which easily and insensibly carry men's
hearts from dissentings to emulations, from emulations to anger, Romans 14.3.
from anger to enmity, from enmity to despiciency, from despising to damning
one another. Private persuasions, like sticks, when they come to vehement
rubbings or agitations, conceive heat, and kindle to passionate flames; whereas
in a calm and Christian temper, who so differs from me, is in charity to be
interpreted, as desirous either to learn of me, or to instruct me better: and
therefore such an one deserves to be treated, 2 These. 3.15.
not as an enemy, but as a brother; not tetrically, morosely, injuriously, but
heartily, charitably, christianly.

Yet because experience teaches us, that the ignorance, infirmity and
incapacity of most people is such, that they cannot easily find out of
themselves the Truths of God, which are the grounds of true Religion; yea, some
are so lazy and indifferent, as to neglect all means which might help them;
yea, and many are either so peevish or proud, as they are impatient not to be
singular, or not to lead Disciples after them in Religion (the highest ambition
being that of Heretics, Acts 20.30.
which seeks to domineere over men's souls and consciences:) for these and other
weighty reasons, both in civil and religious regards, Christian Religion ought
not in any Christian Church-polity or Nation to be left so loose and dissolute,
as to have no hedge or wall to the vineyard, no limits or restraints set to the
petulancy of those, who under the name of liberty, study to be malicious,
licentious, abhorring any thing solid, strict, or settled in Religion, either as
to themselves or others; counting all those as enemies to their factious
designs and interests, who enjoin them to live in any godly order. Hence these
Oecumenicall censors and universal critics as boldly and easily reproach,
revile, contemn, injure as they please, all those Christians and Churches too,
who humbly conform to that profession of Religion, though never so Christian
and Reformed, which is once established in any Nation or Church, by public
consent and sanction, upon the most mature deliberation and impartial advise,
in order to Gods glory, and the common good of that society.

If these dissolute fancies of Christian liberty should be followed or indulged
to people by such Magistrates and Ministers as own that Religion, certainly no
society of men would be more unsociable, more sordid, more shameful, or more
miserable. Common people will be starved or poisoned, if they be left to feed
themselves; they will be as so many ragged regiments, if they be left, as the
Israelites, to pick up Religion, like straw, where they can find it.

Therefore all piety, policy and charity commands, that in every Nation
professing the faith of Jesus Christ as the only true Religion, there should
be, as there was in Engl. some such wise and grand establishment, as should be
the public measure or standard of Religion, both as to Doctrine, Worship and
Government. This in all uprightness ought to be set before people: not only
propounded and commended to them, but so far commanded and enjoined by
authority, as none should neglect it, or vary from it without giving account;
much less should any man publicly scorn and contemn it, or the Ministers and
dispensers of it, by writing, speech, or action, to the scandal of the whole
Church and Nation, yea to the scandal of the very name of Jesus Christ and his
holy Institution, which ought to be (as Tertullian rarely expresses it)
received with godly fear and reverence, Ubi metus in Deum, ibi gravitas
modesta, and diligentia attonita, and cura solicita, and adlectio explorata,
and communicatio deliberata, and promotio emerita, and subjectio religiosa, and
apparitio devota, and processio modesta, and ecclesia unita, and Dei omnia.
Tert. de praes. c. 43.
entertained with solicitous diligence, maintained with honorable munificence,
contained within the bounds of charitable union and humble subjection; such as
no way permits any private fancy, upon any pretensions whatsoever, rudely and
publicly to oppose or despise it.

But, because it is possible that some truths of Religion may be unseen, and so
omitted by the most public diligence; and some may afterward be discovered by
private industry and devotion, which ought not to be prejudged, smothered or
concealed, if they have the character of Gods will revealed in his written
Word, whose true meaning is the fixed measure and unalterable rule of all true
Religion: to prevent the suppressing or detaining of any Truth, which may be
really offered to any Church or Christians, beyond what is publicly owned and
established; also to avoid the petulant and insolent obtruding whatever novelty
any man's fancy lists to set up upon his own private account, variating from,
or contrary to the public establishment; nothing were more necessary and
happy, than to have in every National Church (which has agreed with one
heart, one mind, one spirit, and one mouth to serve the Lord Jesus) according
to the pattern of primitive piety and wisdom, persons of eminent learning,
piety, prudence and integrity, publicly chosen and appointed to be the
constant Conservators of Religion; whose office it should be, to try and
examine all new opinions publicly propounded: no man should print or preach
any thing different from the public standard and establishment of Religion,
until he had first humbly propounded to that venerable council in writing his
opinion, together with his reasons, why he adds to, or differs from the public
profession.

If these grand Conservators of Religion, who ought to be the choicest persons
in the Church and Nation, both for ability, gravity and honesty, do (at their
solemn and set meetings once or twice every year) allow the propounders reasons
and opinions, he may then publicate his judgment by preaching, disputing,
writing or printing: But if they do not, he shall then keep his opinion to
himself, in the bounds of private conference only, for his better
satisfaction; but in no way publicate it, to the scandal or perturbation of
what is settled in Religion. Here every man may enjoy his ingenuous liberty, as
to private dissenting, without any blame or penalty, which he shall incur and
undergo, in case he do so broach any thing without leave, as a rude Innovator
and proud disturber.

Private and modest dissentings among Christians safely may, and charitably
ought to be born with all Christian meekness and wisdom: but certainly it
would be the very pest and gangrene of all true Religion, also the moth and
canker of all civil as well as Ecclesiastic peace, to tolerate every man's
ignorance, rudeness and pragmaticalness, to innovate and act what they please
in Religion. Though Christians may be otherways sound and hearty, yet they may
have an itch of novelty, popularity, vainglory. It would make mad work in
Religion, if every man, under the notion of Christian liberty, should be
permitted not only to scratch himself as he lists, but to infect others by
every pestilent contagion, yea to make what riotous havoc he pleases of the
public peace and order.

It were a miserable childishness in any nation professing Christianity, 2 Timothy 3.7. Ephesians. 4.14.
to be ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of saving and necessary
truths; to be still tossed to and fro with winds of doctrine, and never cast
anchor upon sure and safe grounds; which are easily found, if men aimed at
piety as well as policy, and regarded Christ's interest or his Churches, more
than their own private and secular advantages: which was once happily done, by
Gods blessing, in the Church of England, to so great an exactness and
completeness of Religion, that nothing for necessity, decency, or majesty, was
to be added or desired by sober Christians; nor could much be added for
convenience.

When Religion is thus settled by public counsel, consent and sanction, it
ought in all reason and conscience to be preserved in ways of honor, peace
and safety, more carefully than those banks are, which, by keeping out the seas
inundations, preserve our pastures and cattle from drowning: else every Polity
and Nation pretending to be Christian, proclaim to all the world, that they
think Religion to be no better than matters of Scepticall dispute, and variable
opinion, having nothing in it clear or certain, as to any divine truth, or
infallible Revelation. Of which, since their ignorance and weakness, or passion
and partiality (to which every private man is subject) makes them less capable
either to search or judge, to dispute or determine; the wisdom of God has
always either established, or exemplarily directed his Church to use and enjoy
some such constant Conservators of Religion, besides the occasional Reformers
and restorers of it; which were of old the Prophets extraordinarily sent,
besides those that were ordinarily brought up in the schools of the Prophets,
which were the nurseries of those learned and wise men, who made up the
Sanhedrim or grand Council among the Jews, consisting of seventy men, who were
for piety, parts and place, chief Fathers, Doctors and Rabbis in the Church of
the Jews, and the great Conservators of their Law and Religion.

Answerably we read in the Primitive Churches and times, this care and power
was by the wisdom of Christ fixed, and by all good Christians owned, in the
Apostles and Elders; to whom, Acts 15.
in case of any dispute or difference in Religion, address was made, not only
to hear their counsel and judgment, but to submit to their decisions and
decrees; which bound every man to preach no other doctrine, different from,
much less contrary to, what that venerable consistory both taught and summarily
delivered to the Churches of Christ, 1 Timothy 1.3.
viz. wholesome forms, and short summaries of sound doctrine, as well as in
their more diffused writings, 2 Timothy 1.13.
occasionally sent to particular Churches, and divinely delivered to the use,
care and custody of the Catholic Church.

Agreeable to these holy precedents, every Christian Church in after-ages had
(within their several distributions, or dioceses, distinguished by their Cities
or Provinces) their Synods or Ecclesiastical Councils, for all those
emergencies or concernments of Religion which arose within their limits and
combinations: proportionably they had more extensive Conventions and general
Councils in cases of grand concernment, for the comprimising of all differences
in Religion, and conservation of the Churches both purity and peace. These
methods of prudent piety and pious prudence, as they were of divine
Institution, so they ought to be perpetual in the Church of Christ, as being
the only means left for the conservation and reformation of Religion.

It Is true, in the dimness of after-ages, when the decay of Primitive zeal,
love, sanctity and sincerity, had too much prevailed over these Western
Churches, the Bishops of Rome, taking the advantage of the higher ground,
whereon the fame of that City was raised, not only for being the Metropolis of
the Roman Empire, but for being a prime Church of Apostolical plantation, and
high renown for the Faith and martyrly constancy of its first Bishops; these,
Romans 1.8.
with no great difficulty, as with great art and policy, contrary to the
judgment and practice of Antiquity for the first 600. years, sought to fix the
Standard of Religion in the Popes chair, and to make his breast the great
Conservator of Religion: certainly a very easy, compendious, and happy way to
keep up the peace and honor of Christian Religion and Churches, if the Bishop
of Rome could, in the noon-day-light of these, times either convince the world
of his special gift of Infallibility, or make good his claim of being sole and
supreme Judge of all controversies in Religion, above any other Pastors and
Bishops, yea and above a general Council.

This late prodigious pillar, or huge Colosse of the Popes infallible, sole and
supreme power, has, as of old, so of late years, not only been much weakened
by many Churches, Greek and Latin, dissenting, but by some it has been quite
overthrown, demolished and broken in pieces, as an arrogant abuse and
intolerable tyranny, contrary to all rules of Scripture and reason, never
challenged by the first famous and holy Bishops of that Church, nor owned in
after-ages (when Popes began to usurp upon other Bishops and Churches) by the
most learned and godly men of those times.

This justice being done to the honor and liberty of the Churches of Christ,
and their respective Bishops or Pastors, against the Papal obtrusion of his
sole judicature: yet no Reformed Church, of any repute, has been so
transported by just indignation against the Papal usurpations, as to expose
themselves and their Religion to the various breach and giddy brains of the
vulgar; but every one has both confined and settled their profession by some
public profession, as the standard of Religion; also they have some such
Conservators of Religion, either ordinary or extraordinary, as do take care
that the established Religion suffer no injury or detriment.

This authority or power seems now much wanting in England, though it be very
necessary, in my judgment, which should so preserve the public stability of
true Religion, as not to invade any good man's private liberty, which ought not
to be too severely curbed; yet not so indulged, as to injure the common
welfare, contrary to all rules of reason, justice and charity.

These Conservators of Religion should not exact of private Christians any
explicit conformity or subscription, under penalty of any mulct or prison,
much less with the terror of fire and faggot, which was the zealotry of Papal
tyranny: only they should take care that people be duly taught that Religion
which is settled; that none be a public Preacher, that is a declared dissenter
or opposer of it; that no man do broach any novelty without their approbation;
that no man do petulantly blaspheme, oppose, scorn or perturb that constitution
of Religion which is publicly settled, as supposed to be the best; that no man
abuse the name of Christian liberty to the public injury.

All sober and wise Christians do see and feel, by late sad experience, that
liberty, in the vulgar sense and notion, is but a golden Calf, which licentious
minds set up to themselves under that specious name; as the Israelites did
their abominable Idol, under the popular title and acclamation of These are
thy Gods, Exodus 32 4
O Israel.

(...). Clem. Alex. (...). 7.
If common people be indulged in what freedom they will challenge to
themselves, wise men will soon find, that their Christian liberty is no better
than an Image of jealousy, a Teraphim, a Tamuz, or Adonis, offensive to the
God of reason, order, law and government; destructive to humane society;
dishonorable to the name of Christ, and that holy profession which was so
renowned of old, as Christian, that is, the most regular, meek, harmless,
strict, peaceable and charitable Religion in the world: whose divided and
deformed aspect, even now in England, if (as Clem. Alex. observes in his time)
a prudent Heathen, or moral Turk, or sober Jew, or grave Philosopher, should
behold, as to the effect of some men's principles and practices, who glory much
in their Christian liberty, would they not conclude, that Christ their Master
was the Author, and Christion profession the favourer of all manner of
Licentiousness?

Which is not more a dehonestation of the Doctrine, Spirit, Disciples and
Mystery of Christ Jesus, than an infinite damp and hindrance to the
propagation and spreading of the Gospel in the world: yea, it is the highway,
through the justice of God upon the wanton wickedness and hypocritical
profaneness of such Christians, utterly to extirpate the power, peace, comfort,
yea and profession of Christian Religion. The Mohammedan power and poison had
never spread so over those famous Asian, African, and Eastern Churches, if
Heretical and Schismatical liberty had not first battered the strength, and
corrupted the health of Christianity. Hence those inundations of barbarity,
those incursions of foreign enemies, following those intestine wars and
confusions, by which the wise and just God has in all ages punished the folly
and presumption of petulant and licentious Christians, who first dare to think,
then to speak, at last to act, what they fancy and affect, instead of what God
commands, and the Catholic Church has observed in all ages. These popular
provocations of God, which are full of impudent impiety, commonly are revenged
by dreadful and durable judgments, long and lasting miseries. For the
pertinacious mischiefs of Heresy and Schism once prevailing upon any Church
and Nation, are, like frenzy or madness, rarely cured, without loss of much
blood; besides the iron goads and sharp harrows of mutual depredations and
oppressions, which are used between parties and factions, once in religious
respects engaged against each other. It Is not expectable that Christians thus
tearing and massacring each other, should recover their wits, till sharp and
successive afflictions have showed them how unholy and unthankful they are,
without natural and spiritual affections, who dare at once despise their
Fathers, reproach their Mother, and devour their Brethren; who being baptized,
instructed, communicated and converted (as they pretend) to the same Lord Jesus
Christ, and to his holy profession, by the Ministry of such a Church as England
was (so Christian, so Reformed) yet by a voluntary separation and desperate
defection (as ((...)) self-condemned) dare to execute such bold and rash
censures of excommunication, both upon themselves and others, Tit 3.11,
as a sober Christian should greatly tremble to undergo, if the sacred
authority of such a Church, by its Bishops, Ministers, and other Members,
should jointly pass such a censure upon them, as their own pride, passion,
superstition, and licentious humors daily dare to do. May they not justly
fear, lest God should satisfy them with their own delusions, and ratify that
judgment which they have uncharitably chosen, of being ever separated from his
Church, and from himself? might not God justly despise and reject them, who
have despised and rejected such means, such Ministers, such Ministrations, as
some have done, and still do, in the Church of England? Luke 20.16.
If the dust of his Ministers feet will rise up in judgment against ungrateful
refusers; Mat. 10.14.
how much sorer punishment may they expect, who are the insolent abusers of
such messengers of peace, and cruel vastators of such a Church as England was,
before it felt the sad effects of this Christian liberty, which common people
are prone not more to magnify, than to mistake and misuse?

CHAP. IV.
Of Plebeian rudeness and licentiousness in Religion, if left to themselves.
WHo doubts, but if the plebs or populacy, in any Nation or Church, be left to
themselves, to cut out Religion and Liberty into what thongs they list, they
will soon be not only unshod, ungirt and unblest, but so quite naked and
unclothed, as to any Christian grace or virtue, gravity or decency, truth or
sanctity, that their shame and nakedness will soon appear in all manner of
fedity, deformity, error and ignorance, insolence and confusion? They have
little studied the vulgar genius, who do not find by all reading and
experience, that the common temper of people is rude and perverse, light and
licentious, petulant and insolent, Non rationibus convincuntur, quia non
intelligunt; nec autoritatibus corriguntur, quia non recipient; nec flectuntur
suasionibus, quia subversi sunt. Bern. in Can. s. 66.
as S. Bernard well expresses it. They are not convincible with reason,
because incapable; they despise good examples, because they love not to imitate
them; they are too proud and peevish to be sweetly won and persuaded to
goodness; they are mad and impatient to be curbed. Yea, they are undone, and
perish eternally, if they be betrayed to themselves; if God and good men be not
better to them than they deserve, desire, or design for themselves, either in
things civil or sacred; if there be not, by just and honest policies, such holy
restraints and wholesome severities put upon them, Imperiti, animosi, and
propter inopia^ consil^i iracu^di. Fermil. ap. Cyp.
as are not their chains, but their girdles; not their bannacles, but their
bridles. Alas, what wise Magistrate or Minister is there, who does not find by
daily experience, that if you will but save peoples purses, they are not very
solicitous how to save their souls? most of them think Taxes and Tithes far
greater burdens, than all their sins and trespasses; not much valuing their
sanctification or salvation, so as they enjoy that rustic, thrifty and
unmannerly liberty, which they naturally affect, against their teachers and
betters. What immense sums of money have of late years been spent upon
military and secular accounts? If the hundredth part had been desired of them,
in order to have procured a competent maintenance for an able Preacher in every
parish (without which there is little hope ever to enjoy competent Ministers) O
what an outcry would have been made? what an oppression would it have seemed
to the common people, beyond ship money, yea, beyond the bricks and bondage of
Egypt, as if their very lifeblood and the marrow of their bones had been taken
from them? so much does the beast and natural man over-weigh the Christian, in
the most of men and women.

The freest, easiest, and cheapest Religion is thought the best among them:
what is most grateful, is most godly: then they fancy themselves most happy,
when least obliged to be holy; and then most zealously religious, when they may
be most securely licentious. The more factious and pragmatick spirits among
them do think that all Polity and Religion, things civil and sacred, must needs
be shipwreckt and utterly miscarry, unless they have an oar in the boat, Nisi
quod ipsi faciunt, nihil r^ctum existimant. Aug. ep. ad Janua.
unless they put their hand to the helm of all government. It does not suffice
their busy heads and hands to trim the sails, as common Mariners, when
commanded, but they must be at the steerage; not considering what balast of
judgment, what anchor of constancy, what compass of sound knowledge, both
divine and humane, is necessary for those who undertake to be Pilots and guides
of States and Churches.

The rude plebs, like mutinous mariners, are prone so to affect liberty, as to
endanger their own and other men's safety: they are like Porpuices, pleased with
storms, especially of their own raising: they joy in the tossings of Religion,
and hope for a prey by the wrecks both of well built Churches and well-setled
States: they fancy it a precious liberty to swim in a wide sea, though they be
drowned at last, or swallowed up by sharks: they triumph to see other poor
souls dancing upon the waves of the dead sea, to be overwhelmed with ignorance,
idleness, Atheism, profaneness, perdition; which is the usual, and almost
unavoidable, fate of those giddy-headed, and madbrain'd people, who being
happily embarked, and orderly guided in any well-setled Church, do either put
their ablest Pilots under hatches, or cast them over-boord; which has been of
late years the religious ambition of many thousands, in order (forsooth) to
recover and enjoy their imaginary Christian liberties, which soon make common
people the sad objects of wise men's grief and pity, rather than of their joy or
envy. For, like wandering sheep, they naturally affect an erroneous and
dangerous freedom from their shepherds and their folds, that they may be free
for foxes, wolves and dogs: yea, some of them, by a strange metamorphosis,
that they may seem Christ's sheep, turn wolves, seizing upon and destroying
their own shepherds: which the true flock of Christ never did, either in the
most persecuted, or the most peaceful times of the Church; but were ever
subject, with all humility and charity, to those godly Bishops and Presbyters,
Heb. 13.17.
which were by Apostolical succession and Divine authority over them in the
Lord; whom they were so far from stripping, robbing, or devouring, that both
Christian Princes and faithful people endowed them with most grateful and
munificent expressions of their loves and esteem, even in primitive and
necessitous times, as a due and deserved honor to men of learning, piety and
gravity, who watched over their souls, being both well enabled, and duly
ordained to be their rulers and guides to heaven.

But now, who sees not by the sad experience of the Church of England, how the
plebs or common people, yea all persons of plebeian spirits, of base and narrow
minds, (who are the greatest sticklers for those enormous and pernicious
liberties) who sees not how much they would be pleased to set up Jeroboams
calves, 2 Chr. 11.15.
if they may have liberty to choose the meanest of the people to be their
Priests, or some scabbed and straggling sheep to be their shepherds; 1 King.
13.33.
if they may make some of their mechanic comrades to be their Pastors and
Ministers, 2 Chronicles 19 9.
examined and ordained by their silly selves? O how willing are they (poor
wretches) in their thirst for novelty, Theophylact in 2 Timothy 4.3. Heaping up
teachers, etc. (...).
liberty and variety, as Theophylact observes, to suffer any pitiful piece of
prating impudence, who walks in the spirit of falsehood, to impose upon them
so far as to be their Preacher and Prophet, if he will but prophecy to them of
liberty and sovereignty, of sacred and civil Independency, Mich. 2.11.
of corn, wine, and strong drink, of good bargains and purchases to be gained
out of the ruins of the Church, and the spoils of Churchmen?

O how little regret would it be to such sacrilegious Libertines, to have no
Christian Sabbath, or Lords days, as well as no Holy Days, or solemn
memorials of Evangelical mercies? How contented would they be with no
preaching, no praying, no Sermons, no Sacraments, no Scriptures, no Presbyters,
(as well as no Bishops,) with no Ministers or holy Ministrations, with no
Church, no Savior, no God, further than they list to fancy the^ in the freedom
of some sudden flashes and extemporary heats? There are that would still be as
glad to see the poor remainder of Church Lands and Revenues, all Tithes and
Glebes, quite alienated and confiscated, as those men were, who got good
estates by the former ruins of Monasteries, or the later spoylings of Bishops
and Cathedrals: nothing is sacred, nothing sacrilegious to the all-craving, and
all-devouring maw of vulgar covetousness and licentiousness. O how glorious a
liberty would it be in some men's eyes, to pay no Tithes to any Minister! much
more precious liberty would it be to purchase them, and by good penniworths to
patch up their private fortunes.

Nothing (in very deed) is less valuable to the shameless, sordid, and
dissolute spirits of some people, than their souls eternal state, or the
service of their God and Savior; whom not seeing, they are not very solicitous
to seek or to serve, further than may consist with their profit, ease and
liberty. They rather choose to go blindfold, wandering and dancing to hell, in
the licentious frolicks of their fancifull Religions, than to live under those
holy orders and wholesome restraints, which in all Ages preserved the unity and
honor of true Christian Religion, both by sober Discipline and sound Doctrine.

In the later of these the Clergy of England most eminently abounded; and in
the former of them they were not so much negligent (which some complain) as
too much checked and curbed: few men being so good Christians, as to be patient
of that severe Discipline which was used in the Primitive Churches; which if
any Bishop or Minister should have revived, how would the rabble of Libertines
cry out, Depart from us, we will none of your ways, Job 22.13.
neither Discipline nor Doctrine, neither your Ministrations nor Ministry,
Psalm. 2.3.
neither Bishops nor Presbyters; let us break these Priestly bonds in sunder,
and cast these Christian cords from us: our liberty is, to lead our tame
teachers by their noses, to pull our asinine Preachers by their luculent ears,
to rule our precarious Rulers: if they pretend to have or use any
Ecclesiastical authority, so as to cross our liberties, to curb our
consciences, or to bridle our extravagancies; we look upon them as men come to
torment us before our time, Mat. 8.29.
who seek to lead us away captive, to deprive us of our dear God Mammon, (as
Micah cried out after the Danites) or of our great Goddess Liberty, Acts 19.28.
according to the jealousy which Demetrius and the Ephesine rabble had for
their Diana, against the Apostles. This is the Idea of that petulant, profane
and fanatic liberty, which vulgar people most fancy and affect; for the
enjoying of which, they have made so many horrid clamours, and ventured upon so
many dangerous confusions, both to their own and other men's souls, in matter of
Religion.

CHAP. V.
I Shall not need by particular instances further to demonstrate to You (my
honored Contrymen) what your own observation daily proclaims, Instances of
abused Liberty in the vulgar neglect of reading the Scriptures.
namely, the strange pranks, cabrioles, or freaks, which the vulgar wantonness
has played of late years, under the color and confidence of liberty in
Religion (provided they profess no other Popery or Prelacy than what is in
their own ambitious hearts and insolent manners.) Nor is this petulancy only
exercised in the smaller circumstances, or disputable matters of Religion, but
even in the very main foundations; such as have been established of old in all
the generations and successions of the Churches of Christ, both as to good
doctrine and orderly conversation.

First, if you consider the ( Magna Charta) grand charter of your souls, the
holy Scriptures. Those lively oracles, Acts 7 38. 2 Timothy 3.16.
which were given by inspiration and direction of Gods Spirit, which beyond all
books in the world have been most desperately persecuted, and most divinely
preserved, having in them the clearest characters of divine Truth, love, mercy,
wisdom, power, majesty and glory, the impressions and manifestations of
greatest goodness, grace, both in morals and mysteries, in the prophecies and
their accomplishment, in the admirable harmony of prescience and performance,
of Prophets and Apostles, setting forth the blessed Messiah, as the prefigured
Sacrifice, the promised Savior, the desire of the world; those Books which
have been delivered to us by the most credible testimony in the world, the
uniform consent of the pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 2.13.
the Catholic Church of God, Gal. 1.8.
which the Apostle S. Paul prefers before that of an Angel from Heaven; that
divine Record, which has been confirmed to us by so many miracles, sealed by
the faith and confession, the repentance and conversion, the doctrine and
example, the gracious lives and glorious deaths of so many holy Confessors and
Martyrs in all ages, besides an innumerable company of other humble professors,
who have been perfected, sanctified and saved by that word of life, dwelling
richly in them in all wisdom. Co^. 3.16.


Yet, even in this grand concernment of Religion, the holy Scriptures, (whose
two Testaments are as the two poles on which all morality and Christianity
turn, the two hinges on which all our piety and felicity depend) much
negligence, indifferency and coldness, is of late used by many, 2 Timothy 4.3.
not only people, but their heaps of Preachers, under the notion and
imagination of their Christian liberty, that is, seldom or never seriously to
read, either privately or publicly, any part of the holy Scripture, unless it
be a short Text or Theme, for fashion sake, which (like a broken morsel) they
list to chew a while in their mouths: Nehem. 8.3, 8.
but the solemn, attentive, grave, devout, and distinct reading of Psalms or
Chapters, or any other set portion of the holy Scriptures, old or new (to which
S. Chrysostom, S. Jerome, S. Austin, and the other ancient Fathers, both Greek
and Latin, so often and so earnestly exhorted all Christians) this they esteem as
a poor and puerile business, only fit for children at school, not for
Christians at Church; unless it be attended with some exposition or gloss upon
it, though never so superficial, simple and extemporary; which is like
painting over well-polished marble; being more prone to wrest, darken and
pervert, than rightly to explain, clear or interpret the Scriptures, which of
themselves are in most places easy to be understood: obscure places are rather
more perplexed than expounded, when they are undertaken by persons not very
learned, Just. M. Apo. 2.
or not well prepared for that work; which was the employment anciently (as
Justin Martyr tells us) chiefly of the ((...)) the Bishop or President then
present, whose office was far above the ((...) or) Readers, who having done his
duty, the other, as Pastor of the flock, either opened or applied such parts of
the Scripture as he thought best to insist upon.

Yet there are (now) many such supercilious and nauseous Christians, who
utterly despise the bare reading or reciting of the Word of God to the
Congregation, as if no beauty were on it, no life or power in it, no good or
virtue to be gotten by it, unless the breath of a poor man further inspire
it, unless a poor worm, like a snaile, flightly passing over it, set a slimy
varnish upon it: as if the saving truth, and self-shining light of Gods Word,
in the precepts, examples, promises, prophecies and histories, were not most
clear and easy of it self, as to all things necessary to be believed, obeyed,
or hoped; Psalm. 19.7, 8.
as if honest and pure-hearted Christians could not easily perceive the mind of
God in the Scriptures, unless they used always such extemporary spectacles,
as some men glory to put upon their own or their auditors noses.

Certainly such new masters in our Israel forget how much they symbolize with
the Papists in this fancy, while denying or disdaining all reading of
Scriptures in public, unless some expound them, though never so sorrily,
slovenly and suddenly, they must by consequence highly discourage, yea, and
utterly forbid common people the reading of any portion of them privately in
their closets or families, where they can have no other expositors but
themselves, and it may be are not themselves so confident, as to undertake the
work of expounding the hard and obscurer places; as for other places which are
more necessary and easy, sure they explain themselves sufficiently to every
humble, diligent, and attentive reader or hearer: the blessed use and effects
of which if these supercilious Rabbis had found in themselves, while the Word
of God is publicly, distinctly and solemnly read in the Church to them,
doubtlesly they would not have so much disused, despised and decried this godly
custom in the Church of England, of emphatick reading the Word of God in the
audience of Christian Congregations.

O rare and unheard of Christian Liberty, which dares to cast so great a
slighting and despiciency upon the public reading of the Scriptures, which are
the Churches chiefest Jewel, so esteemed and used by Jews and Gentiles, full
of its own sacred, innate and divine luster; then indeed most spendid and
illustrious, when handsomely set, that is, Mal. 2.7.
when the Priests lips preserve the knowledge of them, and duly impart them to
Christian people, both by discreet reading and preaching, that is, explaining
and applying them!

CHAP. VI.
Vulgar neglect and scorn of ancient forms of wholesome words, in the
Decalogue, Creed, and Lords Prayer. Romans 6.17. 2 Timothy* 1.13.
AFter these vulgar slightings and depreciatings, cast upon the public reading
of the Word of God by some novellers, I shall in vain set forth to You what is
less strange (yet very strange and new in the Church of Christ) that is, the
supercilious contempt and total rejection of all those ancient venerable forms
of sound words and wholesome doctrine, either literally contained and expressly
commanded in the Scripture, such as are the Ten Commandments and Lords Prayer;
or evidently grounded, and anciently deduced out of the Scriptures, such as are
the Apostles Creed, with other ancient Symbols and Doxologies, which were
bounds and marks of all Christians unity and soundness in the faith, generally
used by all pristine and modern Churches of any renown, who mixed with their
public Services of God these great pillars and chief foundations of piety,
these constant rules, standards and measures of Religion, by which they took
the scantlings or proportions of all their duties and devotions, of their sins
and repentance, of their faith and hope: hence the humble confession of their
sins, the sincere agnition of their duties, the earnest deprecations of divine
vengeance, the fervent supplications for mercy and pardon, the hearty
invocations for grace, the solemn consecration of the sacramental elements,
the due celebration of holy mysteries, the high Doxologies or exaltations of
the glorious Trinity, the joint testifications of Christians mutual charity,
harmony and communion: All these (I say) were carried on and consummated in the
Churches public worship, which was excellently improved, heightened and
adorned, by the use and recitation of those Summaries of Religion amidst the
congregations of Christians, to which they assented with a loud and cheerful
Amen.

Yet, which of them is there (now) that is not openly, not only disused, but
disdained, disgraced and disparaged by some men, as nauseous crambe, which
their souls abhor? so far as they from reverent attending, or hearing, when any
Minister recites them, that they scarce have any patience, or can keep within
those looks and postures of civility which become them: yea, they endure not to
have their children taught them, as the first rudiments of Religion, the
seminaries of faith, and nurseries of devotion; which being rightly planted,
and duly watered by catechizing, may in time (by Gods blessing) bring forth the
ripe fruits of wisdom and holiness, of faith and obedience, both to power and
order, to an uniformity and constancy of Godliness.

Totius Evangelii breviari^m. Tert. de Orat. Dom. So Cyp^. Coelestis doctrinae
compendium, fidelium harmonia, in toto orb celebratum Amen. And Ruffin. in
Symb. Iren. l. 2. c. 9. l. 3. c. 3. It is called Apostolorum traditio, (...),
Amphiloch. Hieron. ep. 16. Chrysostom. in Symb.
The ancient Christian writers, as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Ruffinus,
Jerome, Austin, and others, sufficiently tell us, That these compendious forms
of duty, faith and devotion, the Decalogue, Creed, Lords Prayer and Doxologies,
were highly valued, and solemnly used in Christian Conventions, as the gracious
condescendings of our God, and Savior, to the weakest memories and meanest
capacities: some of them being of their express and immediate dictating:
according to which pattern, the blessed Apostles, and the Churches of Christ
after them, took care that both those, and other forms like to them, should be
used among Christians; that so by frequent repeating and inculcating those
excellent summaries of Faith and Catholic principles of Religion, all sorts of
Christian people, Heb. 6.1.
young and old, learned and idiots, might be either catechized or confirmed in
the very same things, to be believed, prayed for, and practiced, in order to
their own and others salvation. Which great work can never be safely built upon
Seraphick sublimities and Scholastic subtilties; much less upon imaginary
raptures, childish novelties, idle dreams, and futile whimseys, which of late
do seek (very impiously) to justle out of all Churches use, and out of all
Christians memories, those wholesome solidities, and holy summaries, which have
in them both the warmth of Christian love, and the light of Divine truth; in
comparison of which, all novel affectations are dark and cold, dull and
confused, silly and insipid.

Yet what sober Christian does not see, that of late years this popular liberty
in England is risen to such a nauseating, niceness and curiosity of Religion,
as has not only infected the simpler sort of common people with an abhorrence
of all those useful and venerable forms, which the prudence and piety of this
or any Church commended to them in their public celebrations; but (to the
great encouragement and advance of ignorance, Atheism and profaneness,
uncharitableness and insolence among the vulgar) many persons of very
considerable parts and good quality, are shrewdly leavened with these
Novellismes and Libertinismes? Yea (which is worst of all) many Ministers,
especially of the Presbyterian and Independent parties, yea and some of the
ancient order and Catholic conformity of the Church of England, even these (as
S. Gal. 2.14.
Peter was overawed to a dissimulation, misbecoming the freedom and dignity
of so great an Apostle, by too great fears, and compliances with the
circumcised Jews) have been so carried down this stream of plebeian prejudice,
and popular indifferency, more than liberty, to say or silence, to do or omit
what they list, that they have not only much neglected all the devotionall set
forms of this Churches prescription (which, in my judgment, merited a far
better fate and handsomer dismission, than they found from many men's hands) but
some have wilfully disused, and so discountenanced, even all those sacred
forms which have either Divine, or Apostolic, or Catholic characters of
honor, antiquity and Religion upon them.

How miserably are many public Preachers either afraid or ashamed, solemnly to
recite so much as once every Lords day the ten Commandments, or the Apostles
Creed, or any other of those ancient Symbols? yea, when is it, that some
Ministers dare use either so much courage or conscience, as to use the Lords
Prayer, either by it self, or in the conclusion of their own voluminous
supplications before or after their Sermons? in which neither much regard is
had to the method, nor the matter of the Lords Prayer, which they pretend is
the use of it; but it is made to stand, like a mere cipher, silent and
insignificant, while men love to multiply the innumerable Logarithmes of their
own crude inventions and incomposed devotions: when as that Prayer which the
wisdom of our Lord Jesus twice taught his Disciples upon several occasions,
Matthew. 6.9. Luke 11.2.
and in them all his Church, both in a doctrinall and devotionall way, as a
method, matter and form of Prayer, is in it self, and ever was so esteemed and
used by all good Christians, not only as the foundation, measure and
proportion, but also as the confirmation, completion, crown and consummation of
all our prayers and praises to God.

Instead of which, and wholly exclusive of it, how many poor-spirited Preachers,
of late, more to gratify and humor some silly and self-willed people, than to
satisfy their own consciences, yea, highly to the scandal of many worthy
Christians, and the dishonor of the Reformed profession, are become not only
strangers, but almost enemies to that, and all other holy forms of Religion,
contenting themselves with their own private composures, or their more sudden
conceptions, in all public celebrations and solemn worship; not having so much
modesty and humility, as to consider, what is most evident to wise men, that no
private man's sufficiencies in point of public prayer and celebrious duties can
be such, for method, comprehensiveness, clearness, weight, solidity, sanctity
and majesty, as may compare, much less dispense with, and neglect, yea utterly
reject, those sacred summaries and solemn forms, which have been divinely
instituted: whose foolishness is wiser then the wisdom of men, and whose
shortness is beyond the amplest prolixity and largest spinnings of humane lungs
and invention; Quanto facilius audiamur, dum prece quam filius docuit apud
patrem loquimur?

Quanto officacius ^mpetramus quod petimus in Christi nomine, si petamus ipsius
oratione? Cyp. de Orat. Dom.

Quantum substringitur verbis, tantum diffunditur sensibus. Tert. in Orat. Dom.


there being more spirit in one drop of Christ's Prayer (as in cordial and hot
waters) than in whole seas of vulgar effusions; which, at best, having much in
them very flashy, insipid and confused, had need to have, at last, the sacred
infusion of Christ's prayer added to them, to give them and us that sanctity,
spirit, life, completeness, comfort, and fiduciary assurance of acceptance,
which all good men desire in their service of God. Certainly they seem much to
overvalue their own prayers, who wholly disuse or despise the Lords: nor do I
see how a Minister of Christ can comfortably discharge his duty to the flock of
Christ, if while he professes to preach that Gospel which Christ has taught,
he industriously omits the use of that prayer which Christ has not only
commended, but enjoined and commanded, as an Evangelicall institution. Which
shameful compliance of many Ministers with vulgar levity and licentiousness,
seems to me so far from really advancing their own honor, or the true
interests of the Christian and Reformed Religion, that (in earnest) they have
by these and the like mean desertings of their own judgments and duties, very
much exposed themselves, and the Reformed Christian Religion, to the
insolences and contempts of the meanest people, which as easily crowd and
prevail upon them, as waters do against crazy and yielding banks, when once
they see Ministers so stoop and debase themselves to the dictates and censures,
the fears and frowns, the fancies and humors of giddy and inconstant people,
who naturally affect such liberty or looseness in Religion, as may have least
show of divine Ligation and Authority; but only such, as being of men's own
choice and invention, they may as easily reject, as others obtrude. The very
Directory and its ordinances, which gave the supersedeas or quietus est to the
Liturgy of the Church of England, does not yet seem to intend any such
severity, as wholly to silence, sequester and eject the Lords Prayer, ten
Commandments, or the Apostles Creed, out of childrens Catechisms, Ministers
mouths, or Christians public profession and devotion; in which they seem to me
to appear a rich and invaluable Jewels, giving the greatest luster, price and
honor to their religious Solemnities.

CHAP. VII.
I Have already showed you (O worthy Gentlemen) one great and evil instance of
that inordinate liberty, The innovations, usurpations and vastations made by
some upon the order, office and authority of the Evangelicall Ministry.
which some people have challenged of late to themselves in England, to the
great dishonor and detriment of the Christian Reformed Religion; besides the
disgrace and indignity cast upon this sometime famous and flourishing Church,
while they have endeavored to abolish all those holy Summaries and wholesome
Forms, which are the best and meetest preservers of true Faith, holy Obedience,
and mutual Charity among the community of Christian people.

Nor are these the only extravagancies of vulgar licentiousness, (whose
inordinate and squalid torrent, like an inundation of waters, knows not how to
set any bounds of modesty, reason, or conscience to it self;) but they have
farther adventured, as a rare frolic of popular freedom, to invade and usurp
upon, to confound and contemn, to divide and destroy the office, honor,
authority, the succession and derivation, yea, the source and original of that
sacred Priesthood, or Evangelical Ministry and mission, which was ever so
highly esteemed, reverenced and maintained among all true Christians; as well
knowing that Its rise and institution was divine, from our Lord Jesus Christ,
as sent of God his Father, who alone had authority to give the Word and Spirit,
the Mission and Commission, Joh. 15.21, 22.
the Gifts and Powers that are properly ministerial.

Which, as the blessed Apostles first received immediately from Christ, so they
duly and carefully derived them to their Successors, after such a method and
manner as the Primitive and Catholic Churches, in all places and ages, both
perfectly knew, and (without question) exactly followed, in their consecrating
of Bishops and ordaining of Presbyters, with Deacons, as the only ordinary
Ministers of Christ's Church; whose ministerial authority never was any way
derived from, depending upon, or obnoxious to the humor, fancy, insolency, and
licentiousness of the common people. To which miserable captivity and
debasement, as the Aaronicall or Levitical Priesthood was no way subjected, so
much less ought the Melchisedekian, Christian, and Evangelicall Priesthood,
which is no less sovereign and sacred, nor less necessary and honorable in the
Church of God. So that those licentious intrusions, which some people now
affect in this point of the Ministry, cannot be less offensive to Gods Spirit,
than they are directly contrary to those holy rules of power and order
prescribed in the New Testament; which both the Apostles and their successors,
both Bishops and Presbyters, together with all faithful people, precisely
observed in all those grand Combinations and Ecclesiastical Communions,
whereto the Church of Christ was distributed in all nations: where, if sometime
the peoples choice and suffrage were tolerable, as to the person whom they
desired and nominated for their Bishop or Presbyter; yet it was never
imaginable, that either Bishop or Presbyter was sufficiently consecrated and
ordained, that is, invested with the power, office and authority ministerial,
merely by this nomination and election of the people; which indulgence, in
time, grew to such disorder, as was intolerable in the Church: much less was
any esteemed a Minister of Christ only because he obtruded himself upon that
service.

The late licentious variations, innovations, invasions, corruptions and
interruptions, even in this grand point of the Evangelicall office and Ministry
in England, have, partly by the common peoples arrogance, giddiness, madness
and ingratitude, and not a little by some Preachers own levity, fondness,
flattery and meanness of spirit, not only much abated, and abased to a very
low ebb, that double honor which is due; 1 Timothy 5.17.
but they have poured forth deluges of scorn, contempt, division, confusion,
poverty, and almost nullity* not only upon the persons of many worthy
Ministers, but upon the very order and office, the function and profession;
whose sacred power and authority, the pride, petulancy, envy, revenge, cruelty
and covetousness of some people, have sought, not only to arrogate and usurp
as they list, but totally to innovate, enervate, and at last extirpate. For
nothing new in this point can be true, nothing variable can be venerable: that
only being authentic, which is ancient and uniform; that only authoritative,
which is Primitive, Catholic and Apostolic, both in the copy and original,
in the first commission and the exemplification.

I confess I formerly have been, and still am, infinitely grieved to hear, and
ashamed to report what enormous liberties many men have of late years taken to
themselves in this point of being Ministers of the Gospel; what contradictions
of sinners, what cruel mockings, and sawings asunder; what buffetings,
strippings, crucifyings, and killings all the day long, the Ancient and
Catholic Ministry of this and all Churches has lately endured in England,
since the wicked wantonness of some men has taken pleasure to be as thorns in
the eyes, and goads in the sides of the Chapter of England, and Its Ministers, be
they never so able, successful and deserving: whom to calumniate; contemn,
impoverish and destroy in their persons, credits, estates, liberties, yea, and
lives, has seemed (like Mordecai to Hamans malice and wrath) so small a
sacrifice to the fierceness and indignation of some men, that they have aimed
at the utter extirpation of the Nation, the nullifying, cashiering and
exautorating of their whole office and function; either owning no Ministers in
any divine office, place and power, or obtruding such strange moulds and models
of their own invention, as are not more novell and unwonted, than ridiculous
and preposterous; like Monsters, having neither matter nor form proportionate
to Ministers.

Against whose petulant and too prevalent poison, I have formerly sought to
apply some Antidote; not more smart and severe, than charitable and
conscientious: aiming (as now I do) neither to flatter nor exasperate any; but
in all Christian integrity and sincerity, to discharge my duty to God and my
neighbor, to this Church and to my Country.

Nor was it indeed then, or is it now other than high time to answer that
folly, to repel and obstruct (if possible) that Epidemick mischief, which (on
this side) greatly threatens both Church and State, Faith and good manners, all
things civil as well as sacred. What wise and honest-hearted Christian (that
has any care of posterity, or prospect for the future) does not daily find as
an holy impatience, so an infinite despondency rising in his soul, while he
sees so many weak shoulders, such unwashen hands, such unprepared feet, such
rash heads, and such divided hearts, not only disown, cast off, contemn and
abhor all Ministry and Ministers in the Church of England; but they are
publicly intruding themselves upon all holy duties, all sacred Offices, all
solemn Mysteries, all divine Ministrations, after what fashion they list, both
in their admission and execution? In many places, either pitiful silly
wretches, or more subtle and crafty fellows, have become the mighty Rivals,
the supercilious Censors, yea, the open menacers and opposers, no less than
secret underminers, of the most learned and renowned, the most reverend, able
and faithful, both Bishops and Presbyters, in England. All that ever these
Worthies have done in former ages, or still do never so commendably in their
religious services of God and this Church, is superciliously and scurrilously
cried down by some men (under the presumption and protection of their ignorant
and impudent Liberties) as no better than formal and superficial, carnal and
unspirituall, as unchristian, yea, Antichristian.

All their and our catechisings, preachings, prayings, baptisings,
consecratings; their instructing of babes, their confirming of the weak, their
resolvings of the dubious, their terrifying and binding over to judgment
unbelieving and impenitent sinners, their censuring and admonishing of the
scandalous, their excommunicating the contumacious, their loosing the penitent,
their comforting the afflicted, their binding up the brokenhearted; all the
exercise and operations of their spiritual power, yea, their very ordination
and holy orders, their gifts and graces, their abilities and authority, either
from God or this Church; all these are either baffled and disparaged, or
invaded, usurped by some rude Novellers, with equal insolency and
insufficiency, being for the most part by so much the more impudent, by how
much they are grossly ignorant.

Yea, some of them, the better to color over their lazy and illiterate
licentiousness (to which they are now degenerated) have such audacious brows,
and seared consciences, as after they have pretended to have tasted how
gracious the Lord was, 1 Pet. 2.3. Heb. 6.4, 5.
in the orderly and holy dispensations of heavenly gifts by the Ministry of the
Church of Engl. yet they now glory to cast off all her ministrations, to
separate from her communion, and all due subjection to any of her Ministers,
vapouring much of their own and other men's gifts, of extraordinary callings, of
odd ravings and rantings, of new seekings and quakings, of rare dippings and
dreamings, of their extemporary prophecyings, and inspired (yet confused)
prayings, of extraordinary unctions and inward illuminations; the grounds and
fruits of which strange pretensions I have been a long time diligently curious
to observe in the speech, writings and actions of these pretenders. And I must
profess, that either I am wholly a stranger to right reason as well as true
Religion, to the Word and Spirit of God, principles and practices of all godly
men and women in former ages; or I am utterly incapable to discern any of
these, either rational or religious, orderly or honest expressions in any
instances or degrees proportionable, or indeed comparable to (much less beyond)
what was most clearly observable (as the Suns light at noonday) in the
Sermons, Prayers, Writings, Lives and Actions of those Ministers, and other
excellent Christians, who heretofore held, and still do, an holy communion with
the Clergy and Church of England.

Beyond whose sober light and solid discoveries of true Religion, these new
Masters (who will needs be Ministers) have yet offered to me no other but such
strange stuff, such rambling rhapsodies, such crude incoherences, such
chymicall chimaeras, such Chaos-like confusions, such Seraphick whimsies, such
Socinian subtilties, such Behmemick bumbast, such profound nonsense, such
blasphemous raptures, big as Behemoth, Job 40* and 41. 2 Pet. 2.18.
and disdainful as Leviathan, proud swelling words of vanity, as no sober
Christian has leisure to intend, or need to understand, if he had capacity;
which he is not likely to have, since I am confident they pass their authors
own understanding: not that there is any thing in them that flows from the
higher springs of grace, or the profounder depths of divine mysteries; Col.
2.18.
but they are mere puffings up of proud and fleshly minds, intruding themselves
into things they have not seen, who delight in this froth of idleness, these
lyings and vapourings of hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4 2.
which never did of old (in the Gnostics, Montanists, Manichees, or others of
the like bran with these men) in the least degree advance the majesty or
authority of Christian Religion, or the credit and comfort of Christian
Preachers or Professors; however they served for a time the bellies and
interests of such popular Parasites, more than Preachers of the Gospel, or
Ministers of Jesus Christ.

Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father was of old, James 1.27.
still is, and ever will be in the minds and mouths of true Ministers (when
these Hucksters and Mountebanks, these deceitful workers are buried in infamy
and obscurity with those their rotten predecessors) a rich magazine of heavenly
wisdom, a Treasury of sound knowledge, a storehouse of pregnant and ponderous
Truths, bringing men to a good understanding of God, themselves, and their
neighbors, free from the rust and scurf of childish easiness and popular
petulancy, planted by holy and humble industry, watered by prayers and
patience, beautified with all manner of useful virtues and moralities,
dispensed to others with authority, industry and perspicuity, entertained in
men's own hearts with honesty and charity; not studying to be admired of men,
but approved of God; not affecting to stupifie auditors with strange
difficulties and curiosities, but to edify them with saving Truths, and sound
Doctrine, in words easy to be understood; five of which S. 1 Cor. 14.9.
Paul preferred before ten thousand in an unknown tongue, or unintelligible
gibberish, so much affected by these new-minted Ministers.

That primitive, plain, and profitable way of preaching, praying and writing,
was the commendable method of those excellent, ordained, and orderly Ministers
of the Church of England, who were furnished both with ability and authority
for so great and sacred a work, whose notions were more in the fruitful
valleys of practical piety, than in the barren heights of useless
sublimities. Then was it that the sweet and fruitful dews of heaven crowned
those true Ministers labors with all spiritual proficiencies and heavenly
blessings: then was the Church of England, and thousands of pious souls in it,
like Gideons fleece, full of holy distillations, or like the garden of Eden,
liberally watered with the rivers of God; I mean the faithful endeavors of
able, honest, and Orthodox Ministers, both Bishops and Presbyters, duly
ordained and divinely authorized for that service: then was the time common
people had less of curiosity and liberty, but more of piety and charity; they
were more kept to their bounds and enclosures, but enjoyed far better pastures
than they now find in the ramblings and extravagances of those commons, where
they have chosen to enjoy their Pastors and Preachers after their own heart.

Nor is this insolency of people any wonder (though it be a great grief) to
sober Christians, when they consider how far this gangrene of abused liberty
has spread among men and women too: the meanest and most mechanic He or She
(as Tertullian observes of some bolder Heretics and Schismatics in his days)
dare, De praes. ad Har.
contrary to all Primitive pattern, and Scriptural precept, to preach, to
baptize, to consecrate, to censure, to excommunicate; scorning and opposing all
things that are not branded with their schismatic marks, their novell
badges, and factious discriminations.

Wherewith so soon as any silly men or women come once to be dubbed and
signalized, their first vow and adventure is against the whole frame and
constitution of the Church of England, but specially against the orderly,
ancient, and Catholic Ministry of it; which is the rind or bark of Religion,
by which the sap, life, and nourishment of it is preserved and conveyed from
the root Christ Jesus, to the several branches of his Church in every place.
This, this must by all means be peeled round, stripped off, and cast away,
under pretense of Christian liberty; and a better, because freer, course of
deriving Chirstian Religion to peoples ears and hearts, by another Ministry
than that Ancient, Apostolic, Catholic and Primitive way of an orderly
ordained Ministry, which consisted of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, be
brought in. Against the constitution and succession of all these, as corrupt,
adulterous, Popish, Babylonish, spurious and superstitious, in England, whole
troops of plebeian spirits have been, and still are, engaged, whose fierce
onsets and encounters were at first begun, and are still carried on with as
great resolution and error, as his that assaulted a Windmill instead of a
Giant.

The great alarm given by their chief leaders, is, First, to rail bitterly
against the whole Clergy, and all sacred orders used in the Church of England:
thence they proceed to wipe off their Baptism, as vain and invalid; to vomit
up their Lords Supper, as nauseous and superstitious; to read their Creeds
backward, to an unbelief of all things have been preached: next, they cancel
the Decalogue, as a Judaick phylactery, a legal prescription: lastly, they
learn to account and call the Lords Prayer a kind of spell and conjuration,
being perfect enemies to any thing that looks like a Liturgy, or set form of
prayer and devotion. After this, with stiff necks and haughty looks, they
scornfully defy all ancient ordination, all Catholic succession, all
Apostolic commission derived to any Bishops and Presbyters, as Ministers of
Christ, altering and annulling, as much as in them lies, all the order, descent
and power of the Evangelicall Ministry, both in this and all other Christian
Churches since the Apostles days; the right of resumption and redemption of
which they challenge to themselves, according as their several fancies list to
make themselves or others Ministers, or to have none at all; which is the
highest pitch of their Christian liberty, counting all Ministers to be but
their curbs and manacles.

Having thus commenced Masters of mis-rule, their next work is to tu^n the
garden of God, any settled Church, as this of Engl. was, into ruinous heaps, or
a very dunghill; to expel the Priests of the Lord out of his Temple; to make
Churches of Stables, and Stables of Churches; to bring in the lips of bleating
calves there, where the calves of learned, devout, and eloquent lips were wont
to be offered. It is not liberty enough for them to separate from the Church of
England, and apostatize from those Ministers that baptized them, unless they
utterly destroy them both; setting up instead of one National and renowned, one
uniform and flourishing Church, in which were truth and order, unity and
beauty, strength and safety, all Christian gifts and graces, every good word
and work to admiration, innumerable little swarms in several Conventicles,
with Ministers strangely multiform, mutable and misshapen: in which novell
confederacies, both Preachers and people rather catch and hang together by
chance, like burres, in confused knots, than grow like Olive-branches, or the
kernels of Pomgranates, with order and comeliness, from the same root Christ
Jesus, after the methods of those ancient Churches, which were the prime and
exemplary branches whereto after-successions should conform themselves.

As these factious people are, so must their new Priests and Ministers be.
Grave and godly Bishops, with their learned Presbyters, must be set aside, as
broken vessels, that they may set up, by popular and plebeian suffrages, some
miserable mechanics, some antic engines, some pitiful praters and parasites
of the vulgar, who have had no higher breeding or degree in Church or State,
than that of poor tradesmen, (for the better bred and more ingenuous sort of
men abhor such impudence and usurpation:) their shop has been their school,
their hammers, or shuttles, or needles have been their books. At last,
coachmen, footmen, ostlers and grooms despair not to become Preachers, by a
rare and sudden metamorphosis, coming from the office of rubbing horses heels,
to take care of men's souls, as some Farriers in time turn Physicians. It
matters not how sordid, how silly, how slovenly, how mercenary, how illiterate
they are, provided they have cunning enough to pretend a call, impudence enough
to display their ignorance, and hypocrisy enough, by much talk of Gods grace
in them, to supply the real wants of all competent ability, as well as
authority, to be Ministers of the Gospel.

Yet these, these (O my noble Contrymen) are in many places rude intruders,
insolent usurpers, doughty undertakers, to discharge the duty of Evangelicall
Ministers: in any one of these you must seek, and may find, as they pretend, a
Bishop, a Presbyter, and a Deacon; all Evangelicall power, Ecclesiastical
offices, and Ministerial authority: these are the new-invented Machines or
Engines (which the Church of England, and all others, since the Apostles times,
were not so happy as to know or use) which must set up the decayed Kingdom of
Jesus Christ: these must propagate the glorious Gospel; these must exalt Christ
crucified; these must consecrate for you holy Elements; these must administer
to you the blessed Sacraments; these must exercise all Church Power and Divine
authority over your consciences: whereas for my part I do not think that the
best of these new Masters and Ministers can have from their own fancies or
peoples forwardness so much authority (because they have none, either from God,
or the Church of Christ, or the laws of this Land) as would make them petty
Constables or Bom-baylies, a Lay-elder or an Apparitor.

This I am sure, that in the purest and Dandi baptismi jus habet summus
sacerdos qui est Episcopus; dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi. Tert. de bap. c. 17.
Tert. exh. ad Cast. c. 7. Differentiam inter ordinem and plebem constituit
ecclesiae autoritas and honor per ordinis consessum sanctificatus a Deo, ubi
ecclesiast^ci ordinis est consessus and offert and tinguit sacerdos qui est ibi
solus. Eucharistiae Sacramentum non de aliorum manu quam praesidentium sumimus.
Tert. coro. mil. c. 3. Cyp. ep. 35. in illa verba, Quemadmodum misit me pater,
etc. John 20.21. unde intelligimus, non nisi in ecclesia praepositis, ac in
Evangelica lege and Dominica ordinatione fundatis, licere baptisare, aut
remissionem peccatorum dare.
primitive times, as Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and
others assure us, the holy mysteries of Christian Religion, the power of the
Keys, the sacrating of Sacraments, the pastoral ruling and preaching, as of
office, duty and necessity, to any part of Christ's flock, was esteemed the
peculiar and proper work of Bishops and Presbyters in their order and degree,
as the true and only Pastors and Teachers that succeeded the twelve Apostles
and the seventy Disciples in their ordinary Ministry; nor were men branded for
other (how able soever) than insolent and execrable usurpers, who did adventure
to officiate unordained, that is, not duly authorized as Ministers. Such
intruders Tertul. de praes. ad Haer. cap. 41.
Tertullian notes both some men and women to have been in his time, who were
leavened with Schism and Heresy: so Epiphan. Haeres. 89. Aug. de Haer. c. 27.
Epiphanius and S. Austin tell us of the Quintilliani, Pepuziani, and
Colliridiani, who were confounders of the Ministerial order.

Facinus multis mortis generibus multandu^ Socr. hist. l. 1. c. 20. Niceph. l.
8. c. 49.
Sozomen, Socrates, Nicephorus, and other Church-historians sharply censure one
Ischyras, or Ischyrion, who unordained pretended to be a Presbyter, and so to
officiate; calling him a detestable person, and worthy of more than one death:
whom Athanasius finding about to consecrate (or rather desecrate) the
Eucharist, he in an holy and heroic zeal, Athanasius Ischyram vel Ischy^ionem
sacris mysticis operantem, facto flagrante deprehendens, mensam sacram evertit,
calicem confregit, impiam tem^ra^ii hominis audaciam inhibuit. Aetas nostra
multos vidit Ischyras, Athanasia nullum. Langius in Niceph. locum.
as Christ in the Temple, brake the Communion Cup, overthrew the Table, and
repressed his insolent impiety, counting him as another Judas Iscariot, a
traitor to Christ and the Church.

Yet in the place of the Ministers of the Church of England, I beseech you how
few Athanasiusses, how many Ischyrasses may you now see, challenging to
themselves the care of men's souls, as Ministers of Christ, undertaking the
managerie of men's eternal interests, confident to interpret Scriptures, to
resolve doubts, to decide controversies, to satisfy men's consciences, to keep
up the truth, power and majesty of Christian Religion, by new, undue, and
exotic ways, against the torrent and impetuous force of ignorance, Atheism,
profaneness, error, malice and madness of men and Devils?

For all which grand designs of Gods glory and the Churches good, those men are
as fit agitators as Phaeton was to drive Phoebus his Chariot; and truly with
like success they will do it: for instead of enlightening the world, these
Incendiaries will set all on fire, as far as they meet with any combustible
matter: in which sad conflagrations begun and blown up by them in this Church
of England, some of them are so vain as to glory, calling them the spiritual
day of judgment, an invisible doomesday, a coming of Christ in the spirit of
burning and refining, to purge his Church. For this purpose they say the Sun
must be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood; government of Church
and State must be subverted: nor do they (according to their several fancies
and interests) fail to presage and expect a glorious Resurrection to their
parties, which they hope shall reign with Christ, if not a thousand years, yet
as long as they can prevail, so as to get power, and preserve those liberties
they have ravished to themselves.

CHAP. VIII.
NOr are these novell undertakers ever more ridiculous, The pretensions of
Intruders to excuse their wants. Apostolos in perversum aemulantur. Tert. de
praes. l. 30.
than when they sow pillowes under their own rustic arms and others elbows,
excusing, yea abetting their illiterate rudeness, and idiotick confidence, with
the primitive plainness and simplicity of the Apostles, when Christ first chose
them, who were Fishermen, Tent-makers, or the like.

Which is truly, but very impertinently alleged, as any parallel case with
these impotent and pragmatick intruders; unless they could manifest to the
world (which they never yet did, nor ever will) such miraculous endowments,
such power and anointing from above, as came upon the Apostles, which in one
moment was able to furnish them with more sufficiency and authority, than all
study and industry can ever do any of us; which are the now ordinary means
appointed and blessed by God, succeeding in the place of miraculous gifts,
where Churches are once fully planted, and Christianity settled. To all which
the constant testimony of an uninterrupted Ministry and holy succession of
ordained Bishops and Presbyters, from the very Apostles, as they from Christ,
is a more pregnant witness and conviction, than any new miracles could be,
much more than any such pitiful accounts can be, as these wonders of
ignorance and arrogance can give to the world, of any extraordinary matters
they say or do, either as Ministers or Christians. The best of some of whose
lives would deform (I fear) the golden legend, which seems to be written by a
man of a brazen forehead, a leaden wit, and an iron heart.

We (the despised Clergy of England) do profess to use, and pray God to bless
our long preparative studies, meditations, writings, readings; also our
immediate care and concomitant labors in this kind, habitually to fit us for
that dreadful work, and for every actual discharge of it. We find these
methods practiced by the most famous lights of the Church, recommended by S.
Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16.
though a person in some things extraordinarily gifted, that he should attend
didiligently to those exercises, that his profiting might appear. We do not now
expect fire from heaven with Elias, to come down upon our sacrifices; but we
are glad to take the ordinary coals of Gods altar, which may, by his Word and
Spirit going along with our pains and prayers, both enlighten our minds and
kindle our hearts, so as to make us burning and shining lights in Gods house,
which is his Church.

Truly those proud and poor wretches, who know no coals, but those of their own
chimney-corners, may possibly have a few embers on their hearths, or in their
potsheards; they may, like dark lanthorns, have a bit of a farthing-candle in
them, that shines with a little dim and dubious light on one side only; as in
the smatterings of some plain primer-knowledge, which they have gathered either
by superficial reading the Scriptures, or by hearing some Sermons heretofore
from the able Ministers of England, or by gleaning a little out of the plainest
of their writings: but it is most apparent, that on three sides of them, (that
is, for Grammatical skill, historical knowledge, and polemicall learning)
they are so horridly black and dark, that they seem fitter implements to bring
in such ignorance, irreverence, Atheism, superstition and confusion, as shall
quite put out the Christian and Reformed Religion in this nation, (reducing all
to pristine darkness, deformity and barbarity) than probable ever to be either
propagators, purgators, or preservers of it; which had long ago been overrun
with the rank weeds of Idolatry, Heresy, Schism and Apostasy in all the
world, if God had not in the place of primitive miracles supplied the Church
with such Ministers, both Bishops and Presbyters, whose admirable learning,
undaunted courage, indisputable authority, uniform order, and constant
succession, was beyond any miracle; which did at once both wonderfully attest
and mightily preserve the sanctity, mystery and majesty of Christian Religion,
from the subtilty of persecutors, the sophistry of Philosophers, the contumacy
of Schismatics, and contumelies of Heretics; being too hard (by Gods
assistance) for the malice of men, and the wiles of Satan.

All which are then (under several new notions and disguises) probable to
prevail over this or any Christian Church, when such liberty shall be used by
vulgar spirits and inordinate minds, as shall not only diminish and abate, Si
constat id verius quod prius, id prius quod and ab initio, id ab initio quod ab
Apostolis; pariter utique constabit id esse ab Apostolis traditum quod apud
Eccles^as Apostolorum fuerit sacrosanctum. Tertull. adv. Marci. l. 4. c. 5.
but quite in time destroy and vacate the divine reverence and inviolable
sanctity of religious mysteries and holy ministrations; which will inevitably
follow, where the Catholic order and divine authority of Ministers derived
through all ages, is not only questioned and disputed, but denied, despised,
variated, prostituted, usurped, by whosoever list to make himself a Minister in
any new way; which cannot be true if new, nor authentic if it be exotic,
unwonted in the Church of Christ, either broken off, or different from that
primitive commission and constant exemplification, or Catholic succession,
which was owned and observed in Bishops and Presbyters throughout all the
Christian world.

For my part, I abhor all intrusion and obtrusion of dangerous Novelties, both
from Papists and Separatists, either in Doctrine, Discipline, or Government of
the Church: and those I account dangerous, yea detestable Novelties, which not
upon any plea of ignorance or necessity, but merely out of wantonness and
wilfulness, seek to alter the sacred streams and currents of Ecclesiastical
power, authority and order, from those fountains where Christ first broached
it, and those conduits by which the Apostles derived it; which unquestionably
was by Bishops and Presbyters.

I know, that the sacred office and Angelick function of the Evangelicall
Ministry, as it is from my Lord Jesus Christ, and is in his name and stead; so
it ought to be managed, reverenced, esteemed, 2 Cor 5.^0.
transmitted, and undertaken among all true Christians, Tota in Apostolos
potestas Dominici transfertu^. Hilar. in Mat. c. 10.
as a visible supply of Christ's absence in body; as an authoritative embassy
or delegation from Him; as a sacred dispensation of that Ministry to his
Church, by chosen and duly ordained men; setting forth his History, his
Precepts, Promises, Sacraments, and other holy Institutions, together with the
Ministrations and Gifts of his holy Spirit, by which he promised to his
Apostles, Mat. 28.20.
to be with them to the end of the world, in that holy work wherein he employed
them and their lawful successors, Verse 19.
to be his witnesses among all nations whither he should send them.

So that every true Minister (as with the ancients Mr. Chrysostom. in Joh. 20.21.
Calvin observes) in his proper place and order (as Bishop or Presbyter) is
first a Prophet, to teach and instruct in the truths of God, that part of
Christ's Church over which he is constituted: next, he is as a Ruler, Heb. 13.17.
Shepherd, and Governor over them in the Lord, Quia Christus visibili
praesentia inter nos non habitat, hominum ministerium adhibe^, quasi vica^iam
operam; non ad eos jus suum transferendo, sed ut per manus ipsoru^ suum ipse
opus ^g^t. Call. Inst. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 1.
to feed and guide them in that holy order and discipline, which becomes the
lesser and the greater, the single and sociall parts of Christ's flock,
according as they are under their several care and inspection: lastly, every
true Minister is in his proper station to perform in Christ's stead those
offices of his Evangelicall Priesthood, which he has assigned to be dispensed
for his Churches good; as the solemn consecration and celebration of that
Eucharisticall memorial of the great oblation of Christ to his Father upon the
Cross, for the redemption of the world, by which all mankind is put into a
conditional capacity of salvation, and upon their true faith and repentance,
Christ's body and blood, with all his meritorious benefits, are evidently set
forth, signally confirmed, and personally exhibited, in that great Sacrament
and most venerable mystery, to every worthy Receiver. He is further to offer up
upon the altar of Christ's merits the spiritual sacrifices of the Church, in
prayers, Romans 12.1. Heb. 13.10. 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15.
praises, thanksgivings, alms and charities. Besides this, there is in the true
Pastor or Minister of the Church of Christ, according to their proportion and
degree, their line and measure (as Bishops and Presbyters) a power of mission
and propagation, Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 3. and 5.22. Ti. 1.5.
in order to maintain that holy succession of an Evangelicall Priesthood which
Christ Jesus has appointed; and which the Apostles, with their successors, the
Bishops and Pastors of the Church, in all the world, have to this day
continued, without any interruption, or any variation, as to the maine, of the
power and practice of Ordination.

So then, as these three offices are eminently in Christ, as the great Prophet,
Prince and Priest of his Church; to all which he was consecrated by the mission
of his Father, by his own Bloodshed and Passion, also by the anointing of his
eternal Spirit, which filled him with all divine Graces, ministerial Gifts,
and miraculous Power, necessary for so great a work: so the Lord Christ being
absent in body, but present in his power and Spirit, had derived and committed
the outward ministerial execution of these his offices, to chosen and ordained
men, Act. 20.28. 2 Cor. 6.1. 2 Cor. 4.7.
as overseers and workers together with Christ, of themselves but earthen
vessels, yet the fittest instruments for the present dispensations of his
Gospel and grace, which yet are to be carried on, according to the first
appearance of Christ in the flesh, in such darkness, weakness, 1 Cor. 2 3.
and meannesse, as may most set forth the present excellency of Gods gracious
power, and set off the future manifestations of his glory to his Church; which
even in this inferiority and obscurity of the Gospel, has yet, as three that
bear witness to its truth in heaven, the wisdom of the Father contriving, the
love of the Son effecting, and the power of the holy Ghost applying Evangelical
mercies to poor sinners; 1 John 5.7, 8.
so it has three that bear witness on earth to that glorious truth and
mystery of the Gospel, the water of Baptism, which sprinkles to Regeneration,
the blood of the Lords Supper, which feeds and refreshes believers, also the
Spirit of ministerial Power and Authority, which has been, and still is, from
Christ continued in all true Christian Churches. As the first three are one in
an essential unity of divine nature, so these later three (as S. John tells
us) agree in one, that is, in one Sovereign author Jesus Christ, and in one
sacred order and office of Church-Ministry, or Evangelical dispensations,
successively derived from the Apostles, Elders and Deacons, by a power and
commission peculiar to those who are duly ordained to be Christ's Deputies,
Lieutenants, and Vicegerents in his Church, for those holy offices and divine
ministrations; whereto they are severally appointed in an higher or lower
degree, as Apostles or Elders, as Bishops or Presbyters, 1 Timothy 3.13. Ephesians.
4.11.
as Pastors or Teachers; either over-seeing, as Rulers and Guides, or
attending, as Deacons and Servitors.

CHAP. IX.
IN reference to which sacred and grand employments, St. Of Ministerial
sufficiencies, real or pretended. 2 Cor. 2.16.
Paul's modesty and humility asked with trembling that unanswerable question,
Who is sufficient for these things? Whereas now in Engl. there are such
insolent intruders, who act as asking quite contrary, Who is not sufficient for
these things? as if forwardness, boldness and confidence were all the
sufficiency required in a Minister of the Gospel: in which plebeian and
pretended sufficiencies as these novell intruders do most abound; so I am sure
there were really never more blunt and leaden tools in any age applied to
Church-work, than many, if not most of them, are: they come indeed with their
beetles and wedges, their swords and staves, their axes and hammers, Psalm. 74 6.
to beat down all the carved work of Gods house, rather than to prepare or
polish the least stone or corner of that sacred building.

Who being not a little conscious to themselves, that they are grossly defective
in all those real abilities of good learning, sound knowledge, sober
judgment, orderly method, grave utterance, and weighty eloquence, which all
wise and sober Christians expect should appear in every true Minister of the
Church of Christ, in such a competent measure and evident manner, as they may
be able comfortably to discern them, and usefully to enjoy them; these crafty
Intruders do first cry down all those real and visible abilities, as merely
natural, humane, carnal, as enemies to the Cross, Grace, and Spirit of
Christ: for (as the apes in the fable) these deceitful workers having no tails
themselves, they would fain persuade all other creatures which have that
ornament, to cut them off, as burdens and superfluous. After this rude essay of
craft and malice in vain attempted against the fruits of learned industry,
wherein the Ministers of the Church of England have, and still do, so vastly
exceed these Mushrome Ministers of the last and worst editions, they cunningly
fly to the pretentions of special callings, extraordinary inspirations,
illuminations, and graces ministerial; which (they well know) are not easily
to be discerned by any other but a man's self, even there where they may
possibly be real. Who knows not that as to the point of inward Graces, they are
far more easily pretended and voiced, than discerned and enjoyed in ones self?
much less can they be so proved and manifested to others, as to satisfy their
conscience in the points of another power and their own duty. I am sure,
neither gifts nor graces ministerial are by wise and sober Christians to be
much supposed or expected there, where men evidently silly and weak, mean and
vain, ignorant and arrogant, dare yet to disdain all that ancient order and
uniform succession of the Evangelicall Ministry, which has been visible in all
Churches (as in this of England) for 1500. years: and to salve their credit, or
gain reputation as Teachers, they bring for the satisfaction of their own and
other men's conscience, in point of that office, duty, and power ministerial,
which they challenge and undertake, no other signature and character of their
commission and investiture into that office, save only what themselves pretend
to be within them, of secret impulses, which being to man's judgment
undiscernable, are utterly insignificant; nor ought they to bear any sway in
the Church of Christ, where the power ministerial was first declared by
miraculous gifts and endowments, also by evident signs and wonders, sufficient
to confirm its first commission, and to authorize its after-succession, from
those only with whom it was deposited, to be transmitted by them and their
successors to the Churches of Christ in all ages, by such gifts and ordinary
endowments as might be first duly tried and approved in men, before they were
ordained to be Ministers in the Church of Christ.

But these Heteroclite Teachers, for the further corroboration of their dubious
title and claim to the office of the Ministry, are content to accept of some
appointment from that power which is merely military, or civil and
magistratick: which powers in Primitive Churches for 300. years were so far
from making any Minister either Bishop, or Presbyter, or Deacon in the Church
of Christ, that they sought by all means to persecute and destroy the whole
profession of Christianity: It was Constantine the Great's saying to the Nicene
Bishops, Vos intra ecclesiam, ego extra ecclesiam a Deo episcopus constitutus
sum. Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 24.
yea, when the Empire became Christian, as in Constantine the Great's time,
neither He, nor any Christian Emperor, Prince or Magistrate after him, was
ever so impertinent as to imagine, that because they could derive civil and
military power to others, they had also power to make Christian Ministers, or
to invest them with the Ecclesiastical power of holy orders; nor did they
think they had any thing more to do with the Clergy by way of authority, save
only to take care for their due and comfortable discharge of that Ministry,
to which they were by another principle and power ordained, according as the
peace, honor and order of the Church required, which so conformed to the State
and Commonweal, that all Ministers were humbly subject to the Scepters of
Princes, in the several places and stations Ecclesiastical to which they were
applied. The Clergy owe to Princes the civil endowments of honor and revenue,
given to them as the temporal reward of their spiritual work: but they are
not the sources of their orders, nor can their broad seal confer that power of
the holy Spirit, which only makes a Minister of Jesus Christ; not by way of
graces or gifts, so much as by way of mission and authority, flowing only from
the Spirit of Christ, as the chief Pastor, Bishop and Minister of his Church.

Others of these new-modell'd Ministers, in a way not more preposterous than
ridiculous, seek to deduce their ministerial power from mere plebeian
suffrages, from vulgar examinations, approbations and elections; which commonly
are factiously begun, foolishly carried on, and schismatically concluded;
having not less weakness, but less madness, or possibly a little more seeming
order, civility, or tameness, than those whose who pretend no other warrant or
authority for their being Ministers, but what is to be had from their own
blindness and boldness, their proud conceit and flattering confidence of
themselves, which emboldens them by a self-ordination, to take this holy power
to themselves, beyond what Aaron, or the true Prophets, Exodus 28.1 Heb. 4.4 5
Mat. 3.14
or the Apostles, or Christ himself (as man) did, who were not self-sent or
ordained, but chosen and appointed, solemnly consecrated and inaugurated to
their office and Ministry, either by clear prophecies accomplished, or visible
miracles wrought in the sight of the people, or by some such other signal
token, ordinary or extraordinary, by word or work, as God was pleased to use
for the manifestation of his will, and for the satisfaction of his Church, as
to those persons which were to minister to the Lord, and to whom his Church was
conscientiously to submit as to the Lord. Agreeably to which holy pattern, and
as a full answer to all those clamours, envies and despites, which the enemies,
rivals and extirpaters of the ancient Clergy and Ecclesiastic order in
England can pretend, the true Ministers (Bishops and Presbyters) of this
Christian and Reformed Church do challenge, use and maintain no other power,
privilege, or authority Ecclesiastical, than what they have duly and
constantly received in the way of holy orders from their predecessors hands,
who have descended from the very Apostles days.

Nor are they such Monopolizers, or appropriators of this power and office
ministerial to their own persons, or to such only as are formal Academicks,
professed Scholars, and University Graduates, as not willingly to admit into
that holy Order and Fraternity, by the right and Catholic way of due
ordination, not only any worthy Gentlemen, of competent parts, pious
affections, and orderly lives, whose hearts God shall move to so holy an
ambition, to desire so good a work; but even those that are of plebeian
proportions, 1 Timothy 3.1.
of meaner parts, and less improved erudition, provided they be found, upon due
trial, to have acquired such competent abilities, by Gods blessing upon their
private industry and studious piety, as may render them meet for any place or
work in Christ's husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.6.
where one may sow, another may water, a third may weed, a fourth may fense the
Church and Vineyard, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5.
according to the several gifts and dispensations ministered by the same Spirit
and power of Christ, which ought to be dispensed and carried on, not in an
arbitrary, rude and precarious usurpation and intrusion, but in an
authoritative, orderly, and decent derivation and succession, for the honor,
profit and peace of the Church of Christ. Certainly no worthy Minister or sober
Christian can so undervalue and debase those Evangelicall offices of Christ,
which are exercised by his ordained Ministers, as to think that every
self-flatterer and obtruder is presently to officiate, without any due
examination, approbation and ordination from those with whom that commission
and power has been ever deposited in a regular and visible succession from
Christ the great exemplar or Original; Plane Episcopi non de Dei voluntate
fiunt, qui contra dispositionem (Domini) and traditionem (ecclesiae) fiunt.
Cyp. ep. 55.
which visible order, mission and delegation is as necessary for the outward
unity, authority, solemnity and majesty of Christ's militant Church and Ministry
upon earth, as the workings of his blessed Spirit are for the inward operation
and efficacy of true grace in men's hearts.

So that as no private and good Christian has any cause to complain in this
part of the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England, who in dispensing
of holy orders, or ministerial power, acted after the Catholic pattern of
Primitive Churches, no less than the particular constitutions of this Church,
allowed by all estates and degrees of men; no more have any secular Powers, or
civil Magisrates, who are or shall be professors of true Christian Religion,
any cause to be jealous of the ancient Bishops and Ministers of the Church; nor
shall they need either out of conscience, or reasons of state, to pervert and
innovate that pristine course and regular succession of ministerial authority:
yea, as worthy Christians and wise Governors, they ought, both in piety and
policy, in honor and conscience, to be no less exact in preserving this sacred
order and divine authority from alteration, invasion and usurpation, than they
are for their own civil power, and secular jurisdiction; which the renowned
patterns of Christian Potentates, Constantine, Theodosius, and other great and
godly Princes, were so far from arrogating to their imperial power, that they
humbly submitted themselves to the order and power Ecclesiastical in the
things of Christ, highly esteeming and venerating that Apostolic race of
Bishops and Presbyters in the Church, as the great Luminaries of the world, the
constant witnesses of Christ's life and death, the celebraters of his mysterious
sufferings, grace and glory, the ministerial Fathers and confirmers of
Christians faith, as terrestiall Angels, as Gods gracious Ambassadors for
pardon and peace, as Christ's special commissioners appointed for to carry on
the great work of saving men's souls.

Just and generous Princes, if they be truly Christian, cannot be so partial,
as to forbid any man, under the high^st pain and penalty of high treason and
death it self, to challenge to himself any part of their civil or military
power, without a due commission derived either from themselves immediately, or
from those to whom they have deputed power for such ends and purposes; which
order they permit no man to violate or usurp, however conceitedly or really
able he may seem to be to himself or others for the managing of such power; and
yet permit such persons as are for the most part heady and high-minded,
insolent and disorderly, to intrude themselves, by a mere usurpation, upon that
sacred office, authority and Ministry, which is Christ's, without any due and
solemn derivation of this power, in such a way as has ever been Apostolic,
Primitive, Catholic, and only authentic in the Churches of Christ.
Certainly, the rude innovation and usurpation upon this office and honor
merits above any boldness (as Nilus in Balsamon expresses it) that black brand
of the last and perilous times, Page 1164.
when men shall be emphatically Traitors, not only to men, but to Christ; 2 Timothy 3.4.
not only to Common-weals, but to Churches; disobedient to parents, not only
natural and politic, but also spiritual and ecclesiastic; violating and
betraying, not only the visible peace, order, uniformity, and successive
authority of the Church, but the invisible comforts, quiet and grace of poor
peoples souls: who must needs be at a great loss, in a very sad and shameful
case, as to their Religion, where their spiritual leaders and shepherds are
usurpers, intruders, clamberers, not coming into the sheepfold by the door of
right ordination, John. 10.1.
but climbing some other way, as thieves and robbers; when their titular and
intruding Pastors prove either grievous wolves, or miserable asses, Act. 20.29.
as they commonly are found to be, who are not admitted by due ordination, but
crowd into the Ministry by rude and novell obtrusions; so domineering over the
flock of Christ, over whom not the holy Ghost, by an ordinary derived power and
authority, Acts 20.28.
but their own unruly spirits have made them, not so much overseers of others,
as either stark blind, or grossly over-seen in themselves.

CHAP. X.
THe sense of this High Treason against Christ, What caution Christians ought
to use, as to those Ministers with whom they entrust the care of their souls.
and of those sinful disorders which men bring on themselves and the Church of
Christ, by their intrusion, usurpation upon this ministerial power and office,
makes me here seriously suggest to You (my honored and beloved Countrymen)
this religious caution, That it very much concerns you, for your own and your
posterities souls good, to be very wary not to be imposed upon, and abused by
vulgar pretensions of zeal and Christian liberty in this point of the Ministry;
but to be vigilant with whom you entrust, as Ministers, your own, your
childrens, or any other peoples souls, where you are Patrons of Livings. And
since your own prudent abilities for learning, piety and experience, are so
modest, as not rashly to adventure upon this sacred office, charge and
ministration; how infinitely ought you to be ashamed and regretted, to see them
usurped many times by the dogs of your flocks, by your hinds and footmen, your
grooms and serving-men, by threshers, weavers and cobblers, by tailors, tinkers
and tapsters, any mean and mechanic people, whose parts and spirits are only
fit for those trades to which their breeding and necessities have confined
them? Not that I despise or reproach these honest, though mean, employments; but
I highly blame their insolence, and other men's patience, to see these usurp
upon the dignity of the Ministry. Certainly such proud and poor wretches may to
some men possibly seem fittest Ministers in a disordered State, and decaying
Church, as factors for Satan and Antichrist, setters for Ignorance and
Superstition, turning Faith into Faction: but they will never prove (after that
fashion of preparing and admitting) either able, or faithful, or fruitful
Ministers of Christ or his Church; seeming themselves, and making others
despisers of Christ, with the blasphemous Jews, while they so look upon him and
treat him, as under the notion of the Carpenters son, Mat. 13.55.
as their equal or inferior in some handicraft, forgetting his divine glory
and majesty, as the onely-begotten son of God, John 1.14. Mat. 28.18.
to whom all power is given in heaven and earth; who has executed this power
most visibly in sending forth his Ministers to teach and baptize all nations,
out of which to gather, and govern his Church in his name. They rudely slight
Christ's ministerial authority, in such as are truly excellent and duly ordained
Ministers, that they may proudly challenge it to themselves, without any reason
or Scripture, law or order, command or example, either from Christ or his
Church. Revelat. 2.2.
These men, who say they are Apostles, Prophets and Preachers, and are not,
will be in the end (and already are) found liars against God and their own
souls, deceitful workers, false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.13.
Mock-ministers, Pseudo-pastors, disorderly walkers, authors of infinite
scandal and confusion, of scorn and contempt to Christian and Reformed
Religion, both here and elsewhere: many of them serving their bellies, and
gratifying their carnal lusts and momentary wants, Romans 16.18.
much more than designing to advance the glory of God, the Kingdom of Christ,
or the eternal good of men's souls; which are not to be carried on, save in
Gods way, that is, by fit abilities, and with due authority: both are required
as necessary for a true Minister; the first (though real) is not sufficient
without the second. For as the mere outward material action cannot be a
divine, sacramental, or ministerial transaction, more than every killing of an
Ox was a sacrificing; so nor are mere natural or personal abilities
sufficient to acquire any office or authority, much less this of the Ministry
(which is divine, or none) any more than every able Butcher was presently
enabled to be a Priest. Any man's ability fully to understand, or handsomely to
relate the mind of his Prince, makes him not presently an Ambassador or
Minister of State, unless there be a commission, or letters of credence to
authorize the person. The blessed Apostle S. Paul, who was extraordinarily
converted, called, and sent of God, as a Christian, and a Minister or Apostle,
yet we see did not take upon him the exercise or office, till first Ananias had
by Gods special command laid his hands on him, Acts. 9.17.
and he became endowed with the ministerial gift or power of the holy Ghost:
which were afterward (in like sort) solemnly confirmed and increased by the
express command of God, when Paul and Barnabas were separated, and sent upon
special service, with fasting, prayer, and laying on of the hands of some
Prophets and Teachers in Antioch, Acts 11.26.
where the Apostle had formerly preached in the Church a whole year among much
people. This same Apostle often blames (and bids Christians beware of) false
Apostles, not only false in their doctrine, 2 Cor. 11.13.
but in their ordination and mission; as the Prophets of the Lord did of old
the false Prophets, Jer. 23.21.
whom God had not sent, yet they ran.

The Spirit of Christ commends the Angel of the Church of Ephesus (where, Rev.
2.2.
as Irenaeus and others tell us, S. John lived long, and left the most pregnant
examples of Ecclesiastical order, Episcopal power, and Ministerial
succession) for trying those that said they were Apostles and were not; for
finding, esteeming, and declaring them as liars, no way listening and adhering
to, or communicating with them, as being Falsaries and Impostors, enemies at
once to the truth, order and peace of Christ's Church. For it is seldom that a
bastardly generation of Preachers does not bring forth some false and base
doctrines: for it is observable in this, as in civil Histories, that Bastards
in nature, and so in office, are commonly most daring and adventurous spirits.
Certainly the late illegitimate Ministers, or spurious Preachers of new and
strange originals in England, have in less than fifteen years brought more
monsters of opinions and factions in Religion, than have arose in so many
hundred years before in any one Church.

I know some Christians are prone to gratify their curiosity (as those do who
sometime go to see monsters) in making some trial and essay of these pretended
Preachers, that once knowing their ignorance and insolence, they may upon
juster grounds ever after abhor them.

If this be tolerable for some persons of able and sober judgments, yet it is
no better than a snare and dangerous temptation for others that are weak and
unstable: nor may the venture be often made by the more steady Christians, lest
they seem thereby to countenance and encourage so great a confusion,
innovation, usurpation and scandal in the Church of Christ; besides the
abetting of that high profanation of holy duties and mysteries, which ought not
to be transacted, but in the name, power and authority of our God and Savior.
Certainly good Christians ought not at any hand to communicate with such
usurping intruders in any sacramental action; nor ought they to own any thing
more of a Minister of Jesus Christ in them, than they would of a King or
Magistrate in a Stage Player.

Doubtless, as no good Christian, so least of all those that profess to be
Ministers of Christ, ought to live as sons of Belial, disorderly, refractory,
unruly, after the arbitrary, rude and presumptuous dictates of their own wills.
The spirit of true Ministers and Prophets will be subject, as it ought, to that
rule, order and custom, 1 Cor. 14 32.
which in all ages has been the canon, measure and commission of all
Evangelical Ministers and Pastors of Christ's Church. As natural and moral
endowments are no plea to invest any man into any office, military or civil;
much less into any power and authority Ecclesiastical. The pretenses of new and
extraordinary calls, of missions immediate from God, are not in any reason
expectable, nor in Christian Religion credible, where the ordinary power and
commission was continued, and might duly be had, as it was, and yet is in the
Church of England: Ravens must not be hoped for to feed us, where Providence
gives us opportunity to get our bread by honest industry.

Where then there are so many intruders and deceivers gone out, as Ministers of
the Gospel, it is a matter of conscience as well as necessary prudence in all
good Christians, to be cautious and inquisitive, whom they allow and follow as
Ministers; to be first satisfied in that question which the Jews rationally
asked of Christ, By what power or authority do thou these things? Mat. 21.23.


No discreet person in civil affairs will obey any warrant or order, which has
no other authority than a private and pragmatick activity: and can it be piety
or prudence in Christians, to be deluded by any pretenders in the great
concernments of their souls; to have no more of Sacraments, or any other holy
duties, than the mere sensible shell and husk of them? for the spiritual life
and power of them is no where to be had but from such dispensers of them, as
have the authority and power, Mat. 7.29. He taught them as one having
authority. 1 Cor. 4.19. Not the speech, but the power.
the mission and commission of Christ rightly derived to them: which was
evident first in Christ, after in his holy Apostles and their lawful
successors.

Certainly the cheat and falsity of such mock-Ministers and Pseudo-pastors, is
of far greater danger and detriment than those of spurious and supposititious
children, or of embased coin, and counterfeit money. Some people have been so
wicked, as to change their own children, and steal others from their parents;
but it was never heard that children of any discretion were so foolish and
unnatural, as to abdicate their true Fathers and genuine mothers, that they
might adopt false parents, and superinduce upon themselves the Empire of
bastardly progenitors. The mischief and abuse is not less in Churches than in
Commonweals, in Christian Congregations than in families. Due respect of
paternall care and filial love, such as ought to be between Pastor and People,
can never be mutually expected, where the relation is either supposititious, or
presumptuous, or merely imaginary, or at best but arbitrary, which is
inconsistent with humane, much more with divine Authority; the measure of which
is not the pleasure of man, but the will of God, whose will is asserted by his
power.

For my part, I firmly conclude, that as no true Christians may admit of any
Gospel, or Sacraments, or holy Institutions, other than such as have been
already once delivered to the Catholic Church, J^de 3. M^s iste semper in
ecclesi^ vigu^^, ut qu^ quisque s^^^^ religi^si^r, o prompt^us novellis
adinventionibus contraire^. Vin. Li^. adv. haer. c. 9.
and preserved by her fidelity, against which the preaching of an Gal. 1.8.
Angel from heaven is not to be received or believed, but accursed; so nor may
any Church or good Christians either broach, invent, or admit any new
ministerial power, order, mission, or authority, beside or beyond that which
the Church of England and the Catholic Church of Christ has received, and
transmitted in a constant succession. That sacred ordination which began in
Christ, and flowed from him as the effect of his Melchisedechian, Evangelicall
and eternal Priesthood, must never be interrupted, innovated, or essentially
altered, no not under any pretense or removing or reforming what corrupions may
(possibly) be contracted by time and humane infirmities, which are but
accidental (as diseases to the body) to Catholic prescriptions founded upon
divine institutions. Fields once sown with good corn must not be rooted up or
fired, Mat. 13.30.
because tares may be sown by the enemy while men slept; Trees that are full of
moss and missletow through age, yet bearing good fruit, ought not to be cut
down, but pruned and cleared. The decays or dilapidations of the Temple before
Hezekiah and Josiah repaired it, were no excuse for peoples neglect to frequent
it, (much less were they justified) and to sacrifice other where than there
only, as the place which the Lord had chosen to put his name there; 2 Chronicles
29.5. Sanctify the house of the Lord, and carry fo^th the filthiness out of
the holy place.
nor did those pious Princes set that house of God on fire, because it was
decayed, but duly repaired it with great cost and care.

And such indeed was the excellent piety and prudence of the Church of England,
such wisdom and moderation it observed, as in all other things, so in this of
the ministerial order and office: What injuries it (as other holy things) had
suffered in the darkness of times, by the dullness of Presbyters, the negligence
of Bishops, or insolence of Popes, it wisely reformed; not abrogating the
authority, or breaking the Catholic succession of Bishops and Presbyters in
this, as in all Churches; not broaching a new fountain; not obstructing (as
Philistines) the wells their fathers had dug; not diverting the ancient
course and conduits of the waters of life: but cleansing the fountains, and
continuing the streams of primitive holy orders, in the constant descents,
degrees and offices of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. They did not raise up
new Ministers, like Mushromes, out of every molehill, no^ force them (like
Musk-melons) out of the hot beds of popular zeal and novellizing faction,
without any regard to the ancient stock and root of Ecclesiastical power and
Ministerial authority; from which (as Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and
all the ancients clearly tell us) Bishops and Presbyters were ever derived,
Surculi and propagines Apostolorum fidei traduces. Tert. de praes. c. 32.
as slips and off-sets of the twelve Apostles and seventy Disciples. No time
ever did, or ever shall render that Primitive plant and root of Evangelicall
Ministry so dry, dead and barren, that they may or ought to be quite stubbed
up, or new ones set in their room. No, they are only to be pruned and trimmed,
that so they may be worthy of that honor which indeed they have, to be by an
uninterrupted succession derived and descended from the blessed Apostles, whom
Christ first planted by his own hands; nor may any man's presumption undertake
to pull up that holy plantation, as those design to do, who endeavor to destroy
the derivation and succession of the power Ministerial.

The truth, sanctity and validity of which, as to the Ministry of the Church of
England (by its Bishops and Presbyters) has been fully and clearly asserted by
able pens, against both Papists on the one side, and Novellists on the other.
The one confining all Episcopal and Ministerial power to one head and origin,
the Bishop of Rome, as if there had not been twelve fountains and foundations
of prime Apostles, but only one, S. Peter, appointed by our Lord Jesus Christ;
the other lewdly scattering that sacred office and divine authority, even among
vulgar and plebeian hands, that every man may scramble for it as he list,
according as he fancies that his abilities and liberty in these times may
extend.

The putid and pernicious effects of which, in their present usurpations,
divisions, confusions, debasements, and discouragements upon the Clergy and
Church of England, as I shall afterward in the third Book more fully set them
forth; so I cannot here but justly condemn those partial, unreasonable and
irreligious principles, from whence so pragmatick an itch, or thirst of
novelty, in so grand a concernment of Religion, must needs arise; that fond men
should be so eager to stop up the ancient fountains of living waters, which
they dug not, Jer. 2.13.
that they might dig to themselves broken Cisterns, which can hold little or no
water. And this they delight to do, not only against those daily instances,
which miserable and manifest experience gives them of the sad and decayed
condition of the Christian and Reformed Religion in this Chapter of Engl. since
these new Ministers have intruded and divided; but contrary also to all those
pregnant testimonies and undeniable demonstrations, which both our pious
forefathers in Engl. and all other Christian Churches in all ages have
afforded us in the practices and writings of the Fathers, and testimonies of
all Church-historians, who with one mouth every where unanimously tell us, what
was the Apostolic, ancient, true, and only beginning of the Ministerial
order, what the holy and happy way of its descent, derivation and succession,
by duly consecrated Bishops and ordained Presbyters. Contrary to all which
plain and perpetual remonstrances (for nothing is in them dubious or dark) I am
amazed (I confess) to see, not the giddy and heady vulgar ungratefully engaged,
who are always like tinder, ready to take fire at any sparks of innovations,
diminutions, and extirpations especially of their laws and governors; but I
find some men of worth, yea and Ministers of good learning, and seeming
ingenuity, either so overawed by the vulgar, or over-biassed by their own
private interests, inclinations and passions, that after so much light of
Scripture and antiquity, shining both in the divine Originals, and the
Ecclesiastic copies of Ministerial order and succession, after their own
former solemn approbations and subscriptions, after their late experience of
the sad consequences already too much felt in this Church, as fruits of those
innovations and usurpations made upon that unity, power and authority of the
Evangelicall Ministry: yet I grieve, and am ashamed to see that such men should
still pitifully comply with, consent to, yea and promote those dangerous
alterations, and desperate extirpations which are designed by the enemies of
this Church; whose aim is to baffle and deprive this Reformed Church in so main
a point and hinge of Religion, as the ancient sacred orders, the constant
Ecclesiastical methods of the Evangelicall Ministry must needs be which, what
they ever have been in this and all Catholic Churches, no man of moderate
learning, humble piety, and honest principles, can be ignorant of.

CHAP. XI.
THose new, unwonted, and exotic fashions, Of late new models for making
Ministers of the Gospel.
which some men have studied of late to introduce or encourage in England, as
to this point of Ministerial office and power, besides that they are all of
them new, some of them monstrous to this and all ancient Churches, they plainly
savor more of humane faction than of Christian faith; else they would not,
they could not in any conscience or charity be so mischievously bent, and
malapertly spiteful against those worthy Bishops, and other excellent
Ministers, who still adhere to the Ancient and Catholic order of the Church of
England; nor yet could they be so misshapen, multiform, and many-headed in
themselves, changing every day almost (as Proteus) by an innate principle of
mutability, which follows the fancies and interests of new and present
projectors, but not the judgment and grave example of our ancient and
impartial predecessors.

And however some of these new ways, not of successive procreating, but new
creating Ministers, may seem first brewed by domestic discontents, next
broached by a foreign sword, at length fostered by a partial and overawed
Assembly, at last fomented for a season by scattered and divided houses,
Parlaments, in very broken, touchy and bloody times, (when every new thing was
made trial of, which might (as toys and bables) best please the peevish and
petulant parties of people in England;) however others have further challenged
to themselves a particular liberty and arbitrary authority, such as best likes
them, in this point of the Ministry (which no man of any wisdom, piety, or
gravity can allow, under any pretensions of gifts or graces ministerial in any
man:) Yet all these novell inventions, whatever title they pretend from God or
man, from policy or necessity, may not in any reason or Religion, in any honor
or conscience, in any piety or prudence, be put into the balance with (much
less be thought fit to outvie) that clear primitive pattern, that Catholic
constant succession, that Apostolic and divine prescription; which do (all)
preponderate for the Ministry of the Church of England, in the true scale of
regular and authentic ordination of Ministers, who are never so completely and
indisputably invested with that power, as when by the imposition of hands
solemnly done by Episcopal Presidents, and Presbyterian Assistants; who after
due examination, and serious monition, and fervent supplication, do in
prescript words commit that ministerial power, spirit, and authority of
Christ, which ought to be rightly imparted to those that undertake Evangelical
ministrations in Christ's name, to any part of his Church, if they desire to
avoid the sin and scandal of being intruders, traitors, usurpers, and
counterfeiters of Christ's ministerial dignity and authority.

Secular or civil powers, which are but the products of the sword, and managed
chiefly by the policy and arm of flesh, may (indeed) confer what honor, office
and authority they please on any man in civil things; yea they may and ought in
conscience to take care of, and regulate the exercise of Ecclesiastical power
in reference to Gods glory, and the public good both of Church and State: but
they cannot (as from themselves) by any natural, moral, or civil capacity,
confer holy orders, or bestow Ministerial authority on any man; much less may
they (or as Christian Magistrates will they) make a new broad Seal of
Christianity, or commence any new way of ministerial authority; nor may they
in conscience cancel or abrogate the good old way, no nor yet alter in any
material part the Catholic way of its right derivation and succession, which
was by the hands of those who had first received that holy deposition; which
certainly is of as much higher nature, orb and sphere, beyond any natural,
moral, or secular power, as the celestial light of sun and stars is above that
which is from candles, or that holy fire on Gods altar was above that which is
but culinary.

All good Christians agree, that its original is in Christ, its commission
from Christ, its first delegation to the twelve Apostles and the seventy
Disciples: from the Apostles we read its transmission to others in the
Apostolical Acts and Epistles. How it was afterward continued, and by what
means derived to an uninterrupted Catholic succession in all Churches for 1500
years, is not indeed to be learned, and so not decided by Scripture; whose
records (except the Apocalypse) extend not above 28 or 30 years after Christ's
ascension: but being a thing now of late so hotly disputed in this and some
other Churches, there is no rational satisfaction to be had (as to matter of
fact) but by the after-histories of the Church; which I am sure give all the
seeing world in this point so clear, so perfect, so full a light, and so
uniform a testimony, that no learned, impartial, and conscientious Christian
can desire more; nor can they but acquiesce in these, unless they dare to doubt
and deny the veracity and fidelity of all authors that have given us account of
any Ecclesiastical Catholic affairs and customs since the Apostles times: in
all which no one point or practice has less doubt or dispute, less variation
or diversity, than this of Ecclesiastical order,, both as to the Ministry and
government of the Church.

What the ignorant vulgar (who are the bran and courser sort of people) may
endlesly fancy and affect, or what others of better parts, but as base
passions, may cunningly pretend, I know not; the better to bring in their new
modelings of Ministers and Churches: but I am sure it will very ill become you
(O noble Gentlemen) who are the best and finest flower, the beauty and honor,
the strength and stability of this English Nation, who are the choice and
chiefest sons of the Church of England, it ill becomes you to suspect all those
burning and shining lights, both Bishops and Presbyters, Christiani veteres,
and recentes ab Apostolorum and Apostolicorum virorum disciplina, ^orum
praescripta and intelligebant melius, and p^rfectius ^molebant. Grot. de jur.
bell. and pac. l. 4. c. 4. sect. 5.
Fathers and Historians, single and sociall, in their Closets and in their
Councils, even in the first innocent ages, when the Church was most pure and
persecuted; as if they had all been either grossly ignorant of, or supinely
negligent in following the mind of Christ, and methods of the blessed Apostles,
as to these great affairs of the Church; which were openly, uniformly and
universally both preached and practiced by the Apostles, also delivered to and
received by their successors, as in other things, so most indisputably in this
which so much concerned not only the right ordering and well-being and polity
of the estate of the Church militant, but its very being and Essence, in
Doctrine, Ministry, Duties, Discipline and Government. Can it (I beseech you)
without great uncharitableness and pervicacy (unworthy of any ingenuous soul)
be imagined, that from the beginning, during the life of some Apostles and
their scholars, the whole Church, and the most eminent persons in it,
Ministers, Martyrs and Confessors, did all conspire to delude themselves, and
to deceive all posterity, in so clear, great, and sacred concernments, as those
of the Churches Ministry and Polity were ever esteemed?

The incomparable and unanswerable Mr. Rich: Hooker (who is not to be read
without admiration, nor named without veneration) long ago urged this Absurdity
against the then more modest Sticklers for their Disciplinarian Innovations in
the Ministry and Polity of the Church of England. Mr. R. Hookers p^ef. to his
Ec. pol. page 16.
Sure (says he) it were a very strange thing, that such a Discipline (meaning
the Presbyterian) as ye speak of, should be taught by Christ and his Apostles
in the Word of God, and no Church has ever found it out, nor received it till
this present time: or contrariwise, that the Government (of the Church) against
which you bend your selves, should be observed every where through all
generations and ages of the Christian world, and no Church ever perceive it to
be against the word of God. We require you to find out but one Church upon the
face of the earth, that has been ordered by your Discipline, or that has not
been ordered by ours, that is, Episcopal government (for ordination and
jurisdiction) since the times that the blessed Apostles were conversant upon
earth. This unanswered challenge did that excellent person heretofore make, in
order to prevent (if possible) these innovations and mischiefs which are now
grassant in England, to the hazard of quite overthrowing all that ancient
Order, Ministry, succession and Government, which had been conserved in this
Church, conform to all parts of the Catholic Church.

If your other employments and studies have hindered you from being so well
acquainted with the authentic works, and authoritative testimonies of the
ancientest writers of Church Affairs, as those grand Authors deserve, and your
ingenuity cannot but desire; yet far be it from your prudence, piety and
charity, to derogate from the honor and credit of your own Contrymen, who
have in the Histories of England (both Civil and Ecclesiastical, Venerable Bede, Hist. Eccl. The Primate of Armagh, his De primordi^s eccl. B^tan. Sir. H.
Spelman. B. Godwin, and others.
to which you cannot well be strangers) sufficiently showed from the original
of these British Churches, what Ministry and Orders they had.

If you are yet strangers to those eldest ages, times and authors of your own,
and so cannot maturely ground your judgments upon their testimony; yet what
think you of the learning, piety, honesty and courage of those later, and
real, and renowned Reformers of this Church, whether Clergy or Laymen, who
lived in your fathers memories, whose blood and ashes, as Martyrs and
Confessors, against Papal innovations and corruptions, is still warm and
precious? These did not lay new foundations of a Christian Church, a true
Religion, or an authentic Ministry here in England; but they only repaired
the decays of the old, and lightened them of those either erroneous or
dangerous superstructures, with which long ignorance and superstition had
over-laded them, and not so much built upon them, as almost quite buried them.
These Heroes, these worthy men (I say) who were worthy of the name of
Christians, Englishmen and Reformers, did not ever design, or go about to
broach new fountains, nor to cut new channels, nor to lay new pipes, by which
to convey the Ecclesiastical order and Ministerial authority here in England;
but they cleansed the foulness, they removed the obstructions, they sodered the
ruptures of the former Catholic way, which was very good, as well as very old:
yet not the antiquity, but the veracity and divinity of it, attested both by
Scriptures and by the Catholic usage of all Churches, made those blessed
Reformers (now an hundred years ago) cheerfully subscribe to that polity,
Ministry, and authority Ecclesiastical, which they mended, but changed not:
these they recommended to all estates in this nation; by whose Parlamentary
votes and sanction they were established, as the best means to preserve this
Church both Christian and Reformed.

After these famous Fathers of England's happy Reformation, whose judgment is
manifest in the point of ministerial power and holy order, to be carried on by
Bishops and Presbyters, can you suspect that their later successors, in office
and judgment, I mean all those learned, grave and godly Ministers of England,
whom your eyes have seen, and your ears have heard heretofore with great
respect, love and admiration, dispensing the word of God and holy mysteries to
you; who till the divisions and deformities of these last and worst days, have
baptized, instructed and guided, both you and your hopeful posterity in the
way to heaven and happiness, in truth and peace, in faith and repentance, in
humility and holiness, in all graces, virtues and good works, powerfully set
forth to you by their excellent Sermons and fervent Prayers, by the blessed
Sacraments and worthy Examples they have communicated to you; can you (I say)
suspect that all these, together with the Bishops and Presbyters of the
Catholic Church, the East and West, the old and new, the Greeks and Latins,
the Roman and Reformed, that all these have conspired to err so great, so
universal, so constant an error themselves, and to mis-guide you, me, and all
the Christian world, in such ways of receiving and conferring Ecclesiastic
order, Evangelicall Ministry, and Church Government, as were unchristian, yea
Antichristian, diverse from Christ's mind, yea contrary to it, offensive to the
godly, and odious to God himself, as some men have lewdly declamed? whose
tongues I judge to be no slander, since they appear persons of so little
conscience, and less forehead; either grossly ignorant of the practice and
platform of Antiquity, or most uncharitably impudent, in branding so many
thousands of godly Bishops and other gracious Ministers, both in England and
all other places (who were justly famous in their generations for their
learning and piety) as if they were either so many blind guides, or so many
bold intruders, mere usurpers, juglers, impostors and hypocrites; as if, to
gratify their own private ambitions, they had from the very beginning, in the
sight and in despite of S. John and other Apostolic Pastors, perverted the way
of Christ, as to that Ministerial power and Church Order which he had
appointed, setting up of their own heads a paternall presidency or Episcopal
eminency, instead of these newly discovered ways of either a Presbyterian
parity, or a popular Independency, by which Presbyters and people in common
challenge to themselves the sole possession, dispensation and managery of all
Ecclesiastical office, power and authority: inventions so pragmatick, so
turbulent, so contrariant to one another, as well as to the ancient orders of
the Church, that we in England were happily unacquainted with them till of late
years, as were all other Churches in the world, till this last century; who
cannot be thought in all former ages to have wanted such Pastors and Teachers,
such Rulers and Governors as were after Gods own heart, to carry on his great
work of saving souls, in the preserving and propagating of his Church by the
Ministers of it.

If the great cloud of ancient and Catholic witnesses, who ever owned all
Ecclesiastic power to be magisterially (indeed) and primarily in Christ, but
ministerially and secondarily in the Apostles and their successors, as to all
Church-ministration, ordination and jurisdiction; which power resided chiefly
in Bishops, and from them was regularly derived to Presbyters: if these (I say)
can fall under your hard censure, as either deceived, or deceivers, yet truly
their error in this point may be the more venial, because the case was not so
much as once doubted or disputed for three hundred years, in those best and
first ages of the Church. It will be more charity in their censurers, to
suspect they wanted ability to see the light of Christ's mind and the Apostles
examples, than honesty to follow them.

But for my self, and other Ministers, my Fathers and Brethren of the Church of
England, who after so high contests about the Ministry of the Church, both as
to ordination and jurisdiction (in which we have examined all Scriptures, and
rifled all Antiquity) if we do still ( bona fide) humbly, honestly and
conscientiously choose to follow what seems to us Christian, Catholic and
uniform antiquity, rather than any partial and divided ways of novelty; I
hope we are excusable to you, if not commendable; how ignorant or obstinate
soever we seem to others, who think we ought to be confounded, if we will not
be converted (or rather perverted) by them. But if you do indeed judge, that
after so clear demonstrations and potent convictions from Scripture and
Antiquity, which either Geneva, or Edinburgh, or Amsterdam, or New England have
alleged, we do still persist in our Primitive opinions and Catholic Errors,
touching the office, power and derivation of the Evangelicall Ministry and
Authority, such as was established in this Church of England, merely out of
either passion, pertinacy and obstinacy, or for private interests, sinister
ends, and secular policies; if you can think us so base and false, such sots
and beasts, so unworthy of the names of Ministers, Christians, Englishmen, or
men; if this be your sense of us, truly you and the whole State shall do but an
act of high Justice, speedily to cast us all out, as well Presbyters as
Bishops, for unsavory salt; to expose us yet more upon the dunghill of vulgar
contempt and worldly poverty, which some Satyrick tongues and pens have
earnestly importuned, and petulantly endeavored, against all the ancient
Ministers and orderly Clergy of England, under the name of Prelaticks and
Episcopal.

If the bitter and bold invectives of spiteful Papists and fierce Separatists,
of rash Presbyterians and rude Independents, of Erastians and Anabaptists, if
these have been or can be made good to you against the Ministry and ordination
of the Church of England, against all its Bishops and Presbyters, both in
office and exercise; as if we had not, either before or since the Reformation,
any due ministerial office or authority, no true ordination or succession,
little of ministerial gifts, and less of graces, no sound doctrine faithfully
preached, no Sacraments rightly consecrated, no holy mysteries lawfully
celebrated, no Church Discipline dispensed, no right government constituted, no
true Ministry, or authoritative Ministers any way deserving either love or
honor from you and your posterity:

If all your and our faith, repentance, charity, and other graces, be in vain;
if your Christian peace and hopes be all but imaginary; if neither we are made
true Ministers of Christ, nor you true Members or Disciples of Christ; if all
your and your forefathers piety, devotion, charity, Christianity, has been
only a fantastic pageantry, a mummery and mockery of Religion, Christianity
and Reformation; if hitherto you have only been deluded and abused in so high
concernments of your consciences and souls to eternity: truly it is but high
time for you and your new Commonweal, to offer up the wretched remnant of
those Bishops and Presbyters (who have yet survived the calamities and
contempts of these times, and who yet retain their former judgment,
ministerial office, and holy orders, conformably to the Church of England) to
be an acceptable Sacrifice, a welcome Holocaust, or much longed-for
Burnt-offering, to the malice of their adversaries and persecutors, both Gog
and Magog: first to the more secret, but implacable despite of Papists, who
have infinitely longed, and no less rejoice to see poverty, obscurity, silence,
scorn, division, confusion, extirpation, to be the portion of the English
Clergy, whom they heretofore either envied or dreaded, beyond the Ministry of
any Christian or Reformed Church in all the world: next, you shall in so doing
highly gratify the bitter and bolder enmity, the fouler-mouth'd fury of all
other sharp-tongu'd, brazen-faced and heavy-handed Schismatics, who have a
long time grudged at the Clergy of England, envying both Bishops and
Presbyters their honors, liberties, livelihoods and lives, prompted hereto
partly by their own pride, covetousness, and other discontented lusts, and
partly by Jesuitick arts and Papal policies, whose joint aims are (at this
day) to extirpate the whole race ( root and branch) of the Reformed, Catholic,
Christian Church and Ministry in England. They conspire nothing more, than that
they may serve both the Bishops and Presbyters of England, as Elias and Jehu
did Baals Priests: 2 Kings 10.22.
for this is the sense some men have of us; and this is the sentence they have
passed, and seek to execute upon us, as upon so many Cretians, not Christians,
as if we were only liars, evil beasts, and slow-bellies, either imperious
masters or unprofitable servants to the Church; that so these new Masters may
on all sides freely enjoy those superstitious and fanatic liberties, which
they have designed for their divided parties, who despaired to prevail in
England, until they had brought the English Clergy to undergo all manner of
indignities and injuries.

CHAP. XII.
The false and foolish pretensions urged against the Ministry of Engl.
ALl which Tragedies that the people of England might behold and bear with the
greater patience and stupidity, they must by popular orators be persuaded, 1.
That all Bishops, or presidentiall Fathers and Overseers among the Clergy,
such as the Apostles and their immediate Successors first were, are
Antichristian; truly so are Fathers in families, Magistrates in cities, and
Chieftains in armies. 2. That the ordaining of Presbyters by Bishops is merely
Popish; so is the celebrating of Baptism, or the Lords Supper, or the Lords
day. 3. That Christ's Ministry appropriated to one order of men, is a monopoly,
or a taking too much upon men's selves, when others of the congregation may be
as holy and able; so is all order, office and authority, civil and military, a
mere monopoly, when others may be as able and wise as the best Magistrates and
Commanders. 4. That all humane Learning is not only superfluous, but
pernicious in the Ministers of the Gospel; so is all skill, industry and
ability in all other workmen. 5. That Ministers maintenance by Tithes,
Glebe-lands, and other oblations, is Jewish; so is all justice and gratitude in
paying laborers their wages. 6. That the distinction of Clergy and Laity is
arrogant and supercilious; so are the titles of Master and Scholar, Teacher and
Disciple, Priest and People, Minister and ministered. 7. That it was proud and
insolent for any Clergymen to be invested with honor, to be styled and
respected as Lords. Truly, if it be no dishonor to any temporal Lord to
become a Minister or Christ's glorious Gospel, nor does he thereby lose his
civil Lordship and dignity; no more is it misbecoming learned, grave and
venerable Ministers of the Gospel, the chief Fathers and governors of the
Church, to be adorned with honors, and to enjoy, as the favors of Christian
Princes and States, both the Titles and Revenues of their temporal Baronies
and Lordships, which they might (for ought I could ever see) as well deserve
and use as any other Lords, who had their Lordships by birth, by purchase, or
by favor: nor did Honor less become Ecclesiastic Rulers, than it does those
military Commanders, who, I see, can endure themselves to be called and treated
as Lords. I confess (under favor) I do not understand how Church Government
should be less capable of degrees and distinction in Governors, than those
which are civil or military, since order and subordination must be in them all:
nor do I more understand how such chief Governors of the Church-militant, as
Bishops were, and ought to be, might not as well both merit and manage such
honors and estates, as any men, who by far less abilities or pains do get to
be Major-generals, or Colonels and chief Commanders in an Army over poor
Soldiers. Sure the saving of souls is every way as hard and honorable a work,
as the killing of men's bodies, which is the worst of a soldiers work; or as
the saving of men's temporal lives and estates, which is the best of that
employment: nor is it less of true valor, vigilance and resolution in learned
and good Scholars, to fight with, and overcome the ignorance, errors and
barbarity of mankind, than it is fortitude in good soldiers to suppress the
rapines and injustice of men's extravagant actions.

But these, and such like, are the envious cobwebs, the thin and ridiculous
sophistries formerly used by some men of evil eyes and worse hearts, out of
principles full of ignorance, or envy, or covetousness, or licentiousness, or
Atheism, whereby to persuade silly people to follow these novell, easy, and
more thrifty methods of saving souls, which some swelling Libertines propound,
who have the confidence earnestly to invite this noble Nation to commit the
whole managery of Christian Religion, and of their souls eternal salvation, to
such new, cheap, and bold undertakers, who adventure to minister in Christ's
name, without any such character, commission or conscience of divine authority,
P^esb^t^^is q^i s^nt in E^cl^sia obau li^e op^^t^t, qui succession^m habent ab
Apostolis, and cum successio^^ charisma veritatis. Iren. l. 3. c 40. and l. 4.
c. 43. Vid. T^rt. de praes. adv. Haer. c. 20. and 32. etc.
which (as Irenaeus and all the Ancients tell us) were ever in a solemn,
visible and orderly manner derived by the hands of Bishops to the Presbyters,
or lawful Ministers of the Church, as from Christ and the Apostles, in an
undoubted and uninterrupted succession; of which Tertullian gives so excellent
an account in his Book of prescription against Heretics.

Their ostentations of natural liberty, of civil indulgence, of rational
abilities, of special gifts and undiscernable graces, or (which is most
incredible) of extraordinary calls from God; All, or any of these (if they were
really true) yet will not be allowed as a justifiable ground for any man's
usurpation or intrusion into any office military or civil, without a visible
commission derived from the supreme power in both: much less are they
sufficient pleas for any man to officiate in the Ministry Ecclesiastical, Vid.
Auberti Miraei. Notitia^ Episc. and politiae Ecclesiasticae per omnes Ecclesias.
whose Supreme Authority is confessedly in Christ; and the derivation or
deduction of it in all ages is so visible, constant and uniform, that no man
honestly learned can be ignorant where it resided, or how it was derived.
Certainly it never was dispensed by the hands or power of Emperors, Kings,
Protectors, Princes, or any civil Magistrates; whose duty (I conceive) if they
will act as Christians, is not to alter or innovate this sacred authority and
method used by Christ, the Apostles and the Catholic Church, but to preserve
it as sacred and inviolable: much less was it left to the spontaneous
confidence, the passionate suffrages, and confused petulancies of common
people, who are the great and infallible prostrators of all Religion, virtue,
honor, order, peace, civility and humanity, if left to themselves; but it was
divinely settled by Christ in the Apostles, and by the Apostles in their
successors, the ordained Bishops and Presbyters of the Catholic Church, in its
several branches and combinations; who ever have been, and ought to be (under
Christ) the great Conservators, the only complete and regular Distributers of
this holy ministerial power, as they have been to this day, in this and all
other orderly Churches of Christ, without any controversy or contradiction,
without dispute or doubt, till of later years.

CHAP. XIII.
An impartial balancing of the old and new Minister.
THe late licentious Invasions made upon this Church of England, the Reformed
Religion, the Ministerial Order, Office, and Succession established in it,
through all ages since the Nation was Christian, were yet something tolerable
and justifiable, if those Ministers who profess to be of the ordination and
communion of the Chapter of Engl. either wanted ability or industry, skill or will
to serve God, and to deserve well of you ( O worthy Gentlemen) and all their
Contrymen: or if you and the rest of the nation were already better
provided, in order to your souls good, by any new generation of Preachers,
better learned, more rarely gifted, more spiritually extracted, or more
regularly consecrated and duly ordained; if these new-minted Ministers, these
self-intruding Teachers, did afford you weightier Sermons, warmer Prayers, more
solemn Sacraments, more sacred Examples, more useful writings; if they brought
you (with all this bustling and parado) a better God, 2 Cor. 11.4.
a better Savior, a better Gospel, better Scriptures, or a better Spirit than
those were, which the excellent Bishops, and other Ministers of the Church of
England, set before you and this nation, many ways, for many years, with
mighty successes (while they were countenanced, encouraged, and ingenuously
treated;) if the advantages of Religion, as Christian and Reformed, or of your
and your posterities souls, were either real or probable, by these new
intruders, we might well bear with your and the common peoples pious
inconstancy, when it should tend to the improvement and happiness of your
souls.

But these great and good interests of your souls, for my part, as I have not
yet found any where in any new ways, so I do not think that any wise and
honest-hearted Christian can by any one instance prove, that those Libertines
(who are Levellers of the Ministerial duty and dignity) either have been
hitherto able, or will ever be probable to advance them in the least kind or
degree, beyond, or equal, or any way comparable to what the former Clergy of
England have done, and are still both able and willing to do.

As for these new Rabbis, you shall have commonly their best at first: 2 Timothy 3
6.
by soft, and (as they think) saintly insinuations, they first creep into
houses, next into bosoms, at last into pulpits. The small and light bundle of
the gifts they have picked up, are soon set on fire by the least sparks of
popular desire and applause; then (as squibs or grenades) they fly off amain,
with more extravagant motion, panick terror, thick smoke, foul stench and
vapor, than with any great or good execution done against Sin, or Satan, or
the World. After a few godly prefacings about the Spirit, Grace, Christ and the
new Covenant, together with some gallantries, or light skirmishings with some
starveling errors and useless sins, you shall know the utmost of their
sufficiencies; which is, with egregious impudence, to scorn what they cannot
attain, that is, all good learning, and the manners of their betters. When they
have loudly ratled at, more than confuted, any thing which they list to call an
Error, when they have huddled together, wrested and distorted a great many
places of Scripture, 2 Pet 3.16.
without any regard to the Grammatical and genuine sense of the words, or to
the propriety of phrases, or to the main scope of the place, or to the clear
Analogy of faith; after all these flourishings, you shall see the bottom and
dregs of their hearts poured forth in vile and uncomely railings, scurrilous
and odious rantings against all Bishops and Ministers, against the whole
Hierarchy, Ministry and Church of England. At last, with equal vociferation
and emptiness, without any principles of reason, or grounds of Religion,
without proof or plausibility, with more lungs than brains, they cry up their
own new lights, their rare discoveries, their excellent Reformations, and pure
Ordinances of Jesus Christ: all which are as much beyond all former
dispensations and ministrations in this or any Church, as the deceits of
Mountebanks excel all that Fernelius, Galen, or Hippocrates, could ever use or
invent; especially when these are (in a new Paracelsian way) applied and
dispensed, not by the old Empiricks, the Papal and Episcopal Clergy, but by
new-called and ordained Preachers, by specially-inspired Prophets, by precious
men, extraordinarily qualified, and sent, either by the inward and unknown
impulses of Gods Spirit, or by the call and election of some godly select
people; who casting off all ancient Christian Communion with this National or
the Catholic Church, do first body themselves to a new way of
Church Fellowship, then they assume to themselves some Brother and Member (as
they can agree) to be their spiritual Pastor, him they invest by their bare
suffrages with all ministerial power and authority, as from Jesus Christ
himself.

Such a kind of confused noise do these land-floods, these popular torrents,
these turbulent Teachers make, where once they have found a vent and course for
their liberty, to break through all bounds of law and order, being indeed very
muddy, shallow, fatuous and feeble in all things, divine and humane, for the
most part; only they have a strong high conceit of themselves, and a perfect
Antipathy against those Ministers in the Church of England, to whom they owe
all they have of Knowledge and Religion which is worth owning. Do but look near
to their new doctrines and opinions, and you will easily see how loose, how
false, how futile, how fanatic they are: look to their speech and writing, how
rude, how improper, how incoherent, how insignificant, how full of barbarismes,
soloecismes and absurdities: mark their whole form of preaching, how raw, how
rambling, how immethodicall, how incongruous, how obscure, impertinent:
consider their Prayers, how are they farced with odd expressions, with forced,
affected, confused, dull, dead and insipid repetitions: weigh their lives and
actions; how pragmatick, licentious, injurious, sacrilegious, spiteful,
uncharitable, pernicious, scandalous are they to many sober and quiet men, and
specially to such as they have most cause to suspect to be much their betters,
and their most accurate censurers. Last of all, look to all their novell
principles, and you shall see how various, versatile, ambiguous, temporizing
and dangerous they are; while much of their Divinity depends upon Diurnalls;
their Religion is most-what calculated by the Almanac or Ephemeris of their
hopes and fears, their interests and lusts, their prevalences and advantages,
measured not by Scriptures, but by Providence.

These distempers evidently appearing (as they daily do in your new Teachers)
must not you and all sober Christians confess, that these Comets, Jude 13.
these blazing and wandering stars, mostly made up of gross, vulgar and earthy
exhalations, full of portentous malignity to this Reformed Church, are
infinitely short of that benign light, and that divine, sweet and heavenly
influence, which heretofore shined from the fixed stars of this Church, which
were in the right hand of Christ, Rev. 3.1.
the godly Bishops and other Ministers, to the great honor and unspeakable
happiness of this Nation, to the flourishing of the Christian and Reformed
Religion; when men knew what it was to have and to honor Gods Ministers, and
to be good Christians, that is, judicious, humble, honest, charitable, orderly
and constant in the true Religion?

CHAP. XIV.
BUt suppose (in very deed) it were true, that you, A charitable plea for the
ancient Clergy of the Chapter of England, against the ingratitude and indifferency
of some men. Ordo Episcoporum ita per successiones ab initio decurrens, ut
primus in qualibet Ecclesia Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis, aut Apostolocis
vi^is, habuit autorem and antecessorem. Tert. de praes. adv. Haer. c. 32.
the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of England, did find an irreparable decay
and dotage now grown upon the ancient Clergy; and that you might now be
cheaper and better served by these new-sprung Gourds which are but of
yesterday, like Mushromes, the sons of a night: yet since the ancient race and
stock of Apostolic Bishops and Presbyters, is not only of so venerable an age
as 1600 years in the Catholic and this Church of Christ (which is a great plea
of priority, honor and prepossession, against any novell intruders and
pretenders;) since they and their predecessors, both before and since the
Reformation, even from the first plantation of Christianity in this Island,
have done their best to deserve well of you and your forefathers, who, this
last century especially, in your own memory, greatly rejoiced in the luster of
these Joh. 5.35.
burning and shining lights, justly and gratefully esteeming the learned
ability, industry and piety of the English Clergy, a great crown, honor and
rejoicing to this Nation; since they have thus far premerited of you in their
former age, strength and vigor; truly it must needs be, not more their grief
and misery, than your shame and eternal dishonor, if you should use your
ancient Clergy and Ministers, as you would your old dogs and harrased horses,
casting them off to seek new masters, or turning them into the high ways, to
graze upon what alms they can pick up among their timorous and ungrateful
friends, or their supercilious and disdainful enemies.

Surely it were but charity and humanity in you, to provide rather some
Almes-houses and Hospitalls for your cast and decayed Ministers, as well as you
do for your veterane and unserviceable Soldiers, who have in their time and
station been valiant, faithful and orderly; that at least the prouder Jesuits,
and the less charitable Papists (besides other pestilent enemies of the peace
and piety of England) may not too much triumph, to see so many, so venerable
Bishops, and other worthy Ministers of this Reformed and sometimes flourishing
Church of England, either begging or starving: which if it be not (as I fear it
is) I am sure it would be the sad fate of many of them, if God did not stir up
some merciful Obadiahs to relieve them; not that they want ability or
industry, but either such liberty, or such opportunity as their adversaries
presume to enjoy.

But against all this that I plead of Justice and Mercy for the English
Clergy, Object.
some mealy-mouthed and hen-hearted men are prone secretly to object; Alas!
there is now no hope to recover the pristine honor (either as to reputation,
reverence, or revenue) of the Ministry of England, neither to Bishops nor
Presbyters. Alas! they have been, and still are, so vulgarly slighted and
abased. We see these new Teachers have most-what got the upper hand; they are
brisk and bold young men, who have disgraced, displaced, and baffled many of
the old stock; they have decried, affronted and overawed in a manner all of
them: the new-fashioned Ministers ride on the fore-horse, and are fancied by
many wary and wise men to be most useful, advantageous and conform to the
present state of civil interests and affairs; so that men are prone to think
they had better rest satisfied with these new Preachers upon any account, if
they be but tolerable speakers and livers, rather than go about to restore,
much less to prefer the former Ministers and Ministry, which grow daily more
antiquated and exautorated, both as to their persons and pretensions, among the
common sort of people: besides many others, who are their friends, yet look
upon the very names of Bishop and Presbyter, of ordination and succession, as
terms extremely unpopular, unpleasing, and growing out of fashion in England.

Answ.
Well, much good may these new Ministers do to these new-fashioned Christians,
these wary men and their posterity. It Is well however, Phil. 1.16, and 18.
if Christ be preached; whether of envy or good will, whether in truth or in
pretense only.

Yet I cannot forbear (in an honest and Christian freedom) to offer this to
the judgment of you and other Gentlemen, who are of more noble minds, and more
prudent spirits: Do but foresee and consider, I beseech you, what pitiful
Ministellos, what pigmy Presbyters, what plebeian Preachers this Nation in
after-ages is like to have, if the Ministers of the glorious Gospel of J. 1 Timothy 1.11.
Christ your Savior must ever grow up, and live under such vulgar scamblings,
contempts, insolences, obloquies, molestations, intrusions, confusions, which
are, and ever will be as so many nipping frosts and horrid discouragements, to
all able, ingenious, grave and godly men; when they shall see, under the
pretense of Novelty and Christian liberty, not only themselves very much
impoverished, curbed, despised, and depressed, as to that order, dignity,
office and authority which they claim and exercise upon grounds Divine,
Catholic and Ecclesiastical; but they shall further behold all sacred, solemn
and venerable mysteries, as well as offices of the Evangelicall Ministry and
Christian Religion, exposed to such plebeian insolences, such petulant
extravagancies, such fanatic fancies, such fulsome affectations, such empty
pretensions, such uncharitable janglings, such miserable manglings, and such
proud usurpations, under any notions and pretensions which common people please
to call their Christian Liberties.

CHAP. XV.
WHich are indeed little else than novell vanities, The best of the new
Teachers compared with the Ministers of England.
opposing pious Antiquity; weakness vaunting it self against strength;
ignorance, darkness and confusion boasting against sound knowledge; true light,
and holy order; folly crying it self up for wisdom; the rapes and stuprations
of Religion styling themselves rare Reformations: melancholy ravings are cried
up for divine Revelations; schismatic conventicles voted for the only pure
and organized Churches of Christ; being bodies (as Tertullian accurately
observes) so homogeneous, Tert. de praes. c. 41. and 42. Quis catechumenus,
quis fidelis, incertum ^st; pariter audiunt, pariter orant, etc.
similary and inorganick, that it is hard to discern which is the head or tail,
hand or foot, Pastor or people: like earthworms they crawl with either end
forward; all are Prophets and inspired, all grow Seers, Teachers, Elders and
Rulers of the Church. If they can but light on some new notions, some strange
fancies, some odd and unwonted expressions, they are presently set forth for
rare and spiritfull discoveries; when (indeed) they are but old and rotten
errors, protrite and putid opinions of the ancient Gnostics, or Valentinians,
or Manichees, or Montanists, or Circumcellians, or Donatists, who affected
either to invent poetic fancies, job 38.2.
or to darken and bury plain and wholesome Truths, by words without
understanding.

And such are, for ought that ever I could discern, those Seraphick,
Anabaptistick, and Familistick Hyperboles, 2 Pet. 2.18.
those proud swelling words of vanity and novelty, with which those men use to
deceive the simple and credulous sort of people, who are set up by them as the
great rivals and Antagonists of the Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Ministers
of Christ, and Vastators of the whole frame of the Church of England.

Can you (O worthy Gentlemen) or any sober Christians, who are not strangers to
the prayings, preachings and writings heretofore brought forth by the worthy
Ministers, Bishops and Presbyters of the Church of England; can you think, that
either the godly Ministers, or the Christian people in England were ignorant
of, or strangers to those spiritual influences, those inward powers and secret
experiences of Religion, till these new Pedlers of piety began to open their
packs, or till these rare Rabbis turned their shops into Synagogues, and their
Conventicles into the only true spiritualized Churches of Christ? Did we never
know before these new Illuminates and Spiritaties rose up, what belonged to the
humble seeking, the happy finding, and holy acquaintance with God, by the union
and communion of Gods Spirit, working and witnessing with ours? Romans 8.16.
Had we neither the root nor the fruit of true Religion till these new planters
sprung up? Were we utterly strangers to Faith, Repentance, Charity and good
works, or to that joy, love, peace, blessed hopes, sweet satisfactions, evident
sealings, sincere sanctifyings, and undoubted assurings of the holy Ghost,
which are wrought by, and conform to the Word of God; first casting the
Christian into that holy mould, and then filling him with such comforts as are
unspeakable and glorious; Maxima gratia est minime sui ostentatrix. Bern.
whose nature is rather to be humbly enjoyed, modestly owned, and tenderly
treated in a gracious soul, than vulgarly discovered, and vapouringly
ostentated in a rude and vainglorious fashion? The brightest luster of Gods
Jewels is rarely shown, and hardly seen, being most glorious within: the
richest wares are least set upon the stalls or shop-boords.

Psalm. 25.14. Prove. 3.32. Cant. 1.2.
These (Arcana, magnalia, sublimia Dei) secrets of the Lord, these whisperings
of the blessed Spirit, these ( oscula Christi) kisses of Christ as S. Bernard
calls them, these ( aromata gratiae) perfumes of his soft breath, these
glowings of grace in the heart, these holy fervours and heavenly raptures, of
humble, devout, meditative, fervent souls, who the more they believe, the more
they love, and the more they love, the better they live, more humanely and more
divinely, more justly, more charitably and more orderly; these real
pregustations of glory, and anticipations of heaven, blessed be God, were long
ago known, and experimentally set forth in the Prayers, Sermons, writings and
actions of thousands of good Christians, both Ministers and others, long before
these novell and exotic masters began to lisp out the Soboloths of fine
phrases; before they dared to assault, and not only cry, but beat down this
and all National Churches, all Clergy of the ancient and right order, all
Universities and Nurseries of good learning together, all Tithes, all
Liturgies, all studied Sermons and premeditated prayers, all wholesome forms and
sober compendiums of religious duties and devotion; as if all these were merely
carnal, literal, formal and superficial, natural and papal, mere husks
and shells, the rind and outside of Religion. Yea, we had the comfort, and God
the glory of his grace in the Chapter of Eng. long before either Anabaptists, or
Familists, or Seekers, or Quakers, or Ranters, or any other spawn of
Libertinism and Independency, of Schism and Separation, had amused the silly
vulgar (as Incidi in homines superbe delirantes, carnales nimis and sequaces;
in quorum ore laquei Diaboli, and viscum confectum commistione syllabarum,
nominis tui ( i. e. Dei) and Jesu Christi, and paracle^i, Spiritus Sancti: haec
enim nomina non recedebant de ore eorum; sed sono tenus and strepitu linguarum;
caecerum cor inane very. Dicebant veritas veritas mihi; sed nusquam erat in
iis, qui falso loquebantur. Aug. conf. l. 3. c. 6. de Manicheis.
S. Austin tells us, by his own experience, the subtle, but sordid, Manichees
were wont to do) with their new motions and strange expressions of being Godded
with God, Christed with Christ, Spirited with the Spirit, and the like
affectations; which are either barbarities and simplicities, or blasphemies,
insolences and impossibilities of speaking: for no sober Christian ever did or
in Religion ought, or in true reasoning can understand, that by a believers
being 2 Pet. 1.4.
partaker of a diviner nature through Christ, he is presently Deified, that is,
personally invested, and plenarily possessed with all the infinite Attributes,
essence and glory of God, which are incomprehensible by any finite
understanding, and personally incommunicable to any creature, excepting Christ
Jesus, the ((...) or Immanuel) God Incarnate, who only may without Phil. 2.
robbery be equal with God, esteemed, called, and adored as God.

So that they can religiously mean no more by all this pomp of their words,
than what was long ago far better understood, and expressed in more humble,
wholesome and intelligible words; also better enjoyed by sober, meek, just and
quiet-spirited Christians, who well knew the glorious privileges of every
gracious and sincere Christian, which is to see the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ; 2 Cor. 4.6.
to whom being related by faith, they are in some sense united to God. As the
eye that sees the suns light and glory by its beams, is in some sense truly
enlightened by it, united to it, and partaker of it; not as to the vastness of
its Globe, essential glory, which is far too big and too bright for the eyes
small capacity, but as to its pleasing influences: in like manner, the
Christian that is illuminate and regenerate by Baptism, instructed by the Word
of God, and sanctified by the Spirit of God, is so drawn to Christ, by the
sweet attractions of the cords of his love, and engraffed in him, that he is
not now his own, but Christ's; 1 Cor. 6.19.
not enslaved to his own sinful and depraved nature, but endued with the new
powers and principles of an holy and heavenly nature, which is truly and
soberly that divine nature of which S. Peter speaks; which while we behold by
true faith and obedience, 2 Cor. 3.18.
we are changed into the same image from Glory to Glory.

CHAP. XVI.
IF then a wise and serious Christian, A farther sifting of these new Teachers.
who is not so idle or impudent as to play with Religion, to trifle in holy
things, or to mock with God; if such an one will lose so much time as to sift
all that these new masters vent, that these vapouring Prophets say or write, as
rare and precious, spiritual and heavenly, beyond all the fleshly forms,
learned ignorance, and litterall darkness, under which, they say, we other
Christians and Ministers in England have lain long, and labored all night in
vain; if he will do himself and them so much right, as to winnow away the chaff
of their affected language, their bumbast terms, their insolent expressions;
drive them from the refuge and confidence they have in the silliness of their
Auditors, the easiness of their Disciples, and the sequaciousnesse of their
followers (who most admire, when they least understand:) this done, he shall
find, that either nothing remains that is wholesome and good in their swollen
heaps of new notions and expressions (which are many times the gildings of some
of their pills, the palliations of their poisonous opinions, the daring-glasses
or decoyes to bring men into the snares of their dangerous or damnable
doctrines;) or (at best) all this froth and swelling, this noise and rattling of
their Novellizings, is reducible into a few drops, a little proportion of
plain, easy and well-known truth; which neither needs nor desires such
Gnostick disguises, such vapourings and vampings of uncouth language, such
muddy, rather than mysterious, clouds of words; which rather signify a cracked
brain, a fanatic spirit, or an affected hypocrite (who either knows not, or
cares not what they say or do) than any such blessed broachings of rarities, as
they set forth their pageantries of new-drest Divinity to be, with the emphasis
of Gospel Truths, precious sparks, spiritual manifestations, rare discoveries,
unheard of emanations, the Saints anointing, the uncarnating of a Christian,
the pryings of Gods children into their fathers glory, their rising and
reigning with Christ, their deification with God. Dogmatum torm^nta, and
terriculamenta verborum. Hier.
With these and such like, either torments of opinions, or terriculaments of
expressions, do these new sort of Preachers seek, not to edify in the most
holy faith, but to scare and terrify their silly sectators out of their sober
senses and mother-wits; by which (God knows) they are only capable, as babes,
of milk (things and words easy to be understood) but not of such hard and
strong meat as these men proffer them, which are indeed stones rather than
bread, and many times serpents more than fishes; dry and bare bones, or rotten
and noisome carrion, rather than savoury and wholesome nourishments of sound and
Christian Doctrine.

But if any of these rare Master-cooks of Christianity, whose art is to new
dress and disguise old Divinity, when they have first learned themselves, then
taught others to despise those plain and practick methods of Faith and
Repentance, of Piety and Charity, which were wont to be commended to good
Christians, by the learned, orderly and excellent Ministers of the Church of
England; if these mysterious Mountebanks do by chance hit upon some new notions
and odd expressions, either by reading some of the Speculatists of the Roman
party, as Harpius, Nubergensis, Thomas de Kempis, Martin d' Espilla, Teresa, or
the like; if they can spell out Theologia Germanica, or conne by heart the
religious Rhodomontado's of H. N. if they can (as Heraclitus his ass) feed upon
the tall thistles of Jacob Behmen, Vanhelmont, or some such piece of
Familistick nonsense, and Seraphick curiosity; if they have naturally a
chimerick fancy, a stroke of Evans or Gostelowes crowing brains; if in many
odd ravings they perchance light upon something that seems truish and newish,
gay and glistering in Religion, beyond what was heretofore known by themselves,
or usual to the common people, because neglected and despised by grave and
sober Ministers:

Yet (still) all this their glory and invention amounts commonly to no more
than the Devils setting Christ on the pinnacle of the Temple, Matthew. 3.
not to exalt him, but to tempt him: the end and aim is, that from the
precipice of pride and presumption he may cast them down and destroy them.
After much bigness, they bring forth (perhaps) some Scholastic subtilty, some
Sceptick nicety, or Seraphick sublimity, which only serves to puff up, but not
at all to feed either themselves or their windy Disciples: much after the rate
that Origin did, when he decayed or doted, when from a learned Catechist at
Alexandria, from a grave and admired interpreter of Scripture, he turned
Chemist in Divinity, and Allegorist in Religion; for leaving the fruitful
valleys and plain paths of necessary Christian verities, he fancied nothing but
high-flying curiosities, and far-fetched fancies: Nobis post Christum
curiositate opus non est, nec revelatione post Evangelium. De praes.
of which (as Tertullian speaks) good Christians have no need, and so no
desire, since the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ is sufficiently
and plainly revealed to them in the Scripture: although even Tertullian himself
(as a man of an enormous wit and transcendent fancy, Hoc prius credimus, ultra
scripturas n^hil esse quod credamus. Id. Romans 1^.3.
too big for it self) was hardly able afterward to keep within those sober
bounds which sometime he prescribed to others, after the good rule of S. Paul
((...)) to be soberly wise, or wise with sobriety; but He, even He turned
Enthusiast, and driven by envy, disdain and anger, beyond the bounds of Reason
and Religion, he forsook the Catholic Communion of the Church (not in Doctrine
so much as Discipline) to comply with some fanatics, who fitted his sharp and
melancholy humor, which was prone to severities of conversation and ecstasies
of speculation. Not only great wits, as Origin and Tertullian, so Nestorius
and Apollinaris, etc. but lesser ones, as Montanus, and Manes, and Arius, whom
Saint Jerome calls Daemonium meridianum, are many times prone to adventure on
the brinks of hell; their itch and petulancy are not satisfied, Lascivienti
ingenio nihil periculosius aut bonis moribus aut sanae religioni. Eras.
till their bold fancies and heterodox opinions have an haut-goust of
blasphemy; till they so far advance upon the suburbs of error, heresy, and
damnable Doctrine, that they can hardly be fetched off by any salvoes of
cunning sophistries, with pretended inspirations, or nice and subtle
distinctions, which are like high-tasted sawces made with garlic or onions,
purposely applied to tainted meats, Ut cadavera, sic haereticorum dogmata, quo
magis pu^ida, eo magis inflata, suaque tabe tum scunt.
to make their putidness less perceptible, or more passable with grosser
palates. As dead carcases, so are the corrupt minds and doctrines of men, the
more putid, by how much the more swelled in the pomp of words.

Take their raptures, rarities and novelties of our new Masters at their best,
they have ever much more in the show than substance of Religion; like Herons
and Estriches, they are more in the wing and feather than in the body and
substance: they are such precious discoveries as are justly nauseous to a
gracious spirit, and of which a good Christian may safely be ignorant. If any
simple souls do perchance light on any of their jingling notions, and be taken
with their new-sounding Divinity, like the noise of tinkling Cymbals, or
bag-pipes, or Jews-trumps, compared to that grave Church-musick which was made
of the ancient harmony of Catholic Doctrine; yet I see no cause for either the
authors or followers of those novell niceties, to be puffed up, and swelled so
excessively in themselves, Tolerabilius est Deo quempiam cum ignorantia in
humilitate jacere, quam cum elatione alta sapere. Greg. Moral.
nor yet to despise (as they do) all those grave Divines and godly Christians,
whose rack is not so high, but their manger may be as full; who can be content
with manna, though they have no quails wherewith to gratify their wanton
appetites. Truly I could never yet esteem these vapouring Seraphicks, these new
Gnostics, to be other than a kind of Gipsy-Christians, or a race of
Circulators, Tumblers and Juglers in the Church, who have more of little apish
tricks and feats, than of solid ability, industry, or honesty: they impose upon
the vulgar by a kind of legerdemain, by a juggling and canting way in Religion:
much shifting up and down, much capering and vaulting they use, but they
advance not at all in any virtue, grace, or knowledge. They are a sort of
(funambulones) dancers upon the ropes in Religion, whose affected height and
daring curiosity in their notions and motions, does not countervail the danger
of their audacity, or the impertinency of their activity; nor have they any
cause to despise those who walk more lowlily and soberly on the firm ground,
less indeed to vulgar admiration, but more to their own safety and others
benefit. S. Paul seriously represseth the vanity of knowledge falsely so called,
2 Timothy 2.20.
when men intrude themselves into things they understand not, Col. 2.18.
being puffed up (as those primitive Gnostics) in their fleshly minds, 2 Cor.
11.10.
not holding the Truths as they are in Jesus, nor content with the simplicity
of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11.3.
as it has been delivered, received, understood, believed and practiced by the
Catholic Church of Christ: this check the Apostle gave to humane curiosities
and Satanick subtilties, even then, when special gifts and revelations were at
the highest tide.

CHAP. XVII.
The modesty, gravity, sanctity and solidity of true Ministers, etc. Sanctam
inscientiam and docta^ ignorantiam. Praestat per Deum nescire, quia non
revelaverit, quam per hominem scire, quia ipse praesumpserit. Tert. de An. cap.
1.
THe better learned and more humble Ministers of the Church of England, (both
Bishops and Presbyters) ever professed, with S. Austin and the renowned
Ancients, an holy nescience, or modest ignorance in many things; no less
becoming the best Christians, the acutest Scholars, and profoundest Divines,
than their (otherwise) vast knowledge and accurate diligence to search the
Scriptures, and find out things Deuteronomy. 29.29. Si propter ^os solos Christus
mortuus est qui certa intelligentia possunt ista (sublimia) discernere, pene
frustra in ^cclesiae laboramus. Aug. ep. 102.
revealed by God which belong to the Church. The modesty and gravity of their
learning commends the vastness and variety of it; as dark shadows and deep
grounds set off the luster of fair pictures to the greater height. They were
not ashamed to subscribe to Saint Romans 11.33. Neque qui valde potens est in
dicendo ex ecclesiae praeectis alia ab his dicet; neque qui debilis est in
dicendo hanc traditione^ imminuet. Iren. l. 1. cap. 3. de Symbol.
Paul's ((...)) unfathomable depth, the divine Abyss of unsearchable wisdom
and knowledge: they were not curious to pry into things above them, or to
stretch their wits and fancies beyond that line and measure of truth, which God
had set forth to his Church in his written Word, and in those Catholic
summaries thence extracted, as the rule of Christian Faith, Manners and
Devotion, whereto the spirits of all good Christians, great and small, learned
and idiots, were willingly confined of old (as Irenaeus tells us:) they never
boasted of raptures, revelations, new lights, visions, inspirations, special
missions and secret impulses from Gods Spirit, beyond or contrary to Gods Word,
and the good order of his Church, thereby to exercise their supposed liberties
and presumptuous abilities; that is, indeed, to satisfy their lusts, disorders
and extravagances in things civil and sacred, to discover their immodesties and
impudicities, like the Cainites, Ophites, Judaites and Adamites, to gratify
their luxuries and injuries, their sacriledges and oppressions, their cruelties
against man, and blasphemies against God, their separations, divisions and
desolations intended against this Church.

The godly Pastors and people of Christ's flock never professed any such
impudent piety, or pious impudence, because they were evidently contrary to
sound Doctrine and holy Discipline, beyond and against the sacred precepts and
excellent patterns of true Ministers, sincere Saints, and upright Christians,
whose everlasting limits are the holy Scriptures, sufficient to make the man of
God and Minister of Christ perfect to salvation. They were not (like children)
taken with any of these odd maskings and mummeries of the Devil, who is an old
master of these arts, in false Prophets and false Apostles, with their
followers; whose craft ever sought to advance their credits against the
Orthodox Bishops, Presbyters, and professors of true Religion, by such
ostentations of novelties and unheard of curiosities in Religion, which never,
of old or late, made any man more honest, holy, humble, or heavenly: they never
advanced Christians comforts, solitary or sociall, living or dying; but kept
both their Masters and Disciples in perpetual inquietudes, perplexities and
presumptions, which usually ended in villainies, outrages and despairs. Nor will
these new Masters late discoveries prove much better (whereof they boast with
so insolent and loud an (...)) for all their rarities are but dead carkases,
which are become mummy by being long dried in the sands, or wrapped up in
searcloths; they are not less dead, though they seem less putrified, to those
whose simplicity or curiosity tempts them thus to rake into the skulls and
sepulchers of old Heretics and idle Ecstaticks, such as the very primitive
times were infinitely pestred withal: but, blessed be God, they were all long
ago either extinct of themselves, and gone down to the pit, or crucified, dead,
buried, and descended into hell, by the just censures, Anathemaes and
condemnations passed against them by the godly Bishops and Ministers of the
Church in those ages. Nor have these Specter ever much appeared in this Church
of England till these later years, in which, by the ruins and rendings of this
Church, they have gained a rotten kind of resurrection; not to their glory, but
to their renewed shame and eternal infamy, I trust, in Gods due time, when
once the honor of the true Christian and Reformed Religion (once happily
settled and professed in the Church of England) shall be again worthily asserted
and re-established by your piety and prudence (my noble and religious
Contrymen) who have been, and I hope ever will be, the chief professors and
constant Patrons of it, under your God and your pious Governors.

Your prudence and piety, your justice and generosity is best able to see
through all those transports, which are so transparent, those specious
pretenses, those artificial mists and vapors, which are used by some novel
Teachers to abuse the common people; that engaging them into eternal parties,
animosities and factions, they may more easily, by many mouths and hands, not
only cry, but utterly pull down this Reformed Church of England, in its sound
Doctrine, wholesome Discipline, Catholic Ministry, sacred Order, solemn
Worship, and Apostolic Government. All which must now be represented to the
world by these new Remonstrants, as poor and pitiful, carnal and common,
mere empty forms and beggarly elements, fit to be cast out with scorn, as
reaching no further than Christ in the letter, Jesus in the flesh, Truth in the
outward court, Religion in the story or legend: but (they say) the Ministers
and other Christians of Old England are not come within the veil, to the
Spirit and Mystery; they have not that light within, which far out-shines the
paper-lanthern of Gods word without them.

CHAP. XVIII.
The designs and ends of fanatic Libertines fatal to the Reformed Religion.
THese, and such like, are the uncouth expressions used to usher in, under the
names of liberty, curiosity, sublimity, nothing but ignorance, idleness,
Atheism, barbarity, irreligion, and utter confusion in this Church: or, at
best, (as I shall afterward more fully demonstrate) they are but vancourriers
or agitators for Romish superstitions and Papal usurpations; the end of all
this gibberish is, Venient Romani.

Put all these fine fancies and affected phrases together, with all those
strange phantasms in Religion, which of late have haunted this Church, like so
many unquiet vermin, or unclean spirits; truly they spell nothing but, first,
popular extravagances, which are the embasings and embroylings of all true and
Reformed Religion; next, they portend Popish interests and policies prevailing
against this Church and State, whose future advantages are cunningly, but
notably, wrapped up in these plebeian furies and fondnesses, as grocery wares are
in brown paper. Be confident, the spirit of Rome (which is very vigilant and
active) does then move most potently upon the face of our English waters, when
there is to be seen nothing but a sea of confusion, a mere Chaos of the
Christian and Reformed Religion.

Which feared deluge, and (by wise men foreseen) devastation of the Reformed
Religion (once wisely established, honorably maintained, and mightily
prospered in the Church of England) is already much spread and prevalent among
many people, under the plea and color of I know not what liberty, to own any
or no Minister, any or no Religion, any, none, or many Churches in England. The
visible decays and debasings of the true and Reformed Religion in England, as
to piety, equity, unity and charity, as to the authority of its Ministry and
solemnity of its Ministrations, are so palpable, both in the outward peace and
profession, also in the inward warmth and persuasion, that it is high time for
all sober and wise men, that love God, Religion and their Country, mightily to
importune the mercies of God, that breathing upon us with a spirit of meekness
and wisdom, truth and love, humility and honesty, he would (at length) assuage
that deluge of contempt and confusion, the troubled and bitter waters of wrath
and contention, which have overwhelmed the highest mountains of this Church;
over-topping by their salt waves and aspersions, the gravest, wisest, most
learned and religious, both Preachers and professors, of the Reformed Religion
in this Church and Nation.

Which licentious insolences have made all sober Christians so sick, weary and
ashamed of them, that they cannot but be infinitely grieved to see and foresee
the low ebb, to which the Reformed Religion, in its purity and power, must in
time fall in England, while the pristine dignity and authority of the
Evangelicall Ministry is so invaded, baffled and despised; while the authentic
derivation, and Catholic succession of that holy power, is so interrupted,
innovated, divided, destroyed; while the reverence of primitive customs and
examples is so slighted, abated, by fanatic innovators; while the cords of
Christian harmony and Church-polity are so loosened and ravelled on every side;
while the just honor and encouragements of learning and learned men are so
much damped and exhausted; while the Ecclesiastic Glory of this Nation, which
was its chiefest (in being and owning it self as a true and Reformed Church of
Christ) is so much eclipsed, to the great reproach of this present age, and the
infinite hazard of posterity; which will hardly ever recover the honor, order,
beauty and unity of Christian and Reformed Religion formerly enjoyed in this
Church and Nation, when once the Jewels of it, the learned, ordained, orderly
and authoritative Ministers of the Gospel, with all their Ministry and
Ministrations, come to be either trampled under feet by Schismatic fury, or
invaded and usurped by vulgar insolency; which in time will rake them all up,
and bury them in the dunghill of Romish superstitions and Papal usurpations.

CHAP. XIX.
An humble and earnest expostulation in the behalf of the people and Church of
England.
HOw far in humane policy or reason of State this popular liberty (or rather
insolency, usurpation, and anarchy in Religion) is to be indulged, I know not,
as not pretending to any of those depths of secular wisdom, which will be
found shallow at last, if Gods glory and the good of men's souls be not in the
bottom of them.

But thus far I conceive I may (after so many years sad experience, which all
sober Christians have had of the retrogradations of the Reformed Religion in
England) appeal, as to you, who are the most generous and judicious persons in
this Nation, so to all prudent and well-advised persons, of all sizes and
conditions, who are capable to weigh the true interests and future concernments
of their Country and Posterity, both as to Piety and Peace, Honor and
Happiness, by way of an humble and earnest expostulation.

Has not (I beseech you) this English world, Prince and peasant, Pastors and
people, great and small, had enough, both in cities and in villages, of these
late Hashshes, Olives, and Queckshoes of Religion; in the mixture and dressing
of which every foul hand must have a finger? Do you not perceive a different
face of Christian and Reformed Religion, from what was heretofore in England,
when it had less experience of vulgar licentiousness, but more true Christian
liberty; when, in my memory and most of yours, Engl. was so full and
flourishing, with excellent Christians of all sorts, young and old, plain and
polite, learned and illiterate, noble and ignoble, in the Nobility, Gentry,
Yeomanry and Peasantry, whose settled and judicious piety was the fruit of the
labors, cares, counsels and inspection of those learned, grave and godly
Ministers, both Bishops and Presbyters, with whom you were blessed? Have not
all of you had enough, and too much of these new flashes, these fluttering
squibs, these erratick Planets, these wandering Stars, these pretenders to
rarities, novelties, superfluities, super-reformings, raptures, revelations,
and Enthusiasmes in Religion? To all which you may easily see, that a fancifull
invention, a melancholy pride, a popular itching, a profane spirit, a loose
temper, and a glib tongue, are very prone to betray men (being as sufficient to
furnish them in those trades, as a little stock will go far to make up a
pedlars pack:) yet have they so great confidence of themselves, as if they
exceeded not only all former Christians, all Ministers, all Councils, all
Churches, but even all holy Scriptures themselves, whose darkness or
incompleteness must (as some men say) be cleared and supplied by their special
illuminations: an old artifice of the Devil, most used by those men, and in
those times, which being most destitute of true reason, good learning and
Religion, did most vapor of their visions and revelations, their traditions
and superstitions: witness those Cimmerian Centuries, or blinder ages of these
Western Churches, in which there were as many visions, revelations and miracles
daily obtruded on the credulous vulgar, as there were Monasteries and
Nunneries, which in stead of Seminaries and Nurseries became dark dungeons,
wherein Christian Religion and Devotion were for many ages sadly confined, and
almost smothered with superstition, idleness and luxury.

Have we not had enough and too much of vulgar playings with piety, of
triflings with Christian and Reformed Religion, of baffling, abusing and
abasing the Christian Ministry, of buffetings of Christ, of mockings of God, by
impudent pratings and insolent intrudings, by confused rhapsodies and shuffling
sanctities, by endless janglings and refined blasphemies, vented in some men's
writings, preachings, prayings, and practisings; so far from the light, weight
and height, the sobriety, sanctity and majesty of true Religion, that they are
(most-what) void of ordinary reason and common sense, of equity and modesty, of
humanity and civility; being little else but the froth of futile and fanatic
spirits, who blind poor people to enlighten them, captivate them to make them
free, and ruin them, under pretense of building them after new ways and
models of Religion, sanctity, salvation?

Have we not had enough of passionate transports, popular zelotries,
Anarchicall furies, deformed reformings, and desperate hypocrisies; by which
some men have, like very foul chimneys, not only taken fire themselves,
according as their own lusts kindled them, but they have sought to set this
whole house of God, the Reformed Church of England, on fire, under pretense
(forsooth) of cleansing the soil and soot of it; which appear now to have been
more in their own hearts, than any where else?

Have we not had enough of insolent railings, bitter calumnies, odious
indignities, and endless divisions, brought upon this Reformed Church of
England, upon its Apostolic Ministry, and all its Evangelical Ministrations,
as invalid, superstitious, Popish, Antichristian, abominable? Besides the
tragic depressions and undoings of many sober Ministers, in their persons,
credits and estates, who were justly esteemed by good Christians for very
pious, painful and peaceable men; yet have the storms of times not only fallen
heavily upon them, during the paroxysme of our civil wars, but even since that
tempest has been allayed, many poor Ministers (beyond all other men) have been
afflicted with the strifes of tongues, with schismatical despites, with
opinionative and disputative (besides operative) persecutions, so far, that
many a grave and godly Minister has not known whither to fly, not so much for
employment, as for his safety, or quiet; that he might in any corner or cottage
of the land be free from the molestations of those importune wasps, those
ill-natured Factionists, who are his eternal Antagonists; who first separating
from him, at length they preach (or prate) against him, Ep. Joh. 3.10.
against his office, orders and function, counting themselves as a new swarm of
Teachers sent of God, to be to the former stock of Preachers like the hornets
sent against the Canaanites, Exodus 23.28.
that driving all the ancient, orthodox, duly ordained, and well-learned
Ministers out of the employment and communion of the Church, this Canaan of
England, this good land, this famous Church, may wholly be in their possession.

Have we not had enough and too much of petulant practices, scurrilous
expressions, and blasphemous insolences, cast even upon that God, that
Savior, that holy Spirit, that blessed Trinity, whom we adore and admire;
besides the neglects, contempts and profanations cast upon our Sacraments, our
Sermons, our Prayers? I need not to add and repeat the diminutions and
indignities under which many worthy Ministers, both Bishops and Presbyters, do
lie, together with that whole Evangelical order and office, which planted,
preserved and reformed this Church of England. How many have questioned, others
derided, a third sort divided from, and not a few have utterly denied, and (as
much as in them lies) destroyed them all? Hence many are grown to esteem all
our Religion, all our Reformation, all Christian duties, all Worship and
Devotion, no better than mere politic frauds, specious fables, popular
fallacies, cunning captivities, witty mockeries and delusions of the people.

Yea, that nothing might be wanting which malice can invent or act, there are
some so fierce and cunning enemies of the Church of England, that (to bring our
Reformation into further defiance and disgrace among Papists, Atheists and
profane livers) they dare to impute even their most putid errors, their most
extravagant fancies, their most factious and flagitious practices, either to
reforming principles, or to Gods Spirit and divine impulses. O what
astonishment, what stupor, what a lethargy, what a dumbness, what
searednesse, what deadness must needs possess the spirit of any Nation (so
Christian, so Reformed, so knowing and enlightened as the people of England
sometime was) to hear with patience, yea with silence, yea with connivence, yea
with smiles and seeming approbation, such insolences, such extravagancies
imputed to their Religion, yea to their Reformation, nay to the Spirit of their
God and Savior, horrid and black enormities, which deserve to be expiated with
tears of blood, as Gregory Nazianzen speaks of some abuses of Religion in his
times. O blessed God, stir up such a pious shame, sorrow and abhorrence in the
generality of the people, that these fedities may not become the sins of the
nation.

Have we not had enough and too much of scepticall disputes and unedifying
contests, of unhealing questions and uncharitable quarrellings, of bitter
strifes and bloody contradictions, of evil eyes and envious emulations,
prevailing like gangrenes or cancerous distempers, even among those that
profess to be godly, and contend for the superiority of Sanctity? By all which
(as S. Post Nicenam Synodum, nihil aliud quam fidem scribimus, dum in verbis
pugna est, dum de novitatibus quaestio est, dum de ambiguis querela est; dum
alter alteri Anathema esse coep^t, prope jam nemo est Christi. Eo processu^
est, ut nihil sanctu^, nihil inviolabile perseveret; invicem mordentes pene
absumpti sumus. Hilar. vita.
Hilary passionately complains, after the Arian fury had poisoned the Church in
his times) not only unkind distances, but mutual defyances and damnings, the
Christian Reformed Religion, sometime settled, uniform, and flourishing with
verity, charity, decency, divine authority and public majesty in the Church of
England, is now made Annuas atque menstruas de Deo fides decernimus. Hilar.
an annual, menstruall and diurnall Faith or Religion, as S. Hilary aptly
deplores. All things are either so snarled and entangled by infinite doubts and
scruples, or so wire-drawn by popular and petty disputes, or so broken in
sunder by factious divisions, or so horrid, by reciprocal Anathemaes, like
thunderbolts, cast on all sides in each others faces, that the common sort of
people know not what to make of Christian or Reformed Religion, nor to what
Ministers or Ministry to apply themselves with comfort and conscience. The
solid mass of pure gold, which was the highest riches and honor of this
nation, the true and invaluable treasure of your souls (while Religion, as
Christian and Reformed, was carefully preserved as a precious and holy
depositum;) this well-refined gold is now so dim and embased with dross, or so
malleated and beaten thin by perverse disputations, that most men use Religion
only as leaf-gold, to tip their tongues, or gild over the superficies of their
conversation withal, or to set off (as S. Austin observed of old in the crafty
Manichees and others, both Heretics and Schismatics, Insanas and sacrilegas
fabulas suas Christiani nominis pallio velare contendunt. Aug. cont. Fau. l.
22. c. 15.
of his time) with the show and luster of Christian Religion, all the new
fancies, projects, policies and opinions of several parties, which are
presently by their authors and abettors cried up as the pure Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, the perfect mind of the Spirit, the true meaning of the
Scripture, Gospel Truths, hidden treasures, Evangelick rarities: yea, that
nothing might be thought to have been Christian, Catholic, clear and constant,
settled and indisputable, as to Religion, in this or any other Church of any
other frame and fashion; some men have sought, not only to shake and batter,
but to demolish and utterly overthrow, the whole house of wisdom, beating down
all the grand and goodly pillars, on the one side, of faith, repentance,
charity, good works; on the other side, of Scriptures, Ministry, Worship, and
Sacramental Mysteries, as to the validity, authority, majesty, sanctity,
solemnity, and saving efficacy of them all:

Upon which the Catholic Church was every where anciently built, even then,
when it was by the hands of the Apostles and their successors (the Primitive
Bishops and Presbyters, Martyrs and Confessors) hewn out of the rock of
heathenish barbarity and idolatry, polished by heavy and sharp persecutions,
fixed by the solidity and patience, honored by the charity and constancy of
Christian people: even all these solid supports of Religion are sought by some
men to be either sawn in sunder, or to be cut into chips and shavings, by their
infinite scrupulosities, by their importune longing after novelties, by their
affectations of Schisms, and separations, and usurpations.

Alas! how many poor souls, rather weak than wicked, of easy heads, yet honest
hearts, have (in these later years, since the vertigo of Religion befell this
Nation) ravelled out their time and ended their days in Obs and Sols, in
cavilling and contending, in shifting their sides and parties, in seeking and
shaking, in ranting and raving, in quarrelling and jangling about their
Religion? What new models of Churches, what new methods of worshipping God,
what new forms for Ministry and Ministers have distracted and distorted them,
while they have been picking and choosing what way they could best fancy, and
with most advantages follow? Thus poor mortals (who have infinite sins to be
pardoned, and infinite wants to be supplied, who have precious and immortal
souls to be saved, by the happy improvement of their short uncertain moment)
are by a pragmatick vanity, continually itching and scratching, while they
should be cleansing and healing; sceptically and miserably disputing and
doubting, while they are decaying and dying, while they should, in all piety
and prudence, by sound faith and serious repentance, be doing that great work
which is evidently set forth in the Word of God, and faithfully delivered unto
them by the Ministers of his Church. Behold the terrors of death prevent them;
Eternity presses upon them, before they are resolved what side to take, when
to begin, where to fix, what to hold fast: the flower of age passes, gray
hairs are here and there, giddiness in their heads, stupor in their minds,
hardness in their hearts, searedness in their conscience, a Manichean dotage
and delirancy seiseth upon them, before ever they are resolved whether the
Scriptures be the true, only and sufficient revelation of the Word and will of
God; whether it be their duty to live righteously, soberly and holily in this
present world toward all men; whether this Church of England, and all the
Churches of Christ in all ages, have not till now cheated them and all the
world; whether there be any Ministers in the Church of England that are duly
set over Christian people in the Lord, to whom they owe double honor; whether
they may not in some cases follow their own fallacious fancies, and other men's
flattering suggestions, rather than the Scriptures plain and pregnant precepts,
in order to carry on the covetous, ambitious, factious, fanatic and novell
designs of such as call themselves godly; whether they may not in some
junctures of times and things (when opportunity suits with their lusts and
worldly interests) dispense with Gods revealed will in his word, that they may
fulfill his secret will, hinted, as they suppose, by his providence; whether
in order to advance the glory of God, men may not sometimes break his express
commands, presuming that then they please God best, when they most please or
profit themselves, as the only people of God. These strange scrupulosities, or
extravagancies (rather) in Religion, do ordinarily not only entangle, but
debauch the minds of common people, when once they please themselves with
inordinate liberties and ramblings in Religion, which fill their heads and
hearts with such snarlings and intrigues, as resemble those deformed knots of
burres which colts get upon their manes and tails, when they run loose upon
heaths or commons; they are easily got on, but very hardly shaken off, or
cleared: men's interests, lusts and passions, once leavening their Religion, and
blinding no less than biassing their judgments, it is not imaginable what sport
the Devil makes with them, and with what compasses and fetches of godliness he
plays his game by them.

Have we not enough and too much hitherto in England, of verbal sanctity and
titular Saints; not after the Catholic Christian account, which was
Scripturall and orderly, unblamable and charitable, most imitable and
honorable in an uniform and constant holiness, full of equity and charity,
purity and sincerity; but upon new notions, names and factions? We have sects
of self-canonizing Saints, as well as self-ordaining Ministers: every petty
Schismatic, every solitary Seeker, every extatick Quaker, every Independent
Noveller, every Presbyterian temporiser, each of these have learned of late to
tip their tongues, and crown the heads of their parties with these precious
names; (which are the ambition of Angels, the beauties of heaven, and glory of
God himself.) And this they do not in a way of charitable communion and
Christian emulation, as allowing others with them an interest in that honor,
which I have the charity to believe some of the soberest in most of those sects
may deserve; but peculiarly and exclusively, as if none that had, or still have
communion with the Church of Engl. either as Bishops, or Presbyters, or people,
ever had, or have any right or claim to be called or esteemed Saints: yea, some
of the most noisome weeds of late grown up in the garden of this Church, the
most vile, polluted and profane wretches, affect to style themselves the only
herbs of grace; hereby causing the silly people to mistake hemlock for parsley,
and to gather hen-bane for hearts-ease.

Thus while either with great superstition many men scruple, or with great
pride they disdain to give the name and honor of Saints, to those holy men and
women, whom the judgment of the Catholic Church, or the Scripture-Records,
have ever counted and called Saints; yet they very superciliously and
Pharisaically arrogate, nay some monopolize these Titles to themselves and
their comrades, as absolutely and magisterially, as Popes have done that of His
Holiness, though they be never so black and abominable, as some Popes, even by
Roman writers, are reported to have been, in the darkness and degeneracy of
times, very monsters of men, and prodigies of all impiety; such as Guicciardine
A Serpent, who with his immoderat ambition and poisoned infidelity, together
with all the horrible examples of cruelty, luxury and monstrous covetousness,
had infected the world. Guicciard^n. l. 6. p. 308.
describes Pope Alexan. the sixth, a Father worthier of such a Son, as Caesar
Borgia, or the Duke of Valentinois was, than to enjoy so high a place of
paternal presidency in the Church of Christ.

For what (I pray) can be more unsaintly, than to desire, yea, delight and
glory, as some in England now do, in most unjust and uncharitable actions, in
immoderate revenges, in the poverties, disgraces and dejections of their
lawful Pastors, in the divisions, distractions and destructions of that nobly
Christian and Reformed Church, in whose bosom they were duly baptized and
instructed, legitimately begotten, wholsomely nourished, and carefully
educated, as Christians, and as Reformed, to all excellent proportions of
piety? Contra hoc concilium nostrum rebellatur, and omnis sacerdotalis
autoritas factiosis conspirationibus destruitur. Cyp. ep. 40. ad pleb.
What is less Saintly than for Christians to mutiny, nay rebel (as S. Cyprian
calls it) against those reverend Fathers, orthodox and godly Bishops, and other
worthy, yea excellent Ministers, to whom they and their forefathers do really
owe themselves, as S. Paul tells Philemon, as to whatever they can rightly
pretend of the true honor, privilege and power of Christiany?

What is less Saintly than to cry up novell, partial and factious
Reformations, to magnify uncouth and exotic ways of Ministry and
Christianity, Church Fellowship and Communion; while in the mean time they
ungratefully despise and cruelly crucify their proper Mother, the Church of
England, together with those whom they sometime justly esteemed as their
Fathers in God, and brethren in Christ? Malac. 3.8.
What is less Saintly than to endeavor to rob God in a land of peace and
plenty, to expose his servants and service (after the order of Christ's
Evangelicall Priesthood) to as great contempts, deformities and diminutions in
all points, both for order and authority, learning and maintenance, as ever
Julian the Apostate did design? with great impudence crying down the rare and
(indeed) incomparable Ministers of the Church of England, who had been
liberally treated and honorably maintained, that they may, with vulgar
easiness and credulity, by a penurious, covetous and sacrilegious sophistry,
cry up some cheap new-fashioned Teachers, as rare Angels, that had no stomachs,
and would preach gratis; who, I believe, are found in many places, as greedy
and voracious as Bell and the Dragon in the Apocrypha? Nor can I think them
other than Apocryphal Preachers, so far from Angels of light sent from God to
comfort the Reformed Religion in its bloody sweat and agonies, 2 Cor. 11.7.
that they seem rather as Messengers of Satan sent to buffet this Reformed
Church and the renowned Clergy of England; whose fame and flourishing, whose
piety and prosperity, whose honor and unity, whose Catholic order and
authority, heretofore was so conspicuous, by the rare indulgence of Gods
providence, by the generous munificence of pious Princes, and by the moderation
of wise and worthy Parliaments, that God (it seems) saw it in danger (as S.
Paul) to be exalted above measure, by reason of those excellent endowments and
enjoyments, both spiritual and temporal, which were bestowed upon it. All
which are prone to threaten themselves by their excess; the usual temper of
humane frailty being such, that it is never so fixed, sweetened and seasoned by
any temporal blessings in the best of men, but it is subject to warp, to
sour, or to putrify, if it stand too long in the warm sun of prosperity.

However it becomes all holy and humble Ministers to bless God, with holy Job,
though he take what he once gave: it is his mercy that he chooses rather by
impoverishing of us to correct us, than to leave us wholly to that crookedness
and putrefaction, which we were ready of our selves in peace and plenty to
contract: it is better for any Church, any Clergy, any Christians, to be
healed by the sharpness of Gods corrosives and vinegar, than too much softened
by the suppleness of his oils and lenitives. I hope the health and soundness
of the Church and Clergy of England are Gods last designs; that his blessings
to both shall in due time be restored and enjoyed again, when being better
prepared to use and value them, we shall be less subject to abuse and loose
them.

CHAP. XX.
MEan time, The rudeness and irreverence expressed by some in religious duties,
as a part of their Liberty.
while many grave and excellent Ministers are feign patiently to hang their
harps upon the willowes, while they and other sober Christians daily weep over
the waters of Babylon (our sad confusions;) a general astonishment has seized
upon all sober and serious, wise and worthy men, true lovers of this Church and
Nation, who, with sad hearts and moistened eyes, do hear and see the more then
childish petulancies, the rude insolences, the impudent familiarities, the
irreverent behaviors, which in many places the common sort of people are grown
to affect, and presume to use, even in our religious duties and sacred
assemblies; expressing less outward respect or reverence in the presence of
God, when his Ministers and his people assemble to worship him, than they are
wont to use, either for fear, or civility, or shame, before the Steward and
Jury of a Court Leet, or the meanest Justice of Peace and his Clark in the
country.

From the rude examples and daring indulgences of some men, whose years and
education might have taught them better manners) there daily grows up a
numerous generation, a rustic, heady and impudent fry of younger people, who
carry no more regard to any duties of Religion, or respect to the Ministers of
them, than the forty children did to the Prophet Elisha, when they mocked him,
and were for their ill breeding and irreligious rudeness 2 King. ^.24. (...).
Quaest. and Resp. ad Orthod. in ep. Just. Mar. Res. 80.
torn in pieces by the she-Bears; to teach both parents and children better
manners toward Gods Prophets, as was of old observed. Yea there are some grown
so clownish and Cyclopick Christians, that their very Religion consists (not a
little) in their morose, undecent, uncivil, untractable spirits and demeanor:
if others have their heads reverently uncovered in the presence and service of
God, these must have their hats on; not to relieve the tenderness and infirmity
of their heads, but to show the liberty and surliness of their wills and
spirits.

If others testify their inward veneration of the divine Majesty by their
outward comely gestures, as either standing or kneeling, according to the
variety of duties; these by all means affect to fit or loll, after such a lazy
and neglective fashion, that easily discovers and openly proclaims, neither
much fear of God, nor reverence of man: yea, some people are not satisfied thus
to express their sullen tempers by their churlish and unconformable gestures,
as to our religious duties and decencies (in case they vouchsafe to be
present;) but they must be railing and reviling, prating and opposing,
cavilling and disputing in public.

What ear, not wholly uncircumcised, can bear the vain bablings, the
unprofitable, unpleasing and profane janglings of such sophisters, the
unharmonious noise of such Low-bels, whose sound is neither with verity,
certainty, harmony, nor gravity? yet do they, every where, seek to drown or
confound the sacred concent of Aarons bells, and that sweet music which was
wont to be in Gods sanctuary, in our Churches here in England, when good
Christians did orderly and reverently meet together with their lawful
Ministers in one place, with one accord, with one heart, one mind, one mouth,
to serve the Lord, and to edify one another in truth and love, with all
modesty, humility, decency and solemnity.

CHAP. XXI.
The sad exchange people make of their old Religion for new Raptures.
WHich comfort and honor, solemnity and blessing of Religion, formerly enjoyed
in most Congregations of the Church of England, how many of later years have
dared, not more with rudeness than profaneness, to exchange for a kind of
Sibylline ravings, Bacchinal raptures? They obtrude upon poor people sudden
correptions, licentious rantings, ridiculous quakings, fanatic ravings,
senseless vapourings, and such like rallieries or gallantries in Religion,
which seek to turn Christianity to a kind of buffoonery. If these corrept and
corrupt ecstasies, or extravagancies, be not permitted to such fanatic
triflers, troublers of travagancies, be not permitted to such fanatic
triflers, troublers of Religion (which no sober Christian can tolerate in their
public and religious meetings) they presently meditate the most desperate
separations; they instantly fall to set up new Churches and Pastors after their
own heart; their full revenge must be had, not only by dividing themselves,
but by seducing and poisoning other silly people, as much as may be,
withdrawing them from that good esteem they had, and respect they formerly bare
to the Church of England and their lawful Ministers. Then the followers of
these pragmatick Preachers are taught to bear with patience (as horses are the
noise of drums and trumpets) all manner of scurrilous railings against the
Church and Clergy of England. At last they are by troops brought up in front,
to charge them with such insolency of speech and behavior, of writing and
acting, as sufficiently discovers their evil hearts to be like mines or Petars,
full fraught and charged with all kinds of bitterness, contempt and animosity
against them, in order to destroy them utterly, as soon as they have power and
opportunity to do it.

In the room of whose orderly beauty, learned gravity, sober sanctity, and
exemplary piety, so famous, conspicuous and prosperous heretofore, these bold
extirpators and bitter Antagonists have hitherto produced (as the eructations
of Aetna, and earthquakes are wont, with much swelling, noise and terror)
nothing but darkness, smoke and thick vapors, full of sulphurous
obfuscations. Sure their executions and conclusions must be full of mischiefs,
subversions, confusions, desolations, to the Reformed Religion; because there
is not one dram or iota (that ever I could observe) of sound knowledge, of
useful piety, of gracious effects, of holy patterns, of Christian principles,
to be found in them, any way comparable to those proportions of wisdom and
good understanding, of justice and charity, of meekness and moderation, with
all which the English world was heretofore well acquainted, by the learned
industry and exemplary piety of its reverend Bishops, and other godly
Ministers; who were ever highly honored, passionately loved, and worthily
treated by pious Princes, peaceful Parliaments, and unpassionate people, long
before either tumultuary rabbles, or schismatic agitators, or the Scotch
sword, or the Smectymnuan juncto, or a sifted sequacious Assembly, or
covenanting Houses, or Committee-Consistories, or Military Superintendents,
undertook (by an unwonted authority and severity) not only to catechize, but
to chastise the Church and Clergy of England, even all the Bishops, and most
of the Presbyters; among whom many one person might be found, whose learning
and worth (every way) might modestly be put into the balance against all that
any or all those parties can pretend to, or ever yet discovered to the wiser
and better world, who have been, and are, the most rigid exactors, severest
censurers, and sorest enemies to the Reformed Clergy and Church of England.

Whose more crafty rivalls and cruellest persecutors, finding themselves (as
heretofore, so still) vastly exceeded, and infinitely outdone, as to all real
endowments, commendable practices, and visible sufficiencies, for learning,
knowledge, utterance, prudence, for praying, preaching, writing and living,
they are (now of late, after the way of those old fanatics, who called
themselves the pure, elect, inspired and spiritual ones) flown to the retreats
and refuges of their inward graces, to more secret and spiritual perceptions,
to hidden and unseen acquaintances with God. Which are (as I formerly touched)
the old (...) of elect Manichees, Vid. Aug. de Haeres. Manich.
and paraclete Montanists, mere shifts and sleights, blinds and evasions, where
the light of men's works and gifts shines not to the glory of God, Mat 5.16.
as our Savior speaks: for these are (a nemo scit) as easily denied as they
are rashly affirmed, 1 Cor. 2.11. Rev. 2.17.
being indiscoverable and incommunicable to any but Gods and a man's own spirit.
The hidden manna, the white stone, the new name, which none can read but he
that has it, these (if meant of Graces) are best asserted, or most confuted,
by men's works. No man is of God, John 5.30.
who does not the will and works of God, as they are revealed in his Word, in
all righteousness and holiness, with meekness and humility, with sobriety and
good order: in all which, if any (the best) of these Novellers do at any time
come near to the parts, graces and merits of those that were, and are, dutiful
sons and servants to the Church of England; yet I am sure they cannot, without
intolerable impudence, pretend to exceed them so far, that no fair quarter may
be allowed to the former Preachers and Professors in this Church; that no place
or nail should be left them in Gods sanctuary here in England.

CHAP. XXII.
The soul mistakes and abuses of Christian liberty in vulgar spirits.
INto which (as I have by many instances evinced) some men's folly or fury has
(of later years) sought to bring so much filth and confusion, that they have
almost made this Church an Augean stable; so that it is an Herculean work to
cleanse it of all those debordments and debasements fallen upon Christian
Religion, of those fedities and deformities brought upon its reformed
profession, of those disorders and undecencies which have invaded Ecclesiastic
duties and mysteries: all which necessarily follow the invasions and
usurpations of popular liberty in Religion; which (though already full of
squallor and sordidness, yet) are still eagerly challenged, loudly clamoured,
and fiercely asserted by the common people and their parasites, the most
plebeian spirits.

Who not capable to comprehend, or not willing to understand the gracious
beauty, the holy modesty, and divine majesty of true Christian liberty (which
most excludes all base licenciousnesse, as the brightest light does all
darkness, and the perfectest health all sickness) have excessively doted in
later years upon this Image of imaginary liberty, as if it had newly come down
from heaven in a whirlwind of Civil war and Schism; whereas (in good earnest)
the most vociferant vulgar, Acts 19.3^
who most cry up this their Diana, like the riotous rabble at Ephesus, do least
know what the matter is, nor what true Christian liberty means: which
undoubtedly puts the severest restraints that may be upon it self, as to doing
any thing offensive to God, or injurious to its neighbor, in private and
single, much more in public and sociall respects; in civil, much more in
religious relations, which as men and Christians we bear to one another.

True Christian liberty is as far as heaven from hell, from any thing that
looks like incivility, rudeness, barbarity, inhumanity, frenzy, fedity,
disorder, deformity. Rational and religious liberty is not the freedom of an
untamed heifer, of an unbridled horse, of a mad dog, or an unyoked hog, which
will ramble and wallow, and bite and root up where they list; which seeks to
subvert, not whole houses only, Titus 1.11.
but famous Churches, to infect as many as they can, with the plague and
contagion of men's own evil hearts.

It is not Christian liberty, but an earthly, sensual and devilish laziness,
or licentiousness, for men and women that have been baptized in the name of
Christ, and so dedicated to his worship and service (as well public and
social, as private and solitary) to sleep and laze in their chimney corners on
the Lords day, rather than go to Church, as many hundreds do. It is no part of
Christian liberty, to come seldom or never to the Lords Supper, to despise
Baptism, to forsake those public assemblies where the true God is truly and
sincerely worshipped, according to his Word, with soundness, holiness, order,
decency and sincerity; to rail at, and separate from all those Bishops and
Ministers of so well a reformed and wisely settled National Church, who are
evidently furnished with good ability, and invested with most undeniable and
due authority, to dispense sacred mysteries. It is no part of Christian
liberty, for men to speak, and act, and behave themselves in Religion, as seems
good in their own eyes; which are easily blinded with passion, pride,
prejudice, covetousness, ambition, revenge. It is no part of Christian liberty,
for men to have no regard to that order, peace, charity, duty and subordination
which God requires, and which every Christian owes, as to the civil, so to that
Ecclesiastic polity and Society in which God has placed him, as by his birth
and habitation, so by his baptism and profession; which are the holy ties of
Religion, by which, as members of Christ's body in the judgment of charity (
his visible Church) we are bound to him as the head, and to each other as
members, in the several places and proportions where God has set us, either
in a coordination and community, as to brethren, or in subordination and
superiority, as to Fathers, guides, Pastors, Governors, Teachers; to whom, as
sons, Heb. 13.7, 17.
or scholars, we owe the duties of love, gratitude, reverence, submission and
obedience for the Lords sake, and for their work sake. 1 These. 5.13.
If it be a great sin, and deserving the ponderous millstone of Gods heavy
judgment (as our Savior tells us) to offend causelessly, Mat. 18.6.
uncharitably and maliciously, one of Christ's little ones; how much greater and
more intolerable must the condemnation of those be, who wantonly and
presumptuously offend, yea, seek to wound and destroy, those that are duly and
deservedly the Bishops and Presbyters, the chief heads and Fathers, Officers
and Stewards, Guides and Governors, even in Christ's stead, and by his
authority, over his house and family, his Temple and Body, which is his Church,
in the several parts and proportions of it, according to the Catholic order
and custom used in his Church?

Of which riotously to make havoc, to rend, to strip, and waste all things of
good order, Catholic custom, comely honor, authority, decency and solemnity,
to the overthrowing of Christian unity and charity, to the dissolving,
deforming and discountenancing even of that truth, those gifts and graces,
which were in such a Church as this of England was, must without all
peradventure be no less sin and crime, Sacrilegium schismatis omnia scilera
supergreditur. l. 1. c. 4. cont. ep. Parmen.
than it is a sacrilege and scandal (in S. Austins judgment;) agreeable to
the sense of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, who in his Epistle, so famed, tells
Novatus as much, who was a primitive Schismatic, or a Saintly Separatist, from
the Catholic custom, judgment and communion of Christ's Church. For which
practice in any case, a man must have very great and pregnant grounds (as S.
Vid. Cyp. lib. ad Novatian. Haeret. and ep. ad Magn. 76.
Cyprian and S. Austin often observe) either in point of gross errors, or
immoralities, obtruded upon a believer (in case he will keep communion) whereby
to justify his desertion, division, or separation, which upon small and
trifling accounts, or upon spiteful and malicious principles, or for covetous
and vainglorious interests, or upon mere jealousies and surmises to violate,
Quis non trepidat, Christi Ecclesia derelicta, ratione caeca, apud temerarios
illosschi smatum Duces and dissensionis autores converti^ Cyp. ad Nov.
was ever esteemed, by the soundest and soberest Christians in all ages, a sin
much of the nature and size of Korah's, Dathan's and Abiram's transgression or
rebellion, as S. Cyprian observes, applying that History to some such mutinous
distempers and unquiet spirits, as haunted the Church in his days and Diocese;
That their popular and parasitick crying up of Numb. 16.
all the Lords people to be holy, their rude reproching of Moses and Aaron, as
taking too much upon them, these specious pleas did not serve their turn, when
Gods searching severity, and not vulgar levity, credulity or ingratitude, was
their judge: all their plausible pretensions of sanctity and liberty before the
people, were not able to defend them from those horrid chasms, and unheard of
gapings of the earth, which by a new way of death, Cypr. ep. ad Rogat l. 3. ep.
9. and ep. ad Felice^ ep. 78.
swallowed up (even quick, and yet alive) these mutinous novellers and
levelling rebels into the black and dreadful Abyssus of eternal death and
darkness; whose names and memory (yet) the Cainites did venerate, as the
commendable asserters of popular liberty, Haeres. 18.
and the Princes or Protoplasts of Schism, as S. Austin observes.

Nor is the usual fate of such like insolent and popular perturbers of Christ's
Church much different or disproportionate at last: for either they fall ( when
their pride and folly is manifest) into the pit of vulgar hatred, 2 Timothy 3.9.
contempt and abhorrence; or they are swallowed up with carnal lusts, with
earthly, sensual and devilish passions, affections and actions; or being at
last justly abandoned and abhorred of all sober and good Christians, they are
(by Gods utter forsaking of them) plunged into the gulf of their own polluted,
seared and despairing consciences.

If those were in the primitive times esteemed as given over to the will and
power of Satan, 1 Cor. 5 5. 1 Timothy 5.20.
who were justly excommunicated from the communion of the true Church of
Christ; which sentence (as Tertullian tells us) every good Christian did dread,
next to that doom of (Ite maledicti) Go ye cursed, Summum futuri judicii
praejudicium. Tert. Apol. c. 39.
as a dreadful pre-judging before the last and fatal judgment; how must they
needs lie down in darkness and sorrow, who upon no just cause, do not only
excommunicate themselves from any one Churches communion (in which they were)
out of a fancy of I know not what liberty, but (out of an excessive pride,
arrogance and boldness of spirit) they dare excommunicate even whole National
Churches, yea, such a famous Reformed Church as England; nay they exclude the
very Catholic Church of Christ in all ages and places, from any communion with
themselves (which certainly is no small height of uncharitableness) yea, and
from all communion with Christ himself, which is a strange pitch of Luciferian
pride.

It is no news for the patient, but just and righteous God, to keep those men
and women at a great distance, even from himself, and from the sweet communion
of his holy Spirit, who proudly or peevishly despise the communion of any part
of his Church, in the holy ministrations of the Word, Prayer and Sacraments.
They that hope to kindle to themselves strange fires, and light new sparks by
their violent strikings and novell agitations in any sound and well-ordered
Church, God (commonly) beats the smoky brands ends about their own heads, and
kindles a fire of displeasure in their own breasts, because they cared not to
set whole-Churches on fire, in order to roast their new-laid eggs; the best of
which are of no great worth, and most of them are quite addle or rotten.

CHAP. XXIII.
ALthough I have thus far and thus long insisted (most honored and beloved
Contrymen) upon the mischiefs of abused Liberty, A further discovery of
mischiefs from abused liberty in Religion.
as the first and chief cause (I conceive) of the greatly lapsed and decaying
estate of the Church of England and the Reformed Religion (which was heretofore
so settled, so sound, so prospered, so approved by God and good men;) yet I
cannot forbear a further search into this Ulcer or Fistula: for indeed her hurt
is not now a green wound lately made, either by the malice of open enemies, or
by the wantonness of those friends, who love to be always pickeering and
skirmishing in Religion; but it is now by a long confluence of ill humors in
people, grown a venomous and inveterate sore, contumacious to any ordinary
Medicines, opprobrious to the best Physicians, contagious to the remaining
parts of this Civil and Ecclesiastical body, which have any thing in them sound
and sincere; many of which, especially among the common people, being weak, are
less able to resist that petulant poison, and spreading itch of liberty, which
is so bewitching a name to the populacy; a temptation and infection which few
vulgar spirits are able to resist, or willing to remedy. And indeed the
mischief seizing (like Mercury or Quicksilver) upon the spirits and brains of
men that are rash, easy, and heady, it makes them presently suspect, and
shortly to hate all those, as their enemies, who go about to curb or cure so
welcome and flattering a disease: which is not less dangerous, because
delightful; for commonly all those things that are most agreeable to natural
men and carnal minds (who love to be licentious) prove grievous to Gods
Spirit, scandalous to the name of Christ, and pernicious to his Churches purity
or peace. Liberty, if it be in ill keeping, soon putrifies to licentiousness,
Exodus 16.20.
as the manna did, which turned to worms.

Not that I am any way against that rational, ingenuous, modest, inoffensive,
charitable and conscientious liberty, which is the only true Christian liberty
to be desired and enjoyed, either in private or in public; such I mean as is
neither touchy nor turbulent, but carries an equal tenderness to other men's
honest and harmless freedom, as to its own, seeking only by lawful means,
either to remove those impediments of its well-being and doing, that are really
rubs or remiras in its way to heaven, or else to obtain those holy allowed
advantages which may most promote its communion with God; with Christ, and his
blessed Spirit: which holy freedoms and happy advantages are surest to be met
withal (as I conceive) in those high ways and plain paths, which Christ's
Catholic Church in its nobler parts and ampler combinations has constantly
kept, after the primitive proportions, and Apostolical distributions of
Churches, wherein the majesty of Christ, and the harmony of Christians, which
is the honor of Christian Religion, are infinitely more to be seen, and safely
preserved, than in any of those by-ways or diverticles, which Schismatic
liberty affects to choose and follow; which will at length make any National,
Christian and Reformed Church, that was heretofore grounded in truth, guided
with order, united in love, conspicuous with beauty, fortified with its joint
power, uniform in its solemn ministrations, and orderly in all its holy motions
(like an army well ordered disciplined, and bravely marshalled) to be like the
routed parties and ragged regiments of a scattered and divided army.

It is an observation never failing, That the sanctity of Christian Martyrs,
the honor and prevalency of that Religion which recommends the crucified Lord
Jesus, as a Savior and preserver, not a destroyer of mankind, these are best
preserved in any nation or society of men, there, where least liberty or
license is permitted to private spirits publicly to innovate or alter, dispute
or deny, contemn or subvert, those Catholic Truths and Doctrines, or those
comely constitutions and customs, which are once well and wisely settled by
public counsel and authority, which carried due regard to the glory of God, to
the rule of his Word, to the Catholic precedents, and to the common good of
that particular Nation or polity. All experience, and our own as bad as any,
teaches us, that liberty, in the vulgar sense and use, is like a sweet and
rank kind of Clover-grass, with which the beast of the people will soon
surfeit, even till they burst themselves, if they be not moderated, and
restrained from over-feeding by their wise Governors in Church and State.

The Histories of Sleidanus and others sufficiently show you, in the last
Century, how wild the Boores of Germany grew, even to a kind of a Lycanthropy,
by such liberties as their teachers first indulged, and themselves afterward
usurped; how quickly this charm (like Circe's) turns men and women into dogs
and wolves; how abused liberty having once seized upon the thatch and straw,
the petulancy and insolency of common people, as most combustible matter, like
a masterless and unbridled fire, it will devour more in a few days, by the
pragmatick folly of some extravagant heads and hands, than the wisdom, piety
and gravity of your forefathers could erect, or your posterity will be able to
repair, in many years or ages: for no fires burn with more fury and pertinacy,
than those which maintain their unquenchable flames by the oil of Religion and
Liberty, with which they are least to be trusted, who most love to play with
it, as children do with fire and gunpowder. Common people, like young heirs,
who have more wealth than wit, are of so profuse an humor, and so lavish of
their liberty, both civil and religious, when once they think themselves
masters of it, that they will presently be undone, if they have not some wiser
men to be their Guardians, who will be better husbands for them than they would
be for themselves; nor are they ever more desperately prodigal, or more
certainly miserable, than when (like madmen) they have by insolency or
importunity extorted from their Governors and the Laws, such a portion of
liberty, either civil or religious, as they least know how to use, and will be
sure to abuse.

Let those men that are the greatest Tribunes of the people, the seeming
Patrons of their liberties (but real parasites of their licentious humors) in
Religion, let them, I say, make but one years trial, with how much good
nature, reason, justice and modesty, these people will use their civil and
natural liberty; in which, being absolved from all restraint of laws and
fears, of power and of punishment, they shall have leave, with the bridle on
their necks, to covet, challenge, contend, invade, usurp, and take every man to
himself such women, such houses, such goods, such lands, such offices, such
power and such honors, as each of them most fancies himself capable to deserve
or enjoy: in a few days they will soon see how severe a revenge such folly
will take of it self, both as to the actors and permitters.

If such inordinate liberty (which naturally men affect, and which imposes on
mankind the necessity of having public laws and magistratick powers above all
private men's fancies) if it be so pestilent in civil and secular regards, that
the indulgence of it is no more to be permitted by wise and good men, for one
month, or one day, than a fire may be left to its freedom for one hour in any
private cabin or chamber, to the endangering of the whole ship and house; how
(I beseech you) can it be convenient or profitable to the common interests of
Religion, or the honor of any Nation that desires to be called Christian, to
let every man pick and choose their several doctrines, opinions, forms and
fashions of Religion, as they best fancy; or to suffer them to set up to
themselves what Prophets, Pastors, or Preachers, what Churches, Congregations
and Conventicles they most affect; 1 Cor. 3.4.
one being of Paul, another of Apollos, a third of Cephas; one Episcopal,
another Presbyterian, a third Independent, a fourth owning no Ministers, no
Religion at all? Specious names and godly pretensions may be very pernicious to
the peace of the Church, the honor of Christ, and the good of men's souls, as
the blessed Apostle there observes, through the folly and factiousness of
people. Better the most deserving names, how much more the most flattering
Novellers in the world, should be buried in eternal oblivion, than they should
be set up in the Church of Christ, as so many apples of contention, so many
wedges of division, so many rivals to the glory of Christ, so many moths to
religious unity and the Churches beauty, so many Molechs or Idols, through
whose fires your posterity, as Christians (that are not yours only, Heb. 2.13.
but Gods children, and, as it were, Christ's seed and offspring) should be
forced to pass with popular noyses and incondite acclamations of liberty, only
to drown the sad cries of those poor souls who are to be tormented in those
flames, those Tophets of uncharitable novelties and factious liberties.

Christian liberty, as vulgar spirits commonly use it, is but a corroding salve
spread on a silk plaster; it is a confection of carnal projects, wrought up
with spiritual mixtures; it is poison presented in a gilt cup, the Devils
rats-bane mingled with sugar. The sad effects already upon us in England, and
further threatening us, do promise nothing upon this account, 2 Cor. 12.20.
but envies, wraths, strifes, jealousies, animosities, whisperings, swellings,
tumults, seditions, oppressions, and mutual persecutions, Jam. 3.16.
with every evil work among us, as men and Christians.

CHAP. XXVI.
NOr are these mischiefs only rife among Laymen, The contagion of abused or
mistaken Liberty spread among Ministers, to the dividing, debasing and
destroying of them.
or ordinary people (whose ignorance, meanness and discontent, are prone to
tempt them to any thing) but even among those who desire to be called the
Ministers, Teachers, Pastors and leaders of the people; for even these, in many
places, either misled by the people, or sadly misleading them, are very much
bitten and infected with this epidemicall disease, of mistaken, corrupted and
abused liberties in matters of Religion, both as to Doctrine and Worship, as to
Ecclesiastical order and Ministerial authority: many of these (otherwise men
of worth, for soundness and integrity, no way unfit for the work, or unworthy
to have the honor of being Ministers of the Gospel) yet are miserably tainted
with these divisions, distractions and deformities, even among themselves.

Which contagion (among the Pastors as well as the Flocks) as a farther sad and
evident instance of the grand causes or occasions of this Churches present
miseries, and of the great decays of the Reformed Religion, I crave leave,
without offense to any of my worthy and deserving Brethren in the Ministry (of
what name or title, of what stamp or metal soever they are) a little to insist
upon; that I may, by further discovering the rise and progress of our
mischiefs, the better make way for such remedies as your wisdom (O my noble
Contrymen) shall see fittest for the recovery of health, strength and
beauty, to this deformed Church, and the remnants of Reformed Religion in it.

As all experience tells us poor mortals, that our greatest enemies are many
times nearest to us, and often lie in our own bosoms; so the greatest mischiefs
that have, or can befall the Christian Reformed Religion in England, do chiefly
arise from some Preachers, or such as would be accounted the Ministers of
Christ's Church, under several notions and formations. Vulgar reproaches,
plebeian contempts, the injuries of Laymen, yea the persecutions of great and
mighty men, the Clergy, or true Ministers of Christ's Church in England, might
possibly have born with patience, constancy, comfort and honor, (though much
to their outward diminution) if they had had the grace, wisdom and
understanding, to have kept among themselves that harmony, constancy and
integrity, in judgments, practice and affections, which became men that should
be both wise and warm, prudent as serpents, and innocent as doves; if they had
(as Christ's Disciples) loved one another, though the world hated them: Mat.
10.16.
if they had (as one man) held together, like a well-turn'd Arch, surely they
might at once have upheld themselves, and easily sustained any pressures laid
upon them by the levity, violence and ingratitude of other men: the Clergy
being as the cable and anchor of Religion, which firmly twisted together, and
fraternally combined in truth and love, will in time bring the people to quiet
and calmnesse in Religion; however they may have their storms and tossings
sometime, partly by innate fluctuancy, as the rollings and tidings of the sea,
and partly by outward winds and tempests.

What Nation has there been so barbarous, what heathens so truculent, what
persecutors so inhumane, whom godly Bishops and other Ministers have not by
their exemplary faith, patience, unity and charity, with Gods blessing, in time
softened and sweetened, convinced and converted to be Christians; while they
all spoke the same things, and carried on the same interests of Christ, as it
were with one shoulder? These once broken in their orderly and uniform methods,
varied in their Catholic succession and authority, divided in their fraternall
concord and harmony, the peoples minds soon grow distracted, and are violently
driven, as ships from their anchors and cables, upon a thousand dangers. When
primitive Pastors and people were most cordially united, though they were most
cruelly persecuted, yet Christianity spread and prospered; what the fury of men
pulled down, that the care and charity of their Ministers built up, twisting
what others ravelled, either as Idolaters, Heretics or Schismatics: which
reparations of Religion were easily effected, while the sheep knew their true
shepherds, following them, or flying to them in case of any danger; when the
people knew their proper Presbyters, and orderly Presbyters owned those Bishops
to whom they were duly subordinate, when all ranks and orders in the Church of
Christ, as parts in the body, kept their stations and ranks, their orders and
correspondencies, their proportions and duties, either in filial subjection or
fatherly inspection; when no good Christian was to seek what Pastors, what
Preachers he should apply to, nor any Deacon or Presbyter did doubt to what
Bishop he owed a respect, as to his Superior, in Ecclesiastic eminency, order
and authority.

This, this blessed harmony, this Catholic (and in primitive times undoubted,
as well as uniform and constant) order, did then keep up, or recover, by Gods
blessing, the majesty of Christian Religion, the love, together with the honor
and authority, of the Evangelical ministry, amidst the heaviest distractions
and persecutions; and so, no doubt, it would have done in England, amidst all
plebeian insolences and popular prostitutions.

But (alas!) though all this evil be come upon us Ministers of all sorts and
sizes, from without, from civil wars, and unhappy public differences in
secular interests (which spare no men) as also from the private covetousness,
inconstancy, malice, revenge, impatience, ambition and ingratitude of some
vulgar people (not only to the great injuring of many Ministers persons,
credit and estates, but to the menacing of an utter subversion, even to the
whole tribe, office and function, as it was founded on Divine Institution,
built up by Apostolical Tradition, and preserved by Catholic Succession:) yet
in our distresses and afflictions many Ministers (as Ahaz) have sinned more and
more: 2 Chro. 28.22.
and as if it were a small matter that plebeian spite and petulancy could
ambitiously inflict upon Ministers, themselves have added much fuel to their
fires, encouraging their malice by wretched complyings with them, and
flattering of them, in the very abuses of their liberties, in their rude
arrogatings, and usurpations upon the Ministry, infinitely to the disgrace of
their holy calling, to the disparagement of their own judgments, and to the
prostrating of their due authority, which is (as I have proved) divine, or none
at all: that I mention not Ministers betraying of their own honest interests
and enjoyments as to this world, in point of profit, honor and reputation. All
which the gulf of secular avarice, and the Abyss of Laymens sacrilege, daily
gapes to devour, after the pattern which some Achans and Ananiasses of the
Clergy have set them: the poor remainders of which, as they are already
forfeited, by the sordid and shameful debasing of themselves, to the humouring
of people in their lusts and licentiousness; so they will in a few years be
utterly lost and confiscated, by the advantages which will be given to peoples
covetous cruelty, through those mutual animosities, jealousies, distances and
varieties, which are now maintained by the several sides and sorts of
Ministers in England, all pretending to be Preachers of the Gospel, under
reformed and super-reforming names.

What infinite swellings, disdains, envies and pertinacies, Qui jam alios
quieta consilia sequi persuadebit, quando vos (sacerdotes Dei) tam hostiliter
arma sumitis and inter vos depugnatis? Niceph. l. 8. c. 16. orat. Constable. m. ad
Epis.
are open to all men's observations, even among those men who would be thought
grave, wise, learned, holy, and every way able to teach and rule the vulgar?
How have their innovations, mutations, levities and divisions, so clearly
manifested their weakness, folly and factiousnesse, that as it cannot be hid
from vulgar eyes and censures, so it is already many ways confuted and sorely
punished, not only by the palpable frustratings of some of their novell
designs, but by their being generally debased far below their former station,
and extremely worsted in all points, as to that handsome, if not honorable
condition, which they might in unity and order (as heretofore) have enjoyed in
England? If once the Ministers of any Church (who are as the walls and
sea-banks) do make cracks and breaches upon themselves, or suffer the moles and
water-rats of the people so to do; no wonder if the high tides of vulgar
insolency and rapine soon break in upon them, and make their ruins not more
deplorable than irreparable.

CHAP. XXV.
Unavoidable contentions among Ministers of different ordinations.
YEt after all this sharp and sad experience, which has rendered the profession
of Ministers on all hands contemptible, their ordination disputable, their
enjoyments miserable, their necessities irreparable, their dependences poor,
plebeian, and almost sordid, by their mutual and unhappy divisions; yet still
many, who glory to be called Ministers, (of whatever odd ordination or new
edition they are) do fancy it a great part of their piety, to be pertinacious
in those new opinions, ways and factions, which they have adopted; yea much of
their sanctity is made to consist in their scorning all antiquity, and of all
Reformation heretofore in the Church of England. If they can find nothing else
to quarrel at in the old Clergy of England (whose doctrine was found, whose
ordination most Catholic, valid and unquestionable by Bishops, whose learning
and lives were most commendable) yet they must find fault with their very
clothes; and rather than not differ, they must disguise themselves from the
gravity of Gowns and Cassocks, of black caps and black clothes, to military
clokes, to Scotch jumps, to white caps, and all mechanic colors: in which
posture being as Preachers once got into a Pulpit, then both they and the silly
people fancy they see great Reformations of Religion, more looking at the gay
and strange colors of a foolish bird, than minding how it speaks: especially
if these new Ministers do gratify the plebs of the Laity and the plebs of the
Clergy with any influence or stroke in their ordination, and consecration to
the office of the Ministry; if they have highly cried up popular rights and
liberties in making and marring, in electing and rejecting, in ordaining and
deposing their Pastors; if they have gently condescended to such popular
transports and real novellizings in England, as are contrary to all practices
of ancient and best Churches; O what an high mountain do these new Masters and
their new Disciples fancy they are ascended! to what a glorious transfiguration
do they imagine themselves to be changed! what a new heaven and new earth do
some of them, either more silly, or more subtle than others, glory they have
created, in their godly corporations, their rare associations, and blessed
ordinations! how strange, novell and disorderly soever they are, as to all
ancient customs of this and all Churches.

Nor do they think it worth considering, how much they deviate from all
Antiquity; how much they desert, yea and reproach the wisdom of this Church and
all estates in this Nation, ever since it was either Christian or Reformed; how
much they go beyond the duty they owed to the civil peace of this Nation, as
also that modesty, humility, ingenuity, reverence and subjection, which by the
laws of God and man, by all sanctions, civil and Ecclesiastical, they owed to
the Governors and guides, Pastors and Preachers, the peace and welfare of
this Church of England; besides that prudence and policy which they ought to
maintain, in order to the honor and respect, which is indeed due to their
calling and authority, when it is truly ministerial and authentic.

What sober and impartial man does not see, how the despites, arrogancies and
insolences, first expressed in tumultuary heats and furies, against all
Bishops whatsoever (though never so learned, grave, godly and industrious men,
fit to govern, and apt to teach the Church of Christ,) are still maintained and
repeated daily; yea raked up and increased by the popular oratory of some novel
Ministers, so far as to raise eternal prejudices and antipathies, even against
all those Presbyters which were, or are, of Episcopal ordination? And the
better to justify these Novelties and Schisms in the Church of England, (which
some were so eager and easy to begin, so loath and unwilling to retract) they
still entertain their nauseous, credulous and itching Disciples, with all those
odious, stale and envious Crambes, which are most welcome to vulgar ears and
sacrilegious aims: as how unfit it was for the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who
was the great pattern of piety and poverty, to have great revenues, stately
Palaces, and noble Lordships, which more godly men do want; for Preachers to
have any titles of honor and respect, as Lords, to have any part of civil
power, or indeed of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

All which honest employments and enjoyments, I conceive, (under favor) the
excellent Bishops, and other deserving Clergymen in England, were as worthy
to enjoy, and as able to use, with honor, conscience and charity, as any of
those men, either military or civil, who were most zealous to deprive, to
debase, and to destroy the Hierarchy, or just honor of the Ecclesiastic state
in England. Nor do I think it was any way displeasing to God, or in the least
kind unbecoming the name of Christ, for Bishops and other Ministers of his
Church to have such ample estates and honorable preferments for their double
honor, in so plentiful a land as England was: this I am sure, it was far less
beseeming any good Christian to repine at them, and unjustly to deprive them of
them.

If this envious vein of popular oratory grow at length fulsome, vile and
ridiculous (as it is now to all sober and judicious auditors;) then the
Anti-episcopall parties of Ministers devoutly rip up, and sadly repeat whatever
they have heard, or others invented, of any Bishops faults, or the Episcopal
Clergies past infirmities: whatever they can they rake up, though long ago
buried as it ought to be, in the charitable forgetfulness of all good men, who
either consider their own frailties, or remember how many holy Bishops were
Martyrs and Confessors in all ages of persecution; how learned, how diligent,
how commendable, how admirable, how useful they were to this Church, for their
preaching, writing and living, in times of persecution as well as peace, even
here in England. All good Bishops and other Clergy (as I have formerly
expressed) confess themselves, as men, to be subject to infirmities and
temptations; the best Bishops and Ministers least deny this truth, being every
day most vigilant to resist the one, and amend the other. These allegations
then (like the Devils quoting of Scripture) though they may have some
squint-eyed truth in them, yet they are spitefully, partially, and most
impertinently alleged against all Bishops, especially by those fierce
Presbyterians, or other implacable Preachers, who have now liberally taught the
English world, that however the riches, pomp and honors of Presbyterian or
Independent, or other Preachers, are (much against their wills) far less than
those which God and man, reason and Religion, order and polity, devotion and
gratitude, Law and Gospel, allowed to Bishops and Presbyters heretofore (that
the eminency of their office and place in the Church might have something of
honorable splendor and hospitable magnificence, proportionable to its
venerable authority and great antiquity;) yet men are not so blinded by that
popular dust, stirred up against the faults and names of Bishops, as not to see
that the pride, covetousness and imperiousness of the most furious and factious
Anti-episcopall Ministers, come not one jot behind any of those Bishops, whom
they look upon and represent with the most malignant aspect. O how magisteriall
are many new masters in their opinions! how authoritative in their decisions!
how supercilious in their conversations! how severe in their censures! how
inexorable in their passions! how implacable in their wrath! how inflexible in
their factions! how irrevocable in their transports, though never so rash,
heady, plebeian and unsuccessfull! by which they (at once) forsook their duties
to others, and their own mercies. And this many of them did to please others or
themselves, contrary to their former judgments, their sworn and avowed
subjection to Bishops for many years, when they paid that respect to those
Fathers and Governors of this Church, which the laws of God and man required,
long before either Presbytery was hatched, or Independency gendered in England.

The sharp severities and early rigours of both which parties and their
Consectaries, grew quickly both remarkable and intolerable to sober Christians:
for as they were bred and born (like Pallas) armed, full of anger, revenge and
ambitious fierceness; so they have acted, even in their infancy and minority,
far beyond what regular, sober, and true Episcopacy ever did in its greatest
age and procerity here in England; yea its greatest passion and transports did
not exceed the aims of these new masters, both Ecclesiastical and civil, which
was either to rule all, or to ruin all. Bishops commonly justified their real
or seeming severities by those laws, either civil or Ecclesiastical, which
were in force against all such as did not conform to them. Hence were
occasioned (much, I am confident, to the grief, and against the desire of the
most grave and godly Bishops) sometimes those so often declaimed against, and
aggravated persecutions of some unconformable, yet otherwise godly Ministers,
by silencings, suspensions, deprivations, etc. which sometimes were but just
and necessary exercises of Discipline (as I conceive) if men will maintain any
order and government in any Church or State; sometimes, it may be, some Bishops
pressed too much upon the strictness and rigor of law, aggravated by their
private passions, beyond what might with charity and moderation safely have
been indulged to some able and peaceable Ministers, though in some things
dissenters, yet, as to the main, good and useful to the Church.

Yet all these old Almanacks, these stale and posthumous calculations of
Episcopal severities, did not upon true account, no not in one hundred years,
equal the number and measure of those pressures and miseries, which have been
acted or designed in one fifteen years, by such as now profess Presbyterian and
Independent principles, against all Bishops, and all those Ministers which are
of the Episcopal persuasion. I think it may, without any stroke of Rhetoric or
Hyperbole, be said with sober truth, that the little finger of Presbytery and
Independency, with the warts and wens of other factions growing upon them, has
been heavier upon the Episcopal, which was the only legal Clergy of England
of late years, than the loins of any sober and godly Bishops ever were for any
one century, yea, and equal to the burdens of the most passionate and
immoderate Bishops whatsoever in any age, who commonly were most imperious when
the Church had most peace and civil prosperity; but the Presbyterian thunder
and Independent lightning, urged most upon all Bishops, and all Episcopal
Ministers, then when they were most scared, pillaged and harrased by a civil
war, when most tossed by those sad storms, and almost overwhelmed by the
impressions of those sad dissentions. Then, then was it that Bishops and other
Episcopal Ministers, (whose consciences were guided in their judgments by the
wisdom of this Church and Nation, together with all other Christian Churches
in all ages) having lost their clokes in the wars, must be deprived of their
coats also; chiefly for their innocent opinion, and honest adherency to
Catholic Episcopacy: then was it, that where Episcopacy had at any time, and
that by special command from their Governors, silenced or sequestered
refractory or turbulent Ministers, by tens or hundreds, possibly Presbytery and
Independency inflicted either those mulcts, or terrors at least, upon
thousands of Ministers dissenting from them, not as to the Religion
established, or Laws in force in England, but merely as to their private
opinions and principles about Church Government. Hence so many learned, pious
and painful Preachers, since the civil digladiations ceased, had been condemned
to chains of everlasting darkness, to remediless distresses, both they and
their families, if there had not been some more generous mercy and connivence
showed, than those men's spirits intended, or can well bear. Through which
miseries and terrors, many Ministers gray hairs have been brought down with
sorrow to their graves.

After all which dreadful severities, either intended or executed, against the
Episcopal Clergy, yet, as far as I can see, the condition of any sort of
Ministers now in England is not any whit better, as to the generality, nor
comparable to what the Clergy enjoyed in former times, who in my judgment
might well have born the yoke of Episcopacy, with as little disparagement, and
with as much ease and honor, every way, as they have for some years done the
examination and inspection, the rebukes and frowns, the terrors and
jurisdictions of Major Generals, or Country Committees, not only in secular
and military, but even in religious respects: among which few, I believe, were
to be found equal, or exceeding such Bishops and other grave Divines as England
afforded, both able Preachers and excellent Governors; much more fitted in all
respects (except their swords) to be the superintendents of Ministers, being of
the same education, office and calling, than most of those men can be, who are
(generally) so much ( Heteroclites) different from learned men, both in their
breeding, learning, studies and course of living, that even from hence they
have sometimes secret Antipathies even against all Ministers or Clergymen, as
persons of another genius, of more refined minds, and, if men were impartially
weighed, of greater worth and merits.

As then I cannot find that Ministers of any new name, form, title and
extractions whatsoever, have much mended their condition, by that great
alteration they have made or sought in this Church and State; so, I am sure,
their mutual enmities and divisions do very much heighten their common
afflictions, and add exceedingly to that general darkness and diminution, in
all respects, civil and sacred, which is come or coming upon them, as upon
wicked men, in the strict account of Gods justice; or as weak men, in the
vulgar process of man's severity.

Indeed the worst of Ministers miseries they generally owe to themselves, who
in piety and prudence, above all men, should by united counsels and cares avoid
them; because it is sport to the most and worst of men, to see those men
together by the ears, hating, despising, biting and devouring one another, who
are esteemed the severe censurers of other men's sins and follies, sharp curbs
to the childish, petulant and licentious humors of people. Ministers
scufflings and contests with one another, is beyond any Cock-fighting or
Bear-baiting to the vulgar envy, malice, profaneness and petulancy.

1 Kings 8.38.
In the midst of all which sufferings, first from Divine Justice, (which calls
upon every one to examine the plague of his own heart,) next from humane
ingratitude and insolency, though every sober and prudent Minister cannot but
see that precipice and gulf of irreligion, irreverence and contempt, to which
the Reformed Religion and the whole office of the Ministry is now falling in
England, through the endless capricios and extravagances chiefly of some
Ministers; though most Ministers on all sides, that have any learning, worth or
abilities for that office, do generally agree in the same Scriptures and
Sacraments, in the same Faith and Salvation, in the same God and Savior, in
the same Graces and Virtues, in the same Doctrine for morals and Mysteries, in
the same Precepts and Promises, in the same holy duties and blessed hopes; yet
even these Ministers (which is a thousand pities) are sharply, and for ought I
can see (unless God work miracles upon some of their spirits and tempers)
resolutely and eternally divided by those wedges of differences, touching
external Church Order and Discipline, the manner of worship, and power of
managing of Church Government: so that the way of peace few have known; nor are
they patient to learn, contrary to their presumptions. To recant their errors
they are ashamed; remit their rigor they must not, lest they abate their
parties and followers; exchange their animosities as men, for moderations
becoming brethren and Christians, they will not, lest their credit decay, and
their factions abate, lest those shows and shadows of popular empire vanish,
which they have seemed or fancied themselves to enjoy, upon these accounts of
rare inventions, and new models of Reformation, Ministry, etc. All which must
by some men be kept up, though all things else do fall to the ground: though
the Church of England lies languishing and sighing, weeping and bleeding;
though the Reformed Religion is deformed, decaying, dying; though both piety
and sincerity be much dispirited; though they cannot but see Ichabod wrote upon
all their foreheads; though all Ministerial order, office, employment and
authority, as to men's inward respect and consciences, no less than in their
outward reverence and obedience, is infinitely slackned, and in many places (as
well as in many hearts) quite dissolved; though the Catholic Character, or
Christ's cognizance of Christians, which is sincere charity, be much defaced,
and the Devils badges of factious confederacies be much worn; though the purity
and simplicity, the warmth and worth, the words and works of true Religion be
much out of fashion, giving way to fanatic follies and impudent vanities,
daily vented in every place; though the beauty and serenity of the true
Christian Religion, as of old, and of the well-reformed Religion, as it was of
later years well established in Engl. be much hidden, defaced, disguised by
many hypocritical masks and new dresses; though the palpable cunning of some
men has taught them to abuse this credulous age, by shaving off the hair and
primitive ornament of this Church, which was very good and graceful (having the
honor of ancient, venerable and gray headed Episcopacy upon it) that they
might the better induce Christianity, which is now above 1500 years old, to put
on and wear ( a la mode) the new peruques either of young Presbytery, or
younger Independency (rather than Religion should go quite bald, and be
ridiculous by its deformity and confusion;) though the pristine polity, peace,
purity, majesty, severity, sanctity and solemnity of Religion, as Christian and
Reformed in England, be infinitely baffled and abased by the petulancy of those
that affect licentious liberties and unsaintly extravagances; though all these
evils (as Daemones meridiani) are pregnant, and every day proclaimed by the
loud Herald of Experience, which themselves declaime against and deplore, as
well as other men: Yet many Ministers (in other respects not to be despised, or
much blamed) do still, as to the point of Church Order, discipline, government
and polity, (which is the outward center of unity, and visible band of peace)
passionately desire and solicitously endeavor, that those wild oats and tares,
which some men have of late years sown, watered and cherished (while the Nation
and Church were not aware, as being engaged in war and blood, during whose
heats great wounds of Religion are little felt) might for ever grow up, spread
and shed abroad (like thistle-down) yea and succeed to after-generations in
this nation; that so England might be more famous for variety of parties and
opinions in Religion, than either Poland is or Amsterdam.

How few nominal or real Ministers, that have been either Authors, or great
sticklers and abettors, not of any modest, just and sober Reformations, but of
needless, endless innovations, schisms, deformities and defections in the
Church of England, can yet find in their hearts meekly to retreat by any
humble, ingenuous and happy ways of Christian meekness and wisdom, to a sweet
accord, from their first heady extravagances and unhappy transports? in which
the heat and passion of men's spirits (as is usual in all quarrels) made, even
at first, the differences, jealousies and offenses far greater than the real
injury or inconvenience indeed was: which is most clearly evident now, not
only by our comparing the former happy estate of this Church, and of the
Reformed Religion here, besides those comforts which the generality of all good
Ministers and sober Christians in former times enjoyed in England under
Episcopacy; but further, by our serious considering those fair offers, those
great moderations, those self-denials and Christian condescentions, with which
all worthy and wise Bishops, with all Episcopal Ministers, were, and are, ready
to gratify the peace of this Church, and the desires of all good Christians,
even of those who have been most their enemies and destroyers; whom they
forgive the more readily, because they believe most of them, as the crucifiers
of Christ, did it ignorantly; ignorant of the laws of this Nation, and of the
good constitutions of this Church, ignorant of the customs, practice and
judgment of all ancient Catholic Churches, ignorant of that equity and
charity which they owed to others, ignorant of that honest policy and
discretion which they owed to themselves and their order, lastly, ignorant of
that pious, grateful and prudent regard they should have had of the honor,
peace and prosperity of this Church, both at present and in after-ages.

But however the exorbitancies of some ignorant men at first might be so far
venial, as they were led on by the pious and specious pretenses of others,
rather than their own principles; yet they are less excusable (now) since the
sad events have so fully confuted all those prejudices and pretensions; since
popular looseness, avarice and madness, has, as a rude broom, swept away all
the fine-spun and speciously spread cobwebs of Reformation, either as to the
state of this Church, or the Reformed Religion professed here in England, or as
to the promised amendment of the Ministerial order and office, either for
ability, duty, authority, or maintenance. Ministers first tearings and rendings
of themselves asunder are not yet sewed together; yea Religion it self is fallen
to rags, and preachers are become as so many pie-bald patches, of several
colors and antic figures: which wretched division and fundamental deformity
in Religion cannot but daily grow, as a Gangrene, to greater maladies,
mischiefs and miseries, which will be bitterness in the later end.

For as no City, so no Church can prosper, Mar. 3.24.
that is divided against it self: neither grace nor peace can advance, where
Preachers of Religion are mutual persecutors; where, while Ministers teach
people to believe, to love and to live Christ crucified, they are daily
crucifying one another. It is a deplorable and desperate state of any Church,
where (as in Babels building) the builders tongues, heads, hands and hearts are
divided, yea the very builders are self-destroyers, mutually ruining themselves
under pretense of zeal to build, or repair the Church of Christ: what one
rears with the right hand, another pulls down with the left; when they
frequently leave their trowels, and fall to their pick-axes and ponyards; when
they fling lime and sand in one another eyes; when they build, or dawb rather,
with untempered mortar; when every one is ambitious to be a Master Builder, a
new modeller of Religion, of Churches, of Ministers and of Ministry, contrary
to the wisdom and piety of such a Church and Nation as England was.

Leaving poor people (mean while) infinitely amazed, jealous, unsatisfied,
perplexed, as to Religion. Some are sadly grieved, others are quite confounded:
many are zealous for the newest fashion, others are for the good old way, a
third sort is glad of the occasion to cast off all Religion, while they see
those Ministers cut the Catholic cords of charity and unity in sunder, in
order to bind Christians up to new parties and factions, or to private
interests and opinions, which, like Sampsons withs, will not serve to bind the
lusts or consciences of men to their good behavior.

These, these are the sad effects which follow those deformities of Preachers
turning Pioneers, of Ministers being underminers and demolishers of one
another, and their Mother Church; when those that should be Gods Ambassadors
(forgetting the majesty of their mission, and sanctity of their errand) fall to
railing and reproching, calumniating and declaiming against one another (like
so many eager Baristers and mercenary Lawyers, who are resolved (being once
fee'd) to defend their cause and their client, whatever the merits of them be,
because they have once undertaken them) without any regard to that justice,
honor, wisdom, gravity, charity, meekness, harmony, joint counsel and
ingenuous correspondency, which ought to be preserved in all fraternities and
honest callings or mysteries: but chiefly among the Ministers of Christ's
glorious Gospel; Preachers should be of the highest form of Christ's Disciples,
the most exemplary in all piety, meekness and prudence, in all gravity, equity
and charity; for want of which, even as to matters of outward polity, order,
civility and ministration, they are (and ever will be) the more blamable before
God and man, by how much nearer they profess to come to one another in the
harmonies of faith, and confessions of the same reformed and true doctrine,
which would soon unite their hearts and studies, if they had (on all sides)
less of easiness, credulity, popularity, peevishness, obstinacy, small
ambitions and juvenilities. The removing of which distempers from all
Ministers, new and old, and from my self as well as any other, is one of my
chief designs and endeavors to be carried on in the fourth and last Book of
this discourse.

At present it suffices to have showed (as an evil branch of abused Liberty in
Religion) this to be none of the least causes or occasions of the Church of
Englands distempers, decays and miseries, that Ministers are (after Mundane
and machiavellian methods) so sharply divided from, and eagerly opposite
against one another; so hardly persuaded by any retreats and principles of
piety, charity, prudence, which honest policy, public necessity,
self-preservation, or care of future succession invite them to; which may make
for an happy close and Christian accommodation.

Upon some Ministers pride and peevishness, not any one, nay not all these
considerations together, can so far prevail (I fear) as to induce them to any
terms or treaty of equable accord; but they still carry themselves as young
men, high in their own conceits, coy and elate in their parties, opinions,
presumptions, prejudices, animosities and disdains, especially against the
former Ministry of England, which was not more Episcopal than Catholic,
Primitive, Apostolical and truly Christian. Few novell Ministers ever lay
their hand on their heart, and ask, what evil have I acted, occasioned, or not
hindered to this Church of England?

CHAP. XXVI.
THat I may a little further open the eyes of all my Brethren, such as either
are, or deserve, The folly and factions of Ministers evidently seen and
punished in their common calamities.
or desire to be Ministers of the Gospel, and of all other my Contrymen,
both as to their own private interests as Ministers, and as to the public
concernments of the Christian Reformed Religion in this Nation, I shall yet
more particularly, and as pathetically as I can, endeavor to show them the
true state and posture in which their persons, their livelihoods, their
credits, their worldly comforts, their calling at present, and their succession
for the future (now) seem to stand in England: what scratched faces, what
deformed aspects, how deplorable conditions all of them either feel, or may
justly fear and expect, by reason of that inordinate liberty which people in
England have lately carried on to such intolerable petulancies, insolences and
licentiousness against Ministers; whereto they have been highly animated and
encouraged, not more by their own lusts and malapertnesse, than by those
unkind, indiscreet and unchristian dissentions, which have broke out among
Ministers themselves against one another, while forgetting that gravity,
constancy, modesty and equanimity, which they owed to themselves and to each
other, they either rowed down, or suffered themselves to be carried down this
foul stream and torrent of vulgar liberty, out of principles of facility or
faction, popularity or pride, covetousness or cowardice, ignorance or
sequaciousness; which have so blinded some Ministers, otherwise of very good
abilities, that (like men drenched over head and ears in water) they cannot
suddenly or easily see what deformities are upon them, what dangers threaten
them, both as men, and as Ministers. Whatever title, order, original, badge, or
discriminating character of their Ministry they bear and wear in the world,
whatever principles they profess, whatever party they patronize, adhere to, or
adopt, new or old; this I am sure, if they be not purely plebeian praters, of
the very scumme, lees and dregs of people (which have no sense of sin, shame,
or honor) if they are persons of any learned latitude, of any ingenious
capacities and abilities, of any tenderness in honor or conscience, if they be
painful, pious or prudent men in any degree, they cannot but see, that no men's
condition in England, or almost under heaven, of whatever calling and quality
they are, is more mean and miserable, more tattered and scambling, less
honorable, or less comfortable; no profession, order, or fraternity of men, is
more divided, dubious, distressed, forlorn, despicable, as to all civil and
secular interests, for profit, peace, respect and reputation, both for the
encouragement of their present ministration, and for the hopes of an able
future succession: none of which things wise and worthy Ministers ought
supinely, sordidly, sluggishly, or simply to neglect.

Their own and all men's eyes that are open and clear, may easily see the sad
prospects of Ministers dejections, diminutions, debasements, distresses in all
those points: all of them are under the scorn of some opposite party or other;
most of them live in a low and mean estate; many of them (to my knowledge)
contend with extreme difficulties, and all manner of necessities; not a few of
them, which I have been often an eyewitness of, have been, and are reduced to a
morsel of bread, and are driven even to beg alms for the support of themselves
and their distressed families. How many of their cries have I heard? how many
of their tears have I seen? with what pallor and dejection, with what squallor
and horror, with what astonishment and despair, do many of them wander from
one village, city, and country to another for relief, until being weary and
wasted, sunk and oppressed by their daily distresses and remediless tragedies,
they go to their graves with sorrow, to the shame and sin (I believe) of the
Age in which they have thus lived and died Ministers of the Gospel, and very
worthy ones too, if it be any merit to have constantly deserved well of the
Church of England, by their godly preaching and living: over whose sad ruins I
know the enemies of this Church and the Reformed Religion, both at home and
abroad, do infinitely triumph and seriously rejoice.

Nor is this hard fate befaln those Ministers only, who were, and are of the
Episcopal persuasion, and most constant to the love and duty they owe to the
Church of England; but even those Ministers have been shrewdly singed, who most
eagerly sought to heat the fiery furnace of popular wrath and revenge against
all Bishops, and the Episcopal Clergy: the thumbs and toes of many of those
great Adonibezeks have been cropped off, who most joyed in the like executions
done by popular revenge and vulgar fierceness against all of the Episcopal
order and ordination; even those Preachers who filled their sails most with the
peoples breath, are now either becalmed, or come aground, or very leaky, or
quite dashed in pieces, as to their former great influence and reputation among
the people: nor have they made either such a fair port, or such a prosperous
voyage, as might any way answer their former presumptions, their high
ostentations, and their flattering expectations. This I am sure, that the
ambitious wantonness of many Ministers lusting to taste of the forbidden fruit
of government, beyond their share, proportion and capacity, has now (if not
altogether) almost quite driven themselves, and all others of that calling,
name and profession, out of that paradise of peace, plenty and respect, which
they did heretofore, as Ministers, enjoy in England, and still might have done,
if they had used such modesty, prudence and piety, as best became wise and
worthy men, who had been masters of any prudence and providence.

But now (alas) who ever professes to be a Minister of the Gospel in England
(not as an interloper or mungrel, who ekes out his other mechanic trade, by
putting the new patch of a plebeian Preacher to that old garment (for these
wretches are deservedly despicable to all conscientious, sober and ingenuous
men) but even those who have destinated and confined themselves wholly to the
Ministerial work and function, whatever account they go upon for the
derivation of their mission, ordination and authority, whether Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, or Plebeian) yet if they make their Ministry their
work and business, and not their wantonness and sport; if they give themselves
to that painful plough and sacred husbandry which tills rocky hearts, and sowes
in hopes of an eternal harvest; they shall be sure to find work enough both to
do and to suffer; enemies enough to encounter with, indignities more than
enough to digest, necessities enough to contend withal: at their very best
estate they are altogether vanity, accounted as the scorn and outcasts of the
people, the filth and offscouring of all things, by some party or other. Even
those Ministers that fancy themselves most favored by the potent or impotent,
by Prince or people, yet still they are attended with many evil eyes, bitter
speeches, contemptuous reproaches, 1 Cor. 13.4.
spiteful affronts, from some side or other. This, this is the portion of
Ministers of all sorts to drink; this is the cup which vulgar liberty and their
own dissentions have mingled for them, as to all civil respects and worldly
enjoyments.

CHAP. XXVII.
TRuly they had need make much of good consciences, The great diminutions of
all sorts of Ministers in Engl. as to all civil respects.
for little comfort else is left to most of them, as to any civil splendor,
competency, or certainty in this world. Look but to the point of estate, and
that moderate subsistence which all ingenuous and industrious men may justly
expect and aim at for themselves and their relations, in the way of honest
labor; no men's salary, subsistence, or maintenance is generally so dubious and
uncertain, so arbitrary and hazardous, so burdened and exhausted, so thin
driven, and, as it were, wire-drawn, both by their own necessities and other
men's injurious sharkings: insomuch that many Ministers very well-deserving, are
reduced not only to tenuities, but to difficulties, necessities, extremities;
they are forced to live by faith: and some of them have (as I have heard) even
died with famine; others had so perished, if charity had not interposed,
wanting those necessary supports which their aged and languishing condition did
require. The truth is, not one of ten (I might say of an hundred) of any sort
of common people make it a matter of conscience to pay them their dues, if they
can hold their livings; few do pay them without delayings, defalkings and
defraudings: many people make it a great point of conscience, to pay them
nothing, either by the Laws of Justice or Gratitude. Ministers must in most
places only learn how to want; Phil. 4 12.
for in few they shall ever learn how to abound. Many of them have been a long
time quite turned out of Gods Husbandry, from their Livings and Labors: many,
such as have leave to labor, have (most-what) their labor for their pains;
forced to study how to live, when they should live to study: such as should
dispense the bread of eternal life, and consecrate the Sacramental bread,
which is the Communion of Christ's blessed Body to his Body the Church, these
are solicitous for that perishing bread, which is the staff of this momentary
life. Many Angels of Christ's Church, and Stewards of his household, are exposed,
many ways, and many times, to sordid necessities, and scurrilous indignities.
The chief Pastors and ablest Shepherds are very much levelled to the meanest of
the flock, while yet the weakest and most scabbed sheep affect to be shepherds:
the very abjects of the people, every where, dare, if they list, contemn their
Ministers to their faces; they make no scruple, yea they take pleasure to be
petulant, peevish, refractory, and insolent, even in public. The aim of many
is, to have such Preachers, as shall be, not Fathers, Rulers, and Heads in the
Church, but either as sequacious and flexible tails, following the frowns and
flatteries of the people, on whose good will they must depend, if they will
eat; or as firebrands of unquenchable factions, engaging the populacy to
infinite parties and sects, under the notion of new Ministers and new Religion.

Jer. 26.23.
These, these are the treatments, these the methods used by some, to bury not
the dead carkases of Ministers in the graves of common people, (which fact is
branded in King Jehoiakim, as a token of great irreligion to God, and
irreverence to the Prophet Uriah;) but they seek to cast them yet alive into a
most plebeian state, the graves of ignominy, poverty, contempt, and shame: yea
many hope at length to make the Reformed Clergy or Ministry of England, as
odious as those Heathen Priests became, Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 14.
when (as the Church-Historians tell us) their Temples were rifled* when their
despicable Deities, their deformed Idols and worm-eaten gods were discovered.
Nor is this deplorable estate befaln those incruders only, who from the basest
of the people have of late consecrated themselves to serve those calves that
list to set them up, 1 King. ^3 33.
or follow them; but many great Prophets, like Jeremy, Jer. 38 6.
stick to this day in the mire and dirt of those dungeons into which they are
cast: 1 Samuel 2.36.
others are become miserable, as Eli's posterity, crouching for a morsel of
bread, even to their enemies, I mean those factious and sacrilegious spirits,
who would be glad to see the most learned Ministers in England advanced to no
higher preferment than Musculus was in Germany, Melchior Ad^m. in vita M^sculi.
who though an excellent Preacher and Writer, yet was forced for his livelihood
sometime to help a Weaver at his Loome, otherwhile to work as a Scavenger in
purging the Towne-ditch.

N^r is this a Parable of Misery, or an artificial and Theatrick Tragedy made
by me: No; I solemnly protest to you ( my honored Countrymen) the World
affords not greater, more numerous, or more calamitous objects of Christian
pity and humane charity, than are many Ministers at present in England, if you
consider their calling, their abilities, their education, and their sad
condition. Many of them are already implunged into the horrible pit of
darkness; others are upon the very brink and precipice of extreme poverty,
meannesse and contempt, through the trialls or displeasures of God, executed by
the restless malice and immoderate revenge of some men, against this Church,
its Ministry, and the Reformed Religion; whose spite and passion have much
overborn (of late years, as by a new, unwonted and ponderous bias) the ancient
noble genius and generous piety of this Nation; which was by no people under
Heaven heretofore exceeded in its honorable munificence, yea magnificence,
toward their God and Savior, toward learned and religious men, especially
those who had the honor to be their Teachers, Governors and Guides to heaven.
No men had more privileges and immunities; no men had more tranquillity and
leisure to be good; none had more means and encouragements to be good, and to
do good, to live holily, hospitably, honorably; no men had abilities,
opportunities, and hearts to do more works of piety and charity both to rich
and poor, great and small, both transient and permanent, occasional and
monumentall, than the Clergy of England: Witness the several goodly
Foundations, and liberal Endowments, which the Ecclesiastics of England have
either themselves erected, or persuaded others to Found and Endow, to Gods
glory, to the good of Mankind, and the honor of the Nation.

But now (alas!) as the Estates of most Ministers are so small, that they
hardly reach to their own necessities; so their influence upon other men's
estates and minds is almost as little. They are despised by many, valued by
few, scarce loved by any, and honored almost by none: they are all reduced to
such a timorous, sneaking, servile, arbitrary, dependant, and plebeian
proportion. Nothing grand, conspicuous, magnificent, honorable or venerable,
is upon any of them, especially as to vulgar eyes and censure: who are never
too liberal of their courtesy, civility, and respect to Ministers; much less
when they find them at a low ebb, as to the esteem of their betters, the rich,
the noble, and the mighty. For with common people, Learning, Wisdom, and all
intellectual excellencies, generally signify little or nothing, if they see
nothing of power, authority, plenty, splendor, or eminency in men, by which
they either hope to be benefited, or fear to be punished. Certainly that part
of the Clergy of England were extreme out, as to all Politics, who fancied
that common people, yea, or the better sort of mankind, were so good-natured,
as to value them most for Ministers, when they enjoyed least as men. Angelick
virtues do not weigh so much in the worlds balance, as houses, lands,
revenues, preferments, and honors do. A golden calfe easily tempts people to
worship it, while desolate and wooden virtues are despised: yea they much
mistook the interest of Christian and Reformed Religion, as well as of the
Ministry in England, who thought it would turn to any account of honor and
advancement of Reformation, 2 Samuel 10.4.
to serve the Clergy as Hanun did David's servants, not only stripping them of
their upper garments, and those comely ornaments which became Gods
Ambassadors, but cutting off their nether garments and necessary coats, to
such a curtailed proportion, as renders them both ashamed of themselves and
ridiculous to others.

The real impoverishings, sufferings and abasings of many Ministers, have been
very great, in all bitter extremities; nor are the fears, terrors or dejections
of those, few or small, who have escaped best, who are still permitted, either
by their gentler neighbors, or the less severe Lay-Bishops of later
inspection, to earn their bread with the sweat of their brows. For even of
these Ministers, many of them dare scarce demand their wages, when they have
dearly deserved it; nor can they tell how with safety and peace to get it, when
they have hardly earned it: so terrified and overawed, so threatened and
reproched are they, some by peevish parishioners, others by separating
straglers, and a third sort (which is a very Epidemicall mischief) by sharking
and shuffling, dilatory and grumbling pay-masters; who think they deal very
bountifully with their Ministers, if they pay them at the years end, with some
difficulty, and many importunities (which looks very like pure begging) after
the rate of two shillings in the pound for their Tithes, when they are bona
fide worth four, five, or six shillings. Few, yea very few, as I said, make it
any point of Conscience in Law, Religion, or Gratitude, to do justice to their
Ministers, so as their rights are assigned them by Man's laws. Few scruple to
rob, deny, shark, detain, and immodestly to delay the payment of their dues,
even according to their own agreements. If the poor Minister complains, though
never so softly and whisperingly, if Necessities so pinch him, that he must
either cry aloud, or starve with his wife and children, if he have so much
spirit and courage, as he dares roundly to demand, or to urge the Law in his
behalf; presently he is scared with the menaces of some proling Sequestrator,
or some surly Aproniere, who being the fag-end or dregs of a
Countrey-Committee, and sowred either with Anabaptisticall leven, or other
factious principles, thinks he does God good service to threaten, to terrify,
to torment, to rout, to undo such a quarrelsome Minister, who dares thus far
to own himself, his calling, his condition, and his rights by Law; especially
if the Minister be known to be of the Episcopal judgment, a lover and honourer
of the Church of England, and have a Living worth the losing. O what arts and
policy, what windings and shifts, what complyings and cringings must this poor
perplexed Minister use, to fence himself against the crafty agitations of his
spiteful neighbors, and those pragmatick pieces, who in every corner do
hover over the heads of Ministers, as Kites do over Pigeons! How many times
have Ministers been affronted publicly, even in their Churches, amidst Divine
Offices; and had been much more, even to the outraging of their persons, if
either the piety or the policy of those in power had not intervened, and in
time repressed this intolerable insolency, which was never heard of, never
indulged, never connived at in any Nation under heaven, that owned any public
veneration, service, or Religion to their God? If some stop and restraint had
not for shame been given to these profane enormities, certainly by this time no
true or worthy Minister should have opened his mouth in public, but he should
have been smitten on the mouth (as Ananias commanded them to use St. Acts 23* 2
Paul) by some of those rude and facinorous Assassinates, whose design is to
silence and extirpate all the Reformed, Orthodox, and orderly Clergy of
England; not only Bishops, as the Apostolic roots, but even all sober
Presbyters, as the branches of Ecclesiastic ordination.

For besides the private scorns and contests, no less than public affronts,
which Ministers have personally sustained, their enemies have proceeded many
times to give even public alarms to all the tribe and function, by rude
Pamphlets, bitter libellings, and insolent Petitions, importuning an utter
extirpation of the Calling, Ordination, and Succession, Esth. 3.
(such as Haman designed against the whole Nation of the Jews) together with a
total alienation or confiscation of all the settled maintenance of Ministers by
Glebes and Tithes. At which morsel some men's mouths have a long time extremely
watered; with which prodigy of sacrilege they have been big a long time: nor
do they yet think they are quite miscarried, or that this godly and gainful
project is wholly abortive; although they have not yet been able to get a
public law or Parlamentary sanction to be their Midwife; nor I hope ever shall
be able so far to blind and abuse the whole Nation, no less than abase the
Ministry of the Gospel.

But the frequent tamperings and essays which some men still make in these
kinds, (for what dare not the meanest wretches meditate and adventure against
the best, yea all the sober Ministers of England?) these (as the clouds did
Deucalion after the Flood) do still so terrify the minds of the better sort of
Ministers (till they shall see a clearer rainbow of assurance appearing in the
English firmament, for their favor and security, than yet has been seen) that
they have continual damps on all their spirits, great and daily checks in their
studies, industry and ingenuity. Few of them can be so good husbands in these
times, as to lay up any thing out of their livings for posterity: nor dare they
be so provident, as to lay out any thing upon the glebes or houses of their
livings, either for their after-benefit, or present convenience, because they
know not (besides the hazards of mortality) what a day or a night may bring
forth; uncertain how soon they may be undermined, and together with their
miserable families turned out of that house and home, which heretofore was
counted their freehold by law, till by law they had forfeited them. Many
Ministers have been suddenly conformed to our Saviors condition, who had not
of his own where to lay his head: which was not his necessity or impotency, but
his gracious choice, by being poor to enrich us; but poor Ministers are not
armed (as Christ was) with miraculous supplies when they please, nor may they
now expect to be courted with such devout donaries and charitable oblations, as
in primitive times were remarkable for their munificence, amplitude and
splendor; of which the Acts of the Apostles, the after-Church-histories, and
Ammianus Marcellinus in the fourth Century give us accounts. Alas, this age is
an iron age; and men's estates are not generally more impaired than their hands
are withered, and their hearts petrified: these are hardened in many, the others
are exhausted in most. Men's minds are every where indifferent toward their
Ministers; in many places they are divided from them, and their spirits
exasperated against them. No wonder then if charity be grown cold, if popular
stipends and arbitrary alms (like morning dews) be soon dried up. The Devil is
so crafty, that he knows, if once he can take away that ancient, legal and
Evangelical maintenance of Ministers by Tithes, he shall soon by starving take
that royal Citadell and Sanctuary of Gods Church, that ancient Fort of
Christian Religion, the Ministry it self: which above all things in the world
he aims to slight, undermine, and utterly demolish; and hopes to do it by the
help of such crafty and cruel engineers, who have, as Satan's mouls and
pioneers, done all they could in these times to undermine and batter down that
firm pillar and support of Religion, a legal and certain maintenance by Glebes
and Tithes, which are yet left to carry on any Church-work and Ministry, with
any comfort or cheerfulness.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The sordid envy and grudging against Ministers Tithes and Glebes.
YEt how cruelly do these still stick in some men's teeth and stomachs, only
because they cannot, yet, devour them. I have other-where largely showed to the
public view, how endlesly and earnestly some covetous and sacrilegious
sophisters have disputed, or rather cavilled against Tithes, as paid to the
Ministers of the Gospel, either in a civil or religious right, as given to
them, and deserved by them, as Gods proportion and man's assignation. O what
swines-flesh, what abominable broth are they still to some men's squeamish
stomachs; not as to their receiving them, or to their detaining them, against
all Law, Justice and Conscience, but as to their paying of them to those to
whom they are many ways and only due!

O how Legal, how Judaicall, how Ceremonial, how Popish, how Antichristian
are Tithes in Ministers hands! Let these holy Harpies once get them into their
own clutches, either by impropriation, or sequestration, or hard compositions,
by fraud, force, or by any way never so illegal and injurious, O then, how
sweet is the sacred sop to them! how quiet is the Cerberus of their tongues and
consciences in the point of Tithes when paid to themselves! These (as all
things) are a portion meet for such Saints, if they can but get them by any
means; though neither God nor man, Law nor Gospel, Reason nor Religion, give
them any true right or title to them.

Nothing is more halting, more partial, more subtle, more sinister, than
covetous hearts and sacrilegious spirits, as is evident in this one instance of
Tithes; which has been long debated to and fro by the perverse disputations of
men of corrupt minds, who have been told a thousand times, that the Ministers
of the Gospel do not plead any right of Tithes, as the Jewish Priests did, by
any Mosaic Law and Jewish Institution; for our service, our sacrifice, our
Ministry, are all changed to an higher and more noble Priesthood than that of
Aaron or Levi was. We plead that Tithes weve prae-Mosaical, and so may be
post-Mosaical, before Moses, and after him in the Church of God; Heb. 7.8.
they are due to the Melchisedechian Priesthood of Christ; they were paid to
the Type or Shadow, and so much more may be to the Antitype or Substance: that
they are Gods proportion even by a genenerall law of Learned Bochart observes
out of Herodotus, Pliny, Strabo and others, that the Sabeans or Arabians
constantly paid the tithe or tenth of all the Frankincense they gathered in
Arabia Faelix, to the Priests and Temple of Apollo, or Phoebus, which is the
Sun, as an acknowledgement, that to his warm beams and influence they owed
those sweet perfumes. Vid. Bocharti Geograph. Sacr. in Arab. Fell.
natural gratitude, besides Gods special choice and assignation: that as they
were ever owned and confessed as due to the Divine Majesty by an innate
principle or a traditionall dictate of all nations, almost in all ages,
confirmed by a parallel law of God among the Jews; so they are no where in the
Gospel abrogated or denied, but confirmed as to Evangelical uses and respects,
in as much as the Christian has no less cause to pay such an homage to God and
his Ministers now, than the Jew had of old; the Ministry of the Gospel (which
Heb. 8.6.
is a more excellent Ministry) deserving as much and as well of mankind as that
of the Law: besides, in all reason, Gods ancient demand and unrepealed
proportion is rather to be chosen than any other, as most pleasing to God, most
equal in it self, and every way best, both for Minister and people, more
agreeable to good conscience, and least subject to cavil, grudging or
exception on either side; especially when it is most evident, that it is
confirmed by Evangelical sanctions and Apostolic orders; even 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
so has the Lord ordained, that they who preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel, as those that served at the Altar did live of the Altar. If these
repiners do not like Gods assignation, and Christ's right to Tithes, (which was
not Leviticall, for Heb. 7 14.
Christ was not of that tribe) which are devolved to his Evangelicall
Ministers, as being in Christ's stead and office; yet they may very well
satisfy their consciences in the paying of them, merely Heb. 7.5, 6, 8.
upon the account of Ministers civil rights, and the public donation of the
nation, which has by law invested Ministers, yea Christ and his Church, in the
right and property of demanding, receiving and enjoying Tithes. This in all
other cases holds good, even with these godly grudgers, as to Meum and Tuum,
the law giving to every man what is his own by any honest acquisition of
industry, purchase, or donation: which last title of gift is as good, both in
law and conscience, as any title in the world; especially where it is done by
public counsel and consent of a Nation, upon valid reasons of gratitude,
equity and piety, both to God, to Ministers, to men's own souls, who have the
greatest benefit by Tithes, if they have grace to partake of those spiritual
good things, which Ministers do (at least ought) conscientiously to dispense to
them.

If these devout devourers of things sacred (these Helluones decimarum) had as
many pregnant Texts of Scripture, as much Analogy of Religion, as strong
grounds of reason, as potent pleas of merit, as great evidences of equity,
before the law, under the law, and after the law; if old Testament and new
Testament were as evident for any thing which they fancy to set up, and are
concerned to promote, as all these undeniably are for Tithes to be paid to the
Ministers of the Gospel; O how should all the world ring, and all ears be
filled with their noise, cries and clamors of a Divine Institution, an
Ordinance of Jesus Christ, an holy rite, a necessary duty, a
Gospel Dispensation, an everlasting Law, an undispensable Institution! O how
should all men, all Christians, all Churches be unchurched, unchristened,
unsainted, unheavened, quite excommunicated, and eternally damned, if these men
might not have their wills; if all not did not readily submit to so clear a
cause, in which Christ Jesus was so much concerned, at least in their opinion
and interpretation, especially if it made for their profit!

But in the case of paying their Tithes, being themselves most concerned not to
part with them, they are so stupid, so sottish, so wilfully blind and
impertinently peevish, that seeing by all those lights, yet they will not see
what is equal, just and righteous before God and man; the bias of their
covetous and base hearts being therefore cross-grained to the paying of Tithes
to Ministers, because they hope (foolishly) that Tithes will one day lapse to
their own private hands, as owners or farmers, and that they shall shark them
not only from Ministers, but from the Exchecquer, and from their several
Landlords: the one of which will certainly confute the folly of these men, who
are never to be reconciled to Tithes, till they can get them, or save them, if
by no other ways, yet by their turning popular Preachers: in which employment
(forsooth) their consciences will serve them now at last to receive those
Antichristian Tithes, which they cannot now much deserve, and which they
heretofore so eagerly disputed against, and injustly denied, as too much for
true and worthy Ministers, beyond, yea, against all modesty, civility,
gratitude, honesty and equity. By which rude, injurious and vexatious tempers
and dealings of such men, swarming in every corner of the land, poor Ministers
of late years, in many, yea most parishes, have hardly been able to keep life
and soul together: what they get is with difficulty, importunity, grudging,
reproaches, unkind and uncomfortable contests, below the spirit of any learned
and ingenuous man, especially when he thinks he has a right both of Law and
Gospel, of public gift and personal desert.

CHAP. XXIX.
WHat, Ministers condition not to be envied, but pitied.
I beseech you (O noble Englishmen and generous Christians) can you find in
this posture of Ministers condition, that has the least shadow of double
honor? what is there here to be envyed? what not to be pityed, as to the
present? what hopes, what help for the future, if your favor, who are persons
of piety, ingenuity, honor, compassion, constancy, fail them? If you also
forsake them, they are utterly lost, and, as to this world, of all men most
miserable. For as to the vulgarity and generality of people, what is there in
the best condition of any true Minister, that carries any thing with it of
spirit and life, of comfort and encouragement, of vigor and improvement to
those studies and prayers, those pains and parts, those charities or
hospitalities which do become a Minister, and which people expect from them,
though they feed them but with pulse, the bread and water of affliction, and
make them (with their families) look like Pharaohs lean kine? what almost is
there left for their comfort, either as to future provision, or present
subsistence? By that time their poor pittances are injuriously compounded, and
slowly paid by dribbets and with infinite delays; by that time taxes, tenths,
and town-rates are defalked out of their wages; by that time they have
satisfied the poor and rich in every Parish, which always expect, as a right
and due from their Ministers, something of charity and hospitality, be their
Livings never so small; by that time the upper and the nether milstones,
private necessities and public exactions, have ground these poor men; alas,
how little will be left for necessity, how nothing for convenience, how less
than nothing for posterity? You may despair of any such superfluity as should
serve for any such great, good, and generous designs, as the Clergy in former
times did effect, both for piety and public charity. Their Livings, at best,
are but for life; and (now) many times upon a very vertical point, an
arbitrary and uncertain account: Besides, they are many ways peeled and
exhausted beyond any men's estates, paying not only civil Taxes and Subsidies
for their Tithes, after the rate of Land of Inheritance, but First Fruits also
and Tenths, as a Spiritual Tax and special mulct upon them. Truly, for my
part, I am so far from seeing any cause for men to envy and grudge at Ministers
enjoyments, such as they are for the most part, that I rather wonder at many of
their subsistence, considering how ill it becomes their breeding and calling,
to debase themselves to any sordid and mechanic ways of gain.

Especially when I consider a further cumulation incident to Ministers
miseries, which is, To be often molested with pedling, peevish, and unhandsome
Suits of Law, to which they are compelled by those that list to be contentious:
Ministers not having to this day any such easy, quiet and compendious way to
get their wages when they have done their duties, as is daily used in raising
the Soldiers pays, or the Poors collections; but the poor Minister, if he
will not be utterly impoverished, must ride and run, solicit and engage in
tedious and chargeable attendances upon Justices, Committees, Lawyers,
Attorneys: among whom although Ministers find some very just, ingenuous, and
generous Gentlemen, lovers of Learning, Religion, Equity, Order, and of their
Mother the Church of England; yet others of them savor so strong of the apron
antipathy, of a rustic, mechanic and illiterate breeding, besides that
factious and peevish temper which they have lately added to their other
perfections, that (in good earnest) the sober and sound Ministers of the Church
of England are as unwelcome to them, as cold water is to their feet in winter,
or vinegar to their aching teeth, or smoke to their sore eyes, which they have
((...)) many ways and often expressed by their looks, words, gestures, actions;
some of them treating aged, grave, godly, venerable, and most deserving
Divines, (much their betters (God and man knows) in all true worth) not only
with rudeness and petulancy, but with such bitterness, haughtiness and
disdain, as they would not show to a Footman or Lacquey, related to any person
whom they either fear, love or esteem. Herod was civil to John Baptist in
comparison. Mark 6.20.
These puff and swell, they bite and threaten, as Ahab did at Eliah or
Micaiah: counting these Ministers, though never so supple and humble, 1 King.
21.20 Have thou found me, O mine enemy? 1 King. 22.8. But I hate him.
tame and trembling before their good Worships, as enemies, because they hold
to the Catholic truth; and as troublers of their Israel, because they will not
be flatterers of their new fancies in Religion; because they persist in a
judicious and conscientious owning their Orders and asserting their Ministry,
which is their chiefest honor; because they will not yet fall down and worship
the imaginations which some men seek to set up in England; because they follow
the Primitive order, constancy and verity, not complying with that ignorance,
levity, vulgarity, Schism and Apostasy against the Church of England,
wherewith some men are so delighted, without any sense of sin or shame, though
never so much against that duty, gratitude, love, honor, estimation and
communion which they owed to the Church of England, and the worthy Ministers of
it.

CHAP. XXX.
THis I write to you (O nobler Christians, Experimental instances how petulant
some people are to their Ministers.
and my Honored Countrymen) as with great certainty, sorrow and sympathy, in
regard of my Brethren the Ministers of this Church; so with the greater
freedom, because it neither has been, nor is my particular case (through Gods
mercy) either to be considerably injured, or in any degree overawed by common
people, much less by any men in Power, either Military or Civil: Nor have I
any cause to complain of the generality of my own people, as to any want of
justice, gratitude, or civility expectable from persons of their size and
proportion.

Yet my own experience teaches me to have the more sensible belief of many
other Ministers sad complaints, who having (it may be) less advantages above
their people, and much depending upon them, are forced in a very low posture to
truckle under such factious, imperious, and injurious spirits as they meet
withal.

There is, I find, no flock of Pigeons so pure and entire, but there will be
some Stares, Jack-dawes and Rooks among them; no people so modest and
ingenuous, so respective and submissive to their Ministers, but there will be
some surly and supercilious, petulant and insolent spirits among them. No
Minister of any good name and merit is so exalted in the love and respect of
his people, but he will have some messenger of Satan to buffet him; some Judas
among his Disciples, that will be prone to betray him, to traduce him privately
and publicly, to make him an offender for a word, to suck poison as Spiders
out of the sweetest flowers of his zeal, piety, charity, and oratory; turning
honey into gall, and requiting evil for good.

I could give you (if you wanted daily experiences) some near and notable
instances, how respective, how gentle, how good-natured, how grateful, how
civil some people are to their Ministers, since they have taken the liberty to
be rude, petulant, insolent, unholy, unthankful. I have seen how much they
disdain to pay any more civility or outward respect to their Minister, than
they challenge to themselves, or than they give to their meanest comrades,
which are of the same bran and barrel with themselves: yea some of them have
taken a glory and pleasure to show incivility, rudeness, contemptuousnesse in
words and behavior as well as looks; more passionate, malapert, and imperious
to their Ministers, than they durst be toward a petty Constable, or a
Bum-baily: some of them so unthankful, that for twice seven years constant
pains among them, they never returned any acknowledgment: some have not been
ashamed to use downright railing, scorn and ruffling to their faces, others
behind their back. Some are so conceited of themselves, that they have
adventured to dictate and prescribe in a way even haughty and menacing, what
their Minister should do and say. There want not some aguish and feverish
Auditors, who hear only by fits, when they list: others are great critics
and severe censurers, whose wanton curiosity uses Sermons, as Walnuts; they
crack them, and peel them, and cast away the greatest part of them with great
nicety, eating little, and digesting less of sound doctrine. Some have high
conceits that they can preach better than my self, I or any Minister. Some have
begun a clownish contest with their Minister at the Font, bringing their
children to Baptism with such indifferency, as when one was asked by his
Minister, if he desired to have his child baptized in the Christian Faith, he
answered very surlily, Yes, if you can do it. Another with great
peremptorinesse refused to have his Child baptized, unless the Minister would
do it himself, though he pleaded (with truth) his great weariness after twice
Preaching that day, and desired another Minister then assistant and present
might do it, as was usual: But he, stiffe-girl, and inexorable, went with a
short turn out of the Church, carrying his child with him, nor ever after
offered it, that I know, to be baptized, although he was entreated with great
gentleness and kindness. These are the religious demeanours and deeds of some
people that I have known.

Nor am I a stranger to those garlands and flowers of rustic oratory and civil
behavior, wherewith some true plebeians do crown the heads of their Ministers,
with as much love and respect as those did, who platted a crown of thorns on
Christ's head. I have heard and read the language of some of their tongues and
pens too, for they dare to scribble as well as babble; nor does their
goose-quill want teeth any more than their lips do the poison of Asps,
sufficient to exercise the best Antidotes of Christian patience and charity,
which any true Minister bears about him. I have seen sometime the virulent
letters of some of these Scribes and Pharisees, as full of contempt, insolency
and menacing, as their little wits and great malice could invent: and this from
such as have been sometime personally obliged, and to whom their Minister
willingly never gave the least offense. No touch-wood or dry gunpowder sooner
kindles to flames of wrath, indignation and disdain, than some ordinary and
mean men dare, yea delight, now to do against their Ministers. I have seen both
by their pasquils and practices some instances of their ingenuous manners, of
their great respects, love and gratitude: all which (in good earnest) I might
(I think without any vanity) have challenged and expected from all men,
especially from my own Parishioners and auditors, whom for many years I have
endeavored to entertain with so much industry, civility, candor, charity and
hospitality, as is not inferior to most (if any) Ministers in the country;
and in some things, as to public charges and burdens, I believe I have
exceeded any man of my estate and calling in England. As for private charities
to the poorer and richer, to the well and the sick, for food, physic,
clothing, etc. it is fitter others assert me, than I should vindicate my self
against the petulant ingratitudes of some men; among whom one had his tongue so
much at liberty, that uninjured, unprovoked, yea almost unknown to me (yet one
of my many hearers) he doubted not openly to join me with my man, and put upon
us both the title of a couple of proud Jack anapeses, when he was but, after
two or three years forbearance, demanded to pay what was due, professing he
would not maintain any proud Parson. Such spirits as these I must leave to be
punished with their own manners; I must pardon them, as David did Shimei, and
pray for them, as Samuel did for the ungrateful Israelites: the rather,
because, I thank God, I meet with few of them in a very numerous people, who
for the greater and better part of them, do indeed deserve all that care, love,
labor, kindness and constancy, which I have showed to them for 15 years
together.

Only by these experiments, both my self and others may easily conjecture how
the pulse of people beats in most, if not all places, toward their Ministers,
whatever they be; if they be men of any worth, spirits and parts above them.
It Is sure enough, that even the best of them in the best places they meet with,
are brought to a low ebb, in comparison of what respect they formerly enjoyed
in England.

Indeed some Ministers (perhaps) have some little sleights and popular
artifices to win and please the vulgar; whom rather than offend, they will do,
or say, or omit, or silence any thing, not grossly a sin and shame; and rather
than not please, they will rub ever and anon some salt upon the Bishops, the
ancient Clergy, upon the Liturgy and the former constitution of the Church of
England: for this gall is honey to the palates of some plebeian spirits. And
rather than displease some people, there are Ministers that will never use the
Creed, Decalogue, or Lords prayer in twice seven years. Nay some people so rule
the tender mouths, and ride the galled backs of their Preachers with so sharp a
snaffle and hard a saddle, that they are afraid to offend these their great
Censors (rather than good Masters and Dames) by putting the title of Saint to
any holy Evangelist, or Apostotick writer, no not when they name their Text, or
cite any place out of their holy writings; but those holy and reverend men are
named with as little respect or honor to their memory and merit in the Church,
as if they spoke to Matthew, and James, and Peter, and John in their kitchen,
as their servants, or fellows and familiars. Yea so spongily soft, timorous
and sequacious some Ministers are, that what they own as their judgment among
men of learning, parts and courage, this they smother with great wariness and
cowardice among those plainer He Is and She Is, by whom they are overawed, as it
were, by a kind of necessary sportulary dependence.

CHAP. XXXI.
The personal sufferings of Ministers, after all their pains, merits and
troubles.
WHat the sufferings, dejections, d^basements, indignities are, which many
Ministers have, and do endure, no man can imagine, who does not see and feel
the weight of high shoes, or the ponderousness of Weavers beams, when they dare
to tread on Ministers toes. If (as I have experimentally instanced) it be thus
done to a green tree, to one that has been not barren or unfruitful among
them, whom God of his mercy and bounty has planted in an upper ground, and in
many degrees of eminency above the vulgar; how (think you) will rustic spirits
lift up their flailes and sithes, their hooks and bills, their shuttles and
shovels against those of my brethren, whom they look upon as much their
underlings and shrubs, by reason of the tenuity of their condition, though they
be never so tall Cedars in learning, piety, and all true worth? How do they
threaten, and scorn, and molest them, if they do not suffer them to enjoy those
shaking and sacrilegious compositions which they will make, or none at all, for
their Tithes? else Articles and Committees, sequestrations and suits are loudly
threatened: at best, parties, factions, schisms and separations are presently
hatched and nourished against him; if the Minister do not sacrifice with great
tameness a great part of his small means, as a peace offering or atonement to
these turbulent spirits, who if they may not be his Masters and Commanders,
resolve to be his oppressors and undoers, if they can; however they take the
freedom to be his declared deserters and enemies, discouraging and disparaging
him what they can, by separating from him, and from the Congregation or Parish,
to some private and spiteful Conventicle.

Which reserve of malice never fails to follow there, where any Minister has
the courage and confidence so far to own himself, as not to submit either to
the injuries or insolences of some proud and pragmatick spirits. If the
conscience of his own integrity sets him immovably as a sluice against the tide
of their folly and petulancy, O how excessively will their spleen swell against
the good man! Rather than fail of having some revenge upon him, they will take
this most severe revenge against themselves (as malice is often its own mischief)
wholly to deprive themselves of all the benefit to be enjoyed by his learned,
judicious and devout Ministry; which they labor to cry down, as that by which
they cannot profit; that to refresh their souls, they are forced to seek out
some more warm, complying, creeping and inspired Preacher: such an one, though
a mere rhapsodist and rambler, must presently be cried up as a rare soul-saving
Preacher.

And indeed it may justly be feared, that most Separates of later years have
taken the rise and occasion of their schisms and separations from their
lawful Ministers, and from the Church of Engl. not so much upon any scruple of
conscience, as upon pride, covetousness, ambition, revenge, and other
inordinate lusts, with which their Ministers would not comply: from which
center of order, union and consistence in the Church, when country people are
once removed, no wonder if, like their cart-wheels, they run round in a vertigo
of Religions; and being themselves once bitten with their own rage, they run
(like mad dogs) up and down the country, seeking whom they may bite and infect
with the contagion of their malice, contempt, revenge and abhorrence against
their former Minister and all of his form, raising what mutinies, conspiracies
and animosities they can against them, among those rural neighbors, to whose
conversation the most part of Ministers are condemned, and by whose egregious
insolence many of late years have been, as with evil spirits, grievously vexed
and tormented, being in most places little respected and less beloved;
generally but men of small estates, helpless enough, and friendless, full of
frequent perplexities, between conscience and necessity, between piety and
policy; having run through so many Ordeales or fiery trials of State, first a
Protestation, then a Covenant, after that a Vow, next an Engagement, and soon
after a dis-engagement. One while they are bound to maintain the Reformed
Religion, as established in the Chapter of Engl. according to their education,
judgment, conscience and ordination: if they keep to this station, first
Presbytery has a fling at them, next Independency pincheth them; at last the
licentious humor of people lets out a whole kennell of Libertines to worry
them. Thus have many Ministers lingered out their lives of late years, laden and
almost oppressed, worn out and quite tired with the burden of years, cares,
labors, fears, anxieties, necessities, rude affronts, and remediless
afflictions.

All which calamities have fallen so thick upon them in their persons and
reputation, in their estates and quiet, in their calling and employment, that
none, but very ingenuous minds and compassionate hearts, are apt or able to
consider fully those sad talents of lead which lie upon many or most Ministers.

Their private closets are almost daily witnesses to their sighs, tears,
prayers, bitter complaints, despondencies, and almost despairs: many of them
ready, with Job and Jeremiah, to curse the day of their birth, Job 3.1. Jer.
20.14.
their education as Scholars, and their ordination as Ministers: many of them,
as Eliah, say secretly in their souls, Lord, it is enough, take away my life,
since I have outlived the glory of this Church, and the honor of my calling.
Many are in such anguish of spirit, that they long for death, as for their
rest, and seek for the grave, as for hidden treasure; so sorely does the heat
and burden of the day beat upon them, as upon Jonah, and no gourd to refresh
them.

All which griefs and dejections, however they strive, many of them, by a
generous magnanimity, to conceal and smother, as much as is possible (knowing
how vain a thing it is to complain, where is no hope but of pity, and scarce
that;) yet many of their neighbors, both friends and enemies, are so much
curious spectators of their distresses and discouragements, that the one has
the pleasure to pity them, the other to insult over them. Which dismal
reflections when the poor Ministers discern in men's looks, words, treatments
and comportments toward them, how do they ruminate afresh, and chew over their
calamities, when they retire home, and hide their heads in their ruinous and
uncertain habitations, which daily, with their masters, fall to dilapidations?
Ministers having neither money to lay out, nor hearts, if they had money, to
repair such uncertain, and, it may be, momentary mansions, where every
relation they meet renews their regrets and vexations, both as to their private
and public condition; when they consider how much they and their profession
are fallen in England, as to all former civil and secular interests, either
honorable, or honest and comely, and forced to stoop to those that make them
their footstool, Isa. 51.23.
commanding them to bow down, that they may go over their backs.

When they hope a little to divert their melancholy thoughts, by going abroad
and meeting with other men; with what force and affectation do Ministers
contend to put on so much brow and confidence, as may keep them from appearing
too sensible of their being every where discountenanced and despised as
Ministers? Hence they think themselves safest, when they are most disguised in
their clothes, both for color and fashion, such as may least bewray them and
their pitiful profession; being Ministers now rather by force and fatal
necessity, than of any good will, choice, or self-comprobation, finding the
best of their condition, preferment and expectation amounts not beyond a
dispirited, dejected, despised, decayed, precarious, proletary, predicant, not
many degrees removed from a mendicant, condition.

Thus while the Soldier looks big, and glories to be seen in his arms, as the
ensigns of his well-paid profession; while wary Lawyers keep as grave and wise
men to their robes and gowns, as badges of their calling, which is their honor
and gain too; while other civil fraternities and companies of trades own their
vests and liveries; only the poor Ministers of England study with great
artifice to disguise themselves, as manifestly, and not a little ashamed of
their order and function; and this not only in highways and markets, but
even in their very Churches and Pulpits: they had rather appear as Lawyers,
Physicians, Troopers, Grasiers, yea, Mechanics, Apprentices and Serving-men,
than in such a color, garment, garb and fashion, as best becomes (in my
judgment) grave Scholars and venerable Preachers: so great is the damp and
discountenance they are sensible of, when they come among Laymen, being
always loath, and often afraid to be taken for Ministers, lest they be openly
disgraced, jeered and contemned: this makes many leave off their wearing black,
when they have cause enough to be in mourning.

There is yet one relief only left them, by which a little to buoy up their
sinking spirits; that is, when Ministers meet together, they seem with some
show of wit, or gravity, or learning, or confidence, or sanctity, to hold up
each others chins, especially if they be of a party, and get into some
associate convention (which is the least of comforts to consorts in calamity;)
and even this invention is carried on (as yet) rather furtively and
precariously, than with any great solemnity or authority: and here, in the
midst of their feigned mirth and seeming serenity, O what a secret guilt, shame
and regret, do most of them find in themselves and in one another! O how great
a cloak of confusion covers their faces! as those most, who are most modest,
ingenuous, ancient and innocent, when they see in their own nakedness, how God
has satisfied either the superpolitick or the simple sort of Ministers with
their own delusions; what a cloud they have embraced instead of Goddesses; with
what slighting they are treated and looked upon by all sorts of men; how they
have helped, with much zeal and little wisdom, to reduce themselves and their
order to this diminutive posture; being so divided and disordered among
themselves, that they are easily despised, derided and destroyed by any that
dare to attacque them: having now no national circumference as Churchmen, no
Ecclesiastical center for union or ordination, no shadow or paternall shelter
of protection among themselves, to defend them from vulgar heats and plebeian
storms; nothing of filial subordination or fraternal conjuntion, to keep them
in any comely posture and regular motion. Look beyond the seas, and they see
all orders cast into a strength, stability and honor, by their subordination
to their Bishops and Superiors, after the ancient and venerable pattern of all
Churches: look homeward, and they find all mysteries of civil trades and
merchandise kept up by mutual correspondencies and corporations, for order,
counsel and government: only the Ministerial Tribe is become a disorderly
order of men, like Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.7.
they must be divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel; which was the
left handed blessing of that holy Patriarch to those fierce and furious
brethren, etc. Yea, the Clergy, or Ministry if you will (for some like that
new title best, since their condition is much worsted) are become in England
like the Jews in all lands; who are dispersed in many countries, but have no
where any polity, community, authority, or government.

Add to this dissipated and distracted state of Ministers, their private
distresses and poverties, together with the public neglect and indifferency of
people toward them; who can wonder if they look pitifully one on another, which
no jocose or juvenile drolings can relieve? how forced are their mutual
salutations, since they affect to call one another brethren, and yet have cast
off their Fathers? how feigned are their smiles and embraces, when they see how
hard an after-game they have to play for their subsistence, reputation, civil
respect and Ecclesiastic union? For splendid estates, or any beam of public
honor and real authority, further than the Territories of their desk and
pulpits reach, they may sadly and justly, many of them, despair of them: though
I am of opinion no men can better deserve them than some Clergymen did
heretofore, and still do; but not those, who by a spiteful and rash prodigality
have set their own as well as other men's cornfieldsd on fire, by helping to tie
foxes tails with firebrarnds. These may be glad if they can preserve the petty
Provinces of their Parochial and Independent Episcopacies, which they so
infinitely ambitionated, that they indiscreetly ventured to consume the larger
harvest of this Church, which was annexed to the honor of Ancient and
Catholic Episcopacy; by which means, not only many Ministers of the
Episcopal Ordination and judgment have been shrewdly distressed, but even
Presbyterian and Independent Preachers, who flatter themselves as if they were
the special favorites of the people, even these are fain, in many places, with
much ado, to fall to their gleanings, to pick up what small compositions,
remnants and scatterings of support and respect, they can here and there get or
find, as new and special undertakers to preach the Gospel, and give some
credit to the lapsed and distressed Ministry of England.

This, this is generally the fate of Ministers; deservedly indeed of some, but
most unworthy of many of them, who not without a patient horror behold this
prospect of calamities befaln them in their decline and age: and all this after
great pains in their studies from their youth upward; after infinite prayers
and tears, for their own and others souls improvement; after unwearied
diligence in their calling; after invincible patience under common peoples
incapacities, stupidities, ingratitudes, indignities; after many rigours and
severities of life, voluntarily, besides necessarily sustained; after a kind of
civil martyrdom endured, like that of Simon Stilites, who laden with irons,
confined himself into a narrow pillar of stone, while most Ministers are all
their lifetime condemned to the rusticity, barbarity, moroseness and
brutishness of the flinty vulgar, being like Orient Jewels set in sockets of
copper, or brass, or lead, or iron, or clay. What Minister but finds in these
licentious times, the deportment of many common people, as in the city proud
and supercilious, so in the country harsh as hedge-hogs, and hard as rocks?
for so their society often seems to those men that have once tasted of ingenuous
breeding, of softer and civiler conversation; from which to be wholly removed,
and all ones life confined to hob-nails and high shoes, to lo^es and lasts, to
tempers utterly clownish, or merely mechanic, yet ponderous or petulant
enough, as now they dare appear, is as if a man should fall from a down bed
into a plot of briars and thorns.

Tell me I beseech you (O my brethren and fellow laborers in the Ministry) who
have many years contended with the clod, and toiled in the brick clamp of a
country living, being as Ministers (now) even fallen under plough-shares, and
sawes, and harrowes (as David once treated the children of Ammon;) tell me (O
you my companions in this tribulation) who have any thing in your temper,
constitution, or education, that is courteous and civil, polished and generous,
learned and ingenuous; yea tell me (O ye Noblemen and Gentlemen of England, who
are the chief pillars of cloud and fire, of light and favor, of capacity and
affection (under God) to the now depressed Ministers either in their several
solitudes, or amidst those rural societies, which are many times more sad than
utter solitudes;) tell me (I beseech you all, who are my betters or brethren)
are not those excellent associates, rare refreshments, precious rewards, noble
encouragements, which Ministers of worth and parts in most places of England
(for in Wales they say few are resident or incumbent) do now enjoy, for which
they must spend their spirits, wast their lungs, decay their health, exhaust
their lives, neglect all other ways of livelihood, both for themselves and
their families? After all which, little shall be left them, if some men may
have their wills, but contempt cast upon their persons and calling together,
with the legacies of extreme poverty, which after a lingering death they must
leave to their desolate wives and fatherless children. Good God! what arts did
Churchmen in former times use, when they did so much out-wit and out-wealth
us; when having less charge, less learning, and less work, they had more order
and unity, more honor and revenues, even heaped up, pressed down, and running
over? whereas (now) the tale of brick is much more, and the supply of straw far
less: Livings heretofore worth an 100 l. per annum, are now ebbed and hardly
squeezed to 50. or 60. pounds; and this with much whining and grudging, with
many evil eyes and evil words on all sides.

Nor are these yet the dregs of that bitter cup, which Ministers above all men
are to drink: for after all their former pains faithfully bestowed, after they
have been miserably tossed and weather-beaten by the storms of a long and
dubious civil war, in the bowels of the Church as well as the State, after they
have made shipwreck of almost all but a good conscience (few of them being ever
admitted to any composition or resumption, as to their livings, yea many of
them denied to make use of any such plank or rafter, which might serve to buoy
them up from utter sinking and starving, though it were but teaching school in
a belfrey;) yet after all these personal sufferings and extremities, behold
they must live to hear and see their very calling and orders, their whole
function and fraternity disgraced and disordered, yea (as to some men's desires
and endeavors) quite routed and abolished; the primitive pipes and ancient
conduits of all Ecclesiastic power quite broken, and new cisterns set up,
which hold no water, comparable to that brazen sea of Apostolic Episcopacy and
orderly Presbytery, which ever served the Sanctuary of Christ's Church, in all
ages, places and offices. It might (possibly) break the quiet, the
cheerfulness, the estates of many worthy Ministers, to see their persons,
preaching, pains, prayers and holy ministrations neglected by many, despised by
some, and trampled under foot by not a few; who (after the rate of plebeian
spirits) following the revolutions of men's fortunes, think there can be no
worth meriting their value and respect, either civil or religious, but only
under the characters of riches, honor, and power; soon ebbing in their love
and esteem of the Clergy, when they see the tide of honor and munificence so
turned and abated, even to the lowest water-mark almost, as now it seems in
England. But it breaks the very hearts and spirits of worthy Ministers (like
old Elies) to hear and see Philistines take by violence the Ark of God, 1 Samuel
4.
and carry it captive to their Dagons, the Idols that every ones fancy lists to
set up in private Conventicles, under the title of Ministerial power and holy
ordination: this at present infinitely dejects all sober Christians and true
Ministers; this for the future quite sinks them in despair.

CHAP. XXXII.
Discouragements to ingenuous men to be made Ministers in England in
aftertimes.
O How high and holy an ambition, I beseech you (my worthy Countrymen) will it
be in aftertimes, and already is, for any man of parts, of learning, of
conscience, (guided by Scripture, and by all ancient practices of the Catholic
Church, no less than that of this Reformed and famous Church of England) to
devote himself to be a Minister of the Gospel, when he shall see no Reverend
Bishops, no subordinate Presbyters left to ordain him, few or no people left to
entertain him with due respect to his calling; some doubting, others denying, a
third sort wholly despising all his Ministerial power and authority! of which,
next to our salvation, Ministers and other Christians should study to be
assured that it is valid and divine, upon good and authentic grounds, which
may both merit their acknowledgment, and oblige them to submission.

If any man that is fit, and willing to be a Minister in England, if, I say, he
can dispense with the Novelties, irregularities, and inconformities of his
ordination, as to all Antiquity, no less than the orders of the Church of
England (which ever was by Bishops, as the Apostolic Conduits, the chief
Fathers and proper Conveyors, so confessed by all Reformed Churches;) if he can
bear the tedious journeys from the remoter Counties, the long delays, the
unexpected scrutinies, and the strange questions he shall meet with, before he
be allowed and admitted to officiate; which are very hard trials to men that
are tolerably learned, and not intolerably necessitated for a small living: if
these difficulties can be digested, which we see of late have deterred many
good scholars and hopeful students from entering upon the Ministry, rather
diverting their thoughts to other employments which are more easy, profitable
and honorable now in England; yet still, whatever door he comes in at, he is
a great and bold adventurer, daring at once to undertake so tedious and
dreadful an employment, in which he must daily undergo many oppositions, many
abuses, many injuries, many indignities incident from one side or other, to any
Minister, what stamp soever he bears. He must be fortified with invincible
patience, with heroic resolutions, with humble constancy, with Hermeticall
content, with Martyrly charity, while he contends with many causeless enemies,
with all those difficulties of poverty and contempt, which are very unwelcome
to flesh and blood, though never so spiritualized and refined: these do and
ever will attend him as a Minister, while common people take so great liberties
and confidences to baffle, to dispute, to despise, to disturb, and to undo
their Ministers, besides their daring to obtrude themselves into his place and
office.

The meanest tradesman or handy-craft mechanic bears the labor of his hands,
and that sore travail of his soul, during his mortal pilgrimage, cheerfully
and comfortably, while being willing and able to work for his living, he gets
his wages without any man's grudging, and enjoyes himself without any envy or
obloquy, in honest ways of industry, though possibly it reach no further than
making of ribbands, or points, or buttons, or babies, for the use of the
Commonweal: only the poor Minister (especially if he dare own the Church of
England, or assert his authority from an higher origin, than what is novel,
secular and popular) after twice seven years rigging and preparing himself for
so rough and hazardous a voyage; after he has many nights and days, by
studying, watching, fasting, praying, weeping, furnished himself as a workman
that needs not to be ashamed before men; after he has wholly and only
devoted himself to that heavy plough and employment, the care and culture of
men's souls (which are naturally hard as fallow grounds, full of weeds and
thorns) which work may well take up the whole time, ability and industry of the
best of men; after he has so followed this holy husbandry, as to neglect all
other means and opportunities to advance his worldly condition, thinking it
would be enough for him to merit well of his Country and the public, and, as
a learned, grave and serious Minister, to serve God and mankind, by setting
forth and communicating to the world the inestimable riches and excellencies of
his and their Savior; which service might well deserve as good salaries and
encouragements as those enjoy, who have offices in the Customs, Excise,
Exchecquers, and treasuries of unrighteous mammon; after he has thus denied,
exhausted and macerated himself, in order to promote the highest interests of
God and man, which is the eternal salvation of sinful souls, and this at no
great charge, or expense of men's estates; after his modesty, charity and
hospitality has convinced all men, that he covets them, not theirs,
condescending often below himself, in order to captate the love and civil favor
of people, that he might gain more advantages to save their souls:

Yet still this good Ministers condition will of all men's in Engl. be most
miserable: for while he is daily doing his duty, and doing it well, with
meekness of wisdom, with good conscience and discretion; yet he shall be sure
to contract many enemies without a cause. Many that are mere strangers to him
will hate him out of anti-ministeriall Antipathies and Epidemick principles;
which are so rife and in fashion in England, against any that own themselves as
Ministers (ex officio) by duty and office, especially after the order of the
Church of England. Upon this very name he shall adopt the censures and hard
speeches, the envy and malice, the janglings and ruffling, the injuries and
indignities of many: he must be made a man of strife, whether he will or no;
often destinated to disgrace and ruin, unheard, untried, unseen, unknown. If he
own himself as a man of any spirit, and a Minister of any authority, then he is
censured as proud, a Pope, a Lucifer; if he be soft and supple, then he is
counted spongie, poor-spirited, pusillanimous: if by any honest arts and
innocent frauds he can preserve his station, his living, his liberty, then he
is counted cunning, a mere politico, a time-server, an hypocrite: where he is
best known he must look to be least beloved by many high Seraphicks and
supercilious Separatists; there will be some godly bubbles, swollen with pride
and ignorance, that will scorn all his learning, all his abilities, all his
devotion, all his duties.

When their mouths are stopped, and their gain-sayings confuted, though not
silenced, yet neither his work nor his person will be accepted; nor will some
men own their profiting by his Ministry, that they may save their purses, and
excuse themselves for not paying him his dues. His wages must be often changed by
peevish Labans, sometimes totally denied by churlish Nabals; and there are who
never batten more than when they most cheat their Minister. In fine, he will
need Argus his eyes to look about him, for fear lest the whole foundation of
his livelihood and subsistence be so undermined, shaken, assaulted and quite
overthrown by two or three pragmatick and spiteful neighbors, that he will be
in hazard to be quite routed and outed, without reward and work, forced to be
either indigent or idle; and this without any ordinary rule or remedy, that I
know, as to the Laws of England.

A dreadful prospect, God knows, of Idleness and Indigence, sufficient to
scare a very resolute soul, more than that spectre did Brutus the night before
he fought unfortunately in the Philippick fields; discouragements capable to
damp any provident men's spirit, from so dangerous, and almost desperate a
service as this is, to be a professed and ordained Minister of the Gospel in
England. What young men of any parts and hopes, of any pregnancy and ingenuity,
will be so zealously forward, as to prick their fingers by gathering roses and
lillies, among such rude thorns, as now either hedge up the way, or encompass
the paths of every solid and sober Minister? It is a fervor not very frequent,
nor are they quotidian fits, either in younger or elder men of any worth, to
embrace Religion in rags, and virtue when it is vagrant and mendicant, out at
heels and elbows: when to be a Minister of Jesus Christ, is to have little for
the belly or back, less for books or the brain; nothing to exercise charity of
hospitality, less than nothing (as from man) to cherish graces, to increase
gifts, to whet industry, to promote piety. What mortal is so brutishly hardy,
as having no fleece or wool on his back, he would choose, not to dwell, but do
penance in so cold, so Scottish a climate, as old England will soon prove to
worthy Ministers; when it is become an Iseland, a Freezland, a nova Zembla,
nothing but Hyperborean rigor, frozenness, and barrenness in it; no spring, no
summer, no harvest expectable, as to any common favor, ingenuous pleasure,
honest profit, or moderate honor? which is the temperature that some men's
distempers have sought to reduce poor Ministers to, while they endeavor to
turn the English Church and Clergy either up-side down, or out of doors.

CHAP. XXXIII.
CAn you (O my worthy and honored Contrymen) without an infinite vanity,
folly and presumption, A worthy Mistry not expectable, unless there be a worthy
usage and entertainment.
(most unworthy of your piety and prudence) ever expect that there should be
such burning and shining lights among you, as have been in this Church and
Nation; when there shall be little or no oil to supply the lamps, or such as
shall be rather Whale-oyl and Greenland-stuff, than such sweet and golden oil,
Zach. 4.12.
as through the golden pipes flowed from the Olive trees, which were round
about the Candlesticks in Zachariah's vision, which was an emblem of
Evangelicall diffusions from Christ to his Ministers, and from these to his
Church? Do you think any men's sons of better quality, or others (whose hopes
and ambition will carry them above the condition of a Cobbler or a Tinker) when
they come to years of discretion, and have a true prospect of that barren
heath, that dry and parched wilderness, to which the Ministry of England is
like to be confined and condemned in the midst of a land of Goshen, which flows
with milk and honey to all other ways of industry; do you think (I say) that
any man, who has not lost his mother-wits, and those innate principles of
self-preservation, will spontaneously rush into so many sharp contentions and
temptations, like the horse into the battle, where hunger, and thirst, and
cold, and nakedness, and shame, and sordidnesse of living, shall threaten him
as a Minister, like the ragged regiment attending that armed man, Prove 6.11.
Psalm. 68.13.
whose name is Poverty; besides the black pots, among which these doves must
lie, I mean the foot and skullery of vulgar insolency, plebeian petulancy and
fanatic contempt? all which, like the over-hanging brow of a rock or cliffe,
threaten to fall upon him and his relations, who seeks for the refuges of his
life and pilgrimage, under the shelter of the Ministry: where if any single men
(being more ((...),) callous and iron-sided) can bear with, and bustle through
their own sufferings and others rude oppositions; yet when they are married,
and have relations more tender and dear to them than their own lives, O how
will their bowels be broyled like S. Laurence's, and their hearts turned upon
the gridiron, when they are frequently forced to hear, and see, and feel the
cries, the wants, the distresses, the tears, the pallors, the squallors of
their wives and children, which pierce and wound the very souls of ingenuous
men! O how cruel will that indulgence appear in after-ages, which took away
the heavy yoke and severe restraints, beyond what God and Nature, Law or Gospel
imposed, as on the other Western Clergy, so here in England, by the policy
more than piety of the Popes of Rome (contrary to the sense of the Nicene and
primitive Fathers) when the fruit of such Clergy-mens marriages shall appear no
other than withered plants, starved in their very original, and condemned to
perpetual tenuity, both of parts and employments!

In ancient times, when the state of this Church and its Clergy was more idle
and superstitious, but more opulent and honorable, what Gentleman, what
Nobleman, what Prince, yea what Sovereign Kings did not ambitionate to plant
some of their sons (as Henry the seventh intended his second son, Henry the
eighth) into Gods vineyard, for the work, office and honor of a Churchman?
Now a Gentleman of the first head disdaines it, a Yeoman disputes it. If the
Fathers piety can digest to make the meanest of his sons a Minister, the
Mothers tenderness dreads it; if the good Mothers zeal devotes the poor youth
to that perpetual servitude, yet the Fathers prudence and policy rather
chooses for him a life of more activity, ease, peace, pleasure and honor; if
it be but to make him, as the last refuge, a common trouper, or a
foot-souldier, who may in time overawe the best Bishop and Minister in a
County, yea a whole Diocese and association of them, if Ministers shrink the
next ten years as they have done of late.

Nor may any wise men, that wish well to their Country and the Church of
England, ever flatter themselves, that one man of a thousand, who has good
abilities of mind, or any competent estate, sufficient to redeem himself from
the servilities of poverty and popularity, will ever condemn himself, in a
monastic or melancholy humor, to be a Minister. The old stocks already are
dwarft in great part, or hewn down; and generally they will be but shrubs, on
which the Ministry hereafter will be grafted, in a foil and age that grows so
barren, stingy, ungenerous, unbenigne to them. Possibly there may be now and
then an heroic resolution in a Gentleman of worth, for family, parts and
estate, to assert the honor of his Savior, and the declining dignity of his
blessed Ministry, by undertaking holy orders: but these are rare birds, and
will be Phoenixes in after-ages; not more admirable than commendable indeed,
when they come in at the right door of Catholic ordination and Apostolic
succession, which are the visible seals of Divine Authority and Commission,
conferred of old, even from the first age, by none (that ever I read) without
Episcopal power and precedence, which immediately succeeded the Apostles in
that ordinative and gubernative eminency; which, I believe, was to be ordinary
and constant in the Churches Economy, both to preserve an orderly polity, and
to confer holy orders with due, that is, Divine authority, in an uninterrupted
succession.

But where a child's portion must be wholly raised by a man's own industry, and
Gods blessing upon his employment in the Ministry, O how cruel will those
parents seem to their sons at years of discretion, when once they come to taste
and drink deep of that cup of gall and vinegar, tenuity and contempt, which
some men's charity designs to mix for Ministers! How will such poor and
despised Preachers, all their tedious and necessitous lives, condemn, and in
the bitterness of their souls sometime be ready to curse (as Job and Jeremiah
did the days of their birth) that preposterous zeal, and pitiless piety, which
bred them up, with no small care, cost and pains, only to condemn them to the
pulpits, as to the galleys of plebeian slavery and necessity; when they shall
by woeful experience find, that all their costly learning and education, their
ingenious parts and excellent abilities, have made them like the sacrifices of
old, adorned with ribbands and garlands, that they may with the greater pomp
and solemnity be slain by popular insolency; when parents devoting their
hopeful sons to the service of the Church, is to prefer them to labor and
sorrow, to pains and poverty, to scorn and shame, to vulgar contempt and
contradiction!

Which very unpleasing and horrid apparitions of all manner of discouragements,
have of later years so evidently damped and discouraged many worthy men, that
not only very hopeful scholars have diverted their studies to any other
design than that of Divinity and the Ministry, but few parents, who can find
any other way to dispose of their sons, are so unnatural, as to expose them to
that sad fate, which they see attends every Minister that dares own the right
way of acquiring and exercising the sacred authority of that function.
Certainly Origens juvenile impatience not to be a Martyr, was not many degrees
above the resolution of those young men who will now adventure to be Ministers
in England, upon a good and Catholic account, which equally abhors plebeian
petulancy, popular dependency, and uncatholick novelty.

And to hope that common people will in time grow better-natur'd toward
Ministers, by enjoying whatever liberties they list to arrogate or indulge to
themselves in Religion, is so high a presumption, as is next door to despair:
unless it can be imagined that mankind (naturally enemies to God and all grace)
will of themselves learn to value their souls and their eternal interests,
which are so remote from their senses, as much as they do their bodies and
estates; or that they will look upon Divines and Ministers as no less necessary
for their good, than Lawyers and Physicians are; whose fees and entertainments
tell the world, that men willingly or necessarily bestow many pounds in order
to secure their bodily health and wealth, when they miserably and basely grudge
at three halfpence spent upon their Ministers and their souls: on which to
bring men to set a due value, has been in all ages the chief end of true
Religion, the great work of all the Prophets, Apostles, holy Bishops and godly
Ministers; yea the main design, next the divine glory of God himself, and our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ. Men are miserably betrayed to themselves, when
they are suffered to live at that liberty or looseness, which will certainly
debase, despise and damn their souls. Which sad events being chiefly imputable
to common peoples own folly and madness, yet will those men be highly
responsible for them, in whose power it was, either to teach them better, or to
restrain them from those profligate humors, by which prodigal and poor
wretches are prone to destroy, as well as to despise, both their Ministers and
themselves; whom to persuade to a true value and reverence of themselves, is an
high point of Philanthropy and Theology, of charity and piety, of humanity and
Divinity: which foundation once well laid, would soon recover the decayed and
desolating condition of Ministers, who will never be valued, loved, or rewarded
proportionably to their worth, labors and dignity, until men think they have
infinite need of them; yea, more need than of the most learned and honest
Lawyers, or the most faithful Physicians, who have so great an influence, yea
empire upon mankind, because men sensibly feel and find the want of them, which
they do not of their able Ministers; every prating intruder being enough to
serve their turn.

But I have done with the causes and occasions, the instances and evidences of
the decays and deformities of Religion in the Church of England; which chiefly
rising from the licentiousness of people, and the inordinateness of Ministers,
have been the main subject of this second Book.

BOOK III. SETTING FORTH THE EVIL CONSEQUENCES Felt or feared from the
Distractions of RELIGION in ENGLAND.
CHAP. I.
HAving in the FIRST BOOK endeavored to set forth the sad and just complaints
of the Chapter of Engl. therefore just, because her calamities are neither deserved
by nor descended from Her former well-reformed constitution; having also in the
SECOND BOOK enquired after, and in great part discovered (as I suppose) the
genuine and proper causes together with the unhappy occasions of Her calamitous
distresses and decays; I am now in this THIRD BOOK to set before you (my
honored Contrymen, as to honest Englishmen and worthy Christians) those
evil consequences which already are greatly felt, or may rationally be feared,
as to the interest of the true Christian and Reformed Religion in this Church
and Nation: Which I shall chiefly reduce to these four heads. First, the
palpable decays of Religion, as to the power of godliness, in the proficiency
and practicks of piety and charity, together with the daily increase of
Atheism, with a supine neglect and irreverence toward all Religion in all
sorts of people. Secondly, the unprofitable, scandalous, vexatious and endless
disputes about Religion. Thirdly, the Romish advantages and Papal prevailings,
which are unavoidable. Fourthly, the civil dangers and dissentions necessarily
following religious differences, if once they come to be fomented by numerous
parties, as they will be, if fit remedies be not seasonably applied to restore,
establish, encourage and unite the pretensions and interests of the Reformed
Religion, according to some order, polity and discipline in the Church of Engl.
such as may be most agreeable to Scripture, to reason, and to the patterns of
primitive Antiquity: all which pious and prudent methods our Forefathers very
commendably and wisely followed (as I conceive) in that excellent Reformation,
which after the fiery trial of Queen Mary's days came forth of that furnace,
pure in its Doctrine, complete in its Liturgy, comely in its Order, solemn in
its Worship and duties, authoritative in its Discipline, harmonious in its
Government, sound in the Faith, fervent in all Charity, full of good works,
abounding in the gifts, and transcending in the graces of Gods Spirit. It was,
as Gods darling, for many years highly prospered with all temporal and
spiritual blessings, as the beloved Disciple, lying in the bosom of Jesus
Christ, to so extraordinary indulgences of divine favor, that all Reformed
Churches admired her; yea the Greek Patriarchs and Churches, though in a
depressed and distant state, yet highly revered her so pious, so prosperous, so
prudent, so primitive constitution and condition: in all which how it now is
impaired, and daily will further decay, will best appear by taking an
impartial view of those sad effects and bad consequences which either already
attend, or further threaten, the divided, distracted and distressed state of
Christian Reformed Religion in this Church and Nation.

Decays in godliness, as to the former generation of Christians.
The first of which is, the great abatement and palpable retrogradation of
godliness, as to the proficiency and power of it, both in men's hearts and
lives. The sweet savor and fragrancy of Religion, which arises from truth and
peace, from inward sanctity and outward harmony, these are grown infinitely
sowred by the leaven of differences, embittered to factions and despites, to
mutual despiciencies and eternal animosities. Where envy and strife are, there
must needs be (as Saint James tells us) confusion, Jam. 3 16.
and every evil work, heightening men by spiritual pride and evil jealousies
to a kind of zealous malice and cruel charity, which choke (as the Devils tares
and thorns) the good seed, giving great and daily advantages to all manner of
evil temptations, even to gross fedities and barbarous immoralities: for where
Religion is once poisoned with passion, and swollen to factious emulations, men
count it a great part of their own godliness, to censure others for ungodly: it
is made a masterpiece of piety to cover their own impieties, by the sharp and
severe imputations they cast upon other men's opinions or profession; thinking
it no small assurance, even of their own salvation, confidently to condemn all
that differ from their party in opinion or communion. By this means the root
and fruit of true charity, which is the life and soul of Christianity, the milk
and marrow of all graces, this first grows mortally infected through the
pestilence of divisions and distractions in Religion: this vital and natural
Balsam of piety once decayed, dried up, or exhausted by unchristian calentures,
no wonder if the whole constitution of Religion grow weak, ricketly and
consumptuous.

For as planting and good husbandry are commonly neglected where war rages,
men being more intent to killing than tilling; so in parties and factions of
Religion, Christians study to live more upon the insolent plundering of other
men's opinions, upon the rifling and harrasing of others consciences, than upon
their own pious industry, or humble devotion; every one is so eager to make
good their side and contests, that they cannot much intend the great work of
grace and truth in their own hearts, which most thrive in fair and clean
weather, in the summers serenity and tranquillity of Religion. As the hot and
scorching beams of the sun soon dry up the morning dew, or as violent flames
instantly lick up the water cast upon them; so are controversies in Religion to
the sweet distillations of grace, and heavenly diffusions of Gods Spirit* Gods
still voice, or those silent and secret whispers of his love to the soul, are
not to be heard in the clamor and tintamar of controverted Religion in the
same house or Church. The work of grace, both in private hearts, public
congregations, and greater Churches, is best carried on, like Solomon's Temple,
with least noise and knocking, the furthest from such contention and confusion,
which are only proper for the building of Babels. They are most preposterous
and unevangelical methods, Isa. ^.4.
by which Christians beat their plough-shares of mortification into swords of
destruction, and their pruning hooks of repentance into sharp spears, by which
they may smite and pierce to the heart one another. While men's heads are so
hotly busied in disputations against others tenets; their hearts and hands
easily grow cold and idle, as to that work of sanctification which they owe to
their own souls; and that exemplary conversation in all holiness, which they
owe to others. Cant. 2.2.
The lilly (indeed) of Christian Religion did mightily thrive amidst the thorns
of heathenish persecutions; but it was soon choked by those of uncharitable
janglings and contentions which grew up among Christians: Acts 15.39.
which commonly prove so sharp and hot (like that between Paul and Barnabas)
that even good men separate one from the other; the bellows of disputes
blowing up sparks of native passions to uncomfortable dissociatings, distances
and damnings. At last the daily whettings of men's wits, and exasperatings of
their spirits, tongues, or pens against each other, do infinitely blunt the
edge of their charity, and dull the brightness of all their graces, both
solitary and sociall, as to the holy improvement of their own or other men's
souls; for all things of Religion are disputed and acted, as between rivals, or
enemies never to be reconciled.

We find of old, See Mr. Tho: Fuller his learned and elegant History of the
holy War.
that no wars were ever carried on with more popular eagerness, godly
presumption and pious pertinacy, nor yet with more superstition and
unsuccessfulness as to Christianity, or with more depopulation to true piety,
and vastation of real sanctity, than those which were at first called the holy
wars; when men inscribed the Croisado on their arms and banners; fighting in
the first design only against Saracens, Turks and Mahometans, but at length
against Christians, both Greek and Latin, by the policies and cruelties of
some Popes and Princes. Thus transports of piety usually engage men, not only
against the first supposed enemies of other men's errors and evil manners, but
even against those truths and holy duties, at length, by which the Antagonists
seek to serve and assist their parties one against another. At last the dust of
dispute so blinds men's eyes, that in pursuing of one error to destroy it, they
are engaged and wounded unaware with another; as is evident in the ancient
reciprocations of opinions, touching the reality and unity of both natures in
the one person of Christ: in which, as in other disputes, men of no mean parts
for learning and piety greatly over-shot themselves; as Vincentius Lyrinensis
instanceth in Tertullian, Origin, Apollinaris, Eutyches, Arius, and others;
himself being suspected for Religion too, if those Quaestiones Vincentianae, to
which Prosper gives answer, be of that Vincentius.

After much inordinate heat and expense, both of time and spirits, the ablest
Christians quarrellings do at once wound others, and wast themselves, as we see
between S. Jerome and Ruffinus: but common people by these childish bickerings
in Religion, as by cracking of nuts, rather break their teeth, than ever fill
their bellies, losing most-what the kernel, sweetness and substance of true
holiness, while they eagerly contend about the husk, shell and shadows of
Religion, beyond which the plainer sort of professors hardly advance in
disputes. The purest spirits of true Religion, which are very fine, subtle and
volatile, do quickly evaporate, when such chymicall heats and unchristian
fervours are applied, as are no way apt to fix and consolidate true piety,
either by charity, or humility, or holy humanity, or any blessed harmony.

All which speculations of wise men are most evident in the late experiences
every where pregnant in England, where the Christian and Reformed Religion
being overheated in the furnace of some men's zeal, and too much hammered upon
the anvils of needless and various contentions, they have only made some
sparks to fly in each others eyes, not without great wast to the solidity,
substance and beauty of that former excellent Reformation, which was so
glorious and renowned. The high tide of justice, mercy, humility, meekness,
charity, thankfulness, obedience, order, unity and sincerity, which heretofore
flowed among us, as Contrymen, as Christians, and as Reformed, is now
brought to so low an ebb, that every one is either censuring, or complaining,
or condemning some other: several parties are jealously cautious of one
another injuries, cruelties, malice, pride and hypocrisy. In stead of mutual
symbolizings and sweet complyings in holy duties, as prayer, conference,
comfortings and communicatings, people with Pastors, and Pastors with their
people, or with one another, both privately and publicly; all places are full
of cavillings and calumniatings, quarrellings and disputings, scornings and
contemnings, schismatizings and separatings, which in many are now advanced (as
fire in light and combustible materials) to infinite hatred and utter
abhorrencies of each others persons, piety and professions. One party thinks it
self not safe, if another enjoyes as much freedom in Religion as it self
affects or usurps; it is death to some to see others live in any order and
unity; each faction measures Gods dislike and displeasure by their own: at last
they begin to persuade themselves, that nothing would be more acceptable to
God, than Victimes and Holocausts of all those Christians, both Magistrates,
Ministers and people, who are not of their parties and adherencies.

Thus are the main pillars of Religion, righteousness and peace, meekness and
patience, charity and humility, mortification and self-denying (which are the
noblest victories of our selves, and the most generous conquests of others)
these are undermined, shaken, battered, and in danger to be quite overthrown by
these modern bickerings and digladiations of Religion now in England. Every one
is ploughing and harrowing long furrows, either on other men's faces or their
backs; Steril^scit seges gratiae inter contentios^s opinionum spinas.
few are sowing, weeding, or watering the seeds of grace in their own hearts
and consciences. Christians, like cattle in hot summers days, are so molested
with the biting of these flies, that they cannot feed fat; so agitated with
scruples, that they can take no rest: like silly sheep, engaged among bushes
and briars, they not only lose their food, but their fleeces, getting nothing
but scratches; which are the decoyes of flies, and nurseries of vermin.

What serious and charitable Christian is not grieved at heart to see so many
of their children, neighbors, kindred and acquaintance, disputing away so much
of their precious lives, and uncertain moment? While they should be examining
their consciences, repenting of their sins, strengthening their faith in
Christ, increasing their love to God and man, getting good evidences for
heaven, and preparing for an happy departure; they (alas) are bawling and
braving, railing and raving against one another: yea, many are doubting and
disputing, while they are dying; ravelling and undoing their own comforts, as
well as other men's Religion, when they should be working out their own, and
assisting others salvation with fear and trembling: even poor silly souls are
then full of Obs and Sols, when penitent sighs and fiduciary tears were much
more seasonable and necessary for them; kindling and increasing those fires
with their breath, which they should rather quench with their tears, nay with
their blood, than leave them to be such everlasting burnings, the very Hell and
Tophet of the Church, the continual torment of infinite Christians, that
possibly mean well, and might do well, while they get little good, yea they
both suffer and do much mischief: like sheep surfeited in good posture, they
infect others, and die themselves of the rot, or scab, or maggot, having no
skilful and careful shepherds to cure or relieve them. Thus infinite poor
people in England, by officious tending upon some late new Masters and various
Teachers, do by their Religion, as the poor link-boyes in London, who so wast
their links by running after other men's steps, that they are fain to go at last
to their own homes in the dark. Without doubt, many Christians heretofore very
thrifty and well-liking, able and honest, have of late years lain down both in
sorrow, poverty and obscurity, as to the point of true spiritual comfort and
inward peace; which are the fruits only of quiet, humble, charitable and
composed minds: for as pigeons are scared out of their houses by much noise and
knocking, so are the gracious motions and consolations of Gods sweet spirit
driven out of Christians hearts; between which calm breathings or soft
insinuations, and the rude tempests or commotions of men's passions, there is as
much difference, as between the operations of oil and of vinegar, or between a
tunable peal of well-rung bells, and those harsh janglings which are used as
the alarms of scare-fires, or tokens of public conflagrations.

Nor are the public symptoms of decayed Religion, as to the gracious power
and charitable efficacy of it, more apparent in other men's lives and
conversations (so scattered, so divided, so dissonant, so unsocial, so uncivil,
and so unsympathising generally with one another, unless with those of their
own side and party) than those damps and decays are which men must needs find
secretly in their own hearts; when many, both Ministers and people, cannot but
see (though they are loath to confess) that the Sun of righteousness, which was
well risen in their souls, ^ King. 20.11.
with healing in his wings, is now gone backward many degrees (as the shadow
did on King Ahaz his dial) whereto it was heretofore ascended. In stead of
their first unfeigned love, Rev. 2.4.
which is most lost and decayed toward God and true Religion, there is general
coolness, much chilness and luke-warmness brought upon their purity and
sincerity, by many sinister policies and worldly interests, besides their own
passions, which, like water, are mixed with the wine of their Religion: many
trees of God that were heretofore sound and full of sap, florid and fruitful,
are now become mossy, cankered, hide-bound and barren. I am sure the liberal
hand and outstretched arm of Christian Charity and English munificence, to
God, his Church, his Ministers, his poor, are now shrunck and withered, 1 Kings
13.4.
like Jeroboams, when it was stretched out against the Prophet of the Lord.
Neither Ministers nor other Christian men love one another, John 13.4.
as Christ's Disciples, (qua tales* and quia tales;) but rather as confederates,
in their several factions, interests, separate parties, sidings and designs:
who, though they be like Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, Psalm. 83.6. Isa 9.21.
like Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, in their mutual
Antipathies; yet all are against Judah, against the distressed Chapter of Engl. and
all such as do with the greatest conscience, charity and constancy, adhere to
the former good order and holy profession of the reformed Religion here
established, which now in many places, in many men's lives and hearts, appears,
as to its cordial spirit, its vital and celestial vigor, like the old drugs
and dispirited simples of Apothecaries: the ea^thy, gross and material parts,
do yet remain, in some proportion, as to the main bulk and pretense of Reformed
Religion; but the virtue and efficacy of it is much vanished and evaporated,
both as to the hearts and lives of Christians, both of Pastors and people,
comparing them with the former generation of their forefathers, or with
themselves in their former grave, comely, humble, wise, sober, useful, orderly
and peaceable conversation; which made many of them like vines, fig trees and
Olive Trees, Judge 9.8, etc.
bearing good fruit, to cheer God and man; where now they are like so many
sharp, bushy and scratching brambles, rather ambitious to have dominion over
other men's faith and consciences, than any way careful or helpful to their
own edification or others comfort, either private or public, as Christians and
neighbors, or as members of one national Church; in which relation they once
thought themselves to stand obliged, as members of one great and goodly body,
to support, sympathize, and pity one another: now the aim of many is to divide
themselves, and tear others asunder from all Catholic communion, to a
Catholic confusion and destruction. Thus is Religion evidently decayed, as to
the power of it, in those that were formerly strong and lively in the ways of
piety and charity.

CHAP. II.
AS for that new generation which is grown up of later years, Decays of
godliness as to the new brood and later offspring of meaner Christians.
and who have never known those Joseph's, whose prudent piety established and
preserved the Reformed Religion for many years, with great peace, plenty,
prosperity and proficiency in the Church of England; these have, for the most
part, been only spectators or abettors of those ungrateful exorbitances,
which some Christians have affected and mis-called for precious liberties,
though beyond all bounds of modesty, charity and piety, as well as beyond the
merits of the Church of England and its well-reformed Religion. These have
hitherto seen the face of this Church and our Religion, like that of a field,
in which a fierce and cruel battle has been fought, and still is, with
dubious success, by Christians of bold, pertinacious and implacable spirits;
they behold all things, as to the purity, peace, order and harmony of the
Reformed Religion (which was once wisely established and uniformly professed in
the Church of Engl.) full of clamor and confusion, of hatred and horror, of
bitter complaints, uncharitable jealousies, Satyrick invectives, sharp
disputations, endless contentions. Many are brought up in gross ignorance of
the very fundamentals of true Religion, counting it a part of their liberty and
Religion, not to be taught by any man, Parent or Minister, any principles of
Religion: others that have some glimmering knowledge, are but mere Scepticks,
and unsettled, ever dubious and vertiginous, thinking it a token of their true
conversion, to be daily turning from one side and opinion to another: a third
sort quarrel at all they have been taught and baptized into by the testimony of
the Church and its Ministry, as a method below the sublimity of their spirits,
who fancy nothing but immediate teachings of God, illuminations and
inspirations, beyond the usual dispensations of the heavenly treasure, 2 Cor.
4.7.
which has been hitherto in earthen vessels. A fourth sort of people, driven
by the furies of their own lusts and passions, animated also by the
extravagancies of others (who seem pretenders to Religion) have sought to cast
off the thought, care and conscience of any Religion, fancying such a Religion
and Liberty, as may best consist with their temporal safety and worldly
interests; however they profess, they practice perfect Atheism, to live without
any God preceptive, but only providential, in the world. Nor are there wanting
some men of great parts and conspicuous learning, as well as estates, who set
their wits on work to maintain this principle, That there is no Numen, no
divine being distinct from that we call Nature, no Creator, no creature, no
Scripture as Gods Word, no Savior, no Sin as against God, no reward or
judgment to come. Yea, that universal Tradition, that inbred Principle, that
Catholic persuasion, which has possessed all Nations and successions of
mankind, (as Tully observed) touching the immortality of rational spirits or
humane souls, as to their eternal recompenses; this point is not only doubted
and disputed, but by some denied: notwithstanding that few men in all ages, by
their greatest wit and wickedness, were ever able to redeem themselves from the
terror of this truth, and the captivity of their own consciences, which are
hardly freed from these convictions, that there is a God above us, and an
immortal soul within us: nor have ever any men endeavored to put out this
light within them, M^lint extingui quam ad supplicia reparari.
but only those, whom the conscience of their wickedness made desirous rather
to perish utterly, than to be perpetuated to an after-being in misery. From
these main unhingings of Religion in men's consciences, which have set them
above any fear of God or reverence of man, who can wonder at those disorderly
motions, which have so long filled and deformed this Church with so many
schisms, Heresies and Tragedies? The utter irreligion of some, the superstition
of others; the peevishness of some, the pertinacy of others; here Atheism,
there hypocrisy; here any Religion that civil polity lists to set up, there
no Religion settled, to give any check or restraint by law; here novelties and
varieties of Religion affected, there uniformity and Catholic antiquity
despised; these encounterings and contradictions among men, as to matters of
Religion in England, what strages and vastations have they made in the minds of
common people, and the younger sort especially? The face of Christian and
Reformed Religion looks blasted with fire, black with powder and smoke,
besmeared with dirt and blood; the prospect of it is full of death and despair;
the distractions of it threaten both it and us with destruction at last;
because nothing whets men's swords sharper against each other than Religion.
With how much glorying, even in point of conscience, have Christians and
Protestants wounded, oppressed, killed one another in England, in great part
upon the quarrel of Religion, yea, and of Reformation? The scandal, eclipse,
and ruin of which, as to its truth, credit and consistency, is far more
considerable, than the loss of thousands of our carkases, or vile bodies, which
were worthily and almost meritoriously sacrificed, if by such means the true
honor and interests of Religion, as Christian and Reformed, could be preserved
or advanced.

But (alas) this is so far from any advantages of life, health and vigor, by
all those bitter pills and potions it has taken, by all those sharp
phlebotomies and lancings it has endured, that it seems exhausted, dispirited,
languishing, drooping, decaying and dying; sinking under its own weight, or
rather under the pressures of impotent passions on all sides: not only to
indifferency, negligence, and unsetledness as to any Religion at all, which is
very rife; but to sottish ignorance, gross superstition, high Atheism, and
insolent blasphemies against our God, our Savior, our Scriptures, our
Sacraments, all ordinances, and all that is sacred. The epidemical rudeness and
irreverence, the vulgar profaneness and immorality, their brutish stupor and
barbarity, their licentious impudencies and insolences, their public scorns,
affronts and oppositions of the lawful Ministers of England in their holy
Ministrations (part of which I have seen, others I have heard of,) these and
the like fedities, like a plague and leprosy, have mightily infected and daily
spread over the souls of men and women, young and old, in countries and cities,
both in England and in Wales, as necessary consequents and concomitants of that
liberty in Religion which many men have challenged to themselves.

Nor is this depravedness only befaln the beasts of the people, the meaner
sort, whose souls are as precious as the best, though their condition be poor,
their breeding bad, and their manners generally vile, having naturally a
brutish carelessness and dullness to any Religion; but their greatest awknesse
and aversness is against that Religion which is most soberly settled, and
exactly professed; this giving most check to their boisterous lusts and
extravagant fancies: whose Religion is generally more upon custom and
constraint, than upon judgment, choice or conscience; ever waiting, as water
pent up does, for any opportunity to get such a liberty as will at last quite
spill and spend it self; being never better pleased than when they find
themselves least tied to please either God, or any men but themselves. This
sort of vulgar people may in part excuse the abuses they make of any liberties
or indulgences they can at any time extort by their terrors, multitudes and
importunities, from wiser men.

CHAP. III.
The evil consequences infesting Christians of better quality.
BUt the mischiefs of unsettled Religion and Irreligion, like a Gangrene, is
further spread to the more noble parts of this body politic, to persons of
generous quality, of hopeful ingenuity, both by extraction and education, who
have fair fortunes, like fuel, to maintain the flames of their factions; and
good abilities, like oil, to nourish the wild-fires of their fancies, which way
soever they affect to rove. This sort of young gallants, who are grown up
amidst our late civil broils and religious distractions, as handsome young
trees often do among brambles and bushes; these (I say) who might be the strong
supports and goodly shelters of Religion in after-ages; these are miserably
shaken, depraved, distorted: not so much by the impetuousness of their own
juvenile fervours and passions (which, Omnis inordinatus animus sibi poena.
if inordinate, will, as S. Austin observes, be their own sting, reproach and
punishment) as by those various circulations and contrariant traversings of
Religion, which have tossed their minds to and fro, to a kind of delirium or
vertigo, a mere whimsicall uncertainty, as to Religion.

Which distemper and giddiness in their heads and hearts they have contracted,
chiefly, by beholding that unsettledness, looseness, giddiness, variety,
irreverence, contempt and confusion, which has been cast upon the face of the
Reformed Religion and this Church of England: for since they came to any years
of discretion, and a capacity, as men, to judge of humane affairs, they have
seen nothing managed with less discretion, gravity and judiciousness, than the
public interests of the Reformed Religion and this Church. Many of them have
been taught by words, and more by examples (full of all petulant rallieries
against our Church and Religion, as formerly established) to despise and abhor
all that their forefathers reformed, or settled, or professed and delivered as
their Religion. How do some suck from their very milk and nurses all manner of
bitter scorns and reproaches against the Church of England, its Baptism, divine
Ministrations and Ministry? Some that are now grown up men and women, yet are
still in the very infancy and cradle of Religion, either sleeping securely in
sensual impenitency, or delighting to be variously rocked from one side to
another, with a lullaby of novelty, which will bring them to a drowsy
indifferency by a religious inconstancy.

Thus the very salt of true Religion, as to its smartness and savor, its
piercing and preserving virtue (which only is able to keep persons of pregnant
parts and opulent estates from vicious putrefactions) this is presented to them
as useless, unsavory, infatuate, while they have from their youth upward seen
it, especially in its chiefest dispensers and most constant professors
(according to the establishment of the Church of England, daily cast out upon
the very dunghill of plebeian petulancy and contempt, exposed to poverty, yea
beggary in many places, yea and profanely trampled under foot by the very
beasts of the people. Hence it is that the Christian and Reformed Religion
appears to many great spirits and young Gentlemen, not as a matter of eternal
truth, of infinite weight, and highest concernment to them; not as having the
Catholic testimony of the wisest and best of mankind in all ages, the
expectation of the Patriarchs, the prediction of the Prophets, the preaching of
the Apostles, the signatures of Martyrs and characters of Confessors, by their
bloodshed and sufferings, which they chose rather to endure, than the least
abnegation, Apostasy or swerving from so great, so holy, so constant, so
necessary, so divine principles, as the Christian Religion is grounded upon.
Many good wits of later years in England look upon Religion with a supercilious
eye, with a squeamish coyness, with a nauseating and huffing aspect: so far
are they from fear and trembling, as if they did God a good turn to own him in
any fashion, or Religion were beholden to them, if they were but civil to it;
not considering the majesty of Miracles, the admiration of Angels, the
accomplishments of Prophecies, the manifestation of the Messiah, the express
image of Gods grace and glory, mercy and truth upon it, in the holiness of the
precepts, in the honor of the examples, in the preciousness of the promises,
in the astonishing love, compassion, wisdom and goodness of God contained in
it, laying out gracious and glorious methods of reconciling and saving sinful
mankind, by such a way of propitiation, satisfaction and merit, as no whit
blemisheth or diminishes his justice, but every way advances and magnifieth
his mercy.

All this divine beauty, majesty, glory and ecstasy of true Religion, so highly
valued heretofore in England, by Princes and Peers, by Noblemen and Gentlemen
of all degrees, is now looked upon by many as a mimicall play, a popular
pageantry; a business so scepticall and litigious, so mutable and various, so
childish and impertinent, so trivial and plebeian, that many think it a point
of gallantry and greatness of mind, totally to undervalue all Religion, as a
mere fabulous flourish, set forth with some pomp and solemnity heretofore, now
with specious liberties and indulgences, in order either to amuse and overawe,
or to please and gratify common people, whose brutall strength and refractory
rudeness is found to be such by all wise Governors in all ages, that nothing
can overawe or bridle the populacy so much, as the opinion of some Religion,
derived from a Deity; whose power being represented as omnipotent, can only
give either terror and check to vulgar presumptions, or fixation to their
everlasting revolutions. Which volatile temper of common people some cunning
men of later years having observed, how in nothing of received Religion they
were settled, they have flown anew to the old craft of those heathenish
Legislators, to pretend Nymphs and caves, to dreams and visions, to extatick
grotts and groves, to converse as Sibyls with Demons or Spirits, and to keep
immediate intelligence with God himself, by special inspirations, beyond any
thing of traditionall Religion, anciently received and constantly delivered by
this or any other Church of Christ.

Nor does this sorry artifice fail to take some simple birds that are more
silly and incautious, who hardly ever get out of these snares and lime-twigs of
pretended new Religion, till they lose their feathers, much of their time and
estates, besides the hazard of their souls and consciences.

But others, of more bold and robust tempers, are from these temptations and
scandals of snarled and entangled, or loose and unsettled, or arbitrary and
nulled Religion, betrayed to downright Atheism; from thence they are carried
down the stream of all sensual debaucheries, without any stop or check of
conscience, as to God or any Religion, by which they stand obliged and
responsible to a Divine power above them.

All which comes to pass, by reason that they fell into such unhappy times, as
to their Religion, education and imitation, as offered them for many years very
little but novelties; and in them nothing worthy of the name of true and solid
Religion, as to any public certainty, harmony, unity, or authority. Nothing
must be owned as the uniform piety of this Nation, or the consent of the
Church, either as from wise men or good Christians; nothing fixed, as becomes
the majesty of a glorious God, and a gracious Savior, an immutable goodness,
and unerrable truth, held forth by the most idoneous and credible witnesses in
the Catholic Church, through all ages and successions: but, as if all
Christians had been either ignorant or impostors in this and all Churches, as
if no Christian Princes, no Presbyters, no Bishops, had had either wit to
discern, or grace to retain true Religion; so have many people on all sides run
up and down, to pick and choose, to begin and invent, to contrive and cut out
what they listed to call their Religion: yea, many rigid Reformers, and most
severe pretenders to Religion (upon new accounts, as schismatizing in, or
separating from the Church of England) even these are daily found either split
upon the rocks of uncharitableness, or beating upon the quicksands of change
and uncertainty; not only their several factions, but the same persons having
as many faces successively of Religion, as Proteus had shapes. The stakes and
cords of that Christian and Reformed Religion, which was fixed in the Church of
England, these are pulled up, quite ravelled and broken into pieces by many.
Nor are these new modellers such as made modest trials and essays of truth;
but they are generally fixed to their unsettled fancies, constant in their
inconstancy, pertinacious in their extravagancies, and hardly ever to be
persuaded by any experience of their own folly, to recant or repent of their
apparent and imprudent transports; much less to return from their exotic
novelties and fanatic inventions they have lately chosen, to that solemn and
sacred, uniform and majestic, primitive and Catholic posture of Religion, in
which it was for many years illustrious in the Chapter of Engl. and in all other
famous Churches.

CHAP. IV.
THe very light of nature and common reason commands mankind to be serious and
settled, Profaneness the fruit of unsetlednesse in Religion.
grave and reverent in the public service and veneration of their God: to
which end they added (as Varro, Tully, and Isidore Hispalensis tell us) not
only many Ceremonies to adorn their Devotion, but a public consent and
sanction, to authorize, and confirm, and fence their Religion, against all
those ((...)) that affected to be rude, or dared to be profane. For right
reason tells us, that Novices, strangers, or beginners in Religion, must be
miserably betrayed to all manner of irreligion, where they see all things of
Religion presented to them, like a kind of Matachin dance, or counter-skuffle,
full of fraction and novelty, of change and contradiction, of intricacy and
incongruity, of emulation and faction, of strife and envy, of hatred and
enmity, of contempt and confusion; debased to meanness, and prostituted to
vulgarity; which can by no persons of any right understanding be thought to be
the temper of any thing that is worthy to bear the name and inscription of the
true God, or the Christian and Reformed Religion. This is not the pulse of
piety, nor can be the influence of Gods holy, wise, and peaceable spirit. No
Christian can be so uncatechised, as not to know, that these wounds and scarres
which are upon the face of Religion, and made by Christians of the same
country and communion, are not the marks of Christ's sheep, nor the characters
of his Disciples; who have been in all ages most eminent for all graces and
virtues, for all things true, comely, orderly, just, generous, benign,
charitable: none exceeded or equalled them for mutual love, while they were
near or far off; insomuch that primitive Assemblies of Bishops, Presbyters and
people, were most lively resemblances of that Angelick Order, Quire, and
Harmony which is in Heaven, before the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Rev.
20.4.
This union and subordination kept up the reverence of Religion, and the
dignity of the Evangelicall Ministry among Christians, even then when
persecution most raged against them: when the persons of holy Bishops and
Presbyters were imprisoned, banished, mangled, and massacred by Heathenish and
Jewish persecutors; yet then was the authority of Ministers looked upon as
sacred and divine, not from the earth, but heaven; not from Kings and Princes,
not from Parlaments and civil Senates, not from Protectors and Major-Generals,
or new Triers, much less from any principle or power which is now challenged
by popular arrogance and vulgar usurpation, but from Christ Jesus, and so from
the blessed God, who sent his Son, and He his Apostles and other Ministers, as
his Father sent him, John 20.21. Ephesians. 4.11.
for the same end and work, in those measures and proportions of his Spirit
which were necessary for the calling, converting, continuing and perfecting the
Church, as the Body of Christ.

While these continued in an holy and uninterrupted succession of undoubted
Authority, as Apostles, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers, of one mind and mission,
of one ordination and succession, they easily preserved the doctrine of
Christian Religion uncorrupted, the Mysteries unprophaned, the Ministry
unviolated, the reverence of Religion unabased: but these once divided against
each other in opinions and factions, their ranks and order broken, their
succession interrupted, their commission counterfeited or varied, their office
invaded, their authority doubted, denied and destroyed; who knows not what
spring-tides, what whole seas of faction and fury, of negligence and
irreverence, of Atheism and irreligion, must necessarily flow in upon the face
of any Church; when the truest and compleatest Ministers shall be questioned or
scorned, the dubious, defective, or false ones magnified, by secular policy, or
popular levity; when Laymen shall either think there are no Ministers invested
with any due authority, or themselves as good as the best, set up after some
novell and arbitrary modes of their own invention, which must not only vye
with the true, ancient and Catholic ordination of 1500 years standing, but
justle it quite out of the Church; like the bastard Abimelech, Judges 9.
who slew all the legitimate issue of Gideon his Father?

Who can hear with trembling, or pray with devotion, or receive with
reverence, or be reproved with patience, or be comforted with peace, or be
terrified with judgment, or mortified to any lust, or moderated to any
passion, or confined to new obedience, or won to true repentance, or moved in
conscience, or raised in hope, when he applies to any or all these duties, out
of faction, novelty, curiosity, levity, custom, affectation, or hypocrisy;
when he thinks the Minister that officiates has no more power than himself, or
his groom and footman; when he looks upon his Minister as a poor man, confined
to his teddar, staked to his petty living, dependant upon men's charity, exposed
to plebeian contempt, at best but an almesman of the State, a public
pensioner, or an Evangelicall Trooper, whose commission is ( ad placitum
hominum) after the will of man, having no divine power or authority to his
office and work, no legal right or title, as to certainty or perpetuity in any
thing he enjoyes as his wages, further, than the arbitrary favors or frowns of
men are dispensed to him; a very trembling and precarious orator, whose pulpit
is (like the Ara Lugdunensis) soon made his scene, his coffin and his
sepulcher; especially if either fervently praying, or faithfully preaching, or
justly, yet wisely, Isa. 29.21.
reproving, he displease any captious and peevish Auditor, who has confidence
enough to make him an offender for a word, and influence enough to sequester,
to silence, yea to starve him and his family, if he use an honest and innocent
parrhesy, or freedom of speaking, such as becomes the Messenger of heaven, the
Minister of Christ, and the Ambassador of God? When the mouths of Gods oxen
are thus easily muzled, when his Prophets are so cheaply despised, when his
nearest servants are thus despitefully used; no wonder if irreverence, Atheism
and profaneness in all sorts of people attend all religious exercises, as
necessarily as shadows do those gross bodies which intervene between the
sight and light: which is the first sad and bad consequence following and
flowing from the inconstancy and unsetlednesse of Religion.

CHAP. V.
BEsides the decays of Piety and Charity in men's hearts, Ministers molested by
endless and vexatious disputes.
both as to the principles, power and practice becoming Christians, which (like
a Lethargick numbnesse and stupor) is come upon the old stock of Christians in
England; together with that unsetlednesse, irreverence, contempt, Atheism and
profaneness, which grows upon the younger sort of people, who have been bred
amidst these our divisions, distractions and extravagancies of Religion, to
very much of irreligion; the lusts and vanities of their minds being not any
way so curbed and repressed by the incumbent majesty and authority of any such
settled and uniform Religion, as is necessary either to persuade men to be good,
or to overawe and restrain them from being so bad as they would be:

Besides these mischiefs, which I have already set forth to you my Honored
Countrymen; there is a second sad and bad consequence, which, like a Gangrene
or spreading Canker, daily frets the spirits, and as it were eats up the very
substance and vitals of Religion in this Nation, by reason of those endless
and vexatious disputes, which agitate the spirits and exasperate the minds of
all sorts of Christians: and of none so much as Ministers, who are looked upon
as those that expose and offer themselves to be the chief heads or Champions of
Religion, in their several parties; who are to undertake the combats and
challenges of all opposers: which truly were no very hard province, if either
Ministers were unanimous, and mutually assisted by concurrent judgment among
themselves; or if they were protected by the shield of this Churches declared
Doctrine, and uniform profession of Religion. Which heretofore was justly
esteemed as sacred, inviolable, and invulnerable: having its strength and
materials from the Scripture; its model, manner, and composure from the
counsel, wisdom, experience and authority, not only of this Church of
England, but of the Primitive, Ancient, Catholic Church in all ages and
places; against all which few men had heretofore the confidence, or indeed
impudence, in any grand part, much less in the whole, to oppose their private
fancies and suggestions.

Now, no petty people are so clownish or inconsiderable, but they dare to
cavil, question or deny, almost every point owned as Religion in the Church of
England.

I shall not need to instance in the grand Mysteries of the Trinity, Christ's
Divinity, his satisfaction to divine justice; in the resurrection of the body,
or the souls immortality; nor yet in the point of Original Sin, or natural
depravedness and defects; of the necessity of Divine Grace; of Christians
imperfection in the best state of this life; of the right use of the Moral
Law, and the true bounds of Evangelicall Liberties. All which (with many other
grand concernments of Religion) are daily not only ventilated and discussed,
but contradicted and denied by many Modern Arrians, Socinians, Pelagians,
Antinomians, Novatians, and others, (besides the constant Controversies of
Papists) so far, that nothing almost is left sound or settled among us; nothing
that any Minister can preach or practice as Religion, but somewhere or other it
finds much snarling, quarrelling, and gainsaying. Every crosse-grain'd piece
of pride; or peevishness, or ignorance, adventures to bark at what they list,
yea to bite, tear and worry the reputation and integrity, together with the
learning and ability of any, yea all the true Ministers of England: who are
become miserable, not only by that great and unintermitted pains which they
must take, if they will be faithful to their own and other men's souls; nor yet
by that biting poverty or tenuity of their worldly condition, for the most part
of them, which is so hardly to be relieved by those dribliting pittances which,
with tedious attendings and shameful importunings, they can get in.

But beyond both these, Ministers are in such a state of perpetual inquietude,
as is like that of very poor people, who are only rich in vermin, and so
troubled with them, that they are not permitted night or day to take their
rest, or to enjoy that sweet sleep and quiet repose indulged to all creatures,
by which they might sometime deceive their sore labor, and forget both their
miseries and their sorrows. For when all is done that belongs to a sober
Ministers ministerial duty and charge; after indefatigable pains, continual
studies, invincible patience, which, like Ostridges, must digest the iron
morsels and manners of this age; when despairing and made incapable of any
honorary rewards in Church or State, answerable to his gravity and merit every
way, he only covets for some ingenuous rest and tranquillity under the shadow
and protection of that Church and State, which he has a long time faithfully
served; yet then, even in his age, and at all times, he must be summoned with
daily alarmes, and provoked to successive duels, by all sorts of factious and
fanatic Spirits, new or old, who list to be contentious T. though he be
wearied, and almost tired with the long and constant fatigations of his
Ministry; though he be almost naked and unarmed, as to the polemick or
controversall part of Divinity; yet must he be compassed with Briars and
Thorns; frequently molested with the perverse disputes and endless janglings
of those, who have no reverence to this Church, nor the Catholic Churches
constant opinion or practice, grounded upon Scripture, and manifested by
undeniable Tradition.

The Ministers of England are the common Butt, at which every fools bolt is
presently shot. If any be less apt for disputation, through unwontednesse,
weakness, depressions, poverty, and infinite dis-spiritings, and so (possibly)
less able on the sudden to defend that truth, and that Church, for which he
has dared to be a suffering Martyr and Confessor, against the bitter arrows
and subtle Sophistries of his many-mouthed Adversaries, modern Sectaries, (who
make what use they can of the Philistines files and grindstones, the wonted
cavils, sophistries, and fallacies of the Papists and Jesuits, against this
Church;) the seeming disadvantages of any one Minister, when he is publicly
surprised, and in the very Church assaulted by such impudent Antagonists, these
are presently voted among the vulgar, as the total rout, baffle and
disparagement of the whole Ministerial order, yea and of the Church of
England: As if none of its Fathers or Sons, its Bishops or Presbyters, so cried
up heretofore for their excellent learning and dex^^rous fortitude, were able
to encounter these doughty Champions, these men of Gath; whose glory (now) is
rather to defy and overawe the Israel of God by force, than to fight
lawfully, by the rules of right disputation, from Scripture or Reason. If the
enemies of the Church of England would lay aside their Swords and Pistols,
their Troopers and Musketeers, their Guns and Canons, which have been so often
their Seconds, and so always a terror to the true Clergy of England; if they
would keep to the lists and weapons of Scripture and reason, of Catholic
example, and constant tradition, (which arms are proper for Religious
contests;) I believe they would be easily so matched in every point, that they
would have no cause long to boast of having the better of any Learned and Grave
Minister, who undertakes to assert the cause of the Church of England, both in
its Doctrine and Discipline.

Which is indeed assisted not only by the Spirit and suffrage of all estates
in this Church, as Christian and reformed, as ancient and modern; but also by
the wisdom and consent, the judgment and practice of all the famous and
flourishing Primitive Churches throughout the world: so that the justification
and honor of the Church of England depends not upon any one Ministers
weakness or ability, but upon that solidity, juncture, and conformity it has,
in all the main parts of it, with the Catholic Church of Christ in all Ages.
He that fights against one, fights against all; he must confute them all,
before he can justly condemn the Church of England, which has for so many
years labored between the Furnace and the Anvill, under the restless files
and hammers of its various Adversaries, who have resolved sooner to die, than
to suffer the Church of England, or its orderly Ministers, to live in peace.

CHAP. VI.
The endless bickerings with Anabaptists, etc. now in England.
AMong other Sects that, like swarms, are of late risen up against the Church of
England and its ancient Ministry, none are more numerous, petulant, and
importune, none more busy, bold, and bitter, than the haughty-spirited and
hotter-headed Anabaptists. (For all of them have not (at least show not) the
like horns and hoofs: some are persons of more calm, grave, and charitable
tempers.) These novel Disputers against, and despisers of all Infant Baptism
(whom no ancient Church ever knew; no late^ Reformed Church but ever spewed out
and abhorred) these now desire to appear as Goliath in their complete Armor,
boldly braving the whole Church of England: and this not only as great
Scripturists, but great Artists too; yea they would seem great Statists,
Pragmaticks, and Politicians. They pretend to be curious inspectors (beyond all
men) into all religious mysteries; yea rigid and exact Anatomizers of all both
Modern and Ancient Churches; subtle Insinuators into all Interests, and grand
Modellers of all Polities both Civil and Ecclesiastical; aiming (no doubt) in
time to erect some Saintly soverainty for their party in England, though their
former ambitious attempts have every where miscarried, as in several parts of
Germany, so of late in Ireland.

These Anti-paedo-baptists, who are such hard-hearted Fathers, such unkind and
unchristian Parents to their Children, as to deny them those distinctions and
indulgences of divine grace and favor, which God of old granted to the Jewish
infants, and which the Catholic Christian Churches in all ages have thankfully
accepted and faithfully applied to the Children of professed believers, as a
privilege and donation renewed to them by Christ, and confirmed by the
Apostles; Job 39.14.
these Birds, (glorying like Ostriches in their negligence toward their young
ones) are risen up to be not only nimble Disputants against children, but
valiant combatants against men. For they find (after the way of the world,)
more is got in one year by the terror of arms, than in ten years by the show
of arguments. And although the pretended principle at first of that party was,
to go with soft feet, as Lions and Cats do, (hiding and preserving their Claws
till there is use of them) crying up Peace, and crying down all War and
sword-work upon Christ's or the Gospels score; yet the latter sort of their
Disciples, (being in hopes to become more regnant and triumphant,) have
interpreted the meaning of their Grandsires to be, only in prudence and
caution, not in piety and conscience: that fighting was only forbidden them,
when they had cause to despair of getting the better, or just fear to be
worsted; but if Providence gives them honest hopes, and advantages by the arm
of flesh, and the sword of Steel, to set up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ and his
spirit, they are ready, with S. Peter, not only to fight for Christ, but to
cut off Malchus his ear, yea and his head too; if they find any Christian,
Prince or Prelate, Magistrate or Minister, stand in their way, or if he seems
to fight against that Anti-infantall Christ, which they say is so predominant
in them, that he ought by their assistance to reform and rule all the Christian
world; first beginning to destroy the Baptismall rights of Christians Infants,
and then to go on to invade the rights of their parents, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical. The ancient Church, as in England, so every where, adored a
Savior, who invited infants to him and blessed them: These men set up a
Christ, who will not endure the Infants of his Church and people to come near
him, or have any relation to him, as Lambs of the flock to that great Shepherd.

Thus, the Papists on the one side agitate an endless controversy with this
Church of England and all Reformed Churches, touching the Lords Supper, First,
in not restoring the Cup to Laymen, agreeable to Christ's institution and
intention, which was best declared by the practice of the Apostles, and the
Catholic Church after them for a thousand years; next, in their stating
precisely and explicitly, as matter of faith, under a grievous curse and
Anathema, the manner of Christ's presence in that Sacrament; which as we
confess to be very mysterious, adorable and ineffable, yet most real, true
and effectual to a worthy Receiver, according to the proper capacity of Faith
receiving its object; so we conclude, that it is not in that gross and
contradictive manner, which they have lately invented, and imposed upon the
Churches credulity by way of Transubstantiatings, In the Councils of Trent and
Laterane. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. 1 Cor. 11.26, 27.
and which is a strange nulling of the substance and nature of the signs,
Bread and Wine, (owned as such by the Apostle after consecration) and inducing
the entire substance of Christ's Body and Blood, under every crum and drop of
those accidents or shadows, which seem still to be Bread and Wine to the four
Senses. And this must be first done, even then when Christ was yet at table
with the Disciples, and had not yet suffered: so that they corporally eat of
Christ's Body made of the Bread, when he gave them the Bread; and was at once in
their eyes, and between their teeth. Which strange and unheard of manner of
super-omnipotent transmuting or transposing, or annihilating of Substances, the
Papists owe more to the wit and subtilties of some Schoolmen of later ages (who
scorned to seem ignorant of any thing, or to be posed in any Christian mystery)
than either to the verdict of their senses, to the principles of true
Philosophy, to the grounds of sound Reason, to the Analogy or tenor of
Scriptures in parallel Mysteries or Sacraments, or last of all, to the
Testimony of the Primitive Fathers and ancient Churches (as has been amply and
unanswerably proved by many Reformed Divines at home and abroad.)

Who, though they spoke very high things of this blessed Sacrament (as to its
holy use, end, and relation to the Lord Jesus) yet they thought it enough for
Christians to believe, adore, and admire the invisible, mystical and
spiritual, yet real, presence of Christ in it; (for truly and fully present
they ever believed him to be, though they confessed themselves ignorant how,
and so were both humbly and modestly silent of the manner of his presence.)

In which bounds if the later Church of Rome could have contained it self, I
believe much trouble and misery, much bloodshed and persecution had been saved
in these Western Churches, which are now divided and destroyed upon no point
more than this of the Lords Supper; which was the greatest Symbol of Christians
communion with Christ and one another, till the Papal arts and policies did so
maim and mishape that blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as to make it a
ground of everlasting contention.

On the other side, the peevish and petulant Anabaptists, who for many years
past (almost since the first dayspring of the Reformation visited these
Western Churches) have by the pens and tongues, the writings and preachings of
many learned and godly men, been brayed in the mortar of Scripture-testimonies,
Ecclesiastic practice, Catholic custom and tradition, Prove. 27.22.
yet will not their folly depart from them. These, I say, have heretofore in
Transylvania, Westphalia, and many parts of Germany and the adjacent Countries,
(and of late in England, since it became Africa Septentrionalis, the Northern
Africa, full of Serpents and fruitful in Monsters) with greater boldness and
freedom than they ever enjoyed under any Christian Magistrate, or in any
Reformed Church, sharply contested against the other great Sacrament of
Baptism, so far as it was in the Church of England, and ever has been in all
ages and successions of Christianity, imparted to the Infants of Christian
Parents, who own their own Baptism, and continue in the Churches communion,
professing to believe that covenant of God made to them and their children, as
Gods people, or Christ's Disciples, for the remission of sins original and
actual through the blood of Christ.

Against which gracious sign of the Evangelicall covenant, (sealing the truth
of the Gospel, and conferring the grace of it; also distinguishing, as by a
visible mark of Church Fellowship, the Infants of Christians or believers, from
those of heathens and professed unbelievers, who are strangers to the flock of
Christ) the Anabaptists have (ever since their rise in Germany, which is about
130 years) been not so much fair and candid disputants, as bitter and
reproachful enemies, for the most part: not modestly doubting, or civilly
denying it, as to their own private judgments, with a latitude of charity to
such in all the Christian world, who from the Apostles days have, and do
retain Infant Baptism; but as if all the Church had erred till their days,
they imperiously deny it, they rudely despise it, they scurrilously disdain and
mock at the baptism of Infants, as wholly void and null: therefore they repeat
Baptism to their Disciples; whence they have their name.

CHAP. VII.
IN this one vexatious Controversy (heretofore happily settled in the Church of
England, The perverse disputings of Anabaptists against Infant Baptism.
both by doctrine and practice, conform to all Antiquity) I presume as much
has been said and wrote on either side, as the wit of man can well invent, or
the nature of the thing bear, and possibly more than can well agree with
Christian Charity on either side, if the difference were only as to a
circumstance of time, and not about the very essence or substance of our
Baptism: against which the spirit and design of the Anabaptists does so
fiercely drive, that by absolutely nulling all Infant Baptism in the Church of
Christ, they might overthrow, not only the honor, fidelity and credit of this
Church, but of all other, yea, and the whole frame (even to the foundation) of
all Christian ministrations, privileges, comforts and communion, both in
England and all Christian Churches through the world; as if all we had done,
said, or enjoyed, as Christian Ministers and people, had been irregular,
confused, inauthoritative, invalid; all things of Religion having been begun
and continued, exhibited and received, by such Ministers and people, as had no
visible right to any Christian duties or privileges in a Church Communion, as
having never been baptized after the way which Christ instituted; so that their
claim to be Christians or Churches, is as false and insufficient as theirs is
to an estate, of which they have no deed, seal, or seisin, but what are false
or counterfeit.

By which high and bold reproach of the Anabaptists against this and all other
Churches from the beginning, it must follow, that (contrary to Christ's promise)
the gates of Hell have so long prevailed against the Catholic Church, Mat.
16.18.
in so great a concern as this Sacrament must needs be: which being made void
and null, as to any initiation, obsignation and confirmation of all
Evangelicall gifts, graces and privileges, it will follow not only that all
the Ministry and ministrations of the Church have been illegitimate, invalid,
irregular, being acted, dispensed and received by such as had no right, title,
or authority to them, being persons unbaptized; but also all the faith and
repentance, all the confessions and absolutions, all the celebrations and
consecrations of the Lords Supper, all the perceptions of grace and spiritual
comfort, all sense of peace, joy, love of God, and Christian charity, all the
patience and hopes of all Christians, as Believers, Confessors, Martyrs, all
must be either very defective of Christ's order and method, or merely fancifull
and superstitious, or grossly presumptuous, preposterous, and wholly
impertinent, because wanting the first root of Christian Religion, the badge
and band of Christ's Disciples, right or lawful, true and valid Baptism. So
that, however God guided his Church in all other things aright, yet in this it
seems to have erred a Catholic error so far, that in stead of one Baptism
(which the Apostle urges, Ephesians. 4.5.
as concurrent with other unities of Christian accord, as one God, one Faith,
one Body, one Christ, one Head, etc. all which the true Church retained
constantly) there must have been no Baptism at all, for the greatest part of
1600 years; in which time, as (generally) before, so universally after the
Church had peace, all Christians brought their Infants to Baptism.

Which abominable consequence, or conclusion, following the Anabaptistick
opinion and practice, seems to me so uncharitable, so immodest, so absurd, so
cruel, so every-way unworthy of any good Christian, who understands the
fidelity, exactness and constancy of primitive and persecuted Churches, Jude 3.
in following the way once delivered to them by Christ and his Apostles (from
which they were so far from an easy receding, that they rather chose to die;)
that this jealousy and scandal rather becomes Turks, Jews, Heathens,
Heretics, and Infidels, or downright Atheists, than any good Christians, so
far to charge openly, or but secretly indeed to suspect the fidelity, honesty
and integrity of the Catholic Church: nor do I see how any judicious, sober,
and humble Christian can with charity, comfort, and good conscience, entertain
and promote so horrid a jealousy and censure of all the Christian world; as if
having kept the two Testaments entire (which I suppose the Anabaptists do not
deny or doubt) yet they had lost one of the two Sacraments, and that which is
the first foundation, main hinge and center of all the Churches polity,
privileges, community and unity in this world, both to Christ, and to each
other.

It is not my purpose in this place or work (which is rather to deplore the
lapsed state of this Church, than to dispute this or any other point, long ago
settled in this and all true Churches) my aim is not to tire you (my honored
Contrymen) with drawing over the rough sand of this controversy at large;
which has of late by sharp reciprocations made such deep wounds or incisions
on this Churches face and peace (agreeable to the practice and spirit of the
Anabaptists, wherever they come and prevail.) Only give me leave (since this
Anabaptistick poison is still pregnant in this Nation) in order to move your
compassions to the Church of England, and your love to the truth of God as it
is in Jesus, to show you how unjustly She has, and still does suffer, yea, and
is daily more threatened by this sort of men, who upon weak and shallow
pretensions seek to overthrow so great, so ancient, so Catholic, so Primitive,
so Apostolic, so Scriptural, so Christian a practice and privilege, as that
is of baptizing the Infants of Christian Professors.

First, the Anabaptists cannot with any forehead or face of reason (and
therefore the soberest of them do not) deny, but that the Infants of Christians
have both in respect of sinful nature, and in regard of the offer of
Evangelick grace by Christ, as much need and as much capacity of Baptism as
the Jewish children had of Circumcision, so far as both those initial
Sacraments betoken the taking away of sin, the supply of righteousness, and
other benefits attainable by sinners, young or old, through the covenant made
in the blood of J. Christ, between God and his Church, both Jewish and
Christian.

Only they put in these three popular bars against Infants partaking of those
benefits which they need, The sum of the Anabapt. strength.
and are (otherwise) capable of by Christ; but not (as the Anabaptists say) in
the way of Baptism, at that age, in which they have no right or capacity to be
baptized; because,

First, They allege, there is no precise or nominall command in the New
Testament to baptize any Infants by name.

Secondly, Baptism is limited to such as are first taught and profess to
believe; which must ever exclude Infants.

Thirdly, There is no one express and nominall instance of any one example,
where Christ or his Apostles baptized any infant; which if they could find,
they confess they should then (with us) interpret all places in favor of
infants, Mat. 28.19. Acts 16.15. 1 Corin. 1.16. Acts 2.39.
as contained under the expression of all nations and whole households, and you
and your children, etc. since they confess the tenor of the Gospel, the
extent or proportions of Evangelicall mercies, the sufficiency of Christ's
merits, and the sinful state of infants by nature, yea their damnable estate,
unless they be washed and saved by the blood of Christ: all these make much
for infants enjoying the Sign and Seal, as well as the Thing signified, Grace
and Glory too; if they had but one example, or could be convinced that ever any
Apostle did baptize any one infant.

CHAP. VIII.
THis in brief is the whole strength (as I conceive) of the Anabaptists,
whereto they so pertinaciously hold, The weakness of Anabaptists grounds
against Infant Baptism.
merely as to the literal silence of the name Infant, in the point of
Baptism: and at the same rate they may deny many other points of Christian
doctrine and practice, (which yet I suppose they do not) which not having the
express and individual letter of the word for them ((...)) have (yet) ((...))
the general tenor, and inclusive command, namely, the reason of the
Scripture, and Analogy of Faith to justify them; besides the constant
practice and judgment of the Catholic Church, whose fidelity is not to be
questioned by any sober man, upon such slight and captious pretensions of the
Scriptures silence, in point of particular enumerations, when (yet) it is full,
as to general and comprehensive expressions: which are many and valid
foundations, on which to build Infant Baptism: no more to be justly overthrown
by the most subtle Anabaptists in the world, than the Saducees might deny and
overthrow the resurrection against Christ; or the Psychopannuchists, the souls
immortality; or the Antidominicarians, the Lords day; or the Antiscripturists,
the received Scriptures; or the Antitrinitarians, the Trinity; or the Arians,
the coessentiality of the Son with the Father, as God; because none of these
are (as the Arians urged) in those very words, names and syllables, so set
down, as possibly cavilling Sophisters would require, or else they will not
believe.

The silence or not express naming of Infants, is no more to be urged against
them in this case, than the silence of Christ as to the partakers of the Lords
Supper, who gave it only to the twelve Disciples, with command to them to do
it, etc. without speaking of any Women or Laymen; yet were not these hereby
excluded from the Communion, as to matter of fact, Acts 2.46.
before it was so recorded in the Acts as an History. The Church of Christ
always understood the latitudes of Baptism (expressions as well as graces) to
include Infants of Christians no less than the institution of the other
Sacrament did Laymen and Women; which were neither present at first
institution, nor are nominated in any particular command of Christ.

As for the condition limiting persons baptizable, which is actual believing,
this also the Church of Christ understood in a limited and temporary sense, as
reaching only to those who were the first fruits or plants of the Christian
Church; Genesis 17.10.
who were first (as Abraham) to be taught the nature of the covenant, duty and
seal, before they could reasonably receive the sign, or communicate it rightly
to their children: who come to their claim and privilege, as of Circumcision,
so of Baptism, not by virtue of their personal knowledge and faith, which
Abraham and men grown, but not their children, first had, and so the first
called and converted Christians (as parents) ought to have; but by that federal
relation which they have, even in their ignorance and infancy, to believing
parents, and by them to God, as his people, part of his flock and Church.

And this, not by a natural or civil right (which (yet) descends to and upon
children, when they know nothing) but by an Evangelicall right, as to that
covenant made by God in the blood of Christ, with his Church, both of old and
of late, with Jews and Christians, inclusive of children, yea, even Infants of
eight days old; as is evident in Circumcision, which signified the same grace
under another sign or ceremony, as the Apostle declares it at large, Romans 4.

Leaving therefore the cavilling and pervicacious insistings of the Anabaptists
about the letters, names and syllables, which they must have, or they will not
believe Infant Baptism, more than Thomas Christ's Resurrection till he felt his
wounds: although we grant what they allege as to the nominal silence of the
word Infants, wrested by their perverse disputations; yet nothing is abated as
to the right and use of Infant Baptism, which is grounded upon so many grand
reasonings and right deductions from Scripture-sense; which being explicit and
clear in many places, ought to overruled that silence of the name Infants, and
seeming (but misunderstood) limitation of taught and believing, which is all
the force (upon the point) that ever the Anabaptists could muster together
against the Churches Catholic judgment and practice, conform to the whole
tenor of Gods mind and will, his love and mercy; Christ's grace and merits
dispensed to his Church by some initiall Sacrament, including Infants as well
as the adulti of riper years.

That you may better see upon what little mole-hills the Anabaptists stand so
on tip-toes, as of late they have done in England, pretending to overtop the
mountain of the Lord, which has been established in all lands, I mean, the
judgment and practice of the Catholic Church; I will briefly set down (as in
a matter largely handled by many others, both late and long since) what are the
grand deductions and Scriptural reasonings, upon which the Church of God has
(as I conceive) always maintained the right, privilege and comfort of
Infant Baptism; and this without any scruple or dispute for 1500 years: not
but that the Anabaptists objections, from the silence of the Scripture as to
the name Infant, were then as obvious as now; nor were there wanting heretical
spirits (of the Jews and Gnostics) who would have cavilled in this as other
points, against the true and Orthodox profession, if they had not been so
palpably overborn and convinced by the pregnancy of the Churches practice and
judgment, agreeable to the Apostolical Tradition in this point, (who without
doubt had baptized many Infants some years before there was any part of the New
Testament written, which the Anabaptists so much urge) that it had been an
intolerable impudence to doubt or deny Infant Baptism, or to oppose the
after-letter of the N. Testament against the constant and precedent practice of
the Apostles and their Successors, whose actions were a clear and sufficient,
yea the best interpretation in the world, of the letter of the Scripture, in
case of any thing that seemed less explicit, or any way dubious.

Nor do I doubt, but the Church was ever in this so far commendable, as it was
conformable to the Apostles practice, and went upon the same grounds as they
did, not once erring so Catholic and great an error, as to apply a Sacrament
to such as Christ never intended, yea denied and forbad it (as is pretended;)
and only therefore pertinacious in all ages after, yea, so stupid, as not to
be sensible of so grand an error or misapplication (that it might not be
thought to have erred:) but rather the Church continued constant and without
scruple in the doctrine of the Apostles, and practice of Infant Baptism (as S.
Aug. Ser. 10. de verb. Apost. and Paedobapt. Nemo vobis susurret doctrinas
alienas: hoc ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit; hoc a majorum fide accepit;
hoc usque in finem perseveranter custodit. Tert. de An. c. 39. Tam ex seminis
praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina.
Austin urges against Pelagius) because they were assured from the beginning it
was the mind of Christ, which the Apostles best understood, and according to
which they did constantly practice the baptizing of Infants from the beginning,
where once the faith was planted in the parents; the branches or seed being
presently 1 Cor. 7.14.
holy in Gods claim or covenant, and by the childrens relation to them and to
God, so soon as the parents were believers, and had by receiving the faith, and
being baptized, been brought into the visible fold or flock of Christ.

The Scriptural, Religious and rational grounds, which this and all true
Churches went upon in baptizing Infants of believing parents, (not apostated or
excommunicated) were these; which I oppose to the petty and capricious cavils
of the Anabaptists, as a mighty wall or bulwark planted with great canon
against so many pot-guns or bulrushes.

CHAP. IX.
The Catholic strength for Infant-Bapt.
1. FIrst, The Church of God considered the nature of that Evangelical and
perpetual Covenant, which was explicitly made with Abraham and his seed, also
confirmed to him and his children by another parallel Ceremony or Sacrament,
namely, of Circumcision: which Sign or Seal being (as the Anabaptists
confess) long ago abrogated, rather by the consent and practice of the Church,
than any personal command of Christ that can be alleged, who himself was both
circumcised and baptized; yet it is certain that the Covenant still continues to
Abraham and his seed, as eminently contained in Christ, and by relation to him
derived, Genesis 17.13.
not only to the Jews after the flesh, but to those that are Jews inwardly,
the Israel of God, or spiritual seed of Abrah: as he had his name augmented,
and was to be the Father of many nations, not by natural succession, but by
fiduciary imitation of his faith, who is called and commended to Christians as
the father of the faithful, whose privileges Evangelical descend to all
those, Romans 4.11, 12, 13, 17, 18.
who after Abraham's example, do believe the Evangelical promises of
blessedness by Christ; these being of the household of faith, and Abraham's
children, have right to Abraham's covenant, Gal. 6.10.
and the privileges of his spiritual seed; which reached as to the natural
sons of Abraham, and their Infants, Jews, so to these imitative sons and their
infants, whom since no word of restraint or forbidding has excluded from the
relation, covenant, rights, privileges and comforts Evangelicall, once given
to Abraham, and to all the family of Faith, there was no cause for the
Church-Christian to exclude infants of believing parents from partaking that
Evangelicall new sign and visible seal, which is Baptism, set to the ancient
Covenant: with which, either Anabapt. must affirm no Infants now have any thing
to do, no right to it, or the benefits by it; or they must think infants have
this in so tacit, blind, and implicit a way, as they nor their parents have
any visible sign, seal, and token of it now in the Christian Church, unless
they will fall to circumcise their children again, who so obstinately deny
baptism for that end to infants, whatever they think of it as to those of riper
years.

2. However the Anabaptistick flourishes and ratlings (as to the crambe of
their negations, that neither precept nor practice is found in Scripture,
mentioning Infant Baptism) make a great show and noise with common people, of
small capacities and short-sighted; yet the Anabapt. have no cause to flatter
themselves, that they are wiser than all those Divines of Engl. and other
Churches, who can render valid, cogent and unanswerable, both Historick
instances and reasons, for the Catholic practice of this and all Churches in
this point; and these drawn from the twisted and concurrent sense of Scripture,
Origin. l. 5. ad Romans c. 6. Ecclesia traditionem ab Apostolis suscepit etiam
parvulis dare baptismum. Mat. 22.29. 2 Pet. 3.16.
set forth in the words of Christ, confirmed by his actions, best interpreted
by the constant practice of the universal Church, (as in the second Cent. Orig.
tells us the Church always used Infant-bapt.) which may not be thought to have
erred from the Apostles practice in this, any more than the Apostles did from
Christ's mind.

3. So that the Anabaptists err, partly by not understanding the Scriptures,
partly by wresting them. They wrest the letter of one or two places to an
exclusive sense, contrary to the meaning of many other, which are inclusive of
Infants, upon very great reasons, and to avoid many absurd consequences, as to
the state Evangelicall.

They urge against Infants Baptism the Scriptures not expressly naming them, in
precept or practice. We might as well urge for them, the like silence of
Scripture no where by name excluding, forbidding, or excepting Infants, where
in common sense they are included; as in all nations, whole families or
households, Matthew. 28.19. Acts 16.15. and 34. 1 Corin. 1.16. Coloss. 2.11. Aug.
de Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 4 c. 23. V^raciter conjicere possumus, quid valeat in
parvulis baptismi sacramentu^, ex circumcisione carnis quam prior populus
accepit. 1 Cor. 10.2.
where they are either actually baptized, or commanded to be baptized by the
Apostles without any reserve, limitation, or exclusion, as to Infants.

4. The usual parallel also of Circumcision and Baptism (which S. Paul urges,
and S. Austin often observes) is of great force to those who consider, that this
latter Sacrament, or sign of Gods covenant to his Church-Christian, succeeding
to the former, as to its end, use and virtues, may not in reason be thought
less extensive to Infants in the Church of God, than the former was; nor may
the Antitype be straightened short of the Type. In this all the Jews Church (even
Infants, as well as others) were baptized to Moses in the red Sea and the
cloud: so must all to Christ in the Baptism of his Blood now in the Church,
which was by that sea represented.

5. Nor is it inconsiderable in this point, the custom of washing or baptizing
among the Jews, as a religious ceremony used in admitting proselytes of the
Gate, which were not circumcised; these were ((...)) baptized with their whole
household, servants and children, as the Talmudists report. This usual ceremony
and custom of Baptism chosen by Christ for an Evangelical Sacrament, or sign
of admittance to his Church, may justly be thought, in Christ's use and
intention, to extend to the like latitude in its use or applying to Infants
among Christians, as it did among the Jews; especially where neither Christ
nor the Apostles make any restraint or exception in the case of Infants:

6. Who under the Gospel (as S. Aug. l. 1. de pec. mer. and remis. c. 26.
Austin proves against the Pelagians) are in as much want (by nature) of
Evangelical mercy, as they were under the Law and Jewish polity. Nor is it to
be imagined, without great absurdity, that Christ lessened Gods mercy or favor
to them under the Gospel, short of what was under the Law; seeing they are
every way as capable of this new Sign and Seal, Ecclesia traditione^ ab
Apostolis suscepit etiam parvulis dare baptismum; sci^bant enim illi, quia
essent in omnibus genuinae sordes peccati, quae per aquam and spiritum ab^ui
deberent. Orig. l. 5. ad Romans c. 6.
as they were of the former, and want this as much; which Origin urges as the
ground of Infant Baptism.

7. Neither the Analogy of the Scripture, nor the proportion of Gods
dispensations of grace to his Church-Christian, will allow us to think, that
God under the Gospel denies to believing parents or their children such
latitudes of mercy and holy privileges, in the visible means of grace and
salvation, which were in another form afforded to the Jews; that God has no
regard, or makes no claim to children, as his, or any parts of his Church, till
they come to years of discretion; that he would have the children of Christians
while Infants, now, in no better state and capacity of his mercy by Christ,
than the children of mere Heathens and Infidels; that either no Infants are now
to be saved, or not by the Blood of Christ, or by no visible sign and means, or
by the Spirit alone without Water; which Christ joins together, John 3.5.
affirming that none can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, either the Kingdom
of Grace, or Glory, the visible or invisible Church, (in the ordinary methods
of Gods dispensation of grace now under the Gospel) unless they be born again
of Water and the Spirit.

8. If children are capable to be sanctified by the Spirit, they are no less
capable to be washed by baptismall water, which is consecrated by the Word and
Spirit or power of Christ in his Church, to so holy an use and spiritual
washing away of sin, as is attained by his blood, represented by baptismall
water: for the sign is of less value than the thing signified, as the wax and
parchment are far less than the land or estate consigned and conveyed by them.
Since then Christ has joined these together in so full, express, and large a
manner, extending to all, it must needs appear, not only a petulancy, but
arrogance, in any Christians to separate them; and in order to gratify a
novell fancy or exotic opinion, to run counter to all these proportions of
Evangelicall Truth and Mercy, which evidently cross all those mentioned
absurdities, as inconsistent with Evangelicall promises, favors and
dispensations of grace, which are much ampliated and enlarged, but no way
straightened or abated.

9. This general tenor and scope of the Scriptures, so highly favoring
Christian Infants, as a great part of those Psalm. 22.27. and 82.8. Isa
2.2.52.15.
many nations and families which are prophesied and promised shall come in to
Christ, is in my judgment sufficient to satisfy all those that list not to be
contentious; especially where the Mat. 19.13. Mark 10.14. Luke 18.16. (...).
Eust. Omnes venit per semetipsum salvare; omnes, inquam, qui per eum
renascuntur in Deum; Infantes, and parvulos, and pueros, and juvenes, and
seniores. Ideo per omne^ venit aetatem, and infantibus infans factus,
sanctificans infantes; in parvulis parvulus, sanctificans hanc ipsam habentes
aetatem. Iren. l. 2. c. 39.
words and actions of Christ do further expressly intimate, yea largely declare
his special favor and indulgence toward ((...)) little Infants in his Church
(as Irenaeus justly urges in favor of them, who lived anno 150.) Christ
having himself been an Infant, and received then the seal of Circumcision, as
an Infant, to denote his grace for them, and favor to them, suffering and
shedding his blood in infancy for infants; he afterward (as three Evangelists
tell us) invited infants to come, or be brought to him, testified a favor for
them, blessed them, and declares them capable of the Kingdom of Heaven, as
members of the Church, both in grace and glory. For as Infants have the spirit
and principles of reason, even then when they cannot exercise or exert them; so
may they have (as Tertullian observes) the Designati sanctitatis, and per hoc
etiam salutis, fidelium filii. Tert de An. c. 39.
spirit and principles of grace and glory, of sanctification and salvation,
even then when they are (as under Circumcision) only passive receivers, not
active employers of the grace of God given them by Christ's merits. The
magnetic virtue may be communicated to a needle, although it be not presently
put into such an even posture or aequilibrium as will actually show it; so is
the grace of God in Infants.

Which mercy and indulgence of God to the Infants of his Church, is a gracious
counterpoizing of that native misery and pravity, which (as Origin and Austin
observe) they derive from the old Adam; to which they are not actively
contributive, Quia sunt in omnibus genuinae sordes peccatorum, quae per aquam
and spiritum ablui^ debent. Orig. l. 5. ad To. c. 6. Hoc ipsum peccati corpus
appellatur.
but passively receptive. In like manner, by the second Adam (Christ Jesus) the
Antidote or remedy is early, and so preventive of their agency, that (as S.
Quanto magis prohiberi non debet infans a baptismo, qui recens natus nihil
peccavit, nisi quod secundum Adam carnaliter natus contagionem mortis antiquae
prima nativitate contraxit, etc. Cypr. ep. ad Fid.
Cyprian urges) the means of life and salvation is dispensed to them (also) in
Baptism, before they can know their calamity.

CHAP. X.
10. ALl which weight and strength of reasoning drawn from Scripture in many
instances, Of right reasoning from Scripture.
and most conform to the love, grace, philanthropy, mercy and benignity of God,
through Christ, to his Church under the Gospel, are sufficient to outweigh
those two small and weak cavils, urged by the Anabaptists; either from the
Scriptures silence, not naming Infants in the precept or history of Baptism;
or limiting, as they fancy (for ever, which was but in the first planting of
Churches) Baptism only to such as are taught and actually believe: which is
true (as in Abraham's case, and such as were men grown in his house; he and they
were first taught of God the meaning of that Evangelicall mystery; but the
Infants, who, in the second place, received it, could not be instructed, and
yet were circumcised, that is, owned for Gods, dedicated to him, distinguished
by this visible sign from the children of Aliens, and by this means of grace
brought, no doubt, to glory) so is it in Baptism, where the root of parents
believing is once holy by baptismall relation and dedication to God, keeping
communion with Christ and his Church, there the branches or children are also
holy, 1 Corin. 7.14.
and belong to the Lord.

11. Nor is this reasoning from Scripture, as to the harmony and concurrent
sense of it, either scepticall, or curious, or infirm; but far more pregnant
and potent in Religion, both as to faith and manners, than any urging of one or
two particular places, contrary to this tenor and Analogy of faith; or those
proportions of truth and mercy, which are so manifest in the Scriptures, that
the contrary opinion or practice, however seemingly drawn from some Scripture,
(as Tertull. Cyprian, S. Austin, observed in the quotations of Heretics) yet
carries great incongruities and absurdities, such as are inconsistent with the
Evangelical dispensations, many ways in other Scriptures declared, and easily
to be observed by those that bring no prejudice or prepossessions with them.

Our blessed Saviors wisdom has taught us thus to understand the mind of
God, by this collective or deductive sense of Scriptures. Thus he evinceth a
grand article of Christian faith, the resurrection of the dead, Matthew. 22.29.
against the blind cavils of the Sadduces; first, by alleging such Scriptures
as named not, but implied the Resurrection, yea rather the souls immortality;
then he does by principles and consequences of right reason, draw forth the
force of those places, showing as the souls existence, so the possibility and
certainty of the Resurrection, also the state of those that are once risen and
in glory.

Matthew. 12.5, 8.
In like manner our Savior, by comparing Scriptures, proves Gods dispensations
of labor, as to works of piety, charity and necessity, both to God, to man,
and to beasts, even on the Sabbath, where the letter of the command was
express and fully negative, Thou shall do no manner of work, etc. yet does
Christ redargue those Sabbaticall rigours which were by the Pharisees both
hypocritically and uncharitably urged from the letter of that command; Christ
tells them they erred (though they insisted on the letter of the command) not
knowing the Scriptures, in their harmonious and concurrent sense, which is by
sober and right reasonings to be fairly understood, rather than by harsh and
dissonant exactings so urged, as to make one part of Scripture clash with
another, or one place enterfeare and jarre with the whole tenor and Analogy
of Divine wisdom, truth, mercy and grace.

Which in this point of Baptism the Anabaptists do; if not to their own
damnation, yet very much to the subversion of the faith of many, to the
dividing, undermining and destroying of a famous and well-setled Church, which
has suffered infinitely of late by some Anabaptistick petulancy, pertinacy and
peevishness. Which in this point of Baptism is much upon the same lock as
they are in the point of Ministers maintenance under the Gospel by Tithes;
which is clear by the Analogy, equity, and intent of the Scriptures, comparing
the old and new together, in which the mind and measure of the just and
gracious God is evidently as liberal to the Gospel Ministers as to the Jewish,
1 Cor. 9.14.
as S. Paul urges, Even so has the Lord ordained, etc. The force of which
place I have unanswerably proved in a particular discourse upon Tithes.

Yet what outcries and clamours, what reproaches and calumnies, what a Tragic
and Judaick business has the covetous scrupulosity and sacrilegious nicety of
some men made against Tithes, and Ministers now receiving them, pretending
Scriptures against them, which are most fully for them; still wresting in this,
as other things, the Scriptures silence, or letter, by the bias, and scrue, or
rack of their own prejudices, or depraved lusts and passions, against the
equity, force and reasonings of Scripture, concurrent, and manifest from many
places?

CHAP. XI.
12. BUt in case the Scripture-meaning and letter were less clear in this
point of Infant Baptism than indeed they are; Of the Churches Catholic custom
and testimony.
if several places do seem to stand in such defiance and opposition against
each other, that it were necessary to have an umpire to reconcile them so, as
might moderate, limit and qualify the seeming literal difference of some
places, in order to bring them to a compliance with others, which are possibly
less explicit in the letter, but more comprehensive of and conform to the
general tenor, sense and meaning of them, and that Analogy of Faith or
Evangelicall dispensations, which are the whole scope and design of the
Scriptures:

In this case, to quiet the consciences of Christians, and to compose the state
of the Church of Christ, in a way most charitable, most comfortable, and no way
inconform to the will of God in his Word, I appeal to all sober minds,
Consuetudo veteru^ Christianorum optima Scripturarum interpres. Grot.
whether the constant practice and Catholic custom of the Church of Christ in
all ages and places, be not the best interpreter and reconciler of Scripture;
when so Universal and Primitive, as this of Infant Baptism is owned by all
witnesses, that it must needs be derived from Apostolic men, yea, and Apostles
themselves, who best knew the mind of Christ, and (without doubt) most exactly
in this, as all things, conformed to it.

No Anabaptist ever did, or can prove by any one ancient Writer, that from the
beginning it was not so; that Christian parents either ordinarily did not, or
that any one Doctor of the Church held it unlawful to baptize their infants:
no not Tertullian, Tert. de bapt. c. 18. De anima cap. 39, 40. Apostolus ait,
ex sanctificato altero sexu sanctos procreari, tam ex seminis praerogativa,
quam institutionis disciplina.

Infantes designati sanctitatis, ac per hoc salutis.


the only ancient which the Anabaptists urge in favor of their novel fancy;
who yet does acknowledge otherwhere the prerogative of Christian Infants
wholly, yea, and the use and practice of the Church in his days, to baptize
Infants with eagerness and have; even in that place, where rather with wit and
fancy, than with argument, he speaks of the inconvenience and impertinency of
committing heavenly riches to those that are not capable to manage earthly, and
urges their innocence, not having any sin, and so needing no remission: which
was true as to actual, but not to original sin; for which cause, as Origin,
Cyprian, and Saint Austin urge, Baptism is applied to Infants. The same
flourish might have been made against the Covenant and grace of Circumcision,
yea, against Christ's blessing the little children, when brought to him; yea,
and it may as well be urged against giving the right or investiture of any
estate temporal to Infants, (which is usual and good in law) because they
cannot use or manage them at present.

These are strains of wit, not weight of reason or Religion, in Tertullian, or
any man; nor may they sway with any Christian in this or any case, contrary to
the judgment and practice of the Church, even then, and at all times.

Which Cyp. lib. ep. 3. ep. 8. Nulli hominum nato D^i gratia and misericordia
deneganda; una est apud omnes, sive infantes sive majores natu, divini muneris
aequalitas. Id. Nam Deus ut personam non accipi^, sic nec aetatem. Id.
S. Cyprian, in his large Epistle to Fidus, owns as his own and others uniform
judgment, without any question, as to Infant Baptism, who certainly in this
differed not from his beloved Master Tertullian (as he called him;) yea, he
would not so fully have allowed baptism of Infants, without any limitation to
the eighth day (which was the question put to him) if he had thought Tertullian
seriously doubting in the main, of their being at all to be baptized. I am sure
Cyprian is as valid a testimony for it, as Tertullian against it: who yet is
not against it, unless, it may be, in some cases, where persecution may hinder
parents care of their childrens education, and so there may be danger of
childrens Apostasy.

The judgment of Cypr. ep. ad Fid. is most large and clear.
Cyprian (with 66. Bishops) is followed and commended by S. Hieron. l. 3. con.
Pelag.
Hier. and S. Aug. de pec. orig. c. 40. de remis. pec. c. 9. contra Jul. l. 3.
contr. Non. l. 4. epist. 3. ad Volusian. And often against the Pelagians.
Austin, as a most settled and Catholic practice; owned by S. Chrysostom. hom.
40. in Genesis
Chrysostom. Athan. q. 91. de Script. Ter mergimus infantem. Theodo. epit. div.
dog. cap. de Bapt.
Athanas. Ambr. de Abrah. l. 2. c. 11.
Ambr. Paulinus, Nazian. or. 40. de baptis.
Gregory Nazian. S. Basil. in Tom. 1. exh. ad baptis.
Basil, Epiphan. haeres. 8.
Epiphanius; so before them, by Origin. in Romans l. 5. c. 6. in Levit. hom. 8.
in Lucam hom. 14.
Origin and Iren. lib. 2. c. 39. epist. ad Let.
Irenaeus.

Of whose testimonies I shall not need here to make more particular mention or
repetition, for they are in many books of late duly cited, which have wrote in
English and in Latin of this subject; nor can any Anabaptists teeth so gnaw
that chain and series of successive Infant Baptism in the Church of Christ, as
to break any one link of it, or instance in any one author or century, where it
appears to have been otherwise in the judgment or practice of any one Church
or famous person.

13. Which Catholic custom of the Church, so fully consonant to Scripture and
the evident mind of Christ, set forth in all his Evangelicall dispensations,
both general to all men, and specially to infants in the Church, no judicious,
sober, humble, and charitable Christian, can either doubt, with any show of
reason, or dispute against, with any show of modesty.

1 Cor. 11.16. Contra Apostolicam fidem manifestissimam, contra ecclesiae
^un^^tissimum morem, nemo sentiat. Aug. ep. 28. Matthew 18.17. 1 Timothy 3.15.
Considering that as the custom of the Churches of Christ is stamped with the
authority of a law, silencing all contradiction, and suppressing all novelty,
by the Apostle S. Paul; so Christ himself bids us to hear the Church: which if
it hold good in lesser censures and determinations of private Congregations,
how much more is it our duty to be attentive to and observant of the Churches
directions, which are Catholic; whose authority is very great and sacred, as
the pillar and ground of Truth, holding it forth by doctrine and example, by
Scripture and practice? Nor do I doubt that Christ and his Apostles left many
things, as to the outward polity, practice, and ministration of Religion, less
clear and express in the letter of the Word; that thereby the credit and
authority of the Catholic Church might be more conspicuous and venerable with
all peaceable and orderly Christians, who may safely defer this honor to the
Catholic Church, and to every particular Church agreeing to it, as to
acquiesce in a conformity to its judgment and practice, no way contrary to the
Word of God; from which it cannot be presumed that the Catholic Church of
Christ from the beginning, or in any Age, did vary, either through ignorance or
wilfulness, however particular Churches and Teachers might.

14. The Catholic testimony of the Church of Christ is more than a bare humane
or historick witness: it is so sacred, so divine, Quisquis Catholici dogmatis
and moris sensum, divinitus per loca et tempora omnia dispensatum,
contempserit, non hominem contemnit, sed Deum. Vin. Lyrin.
so irrefragable, that it is more to be valued than an Gal. 1.8.
Angels from heaven; and therefore ought in all reason and conscience to end
such controversies lately raised in the Church: and so it would have done long
ago, if humane passions and interests had not swayed more with some men, than
matter of conscience and Religion; or if the Baptism of infants were the only
thing that some Anabaptists have an aching tooth at, or a mind to pull down. No,
that cannot much hurt them; nor does any mischief or inconvenience follow that
pious custom, either to parents or children, yea much good and comfort accrues
to both: Religion never thrived but with it; no point of faith is prejudiced by
it; no Evangelicall truth or mercy is diminished or overstretched, but rather
asserted and magnified to its due and divine extent. Yet Infant Baptism must
be still crucified between the policy of the Anabaptists and their partiality:
their partiality urges one or two limited places against many pregnant and
large ones; their policy, I fear, would attain something beyond, and more to
the advantage of their popular spirits and designs, which have in many places
been discovered, as far from equity and charity in civil regards, as they are
in this of Baptism far from verity, modesty and antiquity; scornfully
slighting the testimony of the Churches of Christ in all ages, for which
(undoubtedly) they had sufficient warrant from Christ and his Apostles, even
before the letter of the New Testament was written, or the Canon settled. Nor
did they either need or expect a more explicit commission of baptizing of
infants of believing parents, than that which was sufficiently expressed, as in
the general command, to make Disciples in all nations, baptizing them; so also
by the particular words and actions of Christ toward infants, not without check
to his Disciples; also by his requiring all to be born again of Water and the
Spirit, who pretend to be of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the visible
Church; and lastly, by the former parallell-dispensations of Gods mercy in the
Covenant of grace, by Circumcision, to the members of his Church, as children
of faithful Abraham, both young and old, men and infants.

15. Contrary to all which, for a few new men spitefully, peevishly, and
everlastingly thus to contest, and, indeed, only cavil, I conceive, is not
only a great irreverence and scorn put upon the Church of Christ, which we
should respect, love and honor, as the mother of us all; Gal. 4.26. Matthew.
28.20. John 14.26. John 16.13.
but it is an high affront to Christ, to his Word, Truth, and Promise to be
ever with it, even to the end of the world, by his Spirit leading it into all
Evangelicall Truths, for precept and duty, as well as promise and comfort; also
keeping it from all Catholic Apostasies into any error destructive to the
foundation.

John 13.20.
If they that reject or despise any one of Christ's Messengers, despise himself
and his father; how much more they that disbelieve, despise, and discredit so
many of his Messengers and Ministers, who in all ages have by uniforme word and
practice declared to us the mind of Christ, as to this point of Infant Baptism?

By which unhappy Controversy, as by many other, the strange, but just
judgments of God, have of late, in full vials of wrath, been poured upon this
Church of England, by the Anabaptistick spirit chiefly; after so much light and
truth, peace and unity, grace and piety, poured forth upon us by Gods former
munificent mercy, sanctifying and sealing with his Spirit and grace in due time
that Sacrament of Baptism, which thousands had received in their infancy, to
their parents comfort, to the infants happiness, dying and living, also to the
great glory of God in this, as other Churches in all ages.

Nor is there to this day, after so many bickerings and contests, so many
public heats and flames kindled upon this and other accounts, any way of
wisdom and meekness publicly used, by which to quench these flames of
wildfire, which threaten not only to scorch, but utterly to consume this
Reformed and truly Catholic Church, with all its true Ministers and holy
ministrations: in which the Anabaptists are highly subservient to the Papists
grand projects and designs; which is, to deface, disgrace, and quite overthrow
all the frame of Reformed Religion, and the face of any either uniform or
reformed Church in England.

CHAP. XII.
FOr my part, I freely profess, The sin of presumptuous delaying and denying
baptism to Infants.
that if the administration of Baptism in point of age and time, were in it
self free and indifferent, so as men might be baptized when they will, and so
baptize their children sooner or later, as they please, deferring it, as some
of old did, even to their decrepit age and deathbeds, because they would not
sin after it; if this were left to an indifferency, which I do no way think it
is, any more than all other duties of the Lords Supper, prayer, hearing the
Word preached, etc. are, which have no precise measure and limited time set,
because they oblige always, as opportunity is offered; Gods favors and
indulgences import man's duty to accept and use them, as soon as the Lord offers
them to us and ours; though Baptism be not, as S. Cyprian tells Fidus,
confined to the eighth day after infants birth, nor yet to the eighth year, yet
when it may be duly had in the way of Gods providence, it may not be delayed to
the death of the child (unbaptized) without a great detriment to the infant so
dying, and crime to the parents or guardians so delaying, and by their sottish
negligence depriving the child of that visible means of grace which God has
allowed in his Church, Gr. Naz. orat. 40. de Baptis. An and eos baptizahimus
qui ((...)) nec damnum nec gratiam sentiunt? (...). Ita prorsus, si quod
periculum urgeat. Praestat enim absque sensu ((...)) sanctificari, quam sine
sigillo and initiatione abscedere. (...).
both to parents and their children: which is the judgment of Gregory
Nazianzen, one of the ablest Divines that the Church ever had. As a due debt
unlimited to any day of payment, is every day due; so the favors of God, and
privileges of his Church, not precisely confined, but daily offered us, and
not accepted, contract upon us a great sin, either of unbelief under the means,
or affected negligence, undervaluing and ingratitude toward Divine Mercies:
sins under which no Christian of a truly tender conscience will dare to lie
seven years, no nor seven days, merely upon the delays and scruples of his
own or other men's both foolish and sluggish hearts.

As that Genesis 17 14.
soul among the Jews was precisely cut off from the Church of God, (both parents
and children) who was not (unless in Gods connivence and special
dispensation, as in the Josh. 5.
forty years pilgrimage in the wilderness) circumcised the eighth day; so
may those among Christians justly seem to be cut off from the Church of Christ
here and hereafter, which do presume to slight, neglect, and so not at all use
Baptism to their children, according as God gives them in the uncertainties of
life both opportunity and convenience. Gods leaving some things to our choice,
discretion and ingenuity, must not be any remission, but an excitation to
speedy duty, especially in settled Churches, where daily, at least weekly,
opportunities are offered; which if denied by hot persecutions, the delay is
more excusable, and (it may be) in some cases commendable, where parents have
just cause to fear, lest their baptized children shall never attain by their
paternall care such education as is correspondent to their Baptism: In which
cases, I conceive, it was of old deferred; not because it was thought either
unlawful or undesirable in it self, to baptize infants born in the Church, but
for fear of the mischiefs attending persecution, and sometimes the parents
were cold and negligent in their duty.

If, I say, the time of Baptism were left to our freedom, which it is not, as
I have showed; yet still the black brand and gross impudence of such a
reproach, contempt, and error, as the ruder and spitefuller sort of Anabaptists
cast upon this and all other Christian Churches, is most intolerable; while
they dare to re-baptize such who have been once duly baptized (if it be
indifferent when) in their infancy: which re-baptizing of such as were once
duly baptized in the Church, was ever judged as much a monster, and most
insolent in all Christian Churches, as it would have been to renew or repeat
circumcision among the Jews, which was not so much in express letter of
Scripture forbidden, as made indeed impossible in nature: Ephesians. 4.5.
nor is repeating of Baptism so expressly forbidden in the Word of God, where
((...)) one Baptism is mentioned, (which place the Hemerobaptists or daily
dippers slighted) as indeed it is, and always was excluded by the
interpretation, tradition and practice of the Catholic Church; which no more
allowed any to be twice baptized in Religion, or twice ordained to the
Ministry, than twice born in nature: yea, this fancy, heresy, and novell
insolency, was looked upon as the setting up of a new Gospel, another Jesus,
and more Gods than one, as the ancient Councils and Fathers always determined,
even in the case of S. Cyprians candid error. Con. African. can. 48. Synod.
Capuensis an. 389. Zonar. in Con. Carthag. can. 53.
Against whose judgment, for invalidating, and so repeating Baptism, where
administered by Heretics and obstinate Schismatics, the Councils both of
Africa, Europe, and Asia determined, upon the ground of Scripture and Primitive
custom; both as to the use of Infant Baptism, and the not repeating of that
or any other true baptism once received. Both which being such Catholic
determinations of the Church, it is, with me, not in the least degree
disputable, whether I should choose to conform to the Churches universal
testimony, constant practice, and primitive tradition, in this and other modern
disputes (as that of the government of Churches in larger distributions by
Bishops above Presbyters and Deacons; so the use of the Lords day, instead of
the Judaick Sabath, etc.) which are conform to the general scope, tenor and
direction of Scripture; or rather comply, both sillily and shamefully, with
those modern captious novelties and perverse disputings of some private spirits
of yesterday, who dare to cast so great jealousies, blame and dishonor upon
the Catholic Churches of Christ in all ages and places, as not only to
suspect, but to proclaim them, both socially and singly, to have been either
grossly ignorant, or most basely unfaithful, as to what the Apostles had
delivered to them for the mind and will of the Lord, either by Epistle, word,
or Example.

No, I had far rather, with humility and charity, though in infirmity and
ignorance, conform to the Catholic Church in errors and mistakes, (not
fundamental or immorall, of which it never was guilty, nor will be) rather, I
say, than by proud and pernicious curiosity, or by scepticall and schismatic
novelty, either blemish the Churches Integrity, or break its Unity.

Both which the Anabaptists ever have done, and ever will do (since their
first eggshell and spawning in Germany) by their endless and peevish
litigations touching Infant Baptism; which though to some it seem but a small
and circumstantiall business, in point of time, yet the scorn, contempt, and
abhorrency of the Sacrament, as applied to infants, is an error (as I have
showed) of so spreading a venom and dangerous consequences, that it tends to
overthrow all that is or has been of religious polity and power too, of
essence and order, in this and all true Churches, of which we have any record
in Scripture or other Writers.

CHAP. XIII.
BEsides, this poisonous (and now so swollen) error of the Anabaptists in Engl.
against Infant Baptism, The dangerous effects and principles of Anabaptisme.
is further sowred by other seditious principles and infamous practices
attending that opinion, wherewith some of them have taught the world long ago
in Germany, as lately in England, to beware, lest in stead of water, they
baptize both infants and elder people with blood and fire, as proclaiming all
to be no Christians, nor better than Heathens, who will not come to their new
dippings. Their error is not solitary, nor the sting of their schism either
soft or blunt, or unvenomous; which does not a little discover their opinion to
be as far from the Spirit of Christ, as it is from the mind, meaning, and
intent of Christ in his Word: nor are they now excusable (as Luther at first
thought, but afterward recanted, when he saw the bad and bitter fruits of their
new doctrine;) they cannot now with any color plead simple or invincible
ignorance (which, now, is boiled up by the heat of their spirits to obstinacy,
contumacy, and insolency against this and all Churches both peace and practice)
for they do still boldly persist in their tedious error, after so many
Scripture-demonstrations, cleared and confirmed by the Catholic testimony and
practice of the Church of Christ. Nor is their judgment or practice in other
things accompanied with such meekness, modesty, charity, humility, and
innocence, as might render this a venial error, or tolerable difference;
which may grow as a weed (not very noxious or unsavory) among many sweet
flowers of Graces, Virtues, and good Works: like that of S. Candidissimi
pectoris naevus charitatis velo obtegendu^. Aug. de Cypr. errore.
Cyprian in point of rebaptizing such as Heretics had baptized; which S.
Austin calls (in that holy man and Martyr) a wart or mole in a fair and candid
breast, to be covered with the veil of Christian charity. But the
Anabaptistick fury flies in the very face of this and all Churches, pulling out
the very eyes of Christians, by which they obtained their ((...)) first
illumination, Hebr. 10.32.
as Baptism was anciently called by the Fathers, and the Apostolic Author to
the Hebrews: it not only sliely picks at, but violently strives to overthrow
the first foundation of all Christian Faith, Profession, Polity, Order, and
Church Communion.

Hence, besides its novelty and heterodoxie, it rises naturally from so
presumptuous an error, to pertness, sharpness, tumultuariness, sedition,
haughtiness, contempt of all Christian men and Magistrates too, who will not
either receive, or connive at, this and other their imperious errors.

Who is the^, Minister or other, that differs from them, be he never so sober,
grave, and holy, but he must be vilified, reproched, and openly railed at, by
their libellous and scurrilous, either pens or tongues? Their greatest spite
and malice lies (as the Jesuits) most levelled and implacable against the best
and ablest Ministers, who retain both Catholic Ordination and Baptism; whose
successful labors and excellent lives do most confute this and all other
novell fancies; while themselves are, by the blessing of God, justified to all
the Christian world (not willingly blind) to be Ministers, not only of the
Letter and Water, but of the Spirit, Grace and Power. Such as desert Catholic
Ordination and Government by Bishops, give greatest advantage to Anabaptists;
for the pulling out of one cornerstone in a wall, makes way for others easily
to follow. As all Anabaptists are against Bishops, so all the Ancients who are
for Infant Baptism, as Catholic, are for Episcopal Government, even S. Jerome
himself.

Not that I think all men, who, it may be, less approve Infant Baptism, than
that of elder years, conceiving that practice to be more clear in the letter of
the Scripture, have the same calentures and cruel distempers; many of them, I
hope, may have sincerity to Godward, and charity to those Christians who in
this differ from them. But I conceive the tumultuating, rude, violent, and
uncharitable Anabaptists (with all their Spawn of other Sects) have greatly
sinned against the Lord Christ, and against his Church, both in England and
elsewhere, also against his servants the Ministers of all ages and places, whom
they have most injuriously slandered, and shamefully treated with great scorn,
malice, and all manner of indignities that were within their reach and power;
whom I pray God to forgive, giving them that true repentance, which may redeem
them from that gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, in which they seem to
lie: this is the worst I wish any of them. In order to which good desire, I
thought it not amiss thus far to express my judgment, and as much as in me
lies, to justify (after many others) in the point of Infant Baptism, the
doctrine and practice of my Mother the Church of England, and both its Fathers
and Sons, who have suffered so undeservedly, and therefore complain so justly
of, the mischiefs and miseries befaln and threatening them, from this dangerous
party and faction; who resolve never to be satisfied in their perverse disputes
and endless janglings; who with one puff blow away all that concurrent
strength, which in the behalf of Infant Baptism is truly and solidly mustered
up, from the Covenant of Grace, from the tenor of Scriptures, from the
proportion of Evangelicall privileges, from the relation which Christians in
the Church have to God by Christ, from the Catholic custom and practice of
all Churches old and new, from the joint suffrages of all Conc. Carth. v.
Milevit. an. 418. can. 11. Qui parvulos recentes ab utero matris baptizandos
negat, Anathema fit. Conc. Gerundense anno 517. Parvuli, si infirmi fuerint,
etiam eadem die qua nati sunt, si oblati fuerint, baptizentur. Can. 5. Conc.
Bracarense an. 572. Praecipiant epis. ut infantes ad baptismum offerant.
Councils, Fathers, and Church-Historians. Against all which cloud and army of
Witnesses, they bring only two or three literal allegations, partially and
incompleatly interpreted. They boast much, but falsely, of Tertullian in this
point, whom they forsake in many others; who was a person, though excellently
learned, and of high parts, yet immoderately passionate, easily transported,
and in that very point, as I have showed, is either different from himself in
other places, or to be understood in a Tert. de bap. c. 18. Quid festinat
innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum?
meaning limited and occasional; either to the children of Heathens, yet
untaught and unprofessing Christian Religion, or the children of Christians
hurried up and down by persecutions, which in Tertullians times were, if not
constant, yet very frequent. After him they have found in six hundred years one
Anno 850. de reb. eccl. c. 26.
Walafridus Strabo, who seemed to scruple Infant Baptism, as not of primitive
use, but shows no grounds of his scruple: and at last Ludovicus Vives, in his
Ludov. Vives in l. 1. c. 27. Aug. de civ. Dei.
notes of late on S. Austin de civitate Dei, is produced as a witness against
Antiquity; a Papist in all things else, and in this point differing from his
own Bellarm. de Baptis. c. 1. par. 3. So the Council of Trent.
Church and Communion, if it were his opinion and judgment; which I see no
cause to believe, because he proves nothing, he not thinking it unlawful or
vain, but (perhaps) not absolutely necessary to baptize all in infancy; to
which Naz. or. 40. de Bapt.
Nazianzen inclines, except in case of death. But all these are either single
Doctors and private opinions, or petty Pygmies and Mushromes, compared to those
Propriae, occultae and privatae opiniunculae, a co^munis, generalis, and
publicae sententiae autoritate secretae. Vin. Lir. c. 39.
many Heroes, that Lebanon of tall Cedars, which were all advocates of
Infant Baptism in all Ages and Churches from the Apostles days. There is not
any one of the Ancients does dogmatically deny it as lawful, or so far doubt
and dispute it, as to question the usual and approved practice of it from all
times; which S. Austin so vehemently affirms, that in his Epistle to Volusia,
he says, The Consuetudo matris ecclesia in baptizandis parvulis nequaquam
spernenda, nec omnino superflua deputanda, nec omnino credenda, nisi Apostolica
esset traditio. Aug. ep. ad Volusiam.
custom of our Mother the Church in baptizing Infants, as it is not to be
neglected as superfluous, so nor would it have been either practiced or
believed, unless it had been so delivered by the Apostles, as their undoubted
sense and practice: which Pelagius did not, yea, could not with any color
deny, as Aug. l. 1. de pec. mer. and remis. c. 26. Parvulos baptizandos esse
concedunt (Pelagiani.) Qui contra autoritatem universalis ecclesiae proculdubio
per Dominum and Apostolos traditum venire non possunt.
S. Austin observes, though it had much served his design about original sin,
if he could in that point have baffled the credit, custom and authority of the
Catholic Church: which Ep. lib. 3. ep. 8. ad Fidum.
S. Cyprian, who lived in the second Century, so beyond all cavil or scruple,
so industriously and fully sets down, that if there were no other testimonies
of the Ancients, that alone would satisfy any sober man, being written, not
upon any heat of dispute, but calmly and clearly, as of a matter ever done, and
never under dispute in the Church to his days.

But I have in this part done more than I designed, in order to advance not
strifes and further contention, but Christian peace and charity on all sides in
this Church and Nation, as to those religious differences which are a great
occasion of our miseries.

CHAP. XIV.
The Romish advantages by the divisions and deformities of the Chapter of England.
FRom the Deformities, Divisions, and Degeneration of Religion, also the
Falsifications, Usurpations and Devastations, which of later years have been
made by the violent sort of Anabaptists and other furious Sectaries, against
the Unity and Authority, the Sanctity and Majesty of the Church of England,
destroying its Primitive Order and Apostolic Government, its Catholic
Succession, its holy Ordination, its happy and most successful Ministry, to
the great neglect and contempt of all holy ministrations and duties of
Religion; I cannot but further intimate to your piety and prudence ( O my
honored Contrymen) that which is most notorious, and no less dangerous,
both in religious and civil respects; namely, the great Advantages, Applauses
and Increases, which the Roman, or Papal party daily gain against the Reformed
Religion, as it was once wisely, honorably, and happily established, professed
and maintained here in England: which is now looked upon by the more subtle,
superstitious, and malicious sort of Papists, as deformed, divided, dissolved,
desolated; so conclamate for dead, that they fail not with scorn to boast, that
in England we have now no Church, no Pastors, no Bishops, no Presbyters, no
true Ministry, no holy Ministrations, no Order, no Unity, no Authority, no
Reverence, as to things Divine or Ecclesiastic. Insomuch that we must in this
sad posture, not only despair of ever getting ground against the Romanists, by
converting any of them from the errors of their way to the true Reformed
Religion; but we must daily expect to lose ground to the Popish party and their
Proselytes: there being no banks or piles now sufficient to keep the Sea of
Rome from overflowing or undermining us, in order to advance their restless
interests; which have been, and still are, mightily promoted, not by the
reverend Bishops and the other Episcopal Clergy (who are men of Learning,
Piety, Prudence, and Martyr-like constancy) as some men with more Heat than
Wit, more Spite than Truth, have in their mechanic and vulgar Oratory of late
miserably and falsely declaimed; but by those who have most done the Popes
work, while they have seemed most furiously to fly in the Popes face, as
popularly zealous against Popery, and yet at the same time by a strange
giddiness, headiness, and madness, they have risen up against that
Mother Church which bare them, and those Fathers in it, who heretofore mightily
defended them and theirs from the talons and gripes of that Roman Eagle: and
this not with childish scufflings or light skirmishings, to which manner of
fight the illiterate weakness and rudeness of our new Masters and Champions
has reduced those Controversies; but with such a Panoply or complete Armor of
proof, such sharp Weapons, such ponderous Engines, such rare dexterity of
well-managed Powers, raised from all Learning, both Divine and Humane, that the
high places and defenses of Rome were not able to stand before them heretofore,
when they were battered by our Jewels, our Lakes, our Davenants, our Whites,
our Halls, our Mortons, our Andrews, and the late invincible Usher, who
deserved to be Primate, not only of Ireland, but of all the Protestant Forces
in the world. All these were Bishops, Worthies of the first three, seconded in
their ranks by able and orderly Presbyters, as Whitakers, Perkins, Reynolds,
Whites, Crakanthorps, Sutliffs, and innumerable others, while our Regiments
were orderly, our Marchings comely, and our Forces both united and encouraged.

Whereas, now, there is no doubt but the merciless mowing down and scattering
of the Clergy of England, like Hay, with the withering and decay of
Government, Regularity and Order in this Church, these have infinitely
contributed to the Papal harvest, and Romish agitations; the gleanings of
whose Emissaries will soon amount to more than the sheaves of any the most
zealous and reformed Ministers in England. By the Papal interests and
advantages, I do not mean the Roman Clergies preaching or propagating those
Truths of Christian Doctrine and Duties, which (for the main) they profess in
common with us and all Christian Churches: if any of them be thus piously
industrious, I neither quarrel at them, nor envy their successes, but rather I
should rejoice in them, with S. Paul; Phil. 1.18.
because however Christ crucified is preached, by some whom common people will
either more reverence, or sooner believe (than they generally do the decayed,
despised, and divided Ministers of Engl.) who seem to have (many of them) so
small abilities, and carrying so little show or pretense of any good authority
for their work ministerial; nor can they be potent or esteemed abroad, who are
so impotent and disesteemed at home.

But I mean that Papal Monarchy, or Ecclesiastical Tyranny, by which the
Church, or rather the Court of Rome, (by such sinister Arts and unjust
Policies, as were shamefully used and discovered in the Tridentine conventicle)
seeks to usurp and continue an imperial power over all Churches and Bishops,
as if there had been but one Apostle, or one Apostolic Church planted in the
world; also to corrupt and abuse that ancient Purity, Simplicity, and Liberty
of Religion, which was preserved among Primitive Churches and their coordinate
Bishops: Further, without fear of God or reverence of man, opposing some Divine
Truths and undoubted institutions of Christ, also imposing such erroneous
Doctrines and superstitious Opinions upon all Christians, to be believed, and
accordingly practiced, as become not the severity and sanctity of true
Religion; adding to that holy foundation (which was indeed first laid by the
great Apostles, and continued happily for many hundred years, by the successive
Bishops of Rome) those after- superstructures, not of ceremonies only, which
are tolerable (many of them, like feathers, making but little weight in
Religion) but of corrupt Doctrines, and superstitious Duties, as seem (at best)
impertinent to true Piety; but some of them are erroneous, sacrilegious,
pernicious. In some things they are boldly adding to, or detracting from the
Doctrine and Institutions of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ: in other things
they impose, for sacred and necessary, such opinions and customs, which are
but the rust and dross, the disease and deformity of Christian Religion,
contracted in the long ignorance, darkness, and almost barbarity of times,
Acts 17.30.
which God winked at: but now they appear highly and justly scandalous, yea,
intolerable to more judicious and less credulous Christians, who are very
sensible, not only of that offense, which many Papal Injunctions and
Observations give to themselves, as Christians, but also to the very Heathens,
to Jews, and to Mahometans, who cannot reconcile in any Reason or Religion the
Idolatrous use of Images and Hoasts among Papists, to which they must submit,
if they will be in communion with them, or converted to be Christians; nor yet
those Tridentine Terrors and Anathema's of eternal damnation, which are
thundered by them against all those who will not, against Christ's express
Word, own as Truth, and submit to as necessary, those opinions and practices
among Papists, which seem either impious or impertinent, as to true Faith and a
good Conscience.

Against all which burdens (too heavy for any wise and generous Christians to
bear, when once duly informed of the weight and danger of them, and duly
reformed from them) as the great Wisdom, Piety, and Order of the Chapter of Engl.
in its sacred Ministry and holy Ministrations, was heretofore the greatest
bar and bulwark in all the Christian world: so the disadvantages of the
Reformed Religion are now so palpable, and the danger of the people of this
Nation, as so obvious in their returning to that Egypt and Babylon again, which
is not the Church of Rome, but its disease and oppression; that I know not in
ordinary providence any means can be used, or is left, to stop the daily
prevalencies of Popery, and the great Apostasy of England to the Romish
superstition and subjection in aftertimes, unless God stir up such Wisdom,
Zeal and Care in those that have honest hearts joined with public power and
influence, not so much to fleece and depress Popish Recusants by pecuniary
exactions (which is to set Religion to sale, and to make merchandise of men's
errors, rather than fairly to persuade and win them by the proper and
persuasive engines of true Religion;) but (rather) duly to restore and speedily
assert the Honor, Order, Succession, Unity, Authority and Majesty of this
Reformed Church and its Catholic Ministry: from which when the Papists see our
selves to be such profound Revolters, with what face can we expect they should
ever come in to our Reformation, which they now behold with joyful and
disdainful eyes, so mangled, so deformed, so massacred by our own hands? How
can we with Justice, Honor, or Humanity, inflict severe penalties upon
Papists, as refusing to conform to our Church and Religion, when they protest,
with so much truth, to our faces, they cannot see any Church, any Religion
among us, as uniform, public, authentic, constant? What (they say) formerly
had the goodliest figure and fairest presence of a Christian Church, and the
best Reformed of any, is now deformed, ruined, demolished; nothing but
scattered rafters and pieces of that ship-wreckt vessel now appear floating up
and down in a restless and foming sea of faction, opposition and confusion,
between Bishops, Ministers, and People: some are Episcopal, others
Presbyterian, a third sort Independent: all are disparate or opposite in
Discipline, some are Heterodox in Doctrine: the Anabaptists rise against all,
and the Quakers soar above all.

To which of all these, with many other Sects, shall an honest-hearted Papist
apply himself, to be safe and settled in Religion? If to the poor and depressed
remains of Bishops, and the Episcopal Clergy, who yet adhere to the Church
of England; alas, they are weak and exhausted, contemned by many, pitied by
some, but asserted by few or none, according to their true merit in former
ages, or their present Worth, Courage, Constancy and Patience in this. If the
Romanists go to the Presbyterian party, which like small shoots sprang out so
thick in England, upon the cutting down of Episcopacy, to which they all
formerly submitted; these, besides their Levity, Parity, and Inconstancy, as to
their former Stations, Opinions, and Oaths, seem so unseasonably insolent, and
magisterially domineering, before they had got a full and just dominion, that
all sober men think them rather popular, plebeian, and impertinent in their
heats, transports and passions, than so modest, wise, and grave, as becomes
those who will undertake to wrest Government out of the hands of their
superiors and betters every way, and to impose a novelty of untried and
undesired Discipline upon such a great and stout Nation as England is; which
disdaining the insolency of Popes, and offended at the indiscretion of some
Bishops, will hardly ever bear the pertnesse of petty Presbyters, who cannot
want Vanity, Impudence and Arrogance, when they fancy themselves in a supremacy
of Power above People, Parlaments and Princes: for they affect no less, as
Christ's due and theirs too. If the tossed Romanists run to the spruce and
self-conceited Independents for shelter, because these fine new Masters seem to
have patents for Christian Liberty, and urge a Magna Charta from Christ, to be
accountable to none in matters of Religion, but their own little Congregation,
Church, or Body, in which, as in an Ecclesiastic Corporation or free Borough
of Religion, they may hang and draw, exercise high and low Justice upon men's
souls as they list in their little Conventicles; yet here the poor Papist finds
so much of a rude and exotic novelty, such a gross show of Schism, such
variety, such an inconsistency, such a plebeian petulancy, such pitiful and
ridiculous affectations, and arrogating of Church Power in some of the plebs,
and such contempt of it in others, that he cannot think it is other than some
pieces of Joseph's bloody coat, or some torn limbs of his body, compared to what
Splendor, Order, Strength, Beauty, Unity, Decency, and Majesty in Doctrine and
Discipline, in Faith and holy Duties, was formerly to be observed, even to the
envy and admiration of sober Papists, in the Church of England; how much more
in the Ancient and Catholic Churches grand Combinations, from which these
petty fractions and crumblings of Christians seem most abhorrent and dissonant?

This goodly Cedar, then, of the Church of England being thus broken and hewn
down, and nothing like it, or comparable to it, planted in its room, but such
Shrubs and Mushromes as grow of themselves out of the rankness of the earth
(vulgar humors and passions) under whose shade any Egyptian Vermin, Frogs, or
unclean Birds may hide themselves; no wonder if the Papists triumph in their
sufferings and constancies, if they despise all our Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptistick, and fanatic Novelties; if they rejoice in that vengeance which
they conclude God has made upon our Schisms, Errors, Obstinacies, and
Persecutions against them, by our mutual confusions.

Hence must daily and necessarily follow secret inclinations and accessions to
the Roman party, by all those who are not well grounded in the Reformed
Religion, or not much prejudiced against the Popish Errors, or are indifferent
for any Religion which is most easy or pleasing. These at length will warp to
the Roman party, as the most specious of any: so that unless there be a speedy
restoration of the honor of the Church of England, I see not how it is
possible to prevent that fatal relapse, either to Romish superstition and
slavery, or else to a dreadful persecution, which will in time necessarily
follow those dissipations and destructions of this Reformed Church, its
Ministry, Government and Religion; which some men have already too much, and
still do, beyond measure, so industriously promote, to the excessive joy and
gratifying of the Popish party and designs, which are not only invasive upon
the honor and freedom of this Nation, but highly scandalous to our Reformed
Profession, and dangerous to our consciences; especially as we yet stand
convinced of the Errors, Superstitions and Sacriledges of the Romish Religion,
since it lapsed from the Primitive Institutions of Christ, the patterns of the
Apostles, the ancient Communion of Christian Churches, and the fraternall
Coordination of Bishops, who were always united in orderly, happy, and
harmonious Aristocracies, rather than subordinate to any one Monarchical
Supremacy, as to Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction: however they had such
regulation and primacy of order, by Patriarchs and Metropolitans among Bishops
and the representers of several Churches, as became wise men, that were
numerous when they met in great Councils or Church Assemblies.

CHAP. XV.
I Cannot but (here) recommend it to the most serious consideration of all wise
and worthy Christians, The wide and just distances between the Reformed and
Romanists.
who make conscience, and not policy, of Religion, as Christian and Reformed.
That, however the soberest sort of Christians in Engl. do in many, and possibly
in most things necessary to salvation (which are not very numerous) agree both
charitably and cheerfully with those of the Roman Church, as to our common
Faith in Jesus Christ, and hope of Salvation by his merits, in the way of an
holy life and good works; yet, as it will never be hoped, that the Papists
shall return to a communion with us, while we are so divided among our selves,
and daily excommunicating each other from Church, and Christ, and Heaven; so it
will be very difficult and dangerous, both in point of conscience and prudence,
of sin and safety, for you or your posterity, to return to a plenary and
visible Communion with the Papal profession, or Roman Conventions: considering
how we now stand convinced in our judgments, and so will many of your
posterity ever be, until all Books of controversy, which no purgatory Index
can correct, are burnt or buried, by which you and they must needs be so well
informed, as to be justly opposite and uncompliant to those Errors,
Superstitions and Sacriledges, which the Roman party seeks to impose upon all
those that will have visible communion with them; which no conscientious
Christian can swallow down, when they appear to him not only different from,
but contradictive, in plain terms, to that Word of God, which themselves, with
us, do own to be the rule of faith and manners, the measure of all true
Religion: contrary to which, some of their Tenets, Injunctions and Practices
seem to us, either to rob God of his peculiar honor, and omniscience, which is
to search hearts, to hear and answer the prayers of our souls as well as our
lips; or to rob Christ of the glory of his only Merit, Mediation,
Satisfaction, and Intercession for us; or lastly, to rob the Church of Christ
of that pure and plenary perception of Christ's holy Institutions and blessed
Sacraments, to which they add and detract as they please, performing religious
offices, most-what, in such a language as most people cannot understand, and so
not be edified, either in their judgments or affections; which ought, in all
reason by holy duties, to be either more enlightened, or judiciously warmed and
devoutly excited to the knowledge of God, to the love of Christ, to an holy
Life and mutual Charity.

To remove all which Deformities, Disorders and Indignities, put upon religious
Mysteries by the Church of Rome, the Church of England, with great Prudence,
Piety and Charity, did assert and restore to a Scripturall rectitude, primitive
simplicity, and sober decency, the state of this Church and Nation, by a just,
necessary, and prudent Reformation of those Romish Errors, Superfluities and
Corruptions, which had with great fraud and fallacy prevailed upon this, as
other parts of Christendom here in the Western world.

Which great and happy work of due Reformation was begun, carried on, and
completed, not by any foreign or intestine Swords, not by popular and
tumultuary rudeness (as in many places) which are the odious methods of the
Devil to blast, over-drive and pervert due and true Reformation in Churches or
States; but in Gods peaceable, just, and holy way, by such public, lawful and
complete Authority, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, as this Church and Nation
had originally in it self, without any authoritative or subordinate dependence
upon any foreign State or Church, Prince or Prelate: however it did in Charity
so comply for many years, and correspond with the pristine renown and eminency
of the Roman Church, as might most preserve Order and unity in the Christian
world; till it felt, as well as saw, the Roman Yoke to be intolerable in honor
and conscience.

Which Independent and absolute state of this Church and Monarchy, as to the
original right and power of it in it self, has been unanswerably asserted, as
by others, so of late by those very reverend, learned and judicious persons,
who have made it their business in particular Tracts, to defend this Church
and Christian State, from the just charge of any unjust Schism, See B.
Bramhall, Sir Roger Twisden, Dr. Hammond of Schism.
in respect of the Roman Communion and Jurisdiction, or usurpation rather;
resuming upon good grounds, both as to Divine and Humane Laws, that supreme
power which is inherent and unalienable in this Nation, both in Prince,
Nobility, Prelates and People, for the preserving of true Religion and
reforming it, as need shall require, in order to the Honor, Peace and
Happiness, both of Prince and People, Church and State; who never did, nor
indeed ever could, alienate or give away from themselves and their posterity,
those primitive and ancient Rights or Immunities of the Nation, which if any
had in the darkness and drowziness of times by great artifices and pretensions
encroached upon, all Reason and Justice required, that when Prince and People
awaked out of their dreams and superstitious slumbers, they should reassume
those honorary powers, and hereditary privileges of Church and State, which
were cunningly lurched or filched from them, while they were dozed or asleep;
without which the welfare of this polity and entire Nation, both in secular and
religious regards, could not be preserved by honest Magistrates, conscientious
Ministers, or wise and valiant Princes.

Yet, as our wise, godly, and sober Reformers (first and last) did, worthy of
the Honor and Piety of this Church and Nation, vindicate the civil and
religious Rights of both, in all necessary points and interests of Doctrine and
Government: so their charity was no less cautious and commendable than their
courage, in this, that as they did duly reform what they thought amiss, and
establish what they judged in Piety and Prudence best; so they did not by any
heat and fury of popular transport, either unnecessarily or uncharitably affect
to give any offense to the Romanists, by such distances as needless and
groundless Innovations must needs occasion, either to that or any other
Christian Church in the world; with all whom they ever aimed, by their
moderation, to preserve and merit a Christian communion and correspondency; not
intending to schismatize or separate from them or their Christian Predecessors,
as to any Christian band and tie of Christian Verity or Charity; not as to any
point of Faith, Morality or Sanctity; not as to any right Order and Catholic
succession of the Evangelicall Ministry; not as to that Apostolic Government,
Inspection and Authority, which either was of old, or still is preserved in the
Roman Church, or any other; nor, last of all, did they intend to vary from them
in those things of honest policy and decent ceremony, which were most commended
by the Prudence and Piety of Antiquity: only they retained and rejected, as
they thought most became this Church in the use of its Liberty, in matters
Ceremonial; wherein the Roman, as all Churches, have like freedom left them,
to be used with that Modesty, Conscience and Charity, which becomes all
Christian Churches, without giving or receiving any offense; as St. Ambrose
long ago expressed his sense to S. Austin.

But the aim of our wise Reformers (who rather chose to be Martyrs and
Confessors for the Truth, than popular Praters or Compliers with State-policies
and private interests) was only this, to purge away that dross and dust which
Christ's floor had contracted by slovenly laborers in his husbandry. They cast
away the chaff, but retained the wheat well winnowed: they reformed those
gross Superstitions in Prayer, Sacriledges in Sacraments, Superfluities in
Ceremonies, Usurpations as to this Churches liberty and authority, with all
blind Innovations of later date (compared to true primitive Antiquity;) all
which were as evidently discernable by the reformed or restored light of
Learning and Religion, which God then brought into the Christian world, to be
upon the face of the then Roman Church, as the leprosy of Naaman was upon
Gehazi's forehead; if neither they nor we may be judges, but the pregnant
testimonies of holy Scriptures evidently setting forth the institutions of
Christ, the Doctrine and Practices of the Apostles, and the primitive
constitutions of Churches. All these further cleared to us (if any thing be
dark or dubious) by the joint and concurrent suffrages of the first Councils,
the ancient Fathers, and all Ecclesiastical Historians; which, together, ought
to be valued far beyond the sense or example of the Roman, or any one
particular Church, as the immovable bounds and unalterable measures of true
Religion, as to the substance and essentialls of it. Nor does any particular
Church (though heretofore never so justly famous, as that of Rome was) merit
the honorable name and title of Christ's Church, or Catholic, but rather of
(so far) Apostatick and Antichristian, when the Pastors and People of it do,
not by insensible degrees and unawares slide into venial errors and small
abuses; but after so clear a light and conviction, as the last ((...))
regeneration of Learning and Religion has afforded these parts of the world,
they yet wilfully and obstinately persist to corrupt, no less than pervert,
the Doctrine and Institutions of Christ Jesus, who is the great Pastor of his
Church, and chief Bishop of our Souls, Matthew. 17.5.
whose voice all parts of it ought readily to hear, and humbly to obey at all
times, without regard to the antiquity or prevalency of any errors or abuses
in former times; Id pulcherrimum quod verissimum; illud verissimu^ quod
antiquissimum. Tert.
to which no time or use can give authority or validity against the first
appointments of Christ, which are every way, as the ancientest, so the best,
for Truth, Comfort and Safety, to any Church, and to every Christians Soul.

CHAP. XVI.
Irreconcilable differences between Reformed Truths and Romish Errors, which
are as manifest and obstinate.
I Shall not need (here) to enumerate at large, and in particular points, those
many and great differences in Religion, which make your and your posterities
return to the Roman compliance and communion impossible; if you have judgments
to understand, or consciences to act according to their dictates out of the
Word of God, understood in the sense of the Catholic Doctors and Councils of
the first 600 years after Christ. The work is already done by so many able
Writers in this Church, that it is needless to repeat, and scarce possible to
add more weight to what has been by them alleged, to justify their
protestation against, and reformation of the errors, abuses and corruptions of
the Church of Rome.

Papists pertinacy against the true Canon of Scripture.
He that seriously considers the Fraud, Falsity and Pertinacy of the Romanists
in that one grand point, the Canon of the Scripture, which is and must be (when
all is done that Policy and Art can invent) the main pillar and standard of
true Religion, cannot but grow very jealous of their honesty in particular
points of lesser concernments, when he shall see, beyond all reply or forehead,
that they have in the Council of Trent, under the highest Anathema's or Curses
of all that differ from them, assumed into the Canon of Scriptures divinely
inspired, written and delivered to the Church as the Word of God, those
Apocryphal Books, which however we (with the Ancient Churches) value according
to their Worth, Truth, Credit and use, yet we receive them not into the canon
or rule of Faith; because we find for certain, that neither the Greek nor Latin
Churches of old, neither Jews nor Christians, Councils nor Fathers, for 1400
years, did ever so own or receive them. Which Truth, after many others, and
beyond any other (if I may say it without envy) is exactly and fully cleared of
late by a person, Dr. Cosins his late History of the Scriptures.
whose reputation formerly clouded by some popular jealousies (as to his
Sincerity and Constancy in the Reformed Religion of the Church of England)
deserves to have its true luster for Love and Honor with every true Protestant
at home, as he has abroad, for that learned Industry, Courage and Honesty,
which he has showed in that particular, to assert the main hinge of Religion,
the Canon of the Scriptures, against the Papists effrontery in that particular;
which has engaged them in such a Dilemma, as is hard to be avoided by the
greatest sophisters of the Roman party. For if the Canon of the Scriptures be
such, as they now obtrude, including the Apocryphal books, then did their
Church err for so many hundred years before it so owned them for properly
Canonical; Cajetan in c. 10. Estheri.
as Cardinal Cajetan confesses, who says, that all Fathers and Councils in
their expressions as to the larger Canon of Scriptures, must be reduced ad
Hieronymi limam, to S. Jeroms file. If the Canon be such, as we with the
Ancient Churches, with Josephus, S. Jerome, Ruffinus, Aug. de civ. Dei c. 36.
and cont. 2. Gaudentii epis. c. 23. Hieron. in Pro. Gal. and ad Demetriad.
Ruffi. in Symb.
the Council of Laodicea, Gregory Nazianzen, S. Austin in his riper years, and
others, did and do hold, as to the Old Testament; then is the Church of Rome
now in a very great and obstinate error. So that one way or other the Popes
Infallibility and his party is shrewdly endangered, unless they distinguish (to
salve their credit) the books into Protocanonicos and Deuterocanonicos, Books
of Divine Authority and Ecclesiastical use, as Sixtus Sen. Bibl. l. 1. and
Stapleton Fid. doct. l. 9. c. 6. do.

To tell you further, how undigestible to sober Christians (because
Preter-scripturall and Anti-scripturall) the Roman practice and opinion is, of
worshipping and praying to Saints departed, and to Angels; of worshipping with
Divine worship the Images, Crosses, and Relics, which they so credulously and
highly prize; their so unprofitable using of a Language in their Divine and
public Services, which to common people is not understood; so far from
Religion and the Apostles Rule, that it is against all sense and reason, 1
Corin. 14 9. 1 Cor. 14.19.
against the end of speech and devotion, which is to instruct or edify the
hearers; their snares of celibacy, and such vows as many have cause to repent
full sore, either that they made them, or no better kept them. Add to these,
their profitable and popular imaginations of Purgatory, they applying not only
Prayers, but Masses and Oblations, Pardons and Indulgences, yea other men's
merits besides Christ's, to those that are dead as well as to the living: and
this in so mercenary a way, as makes the most ingenuous Papists not a little
ashamed, to see Piety so much a servant to Policy, and Religion a lacquay to
Superstition. Add to all these so often decantated Instances of Papal errors
and presumptions, which have so little Scripture for them, one enormous Error
both in practice and opinion, which has so much Scripture-evidence against it,
as nothing can be desired more; yet in this, when we would have healed Babylon,
she refused to be healed. Jerem. 51.9.


This is their so great, The sacrilegious obstinacy of Romanists in the Lords
Supper, as to the Cup, etc.
rude and sacrilegious maiming of the Lords Supper, by their partial
communicating of the Bread only to the people, without the Cup; then their
strange racking of Christians Faith against all sense and reason, nay beyond
all Scripture Phrase and proportion of Sacramental expressions, or mysterious
predications, to believe they do not receive so much as Bread, but another
substance under the accidents and shows of Bread.

What learned Romanist can deny, but that both Clergy and Laity did, Olim omnes
fideles qualibet die cum sacerdote corpori and sanguini Christi communicabant.
Durand. Rat. off. div. l. 4.
for above a thousand years, receive the Lords Supper in both kinds, after the
constant use of all Primitive Churches, the Apostles Practice, and Christ's
Institution? Nor is there any more doubt, but that the ancient Churches
received those holy Mysteries with an high veneration indeed of that Body and
Blood of Christ, Roman obstinacy and credulity in Transubstantiation.
which was thereby signified, conveyed and sealed to them in the truth and
merits of his Passion; but yet without any Divine Adoration of the Bread and
Wine, or any imagination that they were transubstantiated from their own
seeming Essence and Nature to the very Body and Blood of Christ. B. Ushers
Answer to the Jesuits Challenge about real Presence. (...), etc. Iren. l. 1. c.
9.
Which fancy of ( Metemsomasis) changing the Body and Substance of Sacramental
signs into the bodily Substance of the Thing signified and represented by them
(as the incomparable Primate of Ireland has observed out of Irenaeus) began
from the juglings of one Marcus a Greek Impostor, or juggling Presbyter, who
using long Prayers at the Celebration of the Eucharist, had some device to make
the Cup and Wine appear of a purple, or red and bloody color, that the people
might think, at his invocation the Grace from above did distill Blood into the
Cup. After this the imagination spread from Greeks to Latins, by popular and
credulous fancies, promoted much by one Lib. de corp. and Sang. Christ. Who
lived an. 850. Videtur agnus in manibus, and cruor in calice, etc.
Paschasius Radhertus, who in a legendary spirit tells us of Flesh and Blood,
of a Lamb and a little Child, of appearing to those Receivers that were
doubtful of Christ's corporal presence; so he tells of limbs and little
fingers found in the hands and mouths of Communicants. From hence Damascen
among the Greeks, and P. Lumbard among the Latins, carried on this credulity,
or vain curiosity, using all their wits to make good this strange and
impossible transmutation of disparate subjects and substances: in which having
nothing from Sense or Reason, Nature or Philosophy, from Scripture-Analogy, or
Sacramental and Typical predications, Exodus 12.21. 1 Cor. 5.7. 1 Cor. 0.4.
Ezekiel. 37.11. Genesis 41.26. Dan. 4.22.
frequent in Scripture (as the Lamb is called the Passover, so Christ our
Passover; Christ the Rock, Vine, Door; these dry bones are the house of
Israel; the seven ears of corn are seven years, etc. the Tree is thou, O
King) to prove the Miracle, they fly to absolute omnipotency, whether God will
or no, and shut out all reasoning from Sense, Philosophy, Scripture. Nor do
they regard ancient Fathers and Councils: all which, though highly and justly
magnifying the great Mystery, yea, and the Elements consecrated, as related to
and united with the Body of Christ, as Signs and Seals of its Reality, Truth,
use and merit to a sinner; yet generally they held them to be substantially and
physically Bread and Wine, but Sacramentally, relatively, or representatively
(only) the Body and Blood of Christ: as the Council of Constantinople anno 754
consisting of 338 Bishops, (...). Bertramus li. de corp. and sang. Christi.
Panis ille vinumque figurate Christi corpus and sanguis existit.
did affirm, the Bread to be the Body of Christ, not (...), but (...), not in
substance, but in resemblance, use and appointment. Which Doctrine, as
Catholic, was maintained to the Emperor Carolus Calvus, by Bertramus or
Patrannus, anno 880. which was also maintained in England by Johannes Scotus in
King Alfreds time, until Lanfranks days, anno 1060. who condemned that Book of
Scotus about the Sacrament, agreeable to the opinion of Bertram; whose Homily
expressing his judgment at large against Transubstantiation, was formerly read
publicly in Churches on Easter day, in order to prepare men for the right
understanding and due receiving the Lords Supper.

Nor did the Doctrine of Transubstantiation obtain in the Church, until the
year 1225. when Pope Innocent the third in the Council of Lateran published it
for an Oracle, Conc. Later. c. 1. Christi corpus and sanguis in Sacramento
altaris sub speciebus panis and vini veraciter continentur; Transubstantiatis
pane in corpus and vino in sanguinem divina potestate.
That the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are truly contained under the forms of
Bread and Wine, the Bread being transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, and
the Wine into the Blood of Christ, by the power of God.

Hence followed the invention of Concomitancy, which presuming that the
Communicant received under the accidents and show of Bread, the whole Body of
Christ, and so his Blood, it was judged rather superfluous than necessary (yea
and less safe in some respects) for the Lay People to receive the Cup, or
Wine, and Blood of Christ apart, as he instituted, and the Church of old, even
the Roman, constantly practiced, as do the Greeks at this day, according to
what Christ commanded, and in what sense he gave it, and called it real Bread
and Wine: for such he took, such he brake, such he blessed, such he gave to the
Disciples, when he said, that is, this Bread, is my Body, this cup is my Blood;
such S. Paul understood them to be, and so declares this the mind of Christ, as
he had received it immediately from Christ, The Bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we are all partakers of that one
Bread. So, 1 Cor. 10.17. 1 Cor. 11.27.
whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup unworthily. Let a man
examine himself before he eat of that bread.

Certainly either the Apostles expressions must be affectedly very dark, and
his meaning different from his words, or he was quite of another mind than the
Papists are at this day, who durst, in the all-daring Council of Trent, damn
all those who follow Christ's example, use his words, and are of the Apostles
judgment, expressing their sense of the blessed Sacrament in his words; which
we think much safer to follow, both in the use of Sacramental Bread and Wine,
communicated to all Receivers, and in the persuasion we have of our receiving
true Bread and Wine, yet duly consecrated, and so Sacramentally united to the
real Body and Blood of Christ, which we faithfully behold, thankfully receive,
and reverently adore in that blessed Mystery, according to the ancient Faith,
Judgment, Reverence and Devotion of the Church of Christ, void of sacrilegious
novelties, and incredible superstitious vanities.

If we Christians of the reformed Church of England had no other wall of
separation to keep us from the Papal communion, than these two so palpable and
gross opinions, with their consequences, so rigidly enjoined upon all
Christians under pain of Gods eternal curse, yet both so dissonant from and
opposite to the example of Christ and the words of the Apostle; these were
sufficient to keep sober Christians at an eternal distance from them, lest (
knowingly) partaking of their sins, and abetting their wilful and obstinate
sacrilege, Rev. 18.4. Mal. 15.3, 6.
we also partake of their punishment, who in vain serve God after the
commandments and traditions of men, contrary to the Divine Word and
Prescription.

Nor will the silly shifts and pitiful salvoes serve here, which are used by
some Romanists, whose Learning, Wit and Sophistry are all set on work to take
off the aspersion, odium and envy of these gross and rude Innovations. How
childish and ridiculous is it to talk of the Popes imaginary infallibility, or
the Roman Churches usurped Supreme Authority, in cases expressly contrary to the
Institution of Christ, and the Apostles explication; from whom the Church of
Rome profess to derive their Religion! Nor may they with any foreheads or
modesty, becoming good Christians, so rudely vary from them; if they desire to
have the name and merit of faithful and good Christians; whose greatest
Liberty, Joh. 14.21, 24.
Duty and Honor is, if they love Christ, to keep his commandments, and
neither for pride nor policy to warp from them, and after clear remonstrances
to refuse to return in case of straying to a conformity with them: which
obstinacy makes little for the Pope's infallibility, or Rome's supreme
Authority, never challenged by Popes, or owned by any other Bishops in the
Church for 600 years after Christ, nor by Pope Gregory the Great, who, as an
holy and humble Bishop, abhorred the title and pride of that name, Universal
Bishop, as appears in his works, and others of the Ancients, of whom I gave a
particular account in my Hieraspistes, p. 249. Yet these two are the main
hinges on which the unhappy disputes of Christendom do turn, and the chief
anvils on which the animosities between Protestants and Papists are now
hammered, as otherwhere, so here in England. The ruin of which famous Church
is the greatest prize which the Romish party has gotten since Luther's days,
who began, not without his passions and infirmities, that pious Apostasy;
which being found just and holy, moved, as other Churches, so this of England,
not to forsake the communion of the Church of Rome, so far as it was or is a
Church of Christ, but only so far as it seemed to have been oppressed with a
Synagogue of Satan, deformed with such sinful deformities and sottish
fedities, besides their Court-tyrannies, as became no Christians to endure, who
were either not in the dark (and so could see the need they had to get out of
such a dungeon, full of mire and darkness) or were at their own dispose, as
was the state of the Nation and Church of England, depending on none, nor
subject to any, but God alone.

These so often recocted Crambes of Popish controversies, as I delight not to
aggravate, so I am forced here to touch some of them, to show you ( my honored
Contrymen) as what cause the Church of England had to reform her self, with
what prudence she did it; so how inconsistent it must be with good conscience,
for us in Engl. to revert to the Popish Communion, being of so different
persuasions from them: which wretched Apostasy (being the grand design and
agitation of Roman Counsels) will in time draw this Nation away from Gods
rectitudes to man's obliquities, if the Roman furnace and bellows be so plied
and advanced for them by these operators of several sects and factions, whose
end will be, whatever their aim is, quite to melt down the former fashion of
the Church of England, and its well-reformed state of Religion, that it may by
degrees run into the Roman mould and form.

CHAP. XVII.
NOt that I repeat these differences, Necessary separation and distance from
Rome, without uncharitableness. 1 John 1.5. and 4.8.
in order to increase or continue uncharitable bitternesses among any good
Christians, whose hearts are honest, though their judgments may be erroneous:
the blessed God (who is both light and love) knows that I have not any design
to widen the sad breaches of Christendom, or to hinder the charitable closings
of them, so far as may stand with good conscience and Catholic truth; whose
rule and ground ought to be the Word of God rightly understood, which is its
own best interpreter, and plain in those things of Duty and Persuasion, 2 Timothy
3.16.
of Faith and Devotion, which are most necessary to salvation.

I confess I cannot but vehemently approve (being now past juvenile heats and
popular fervours in Religion) the pious and learned endeavors of those
excellent men, who after Melanchthon, Cassander, Saravia, Wicelius, Thuanus,
Grotius, Casaubon, and others, have not only seriously deplored the sad rents
and wounds of Christian Churches, but sought to pour in Wine and Oil of
wholesome and unpassionate counsels; not palliating apparent errors, yet not
aggravating needless jealousies, nor inflaming mutual angers, in order to
gratify either the sacrilegious policies of Princes, or the pride of Popes, or
the factiousness of people.

I have no Antipathies in me, contracted by any Education, Custom, or
Acquaintance, against the Learned, Wise, and Worthy Romanists (or any others)
either as men or Christians: in both respects I love and esteem them, for their
many excellent parts and works, which are worthy of commendation and imitation.
To them and their pious predecessors, with whom we in England once were in full
communion, we thankfully owe (under God) (as did our forefathers) the
successive honor and happiness of our being baptized, and admitted to the
privileges of Christ's flock and people: to them we owe that conservation, for
the main, of true Religion as Christian (although it were wrapped up in some
either rotten rags or unhandsome clouts (as Christ in the Manger) for many
years;) the substance of which our Reformation in England no more changed, than
the Angel did the person of Jehoshua the high Priest, Zach. 3.3, 4.
when he bid take away from him the filthy garments wherewith he was clothed,
and to put on him change of fair and goodly garments. We owe to the Romanists
(though ill husbands of Religion in later ages) that Word and those Sacraments,
which they conserved and transmitted, like candles put into a dark lantern; by
which, when we came to open the light side, we saw both our and their
deviations from the good old way, which is Gods right way: to which we rather
choose to return under the name of pious novelty and just reformation, than
obstinately to continue with them in their pristine aberrations and inveterate
deformities. Though they were our Fathers in Nature and Religion; yet we think
it not only lawful for us, but our duty, without any brand of disobedient
children, to cure that leprosy or Hereditary disease which we had contracted
from them our less healthful parents, especially when themselves have
preserved for us and afforded to us that receipt of Gods Word, which teaches
and allows us the proper medicine and cure.

The successful use of which is not more comfortable to us than commendable in
us, notwithstanding our Progenitors obstinacy to continue in the same deformed
maladies, after they have seen the happy experiments of its Virtues and Remedy
upon us; who never gloried in, or designed any new Christian Religion, but
only the just Reformation and recovery of the old from those crazy distempers
and dangerous diseases, which by ill times and ill orders it had contracted.

1 Cor. 13.
I well know how little all Religion signifies without charity; that, next to
gross Ignorance, Immorality, Unbelief, and Impenitence, Uncharitableness is
the pest and poison of the Soul, which infects beyond the Antidote of Gifts,
good works and Miracles. I consider that many imperfections and failings are
venial with true charity, which covers a multitude of sins of infirmity; but
no perfections are acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 4.8.
or available to the enjoyer of them, if destitute of charity: that the measure
of a Christian is more by his heart than his head, by his humble and honest
affections than his high and puffing speculations: that in the bosom of the
Church, 1 Cor. 8 7.
as many perish by the rock of uncharitableness, as the flats of ignorance.
Therefore, however I see the Papists are most-what so supercilious and high in
the in-step, that they not only deny us Protestants of all sorts, even the
most noble, sober and moderate (which were in the Church of England) their
charity, but they despise all our charity to them; Vid. Papists reply to
Charity mistaken, against Dr. Potters offer of Charity.
yet I cannot think it my duty to requite evil with evil, or uncharitableness
in them with the like unchristian passion in my self, but rather to requite
evil with good, to commend what is good in them, to own with thanks any good
from them, to pray for them, to be ready to do all offices of Christian love to
them, to keep all inward Christian communion with them, and to be cheerfully
disposed to exercise all actual communion with them, in all such holy Doctrines
and Duties of Christian Faith and Worship, as agree to the Word of God, and the
mind of Christ, which are the center and circumference of all Ecclesiastical
union: that as the guilt and fault of Schism and Heresy is retorted on both
sides; so, I trust, it will only be charged there, where wilful Error and
Uncharitableness are found, but not on the Integrity and Candor of those who
are only driven and forced so far from visible communion, because they do
withdraw from what they saw to be gross Error, Idolatry, or Superstition,
according to the rule of Christ's Word, and trial of his Institution, evidently
cleared by the Apostles and Primitive Churches. Contrary to all which, unless
we will (even this whole Church of England) wholly comply with the Popes
Interests and Roman Errors, they loudly excommunicate us, renouncing all
communion with us, as with Schismatics and Heretics, fitter for fire and
faggot than Christian fellowship.

This notwithstanding on the Romanists part, yet I think it my part, and all
true lovers of Reformation and Christian Union, not to slacken or abate that
Charity and Christian good will, which is due to all men, and especially those
that profess to be Christ's Disciples, Gal. 6.10.
of the Household of Faith, where the Sick and Lame and Blind are parts of the
Polity, and Members of the Economy or Family; to pray night and day
impartially, that God would remove out of his Church on all sides, whatever
does offend his pure eyes, and any good Christian; that he would give both
Protestants and Papists grace, unpassionately to consider from whence the one
are fallen by humane policies, and to what the other transported by popular
zelotries; that whatever pride and peevishness is on either side, might be
composed and laid aside, by such General Synods, Free Councils, and Christian
correspondencies, as might bring forth some happy accord and harmony among
Christian Churches; that those sad and superstitious principles of everlasting
Schism might be removed, by which on one side they think, because in many
things they were right, therefore in nothing they could err; on the other
side, because in some things men have mistaken and erred, therefore they can be
in nothing right: for to this height both Papal and Antipapall Christians are
come, that each thinks their greatest piety consists in perfect and implacable
Antipathies; that their most commendable zeal for Religion is that which is
farthest from moderation, Christian temper or Charity; that where they like not
all, they must loathe all; that nothing is (afterward) (with good conscience)
to be used which has once been abused; that all things must be popularly cried
up, either upon the account of their Antiquity or Novelty, without regard to
that verity and charity which are the life and quintessence of true
Christianity.

Although I shall, by Gods gracious assistance, keep that station and distance
from Popish Errors, where my judgment and conscience, guided by Gods Word,
has set me; yet to leave the Romanists without excuse, as much as in me lies,
I do most earnestly desire, and should most industriously promote, such a
Christian and Catholic accord, as were most for the honor of Christ and the
peace of Christendom. I know the youthful fervours of some are jealous of all
such motions, and for fear of seeming lukewarm, they resolve to boil over
all bounds, till they quench both Truth and Charity among Christians, and make
way for Atheism, Turcisme, Confusion and Barbarity. These hotter heads
possibly dread what I calmly desire; that such a grand Catholic Convention of
able Ecclesiastics in these Western Churches might, by the consent of Princes
and chief Magistrates, be so orderly convened with Freedom, Impartiality and
due Authority, as might enable them to consent in one Canon or rule of Faith
and good manners; that the clear and concurrent sense of Scriptures might be
owned by all, in which all things necessary are contained either literally, or
by just deductions; that what is dark or dubious should be left indifferently
to Christians use and judgments; that all would agree in the same ancient
fundamental Articles of Faith, contained in primitive Creeds, also in the same
Sacraments, or holy Mysteries, to be devoutly celebrated, so in the same way of
good works to be practiced; that we might all have the same Catechize, the same
public Liturgies, so composed, that all Christians might with Faith and
Charity say Amen to them, and in their several Languages understand them; that
a Commentary on Scriptures, and Sermons containing all Christian necessary
Doctrine, might be agreed upon; that neither curiosities nor controversies
should be couched in public Prayers or Preachings; that all might enjoy the
same Catholic Source and course of Ecclesiastic Ordination, Ministry, and
Authority, so tempering Government and Discipline in the Church, that none
should justly think others too much exalted, nor themselves too much depressed;
that Catholic Customs, ancient Ceremonies and Traditions, truly such, being
consonant to Gods Word, and practically interpreting the meaning of it, might
be observed by all, leaving yet such freedom in other things to particular
Churches, as might be most convenient, yet still subordinate to, and to be
regulated by, the judgment of such a General Council, contrary to which none
should affect extravagant liberty, to the ruin of Christian Charity.

Blessed Lord! What good Christian could be injured by such a Christian accord
in the main concernments of Religion, which cannot be impossible in the nature
of the thing, because it was of old enjoyed, and many hundreds of years
generally preserved among all Christians and Churches, of any name and repute
in all the world? Nor did either the heat of Persecution or Prosperity (as warm
and soultry weather) dispirit this charity of Christians; who might still be as
capable subjects of so great a blessing from God on earth, if Passion,
Prejudice, Partiality and private interests on all hands were laid aside,
without parting with any true and real interest that concerns a wise or good
man, either in Conscience or Honor, in civil or religious regards.

CHAP. XVIII.
WHich blessed accord, so good and so pleasant to behold, Two grand
Obstructions of all Christian accommodation in these Western Churches.
how much more to enjoy, being not only possible, but most desirable and
commendable among all good Christians, two great Impediments or obstructions
seem to me chiefly to hinder, as to man (besides our ill deservings on all
sides at Gods hands:) which, however I do not hope by my weak shoulders to
remove, they being like the Gravestone on Christ's Sepulcher, Mat. 28.2.
whose sad and massy weight requires some mighty Angel from heaven to do it;
yet I cannot but here express my sense of them the more sensibly, by how much I
see the miserable distractions of the poor Church of England, and the
advantages given by some men's late immoderations and madnesses, to alienate the
very best and soberest of the Roman party from all propensity or thoughts of
any happy close, by reforming, and so reconciling the parts of divided and
distracted Christendom. Which evil effect (now more exasperated than ever) I
here instance in, as one of the saddest consequences following the divided,
dissolved and deplored state of this Church of Engl. which was the grand
mirror or example of Christianity and Reformation, from which neither
Romanists nor others did so much withdraw by many degrees heretofore, as now
they do.

The first great hinderance is, 1. Great Bar, The Roman Pride.
that exteme pertinacy and height of those of the Roman party, who so much
magnify themselves, their chief Bishop, their Church and Communion, upon the
specious names of Antiquity, Infallibility, and Primacy, as if no Church or
Christians in the world were to be considered, other then as novices, ignorants
and underlings, in comparison of the Roman Name and Majesty. Their Antiquity is
not denied by sober men, but their great Age is evidently attended with many
decays and infirmities, which are novelties; from which even primitive
Churches were not wholly free, both as to Humane frailty and Divine reproofs,
as we read in the Epistles of the Apostles, and of Christ to the seven
Churches. Rev. 2. and 3.
Nor do I know any privilege the Roman Church has above others, unless they
could make good their Infallibility, either as to their chief Bishop, or as to
any Council, in which he should preside. That their persons have erred in
Doctrine and Moralities, that they have varied from, and clashed against each
other in their public Decrees and Councils, yea and from not only pious
Antiquity, but the Scripture-verity, is so evident in what my self have here
lightly touched, and others amply demonstrated, that no ingenuous and honest
Romanist at this day can deny it.

For the affected Supremacy or Primacy which they so glory in and challenge,
not only before, but above and over all Churches, not as a matter of order and
precedence; but of power and authority; as there is no Law of God which
requires this, or any Church so far to own that of Rome, or to be subject to
it; so nor did the ancient Ecclesiastical Laws and distinctions lay more to
the Roman Inspection or Jurisdiction, than the Suburbicarian Regions, which
extended 100 miles from the City. That the Roman Bishop was owned, as the first
or chief Patriarch, in Order and Precedence, in Place or Vote, was not a regard
to the persons of the Bishops, or their authority, as if it were more than
other Bishops by any Divine or Humane right, but a regard to the pristine
Majesty of the City, and the Apostolic eminency of that Church, in which the
two great Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul, had not only placed much of their
pains, but ended their lives.

Lay aside the Roman pomp and insolency, no sober man but will allow the Bishop
of Rome his Civil and Ecclesiastical Primacy, as King James and other
Protestant Princes offered long ago: nor would any of the great Reformers,
Luther, or Calvin, or Cranmer, have grudged this, if the Bishop of Rome would
have submitted either to a General Council, or to the Word of Christ. If the
Roman Arrogance will needs claim and usurp more than its due (which was
heretofore rather invaded and challenged by them, and connived or winked at by
others, than ever given or granted to them by any power of lawful donation or
concession;) yet this cannot hold good by any former subtilty on their part, or
simplicity on the part of this or any Nation and Church, to the prejudice of
that fundamental Liberty and Honor, which are inseparable from the free people
of this Nation and Church, as men and as Christians, until the Roman power
has made them Vassals again, as a conquered Nation, and dependent Church upon
that Scepter and Mitre too: which thing as yet was never done since Rome was
Christian, and, I hope, never will be.

How much more worthy of the Learning, Prudence, Antiquity, Gravity, seeming
Piety and affected Majesty of that Roman Church, were it, for them to glory in
nothing so much as in the knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified; in
conforming all things of Religion to his Word and example, which has the
truest Antiquity, only Infallibility and eminency upon it; yea, and where they
see, as by the light of the Sun at noonday, there has been either aberration
from, or addition to the rule and pattern of Christ, through the ignorance, or
error, or policy of former Ages and Persons, there to return with such holy
and handsome Reformations to a conformity with Christ and the ancient Roman
purity, as will make no less for the glory of the present Church of Rome, than
it was some eclipse and diminution to their predecessors, to suffer so much
tares to be scattered among Christ's good wheat, which by Apostolic hands was
first sown and watered, to mighty increases for many hundreds of year? The
misery is, when knowing and learned men grow wilful, and serve their own and
other men's secular interests more than that of Christ and men's souls, they
choose rather to over-load the foundation of Religion, than to lighten it of
needless superstructures. How little could it hurt them, honestly to restore
the cup to the people, as was sometimes done to the Bohemians, at the
importunity of the Nobility and Clergy, and offered to Queen Elizabeth, as Sir
Roger Twisden proves, provided she would acknowledge the Popes Supremacy; where
(as Luther urged against Eccius) if the Blood of Christ, as is pretended by
Papists, be given Laymen by concomitancy with the Bread or Body, sure they are
as capable of the Cup in Christ's method, as in man's novelty and variation? What
could it lessen the Romanists, if Christians being on all sides taught the
real presence of Christ's Body and Blood, with the benefits of them in the
Sacrament truly offered, and reverently received by every worthy Communicant,
the modus of the Presence were left undefined, uninforced upon any Christians
belief, after the primitive freedom; which rather admired and adored that
Mystery, than disputed it, or determined precisely of it?

So in other things, as praying to Angels and Saints, worshipping before
Images, praying and offering for the dead, in order to mend their condition;
how would it no way abate Christian verity, or comfort, or charity, to lay
these Superstructures of straw and stubble aside, when we all believe that we
have by Faith in Christ access to the Throne of Grace? besides, men would more
take care to live and die holily, when they less expect other men's devotions
to relieve them after death. These and many other humane and impertinent,
because unprofitable, additionals to Sacraments and holy Duties, how easily
might they be spared without any loss to Religion, as with great advantages to
Christian and Catholic Communion? Nor should these just Reformations prove any
diminution to the estates or honors of the Roman Churchmen, if I might have
any vote or influence in so happy an agreement; which last jealousies and
fears in matter of Honor and Estate, are, I believe, the great wall of
partition and terror, that keeps off and scares the wary Romanists from any
thought of Reformation, since they see the Deformities, Uncertainties,
Beggeries, Ruins and Vastations, which at last follow some men's Reformations
of Religion, of Churches and Churchmen, if they be suffered to run on as far
as popular humors have a mind to gratify their passions with the Spoils and
Scorns of Religion and Churchmen.

This indeed is, in my judgment, the second great bar, 2 Great Bar, The
transports of Reformers.
the unmovable obstruction and unexcusable scandal, which lies in the way of
any Reconciliation, fair Accommodation, and Christian Communion among these
Western Churches: which in all probability might, by Gods blessing, have much
advanced ere this time, not only just Reformations of what was really amiss,
but happy Unions, in stead of those Rents and Separations which are now every
where predominant, if those of the Roman party had seen those sober bounds,
that Christian moderation, and those uniform fixations among Reformers, in
their Doctrine and Manners, which did become so good a work as Reformation is.
Nor were the most sober, learned, grave and impartial of the Romanists so much
against such a discreet and settled Reformation, as they saw flourished in
England, beyond any Church in all the world, in which due regard was had to
Primitive Order, and Catholic Antiquity, to the just rewards and dignities of
Churchmen, together with the sanctity and solemnity of true Religion, until
they discovered that immoderation, violence, unsatisfiedness, tumultuariness,
giddiness and transport, which long ago, even here in Engl. murmured and
mutinied against the Happiness and Honor of this flourishing Church and
State; men's Prejudices, Passions, and private Interests, tyrannizing over their
Reason, Religion, Charity, Obedience, and Consciences, still clamouring for
further Reformation, See M. Hookers Preface to his Eccl. Pol.
and threatening violence, if they might not every one set up their fancies in
Religion, under the name of through-Reformation, and bring in intolerable
licentiousness, under the color of Christian Liberty; talking so much of the
pattern in the mount, till they have laid this Church and its Religion in the
valley of death and shadow of darkness; so eager not to have an hoof left in
Egypt, that they have engaged themselves and this whole Church into a red sea,
and brought it to an howling wilderness: nor is it easy to be seen, without
multiplied miracles, how they will ever bring Christian Religion to any land of
Canaan, a state of rest or due Reformation, either here in England, or
other-where.

Which we must ever despair (hereafter) to see make any progress among the
Romanists, either as to private men's persuasions, or whole Churches
Reformations; especially since the late terrors of some English
Super-reformers have given so loud an alarm to all wise Princes and sober
People, especially to all prudent Churchmen, assuring them that there is
neither bottom nor bounds of some men's preposterous reformations: their
spirits are the black Abyssus of immodesty, injustice, disloyalty, cruelty,
sacrilege, inhumanity, barbarity; their teeming fancies are everlastingly
spawning with new inventions; their restless humors are always like a Sea
ebbing and flowing, casting up mire and dirt; their lunatic Religion aims to
abolish the use of all those things which have at any time been abused, though
never so holy and good in their use and institution: they condemn every House,
every Church, as well material as rational, to Ruin and utter Desolation, on
whose walls they fancy there are, or ever have been, any spots of leprosy or
superstition, though neither incurable, nor infectious, nor indeed any way
dangerous to Religion or men's Salvation: yea, they have such malevolent,
spiteful and envious principles in their spiteful and gainful Reformations,
that they judge all things in Religion to be unclean, out of which they may
make any temporal gain or benefit; that Bells and Steeples, Cups and Chalices,
Churches and Chancels, Glebes and Tithes, all Ecclesiastic Honors and
Revenues, are Popish, Superstitious, Antichristian, never sufficiently
reformed, till utterly alienated, and confiscated to the public Exchecquer, or
their private purses; that neither Church nor Churchmen are duly or thoroughly
reformed, till they are made like a barren wilderness, who were as the garden
of God; till, like Naomi, they be empty and destitute of all worldly comforts
and supports; till they look like Pharaoh's lean Kine; till Ministers preach
and pray themselves into absolute hunger and thirst, their souls fainting
within them, and their eyes failing, while in vain they look to be satisfied
with bread.

These are the holy sparks, these the blessed flames of uncharitable and
unquenchable zeal, which the Romanists see burning in some men's reforming
breasts, so long, till they become predatorious and adulterous, consumptionary
and culinary, false and base fires, which are not to be maintained, but by such
sacred fuel as pristine Piety, Charity and Munificence bestowed on the Church
and Churchmen, for Gods service and Christ's sake. Thus covetous hands and
sacrilegious hearts hold the nose of Religion so long to the grindstone of
their Reformations, till they have utterly defaced the Justice and Charity, the
Order and Beauty of Christian Religion: nothing is well reformed (they think)
while there is any thing left, at which they can repine, either in the
hospitable houses or at the charitable tables of Churchmen.

Certainly the Romanists must needs be eternally resolved against such
Reformations, as follow the dictates of men's stomachs more than their
consciences, and serve men's bellies more than the Lord, whom they scruple not
to rob and spoil, while they pretend to purge his Temple and reform his
Ministers, ever finding fault with the Church, while any thing is left to
Churchmen, or any booty yet to be extorted from the Clergy; never thinking
them or their Religion sufficiently circumcised, till they are quite
excoriated, exsected, eunuchised, that is, made so poor and dispirited, so mean
and embased, that they are wholly unfit and unable to do any thing that is
Generous, Ample, or Charitable, either in their Studies, Preaching, or Living;
aspiring no higher than that vulgar softness and popular easiness of some
men's praying and preaching, which costs men of competent boldness and voluble
tongues neither much Study, Charge nor Pains, beyond a few hours loose
meditating, and as much time in confident Praying or Preaching, as raw and
confused notions can stretch into.

When once the Clergy (or Ministers of Christ's Church) are thus reduced to be
as poor and mean in Spirits, Parts, and Estates, as hackney horses, which have
long journeys to go, and little provender given them to eat; when Ministers of
the Gospel, the Preachers and Professors of Divinity, are (one and all)
levelled to the condition of Pesants in France, or Boors in Germany, when they
are endowed with Scotch stomachs and stipends, either at the mercy of the
impropriating Lord, or at the sad charity of godly and well-affected people to
Mammon; when Churchmen appear in England, as they have for the most part in
other Reformed Churches (and now in many places here) threadbare, indigent,
necessitous, exposed to all shamefall and mechanic shifts: Then, O then, these
gracious Sacrilegists and godly Reformers can at once endure them and despise
them, without finding any great fault with them, when they find nothing but
beggary and ignorance attending them; then their Preachers shall be what they
will, in Title and Name, Apostles, Evangelists, Bishops, Presbyters,
Moderators, Pastors, Shepherds, Angels, gracious and precious men, men of God,
etc. though they be never such silly sots, shameless sycophants, and slavish
flatterers, either to Prince or People; provided they neither have nor crave
any thing. It matters not how little Learning, Piety, or Prudence they have,
provided they have no courage in their hearts, and no money in their purses:
they will not then dare to have many reproofs in their mouths against their
good Masters and Dames, their Lords and Ladies, upon whose Alms and Trenchers
they must feed, and upon whose Frowns or Favors they either thrive or starve.

CHAP. XIX.
The equity and charity of severe and sacrilegious Reformings.
THis, this has been the project and plat-forme at which some men's Reformation
has aimed, even here in England, the better to persuade Papists to renounce
their Superstition, and embrace the Reformed Religion, which (like a sharp
Razor or keen Ax) however it has yet spared some Underwood and Copices of
inferior Ministers, Presbyters and Independents most-what (for the better
shelter and covert of their designs;) yet they have felled to the ground all
the fairest trees and choicest timber, whose bark, boughs and bodies afforded
most advantage to the fellers: Not that these trees were useless or
fruitless, saplesse or decayed in this Church; but some Reformers had evil
eyes at their goodly bulk and breadth, their stately heights and tops. What
wise and impartial men at home or abroad, in present or after-ages, but must,
and do confess, that the greatest faults of most of the dignified Clergy in
England were their fair Houses and Revenues, their Manours and Honors? For
they were never legally charged or convinced (either as to their Persons in
particular, or their Functions in general, as Archbishops or Bishops, Deans or
Prebends) of any such misdemeanors as deserved, by any Law of God or Man, the
forfeiture of all their lawful Enjoyments and Ecclesiastic Preferments; which
were as the just rewards of their personal Worth and private learning, so the
public, national, and honorary encouragements of their calling and
profession, to the dignifying of Christian Religion, and the magnifying of wise
and moderate Reformations; such as became the Honor, Piety, Gratitude,
Munificence and Majesty of this English Nation, toward its God and its Clergy,
being blessed of God with abundance of all good things, and no less with
excellent Governors and able Preachers, as well Bishops as Presbyters, who
well deserved whatever the pristine nobleness and bounty of this State had
bestowed on men of Learning and Desert, as public Ministers of Religion sent
from God to his Church: whose true and just reformation was no diminution to
their just enjoyments, or deserved preferments; that so it might be no
discouragement, check or hinderance to others, from embracing such an innocent
reformation of Christian Religion, as consisted with Piety, Equity, and
Charity, with the Glory of God, the good of men's Souls; also with the Dignity
of Churchmen, and the Honor of this Nation.

Contrary to, and destructive of all which, many men, as in other places, so of
late in this Chapter of Engl. (which was the most complete pattern of excellent
Reformation, keeping a mean between doting antiquity and affected Novelty,
between Papal Superstition and popular Immoderation) have discovered such ill
will and envious eyes, not only against the Clergy and Church of England,
(which was heretofore honorably and handsomely reformed) but against all
National Churches, and orderly Ecclesiastics in such Churches; that they do
not think it enough (as Calvin, Beza, and the Augustan Confessors at first did)
for Bishops and Churchmen to forsake their convicted Errors, and amend their
scandalous Manners, where they are really amiss; but these severe
Super-reformers expect, yea, forcibly require, that all Clergymen should be so
sordidly tame and plebeianly patient, as not only with silence to permit, but
with a Scotizing zeal humbly to invite, to the utter ruin, as of their Order
and Function, so of their Honors and Enjoyments, those Lay-ravens, Cormorants,
and Harpies, who can not only devour and digest the Libraries and
Household Stuff, the Livings and Estates, the Flesh and Blood of Bishops and
other Churchmen, but like Ostriches they can greedily devour and wonderfully
digest the Timber, Lead, Stones, Iron and Glass of all material Churches.
There are many throats so wide, and gules so gluttonous in England, that they
can swallow down goodly Cathedrals, Bishops large Houses, whole Colleges and
Chapters, with many large Manours, as easily as gilded pills in syrup: Thus
reforming Churches and Churchmen, by rifling them of all their public
Patrimony and Endowments, till Churches and Churchmen are left, like the poor
man in the Gospel, naked and wounded, exposed to the transient, extemporary and
arbitrary Charities of such as shall pass by; who, like the Priest and
Pharisee, may be great professors, but little relievers of Religion or
religious men, who owe their Wounds and Necessities to such rude, unjust, and
cruel reformers, who loudly command all Romish Churches and Churchmen to
abhor such Reformation, as their ruin and utter undoing.

For these wild and vile methods of reforming will do as much good, in order to
win upon the Papists, or to stop the prevailing and spreading of Popery, as the
Popes exactions are wont to do upon the Jews, in order to their conversion;
who (as Sir Edwin Sands tells us) must forgo all their Estates when they turn
Christian, Sir Ed. Sands's Survey of the Western Churches.
to show the sincerity of their conversion; that so his Holiness may have the
happiness of the Confiscation, as they will have of their poor Conversion: a
threshold (certainly) so high, at the very Church Porch or entrance to
Christianity, and so to any wise man's reformation, that few will ever desire to
go over it, into any Church or Reformed Profession of Religion.

Therefore I judge it a most cruel principle and scandalous practice (taken up
by some sharp Anabaptists and other hungry Factionists here in England,
fomented by some subtle Jesuits, in order to make the Reformed Religion odious
and ridiculous to all the world) which seeks to treat all worthy Bishops, true
Ministers and deserving Churchmen, after such a base and penurious rate, that
tells the world they cannot be worthy Preachers in their esteem, till they be
not worth a groat; never sufficiently reformed, till they be quite ruined;
never truly holy, till they are deadly hungry; then only thoroughly reformed
and purged of all their dross, when they may truly and sadly say with S.
Peter, Acts 3.6.
Silver and Gold have we none, either for Charity, Hospitality, Civility, or
Necessity.

Which Apostolic poverty and Primitive beggary has been of late years, and
still is, the state of many venerable Bishops and other worthy Clergymen in
England, and is threatened to all, in order to make good that Canon of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17.
which requires double honor to those that rule well, and labor in the Word
and Doctrine. How much it has been, will be, or is ever like to be, to the
further advance of any true Reformation here or elsewhere; how worthy measure
it is to be meted to reverend Bishops and other grave Ministers, that had not
criminally offended any Law of God or Man; how worthy it is of the Honor and
Magnificence of this Church and Nation, I leave to God, to all good men, and
specially to your selves ( O my nobler-minded contrymen) to consider of and
judge; who are witnesses with me, how many grave Bishops, and other both great
and good Divines, have lived many months, nay many years, as they do to this
day, merely upon extraordinary providence, or small pittances, attending many
times Elias his merciful Ravens, miraculously to feed their famished Souls and
distressed Families.

Noble and potent encouragements (no doubt) to invite the Romanists at home or
abroad, or any other prudent persons that have either wit or sense, to embrace
such a reformed Profession of Religion, which (besides other Novelties and
Scandals, not easily washed away or excused) has that brand of Sacrilege upon
its hands and forehead, spoiling its chief Professors and Preachers of that
double Honor (Maintenance and Reverence) which in persecuting times were
zealously paid to the Pastors and Bishops of the Church, who, after the new
modes of some men's covetous and cruel reformings, must be stripped of all those
Honors and Enjoyments which pristine Piety and Bounty consecrated to Gods
Glory, his Churches Service, and the encouragement of his Ministers: who,
having difficulties enough in other respects to contend withal, ought in all
Reason and Conscience to be redeemed from the intolerable pressures of poverty
and contempt; especially in an age which is wantonly wicked, and impiously
petulant against all Governors, especially those that are spiritual.

CHAP. XX.
NOr is this sin of sacrilegious severity to be palliated, The excuses and
pleas for sacrilegious excesses answered.
as some Politicians and Parasites endeavor, by pleading, 1. That the Estates
of Bishops and Cathedrals were in few men's hands; 2. That the generality of the
Clergy was untouched and unconcerned in them; 3. That what they had was too
much for them; 4. That Religion had no advantage by them; 5. That the Public
needed those Revenues for other uses; 6. That some amends has been made to the
Church, by many Augmentations given to small Livings and godly Ministers.

All these are Fig Leaves, which cannot cover the shame of that Sin, Answ.
nor absolve the consciences of the Doers and Approvers. To each of them it may
be replied, 1. Though they were in the hands of few men, yet these had a just
and personal right to those Estates, no way forfeited by their misdemeanors;
no one honest man, to gratify a multitude, may be injured or deprived of what
is his own by all Laws of God and Man. 2. Bishops, Deans and Prebends, though
they were few men comparatively, yet influentially they were many, by the
eminency of their Places, their Learning and their Preferments; which though
few persons could actually enjoy, yet many were encouraged and excited by their
example, to deserve such preferments by their worth, though they never attained
them. 3. They were great decorations and advantages of Honor and public
Respect, given by the Nation to the whole Function of the Ministry; as the
Ornament of the Head and Eyes are the Crown and Glory to all parts of the Body.
4. To say those Preferments and Revenues which some Churchmen enjoyed, were
too much for them, is a speech more worthy of Nabals, Judasses, Ananiasses, and
Julians, than of Just, Grateful, and Reformed Christians: they must have very
evil eyes against God, his Church, and his Ministers, who grudge those means as
too much for twenty, nay an hundred of them, which some one Layman can now
possess and engrosse; whose worth, for Piety, Learning, Charity, Hospitality,
or any useful Virtue, is not comparable to the meanest of those men whose
Estate he enjoyes, and whose Bread he eats. 5. If there had been no other
advantages to Religion by those Preferments, Dignities, and Revenues, but this,
that so it became the Honor, Justice, and Policy of our Reformation, both for
the avoiding of Rapine or Sacrilege, also for the encouragement of the prime
Pastors of the Church, to conciliate respect both to them, and in them to all
other Ministers; these had been reasons enough, beside the Merits of the
persons, and Justice of their property, to have preserved their Estates from
such spoil. 6. For the public need of Church-revenues, and Church-mens
Estates; as no honest Man, so no wise and worthy State, ever needs any thing
which he cannot with justice attain; no man's or States Necessities can justify
Injuries against any one man, much less against many, and those Churchmen,
yea deserving Churchmen. 7. Besides, they that pretended the public want of
these Ecclesiastic Revenues, had far greater of their own; nor should the
Ewe-lamb have been taken away from the Church, where the State had so many rich
Flocks: in public necessities the Priests Lands should be last spent or
invaded, after the method of Joseph's Piety; nor should they be ever quite
alienated, though their Revenue were for a time borrowed. 8. God knows there
was in England no such necessity, but Plenty, Superfluity and Luxury; however
Laymen should rather beg, than rob God or his Church. 9. Nor was ever either
Prince, or Nation, or Family the richer (in a few years) which fethered their
nests by Church-revenues. Witness our Henry the 8. who took away vast Estates,
both movable and immovable, from Monasteries and other Collegiate Churches
(which seemed but the superfluities of Religion, the wens and excrescencies of
a Church) yet he spent more still, and left the Crown much poorer than he found
it: witness also his great Engine the L. Cromwell, who got an Estate ne^ to
the value of 2000 l. per ann. yet a little before the Kings death he lost his
Head; and in the third generation the Heir of his Family exchanged the last
remnant of all that estate in Eng. for a little Land in Ireland, where he might
live less noted and molested by Lawsuits. Commonly Sacrilege makes an evil
bargain, even as to this world, but ever as to another. 10. Lastly, as to the
amends made by laying some Impropriations, and by them making Augmentations to
some Ministers Livings; these are but a few feathers in stead of the body of a
fair Fowl; nor are they upon other terms than arbitrary Donations, not fixed
Revenues. The mending of small and incompetent Livings is a work worthy of the
Honor, Riches, and Piety of this Nation; but Peter ought not to be robbed to
pay Paul: the waters of the Sons of the Prophets might have been healed without
stopping up the wells and fountains of their Fathers and their Assistants,
which were of old from many Generations; which has given great scandal both
to Reformed and Roman Churches: few will ever desire such Reformations, as
extirpate Bishops, and confiscate all Church-revenues.

CHAP. XXI.
CErtainly covetous Principles and sacrilegious Practices are more pernicious
to true Religion, Sacrilege a great pest to Religion and stop to Reformation.
both as to the Profession and Power of it, than any superstition can be, that
holds the foundation: For Superstition is but as an Itch, or Scab, which may
easily be healed, and Religion restored to its Health and Beauty, as was done
in England; but Sacrilege is a Canker, which eats up the flesh, and frets the
very sinews and bones of Religion, defacing and destroying all the Beauty and
Loveliness, all the Strength and Stability of Religion, all its Honor and
Majesty, as to outward Polity and visible Profession; yea, and it infinitely
abates all the inward power of it, as to the Reverence, Value, and Love of it
in men's hearts. Superstition is but as Misletoe, which (in time) may grow upon
old fruit trees, which are of a good kind, and it may easily be pruned off; but
Sacrilege is like the very peeling or barking of a tree round about, which
will infallibly starve the Tree, and in a short time quite kill it.

Besides, Sacrilege has greater insinuations and temptations on men's minds
than Superstition, in as much as worldly Lusts or earthly Affections urge more
upon men, than those that are of a pious and spiritual notion; such as move to
Superstition by a kind of over-boyling or excess of Devotion, which makes men
prodigal of their Estates and Lives too: But Sacrilege is a Mischief so
levelled to those covetous, envious and despitefull humors which are naturally
predominant in men's hearts, that every one is prone to be courted by it, to be
tempted and inclined to it, out of hopes that some gain may accrue to them by
the spoils of the Church and robbery of Religion. Hence many common people
heretofore seeming to be godly and peaceable Christians, Titus 1.10.
when once the hope of gain appeared (though never so filthy lucre) have been
suddenly and strangely zealous to drive the principal Pastors of the Flock, and
chief Shepherds of this Church, out of their Estates and Honors, to utter
Poverty and Contempt, under the color and clamor of Reformation; which was
(as they pretended) to be so mended and perfected, as might invite all the
world, Papists and others, to admire, imitate and embrace the Beauty of such a
Bride, such a new Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, but in a storm and
whirlwind of Civil and Ecclesiastic dissentions, between which it was to be
stripped of its chiefest Ornaments and Encouragements, and must have henceforth
either no Bishops and orderly Ministers, or these no ample Estates or due
respect; no double honor, beyond what Tenuity and Contempt afford. Which
festring scratches have no more the true lineaments or marks of religious and
liberal Reformation, than Baboons, Apes and Monkeys have of humane Beauty,
Procerity and Majesty.

That maxim of the Apostle is in no experience more verified than in those of
the Churches interests and true Religion, 1 Timothy 6.10.
That Covetousness or love of Money is the root of all evil: for it does not
only famish the souls of such rapacious wretches of all true grace and
comforts, rising either from the love of God, or the care of their own and
their brothers spiritual and eternal good; but it prompts them to all manner of
injurious evils: it being impossible they should be truly holy in any kind, 2 Timothy 3.3.
who are so unjust and unthankful in the highest degree, despising their God
(whose property or peculiar Church-revenues are) also his chief Ministers, who
being by God and man appointed to feed the flock of Christ, ought not
themselves to be famished or debased; no nor should they want (much less be
undeservedly deprived of) those temporal encouragements in the work of the
Lord, or Gods husbandry, which give both credit, authority and comfort to true
Religion, in times of Peace, and in a land of Plenty.

Of which Blessings when once true Religion is miserably spoiled, and so
exposed in its Ministry and Order to all Distresses and Scorns, no man can
wonder if Popish Superstition, and all Factions of ungodly Appetites, do
mightily thrive and improve by the ruins of such Reformed Religion; no wonder
if Atheism and Irreligion, if barrenness and leanness, if Egyptian darkness
and death, prevail in a short time over such people and their poor plebeian
Pastors too, whose blood will be required of those sacrilegious Reformers, who
shall thus deform reformed Religion, impoverish a famous Church and flourishing
Clergy, embase a rich, a renowned, and an ancient Christian Nation, to the
indignity and injury of the public, as well as the danger of their own private
souls; to whom that sin of Sacrilege is rarely forgiven, because they seldom
have the grace truly to repent of it; for Repentance cannot be true (as S.
Austin says) unless restitution be made, which few Sacrilegists ever do, or
dream of.

Hence (as the learned Sir Henry Spelman observes, by instances of his
particular experience in many Families) further grows that moth, not only of
men's consciences, but of their Estates, which devours them unsensibly; a secret
pest of Families, which destroys at length all their increase: Job 31.12.
which that learned Knight had observed within sixteen miles compass of his
own dwelling in Norfolk, where so many Estates, first raised out of
Abbey-lands, were now quite extinct, or almost undone; but so many others in
the same compass, continued in flourishing or competent conditions, who were
of far ancienter standing, and not enriched with any Sacrilege; for so he
esteemed the dissolving of religious Houses, destroying of Churches, etc. of
whose Superstition and Forfeiture true Religion should have had the advantage;
Number. 16.39.
as the censers were holy, in which strange Fire was offered.

Yet might that former Confiscation, which devoured so many Churches, Chapels,
and Religious and Superstitious Houses, seem modest and venial, in respect of
some men's later attempts and designs against all settled maintenance of
Ministers. A Christian Church might well subsist, as those in primitive times
did, without Monks and Nuns, without Monasteries and Nunneries, without Abbots
and Abbesses, without Abbeys and Priories; but not well, if at all, without
Pastors and Governors, Bishops and Presbyters: these were Primitive,
Apostolic, after Christ's own pattern, followed by all Churches in the world,
necessary to the well-being, yea to the complete being of a Church, in any
Order, Polity, and regular Communion. Nor is the honorable support of
Church Governors and Ministers more comely than necessary, upon politic as
well as Ecclesiastic Principles, either by occasional Donatives, and
spontaneous Oblations, as in times of primitive Zeal and Persecution, or else
by settled Dedications and fixed Revenues, which were afterward in times of
Peace plentifully given to God and his Church, for the support and honor of an
Able, Hospitable and Charitable Ministry. As it had been high Sacrilege to
have taken away, by stealth or force, those portions which were given to
Ministers, when their Presbyters were yet ( sportularii) depending on the bag
and basket of Christians oblations, and the Bishops dispensations; so is it no
less sin to take away those settled Revenues, which were invested in God for the
use of his Servants, the Governors, Guides, and Ministers of his Church, both
for their Maintenance and Honor. Injuries are no less in taking away Lands
than Goods from men that are the just owners of them; nor does the Clergy in
these evil times more stand in need of convenient Sustenance than due Respect
and Reverence, which is hardly had where Poverty appears.

Yet since the noonday of Reformation has gloriously shined and continued in
this Western world, this (Meridianus Demon) sin of Sacrilege (as rankest
vermin breed in warmest weather, and horridest Monsters are gendred in richest
Soiles) has grown most bold and violent, an Epidemicall and unblushing sin,
aspiring to so full and unrestrained a Liberty, See the excellent History of
Scotl. by the Arch-Bish. of S. Andr. in the life of Mr. Knox.
as has not only much afflicted other Reformed Churches long ago (of which
great complaint was made by Luther in Germany, and Knox in Scotland, before
they died) but the venom and infection is come into the rich and generous
Nation of England, to so pernicious a measure and degree, that it reaches from
the crown of the head to the sole of the foot.

Heretofore (indeed) Sacrilege was not so much a Plebeian as Princely sin, the
attempt not of Pygmies but of Giants, not of the Populacy, but of Popes, of
Kings, of great Noblemen and Gentlemen; these only durst adventure to put so
rude affronts on God and his Church, by alienating, defrauding, detaining,
impropriating and confiscating what they could of holy things: B. Andrew's
(...). Dr. Baziere, Sir H. Spelm. Sir Ja. Semple, and others against Sacrilege.
against which adventurous Sin many learned and worthy men, in all Ages and
Countries (as in Engl.) as well Laymen as Ecclesiastics, have wrote by most
unrepliable demonstrations from the Law of Nature and Nations, from principles
of Reason and Religion, from Scripture Canons and imperial Constitutions; all
which nothing but a covetous violence and blind fury can gainsay or resist.

But now (while the Prince abhorred Sacrilege no less than Idolatry) every
petty, pragmatick, yea poor pesant, dares to adventure upon sacrilegious
projects and practices: it is sport to common people to plunder and pull down
Churches, to deprive Ministers of their legal and Evangelical Maintenance, to
strip this Church of its ancient Portion and honorable Patrimony, which is the
fuel and oil to keep the holy Fire of Devotion on the Altar of God, and the
bright-shining Flame of true Doctrine in the Lamps of the Temple: it is now the
Presumption and Ambition of mechanic and vulgar Spirits to rob God of his
Service, People of their able and honorable Ministers, the Flock of Christ of
its worthy Shepherds, and the Souls of people of those sacred Portions and
Provisions, which are in order to an Eternal Life. The meanest peoples
impudence dares (now) to dispute, detract, usurp, profane, confound, and
challenge as their own, all things sacred, both the Work and the Reward, by a
Spirit so licentious and insolent, that it is thought (by many of them) a great
offense, for any man to write or preach against this enormous and crying sin of
Sacrilege; yea, many Ministers, in other things of hot spirits and sharp
tongues, yet in this are ((...)) mealy-mouthed, of soft and silken tongues, and
therefore do not, because they dare not, in the least sort, quetch against
this odious sin of Sacrilege.

Which the very light of Nature abhorred as Parricide, and Heathens condemned
as the Murder of Parents; which the true God implies by his earnest
expostulation and sharp redargution to the Jews, Malac. 3.8. Qui sacrum sacrove
consecratum clepserit rapscritque parricida esto. Lex 12. Tab. l. 1. cod.
Justin.
Will a man rob God? (that is, any man that is not a Beast) but ye have robbed
me, even this whole Nation, by acting and assenting; for the Sin is not less
crying or criminous, because a popular or national sin. The Jews granted it
parallel, yea superior to Idolatry, as the Apostles Appeal to a man's
Conscience inferres, Romans 2.22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Idolaters own a God,
or Gods, under the Names and Figures of Idols; whom they honor and adorn with
costly Temples, (...). Cl. Alex. Tetrius peccat Deum Iudificans quam negligens.
Isid.
great Gifts and large Revenues, even to a prodigality: but Sacrilegists either
own no God, or they mock their God, making a spoil and sport, a play and a prey
of their Numen; which is the highest indignity can be offered to the Deity; as
rising from such vile and Atheistical Principles, which worse presume thus to
defraud and abuse their God, than not at all to own him or deny him. Nor have
the^ been wanting such signal strokes of providence in all Ages, avenging this
Sin even in the eyes of the Heathens, that men could not but confess,
Doubtless there is a God that judges the earth.

And certainly, as among Christians this sin of Sacrilege is at this day a
great scandal to all Jews, Mahometans and Heathens; so among Protestants or
the Reformed Christians, it is no less offense to Papists, and an obstruction
to their Reformation: for as Averroes chose rather to bequeath his soul to herd
at last with Philosophers, Sit anima meacum Philosophis.
than with the Papists, who profess to worship, and yet to eat their breaden
God; so many Papists resolve rather to live and die in their liberal
superstition, than conform to these penurious Reformers, who make no scruple to
worship, and yet to rob their God, to steal from him with their hands (like
holy Cut-purses) while they speak to him, and look him familiarly in the face
as Friends.

That I may speak my mind freely, in this point, before I die (out of love to
my God and Savior, to his Church, to my Country, to the honor of true
Reformed Religion, and the happiness of Posterity) I confess this sin of
Sacrilege seems to me, as of the greatest magnitude, so of the saddest
weight, and most malignant presage, against, not only private Persons and
Families, but against any Church and Nation that owns the true God, and his Son
Jesus Christ, in their Worship, Ministry, Order and Service. Nothing portends
greater Maladies and Plagues of Religion, than when this Comet blazeth in any
Christian Church or State. Commonly great Ebbs of Learning and Religion, with
great Floods of Ignorance and Atheism do follow, when nothing is counted sacred
and inviolable; when all things are counted godly which are gainful, and
reforming which are ravening; when (upon any civil Fewds and Breaches, wherein
Churchmen cannot but be one way or other involved) Laymen presently think
they have (as the plunder of War) a good title, not only to the Libraries and
Lands, the personal Goods and Estates of particular Ministers, but even to the
constant Revenues and perpetual Patrimony, wherewith the Church is endowed in
the name and right of God Almighty, for the Order, Honor and Support of his
Worship and Service. Nor do many covetous wretches make any scruple what they
do in this kind, if they have an Order under the hands of such as have power in
their hands: as if any Order or Act of any poor Mortals (made but yesterday)
could either prejudice and annull, or out and dispossess God or his Church, or
his lawful Ministers, of those just Rights, Titles, Donations, Possessions,
and Acquisitions, which either a Ministers private and honest Industry has, by
Gods blessing and the favor of the Laws, obtained, and no way forfeited, or
which other men's Piety and Bounty has humbly and thankfully long ago devoted
to God, his Church, his Service, and his Ministers, agreeable to the laws of
the Land, and the will of God, who commands us to honor him with our
substance, Prove. 3.9. Mal. 1.10. Mal. 3.8. Prove. 20.25. Eccles. 5.4.
graciously accepts such grateful oblations from us, and precisely forbids us
so far to mock him, as not to pay our own vows, much more to rob him of the
fruits of other men's devotion and vows, whose Donors sealed and confirmed
those their (Anatham^ta) holy Gifts and Consecrations to God and his Church,
with dreadful execrations and just imprecations of Divine Vengeance, on any
that shall presume to alienate the Gift from God, and violate the last Will of
those pious Benefactors, who are dead many ages ago. Truly I cannot see how
either Committees, or Soldiers, or Parliaments, Prove. 20.25. It is a snare to
the man who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows makes inquiry.
or Princes (all of them but momentary poor worms, clothed in specious pompous
Titles) can pretend any good Title or Authority to Gods derogation and
diminution, who is the Lord Paramount, the principal and proprietor in the
Churches Estate, and in Church-mens public Goods, which they have upon the
account of his service, as his salary and reward; for which his Word is not
only a sufficient Justification to Givers and Enjoyers, but it ought to be a
sufficient Caution from ever sharking and alienating those things which are not
( bona caduca and mobilia, but successiva and perpetua) momentary and movable
goods, but ought to be as lasting as true Religion and the Service of God among
mankind.

Nor do I think this execrable sin of Sacrilege more desperate and damnable in
its chief Authors, first Actors and Abettors (dying impenitent, that is,
without restitution) than infectious, pestilent and damageable to Posterity and
After-ages, who after this example will, like Locusts and Caterpillars, in
time, not only devour all things that are holy, and leave nothing but Beggary,
Contempt, Plebeian and Stipendiary Dependency, for the Alimony, Honor and
Encouragement of Gods constant Ministers and holy Ministrations; but infinitely
discourage all Christian Liberality, Gratitude and Munificence, from dedicating
any thing of settled Emolument to the Service of God and use of his Church,
which will be in worse condition than the ordinary Hospitals, or the Halls and
Companies of London, who are capable of any Endowments. Which I more fear,
because I find that the most popular, panick, and compliant Preachers, who, in
all those ruffling times wherein this Sin marched most furiously and
triumphantly, have had many opportunities to have given some check and stop to
it by their preaching or writing before both the great and the many; yet not
one of all those grand Masters (otherwise Boanergesses, Sons of Thunder enough)
have ever (that I have heard or seen) fallen upon this execrable sin of
Sacrilege, by pen or tongue, to reprove it or repress it: nay some of my own
coat have made no bones to be Actors and Applauders of it, to eat the Flesh and
gnaw the Bones, which some Laymen (as over-gorged) have left, who probably
would not have ventured thus on holy things, if they had not been animated by
some Pulpiteers to prey upon the Church and Clergy. Yea, some Preachers have
been not only perswaders to invade and alienate Church Lands, but themselves
have purchased them to their private Estates and secular uses, to the
perpetual infamy of their Names, and horror of their Souls and their
Children, that shall enjoy those sacred morsels.

Hence is it that the warmest and most over-boyling Reformers of later days,
never so much as summoned, arraigned, questioned, or censured this Monster of
Sacrilege, this reforming Extortion, before their new Consistorian tribunals.
The lean sin of Sabbath-breaking (even to a poor man's gathering a few sticks,
or earning a penny to relieve his hungry belly, or walking abroad to refresh
his spirits) this is often scared, catched and scratched (together with swearing
and drunkenness, private, personal and petty sins in comparison) in the
renewed nets of State-Acts and Ordinances; but the fat sin of Sacrilege ever
goes scot-free, as if it had the Privilege of Parliament, not to be arrested:
it was never yet called to the bar of Lords or Commons, never examined by civil
Justice, never presented or promoted by the reverend Scot-English Assembly,
which were as the grand Inquest, the Promoters or Apparitors so long to the
long Parliament.

For even these Rabbis sitting so long in Moses his Chair (and helping to
displace all Bishops, with all dignified Churchmen, from their Convocations
and Cathedrals, upon I know not what supposed misdemeanors) yet in their large
catalogue of scandalous sins, which they had long studied, and at last, with
much gravity, presented to the Honorable Houses, in order to a Presbyterian
perfect Reformation of all things amiss, as to Conscience and Religion in
Church and State, they had not either so good memories, or so good courages, or
so good consciences, as to reckon among that black rabble, or to impeach, no
not so much as to mention, or once to name, either the sin of Sacrilege or of
Schism. Good men! sure they either over-saw these sins in the crowd (though
they are (one of them at least) higher by the shoulders than most they there
enumerate;) or they saw that a dispensation of course was to be granted to
these sins, which became so popular and epidemick, yea so specious and gallant,
as being clothed with the spoils of the Church, and wearing the Liberties of
the people for their Liveries.

It is not a less true than pertinent observation, which a very prying and
perspicacious eye has made, as to those larger Annotations on the English
Bible, printed 1646. (by persons of commendable Learning and Industry (some of
them) if they had been of more impartiality:) These Annotators, in every place
through the Bible, where the Word and Spirit of God signally commands them to
brand the sin of Sacrilege with a black mark, as one of the Devils hindmost
herd, do so slily and slightly pass it over, as if they had neither seen nor
smelt that foul Beast; as if there were no Gall in their pens, no Reproof in
their mouths, no Courage in their hearts against this Sin: they scarce ever
touch it, never state it, make no perstrictive or invective stroke against it:
which he thought could not be their ignorance, or inadvertency, but the
cowardice, cunning and parasitisme of the times; in which they were content,
for some Presbyterian ends, to connive at Sacrilege in those good Lords and
Masters, whose charity they hoped (yea I heard some of them profess they
expected) would turn all that stream which Bishops, Deans and Chapters enjoyed,
to drive the Presbyterian Mills, to keep up the honor of Ruling and Teaching
Elders. Otherwise it had been impossible that any thing besides a studied
silence and affected palpation in men of any light and sight, could have so
gently slid over that place of Achans sacrilege, Josh. 6.7. or that of
Belshazzars, Dan. 5.2. where they blame his drunkenness, but not his
sacrilegious profaneness, which the emphasis of the Text more points at than
the other. (...) Callide intervertere aut surripere quippiam, ne ad domini
notitiam and usum perveniat.
Nay, upon Acts 5. they urge against Ananias and Saphira the sin of Lying,
Covetousness and Hypocrisy, but not that of their Sacrilege, and defrauding
God of what now was his, and not theirs, being put out of their power by
pretended donation of the whole, which was the capital crime, withdrawing and
purloyning from God and the Church, part of that estate which they had
pretendedly devoted ( in solidum) the whole to sacred uses, and so put it out
of their own power to resume or detain it, as S. Peter tells them: yea, on Romans
2.22. these soft-fingred Censors very gently touch that rough Satyr of
Sacrilege, where it is expressly put in the balance with Idolatry, and
overweighs it, as the more enormous. So on Levit. 25.34. where the Levites
lands are forbidden to be sold; and on Genesis 47.22. where Joseph's Piety and
Pharaoh's Policy forbear to buy or sell the Priests lands; and on Ezekiel. 47.1.
and 48.14. where, in order to support the Evangelicall Service and Ministry,
care is taken to appoint an holy portion of land to be laid out for the Priests
as an holy oblation to the Lord, which might never be sold.

In all these places, which are as a bright cloud of witnesses against
Sacrilege, these wary Annotators shut their eyes, as if they could not see the
prodigy; there is altum silentium in all their Glossaries; this Agag was to be
spared; by a grave and prudent silence, they do not so much as put in any
caution against it, much less pass any crimination or condemnation upon it:
but as if they were Chaplains at once serving the Lord, their Bellies and the
Times, as partaking of the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils; so do
they rather coaks than crush this Cockatrice; seeming (forsooth) fearful of
appearing superstitious men, or but lukewarm Reformers, if they damped some of
their good Masters zeal, by bitterly inveighing against, and justly damning
this darling and damnable sin of Sacrilege; which puts on the form, not only
of Godliness and Reformation, but of Thrift and good Husbandry, to save the
public purse in the necessary expenses of a Civil War; which in some men's
desires, as I believe it had never been begun, but only in order to destroy
the Government of the Church, and confiscate those Revenues, so (all things
computed) I no less believe that the State or secular purse has had but a
dear penniworth of those Church Lands, at so vast a charge as has attended the
War, first commenced by Presbytery against Episcopacy.

CHAP. XXII.
WHich Flames having soon consumed the Lands, Houses, The insatiableness of
sacrilegious spirits unrepressed.
and Revenues of Bishops and Cathedrals (whose honor was the public Honor of
this Nation, of this reformed Church, and of every sober Minister) grew so
masterlesse, that they threatened not only the Livings of Parochial Ministers,
but the very Nurseries of Learning, the Schools of the Prophets, the Colleges
and Lands of both Universities; which seemed to be spared and reprieved a while
by the loud outcries of those men who had there got into the warm nests of
other Birds, whom they had driven from thence; but the wide jaws of some
sacrilegious spirits did, and do still gape and grin upon these Ecclesiastic
and Academick remaining Morsels, grudging that they are not satisfied with
them: nor will they fail to be devoured in a few years, if persons of
Sovereign power and Nobler spirits do not protect them, as hitherto they have
done, from that ever-craving leech of Sacrilege, which lives unsatiably crying
Give, give, in some Laymens breasts; nor may they be too confident of every
Parliament to be their Friends or Defenders.

A notable alarm and instance of which danger the Lord Herbert gives in the
reign of our Henry the 8. Hist. of Hen. 8.
who as an Helduo or unsatiable gulf, having swallowed up, digested and
egested as much Treasure and Lands as would have purchased a good Kingdom, and
maintained it in all equipage, both Military and Civil, becoming Majesty, yet
still indigent and necessitous, he was offered by the House of Commons in a
Parliament toward his later end, all the Lands and Houses of the two famous
Universities, to be confiscated to his Exchecquer, by a most mechanic
prostitution of the Learning, the Honor, and the Piety of the Nation. But that
dreadful Prince told them, not without a just scorn, that he had too much of a
Scholar in him to destroy two such Universities as the world had not the like.
And he had so much of a Christian Prince too, as not to destroy Bishops and
Cathedrals, or to take away their Houses and Estates; but he rather added to
them, and erected four new Bishoprics out of the Lands of some Collegiate and
Monastic Churches. Had he with the same moderation and justice then restored
Impropriations to the Church, for the competent maintenance of Ministers in all
places, he had done a work so glorious and useful to Religion, as might have
expiated all other his Royal Extravagancies.

For my part, I am confident the just God will visit this sin of Sacrilege
upon any Person, Family or Nation, that are guilty of it: nor will the
Controversy ever be taken up till either full vengeance, or due restitution
and redemption be made, of what was Gods portion, for the Order, Honor and
Maintenance of his Service and this Church, no more than Israel could stand in
battle, while Achan and the accursed or devoted thing was among them. Josh.
7.12.
The Safety, Honor, Peace, Plenty, Happiness, and chiefly the Piety and
Religion of any Nation, professing the Name and Worship of the true God, all
these will fatally decay, and be upon not only great hazards, but diminutions
and distresses, while Professors of Religion and Reformation make God the
Father, and Christ the Godfather of any Sacrilege, as if it were as acceptable
a service to them, to take away from such a Christian and Reformed Church such
means as was fit to maintain (and anciently devoted to) the honor and
encouragement of Christ's Ministers and Governors of his Church, as it was to
burn the Chariots, and hough the horses of the Sun in pieces. 2 King. 23.11.
It Is true, all that is dedicated to false (that is no) Gods, is an injury, and
a sacrilegious robbing of the true God; therefore those Donations may lawfully,
in some men's judgments, be taken away: but none ever allowed true men to be
false to the true God, to rob and defraud him, who is the maker and giver of
all. Shall Christians grudge to give that to Christ, yea and rapine that from
him which others have given to him, who is the repairer and restorer of all?
No, good Angels can guard those men or that Nation which they see guilty of
robbing that good God they profess to worship.

Certainly Sacrilege is the more notorious sin, and of deeper die, by how much
it is committed among Christians, and most where they profess to be most
reformed, who should best know how much they owe to God, how they should value
the gift of his Son Jesus Christ to die for them, and the feet of his
Messengers, who preach those glad tidings to poor sinners.

Nor can I but observe, how God has already visited with no small or light
strokes of his vengeance, as the whole Nation, so in particular, the sinful
and shameful silence even of those Ministers who were so cold, cunning and
indifferent, as to the reproving of Sacrilege and Schism, provided they might
(in other designs) gain their process. They and their dictators too have, for
the most part, both in England and Scotland, reaped nothing but Shame and
Infamy, Reproach and Contempt, which is the shadow ever following Sacrilege,
even among honest Heathens and true Christians, while they could liberally
declaim and lift up their voices like Trumpets, in an Oratory not more loud and
popular, Sacrilegi Diis exosi, hominibus infames. Valor. Ma.
than flat and insipid, against a few decent and innocent Ceremonies, against a
handsome and wholesome Liturgy, against learned, godly and reverend Bishops,
far their betters, against Ancient and Catholic Episcopacy, which preserved
the Order and Unity of the Church; but in the great concerns of Gods Glory,
this Churches Honor, the Clergies Maintenance, the good of men's souls, and the
credit of the Christian and Reformed Religion (which were all so invaded by a
bold and resolute Sacrilege, threatening all settled Livings and Maintenance of
Ministers and Scholars) there they peep and mutter, (...) ventriloqui. Isa.
8.19.
like Obs and Pythons, whispering as out of the earth and their bellies, not
from their hearts, more dubiously than the Oracles of Apollo, and more
obscurely than the Sibyls leaves. Thus artificial are some men at the
swallowing of Camels and sticking at Gnats.

I do not forespeak or imprecate a further evil day upon any, but rather I
pray for Personal, yea National Repentance, Amendment and Pardon; without
which I am confident God will vindicate his great Name, and the name of Jesus
Christ, together with the Honor and Principles of both Christian and true
Reformed Religion, from so great a scandal as Sacrilege is, against all those
men, whatever they are, their Parties and Posterities, who not only dare to
commit it, but to connive at it, yea commend it, yea to boast of it, yea impute
it to the impulses of Gods spirit, to their zeal for Religion, and to their
aims at a perfect or through Reformation. After all which noise and rattle,
God knows, much is more deformed than ever in Religion, both as to the Polity
and power of it, the outward Order and inward Efficacy; nothing truly reformed
by robbing the Church, but only the tenuity of some men's former fortunes.

If the persons of any Churchmen in England had by their misdemeanour legally
forfeited their use and enjoyments of such holy things, as they had in Gods
name, and as the Churches servants; yet certainly the whole Church and Nation
had not lost their right in them; Posterity could not consent to be deprived of
those advantages of Learning and Religion, and I am sure Gods title to them can
never fall under any forfeiture or escheat, whose special patrociny those
Demesnes were. In the Goods and Lands belonging to the Ministry and Church of
Christ, for the Service of God, for the Education and Maintenance of his
Ministers, for the well-ordering and Government of the Church, and Relief of
the Poor, who ever presumes to impropriate them by mere Power, or purchase them
to his private Estate, had need have either a very good penniworth of them, for
they will destroy more than they bring, or a better title than Ananias had to
what was once his own, or than God himself has to them, when once devoted and
given to him; yea, they need more power to preserve such Estates to their use
and their Posterities, than God has to bless or curse both them and theirs.

I have read it as an observation made out of many Authors, that the holy
vessels of the Temple, which were taken from Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, and
tossed up and down to many Countries and Cities, in Europe, Asia and Africa, In
Sir H. Spelmans discourse of Sacrilege. MS.
did (as the Ark among the Philistines) carry always a storm and calamity with
them, with such a sacred horror, that no man durst melt them or divert them to
secular uses or private benefit, until they were at last brought out of Africa
from Carthage (as I remember) to Constantinople, and there dedicated by a
Christian Emperor to the service and honor of Christ, in the goodly Church of
Sancta Sophia, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5. Hist.
which Constantine the Great built and endowed with many goodly both Vessels
and Revenues, as Eusebius tells us, yea and commanded all goods taken from
Christian Churches in former times to be restored.

Sacrilege, what fair face soever it carries, has the tail and sting of a
Serpent; nor can any man die with peace, or hope for the prosperity of his
Family after him, who knowingly is guilty of that Sin. Modest and Honest
Christians will not (no not in their extremities) take from God and his Church
so much as a shooe-latchet to make them rich; David would have been famished (I
believe) rather than by force have taken the Shewbread, 1 Samuel 21.5.22.18.
or Priests portion from them, which was a work only fit for Doeg, who durst
take away their lives.

CHAP. XXIII.
Pleas for Sacrilege answered.
I Know it will be pleaded by some (that are more politic than pious,
Religionis trapezitae) 1. That civil Polities have the absolute supreme power
over all things of civil Rights and secular Enjoyments, to dispose of them as
seems most for the public Safety, Profit and Honor; 2. That whatever is
acted, passed and possessed by such Authority, seems valid and unquestionable;
3. that those Lands and Revenues which nourished Bishops, Deans and Prebends,
were superfluous, if not superstitious, as to the point of Christian and
Reformed Religion; 4. That if there be any fault in any men's first invading and
alienating things sacred, yet private possessors, either by gift or purchase of
them, are afterward in no fault, as having the highest civil Right to what they
so enjoy; 5. Besides diverse Princes and States have disposed, as they pleased,
of Church-Revenues.

To all these pretensions every man's own reason and conscience will first and
best give answer, if it be not partial, and bribed by its own private gain:
but to open the eyes of such as are willingly blind, I must tell them, in words
of soberness and truth, with all due respect to whatever powers are ordained
of God as supreme among men, 1. No man, as to his own private civil Estate (to
which he has a good right in Law) would think it just, without any fault done
by him or proved against him, to be deprived of it, and turned out of all by
any reason of State. How then can he think it just, as to any Church-mens
Ecclesiastic Estates, that they should be outed of their Estates, to which
they have both a civil and religious Title, both Gods Right and Man's Donation?
No Christians should offer that measure to Christ and his Ministers which they
would not have offered unto themselves. 2. Though civil polities may have the
supreme power over particular men's Estates, among men, yet it is a power (sub
graviore regno) subordinate to Gods Sovereignty, and ought to be subject to
those rules of Reason, Justice and Religion, which he has given mankind, and
especially Christians: the greater any men's Power is, the more strict the Piety
and Equity of it should be; for they are subject to err and to sin no less
than private men, and are no less punishable by Divine Vengeance, both singly
and socially: whole Nations may rob God, and be accursed of him. 3. Mal. 3.
Civil polities in their due conjunctures are indeed justly counted supreme
upon earth, being, as they ought to be, free and full; when all Estates,
called, convened and concerned in public Counsels and Transactions, have
liberty to plead and vote, deny and grant, to hear and argue, to judge and
determine, according to the conscience of all, and not according to the
prevalency and bias of any one party, nor exclusive of any men's consent which
ought to be had in such cases, either as to the right of Enjoyment, or as to
the joint, legislative and supreme power, which only can make a legal
alienation of any civil rights. It Is evident that the most united and excellent
Parlaments in England for Piety and Peace, did abhor and avoid Sacrilege as a
sin against God, his Church, and all good men. The Kings of England were bound
by Oath to preserve the State and Rights of the Church; nor were Peers and
People less bound in duty and gratitude to God and man, than if they had been
sworn. 4. It does not appear by any Law of God or Man, in Reason or Religion,
that any humane or civil power has any authority or jurisdiction to the
prejudice of Gods Rights and Interest, whose the Estate and Revenues of the
Church are in Fee, as chief Lord, being dedicated to his Service, Worship and
Glory, and are indeed in no man's property, however in Church-mens use, as Gods
Tenants. The acts of power and will may prevail among men, and hold good in
Westminster Hall, in foro soli and humano; but they cannot give a right in foro
coeli and conscientiae, before Gods Tribunal, or in a man's own Conscience,
which regard not actual and arbitrary Power, but internal Right and Equity,
which forbids any injury to be done to any man, Acts 5.35. Ye men of Israel,
take heed to your selves what ye intend to do, as to these men. John 19.23.
and specially to those that are the Ministers or Servants of Christ and his
Church, whose injuries redound to God himself. Good Christians must consider
not quid factum valet among men, but quid fieri debuit, as to the exact
righteousness which God requires. The dividing Christ's garment among the
Soldiers, and casting lots for his Vesture was not sufficient to give them a
good title to his Clothes as their fees, when Christ was so partially and
unjustly condemned. 5. The practice of some Princes or Common-weals is no
precedent or rule for Christians to follow, no more than Jeroboams reason of
State to prevent the return of Israel to David's house justified his Calves.
Yea, though we read some tolerable or good Kings of Judah did make bold with
the Treasures of the Lords house, to redeem themselves, 2 King. 18.16.
and both Church and State, from hostile invasions (as the ancient Clergy often
sold their rich Vessels or Chalices of the Church, to redeem captive Kings, as
our Richard the first, and other Christians) yet this is recorded by the Spirit
of God to their diminution, though it were but borrowing the gold of the Doors,
and superfluities of the Temple, with a purpose (no doubt) to restore them in
better times: but we never read that any Prince or People of any note for
Piety, did ever take away the Lands and Houses of the Priests and Levites of
old, nor those Revenues, Tithes and Oblations, which were the honorable or
necessary subsistence of Evangelick Ministers, the very livelihood of many
worthy men and their Families, the public rewards of learned Men and useful
Virtues, also the honorary encouragements of all Ministers, and advantages of
Christian Reformed Religion, especially in Engl. where Governors in some
eminency will be found as necessary for the order and well-being of the Church,
as Ministers are for the praying and preaching part. 6. If the first Alienators
of holy things be, as principals, sinners and sacrilegious against God and his
Church, I fear it will be hard for those to excuse themselves of being
accessory to the Sin who (knowingly) accept or purchase them at the second or
third hand; however the title may by power be made good among men, yet sure
there is no Power valid, or Title good against God, nor can unjustice stand
before his exact justice; if no wise or honest man will deal in dubious Estates
or cracked Titles, as to civil Bargenings and Purchases, much less where God
and the Church, besides particular men and Ministers too, make so pregnant
Claims and clear Titles by Law, that nothing but absolute will and power of
man can be brought to make good the contrary. Nothing is more for the honor of
a Christian Nation, than to have no men in it that would buy Gods Portion, and
the Churches Patrimony. 7. He that had bought the Wedge and Garment of Achan
ignorantly, might have been excusable, Josh. 7.
as to any complication with, or comprobation of his Theft and Sacrilege; yet,
no doubt, he must have restored them, as Anathemaes devoted to God, if he
expected any Peace or Comfort: but whosoever had knowingly bought or received them
of Achan, could not but be guilty of his sin, and under the same condemnation;
nor could Israel ever recover its Courage, Strength and Honor, till the camp
was cleared of those both goods and persons, who stood before God under the
brand, offense and high guilt of Sacrilege. 8. Every man's own experience or
conscience will give him the fullest convictions, as to this sin: and I am of
opinion, that no man's Estate is so fat and thrifty, by what he has at first,
second, or third hand taken or detained from the Church, but he feels the
sharp stings and gnawings of his own misgiving conscience, besides his famished
and fearful soul; which justly dreads to look Judgment or Death in the face,
when he knows how ill account he can give either of goods unjustly taken and
detained from the right owners of them, or (willingly) bought at under rates
from a second had. If personal and private injuries done against the estate
and livelihood of any one poor man, will oppress the greatest oppressor at the
last day; where will they appear who are found oppressors of many men, and
these religious men too, yea and Ministers of God and his Church, for the good
of the souls of many thousands for many generations?

Nor will it excuse some men, that they are (upon occasion) zealous to relieve
poor Ministers and other distressed Protestants abroad, if they help to undo
and impoverish their own Pastors at home. Sacrilege is certainly a scandal
not to be so easily wiped away from the face of any Reformed Church and
Religion, if it were either the principle, practice, or approbation of any,
which it never was, is, or will be: nor can so great a sin be so cheaply
expiated by any men, with alms given to relieve some poor men in their
distresses.

But I have done with this Viper, this Dragon, this fiery flying Serpent;
against whose poison and fierceness I know no Antidote sufficient, but a pure
heart, innocent hands, and a good conscience: nor is any charm potent enough to
resist its contagion among mean and mercenary spirits, when once it comes to be
an indulged and exemplary mischief, fortified as with a Law, yea consecrated as
the brazen serpent, for an healing Emblem, that is, a Lay-meanes to reform
Churches, to regulate Clergymen, and to recommend Christian Religion, which
must all be impoverished that they may be improved. No arms are strong enough
to give check and repression to its insolency, but such thunderbolts as
Jupiter is said to have used against Typhoeus, or Briareus, or Enceladon; See
B^chartus Geog. S. de Sicul. phoenicibus. l. 1. c. 28. Qui super impositi
spirans per montis hiatus. Aeter^os vomit ore ignes. En celadi bustum qui
saucia membra revinctus Spirat inexhaustu^ flagranti pectore sulphur. Claudian.
de Aetn.
such Giants as designed to pillage the Gods, and to sack Heaven it self, whom
the Poets fancied to be cast into those Tophets or burning Mountains, such as
are Aetna, Vesuvius, and others; the fittest terrors of everlasting burnings
to scare men from Sacrilege, which is a mischief (a (...)) beyond any that can
befall true Religion, or mankind, especially when it pretends most to befriend
and regulate Religion. Such Sacrilege (as a clandestine persecution) is worse
than any open hostility: for this invited even enemies to embrace a profession
adorned with such Saintly patience and heroic constancy; but the other
alienates all, both, Friends and Strangers from such Religion as (is felo de
se) cuts its own throat, mocks and strips its Savior, thieves from its God,
impoverisheth and debaseth his Priests and Ministers, gives nothing but
scandals and offenses to all men of any just Principles and generous Piety, not
only to Divines and Preachers, but to Princes, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Lawyers
and Soldiers, both Protestant and Papist, who have any value of their Savior,
respect to their God, gratitude to their Preachers, or love to true Religion
and true Reformation.

Not but that I know many men, in a licentious and presumptuous Age, which
nothing but daily thunderbolts can confute, Object.
like deaf Adders, after all is said that can be against Sacrilege, yet
flatter themselves in the good purchases they make of Church Lands. They reply
with great confidence, that many grow rich, who dwell and trade in
Sacriledge-alley; that Church Lands afford as good Crops and Rents as any
other; that many prosper under this imaginary curse, which is rather in
Church-mens fretfull fancies than in Gods displeasure, that if it be a sin in
the first Alienators, yet the after-Purchasers are not concerned in the guilt,
many of them thriving and leaving their substance to their children.

My answer is, Answ.
It is very true (as King John scoffingly said) That Stagg may be fat which
never heard Mass. Belshazzar might drink pleasant Wine out of the Vesssels of
the Temple: Dan. 5.2.
many Pirates (as the ancient Moralists observed) had fair winds after they had
pillaged the Temples of their Gods: many enjoy the warm sun, who are out of
Gods blessing; without which, not only leanenesse enters into men's souls,
amidst their greatest worldly enjoyments, but terror also, sooner or later,
seizes on them. No man's Estate can be justly esteemed prosperous which lies
obnoxious to Gods curse, as theirs expressly does Mal. 3.9. even to an whole
Nation, who are robbers of God. Without he continual feast of a good
conscience, fullness it self becomes famine. No man can with comfort build or
dwell^ there where the beams and stones out of the wall cry against him, Hab.
2.11.
as a sacrilegious invader or possessor. There must needs be gravel between
those teeth which eat that bread which belongs to the nourishment of those who
ought to feed the flock of Christ. I am sure no sacrilege can at present enjoy
a secure and serene title before God; and for the future, it is in many
instances to be verified ( vix gaudet tertius haeres) such estates seldom
descend, and if they do, are seldom enjoyed with Blessing and Comfort by the
third heirs, whose teeth are set on edge by those sower grapes which their
fathers have eaten. A Serpent does sometime or other bite the hand, Eccl. 10.8.
head or heart of such who break down the hedge and fence of Gods Church and
Vineyard, which cannot be duly dressed, if Gods Husbandmen, the Pastors and
Ministers, be weakened and impoverished: with whose spoils as I resolve, by
Gods grace, never to be enriched, either by Purchase or Gift upon any terms; so
I wish the like resolution to all my friends: and (as a Father) I do impose it
by way of solemn charge upon my posterity (less arbitrary than that injunction
of drinking no Wine, Jerem. 35.
observed by the Rechabites) that they never buy or accept any thing which they
find is by any pretense, power or presumption whatsoever, alienated from Gods
Right, or the Churches Patrimony; that is, such things as have, according to
the Evangelical tenor of Gods will and Word, been dedicated or given to Gods
glory and worship, either in piety or charity, either for the maintenance and
support of Christ's Ministers in particular, or for the general honor, polity,
order and government of them and the whole Church; which is, in my judgment,
as sacred and inviolable, both in Equity and Charity, Honor and Humanity, as
what is once, and so irrevocably, if lawfully, given by way of alms to the
poor; for this concerns but the momentary, the other the eternal life of poor
mortals. In earnest, no Religion can be carried on with due reputation, 1
Timoth. 6.5.
which turns godliness into unjust gain, or makes secular advantages, by
perverting of things devoted to Divine uses, to spiritual and sacred ends: of
which sin I fear too many in England have been and still are guilty, both as
actors and abettors, under the name and pretense of I know not what Reformation.

Object. Plea against Restitution from indemnity of the Purchasers. 2 Chronicles. 25
9.
But men of Consciences rather Legal than Evangelicall, will be ready to
object, (in behalf of such Proprietors as have given valuable prices, rather
than good consideration, for such Revenues as have been alienated in the heat
and roughness of times from the Church) as Amaziah King of Judah did to the
man of God, What shall I do for the hundred talents which I have given? etc.
What shall Purchasers do to have recompense, who have adventured their Estates
in such Bargains upon public justice, Protection and faith? Must they be
wholly losers of their bargains, yea and must their money (like Simon Magus's)
perish with them, as will follow, if they hold not what they have thus bought?

My Answer is, First, many of them had such Bargains, Answ.
as they can be no great losers, if they should freely restore the peeled and
remaining Lands to the Church; as it might perhaps lessen their Profit a
little, so possibly it might much increase their Peace and Comfort. But to make
the way of Restitution less clamorous, and most equitably conscientious, I
humbly conceive, that as the public Purse, to save men's secular Estates, had
the benefit of those Church-confiscations, and sales in most expensive thrift,
which seems to me less commendable, and less comfortable; so the Wisdom,
Justice, Piety and Honor of the Public shall do worthy of it self, to find
some such way both to buy in Impropriations, and to make such restitutions as
may be least oppressive to any particular man: which is no very hard work, much
less impossible, if men's Hearts were as large, and their Purses as free for
the means of saving their souls, as for their civil safety, which every year
costs as much as in one year for all would in great part effect this most
Honorable* Just and Religious work, of restoring to God, his Ministers and his
Church, those things which fall under so dubious a title at best, that few
Lawyers of Learning and Conscience can find salvoes sufficient to satisfy
those grand Objections, which Reason, Scripture, Ecclesiastical and Imperial
Laws, make against the dispossessing any Church of those Donations and
Enjoyments which are Gods in chief.

CHAP. XXIV.
WHat sober, wise, and wary Christian, The Romanists discouragements as to the
Reformed Religion by Sacrilege.
not wholly carried down the stream of Envy and an evil Covetousness, can
henceforth wonder to see those of the Roman party obstinate in their errors,
and hating to be reformed, while they see Reformation thus marching, like Jehu,
furiously, looking in every quarter for the prey and spoils of the Church, as
if it were carried on not by the meekness and bounty of primitive Christians
and Pious Princes (such as Constantine, Theodosius, Valentian, and others of
former times) but by Achmats and Selimusses, by Saracens, Tartars, Turks and
Crabats, men like evening-wolves, devouring all they can rap and rend from the
Church, where ever they prevail; such spirits of burning, which (like flaming
fire) leave all things like a parched heath and barren wilderness behind them,
which they found well planted and watered, beautiful and plentiful, like the
Garden of God, while the Church enjoyed its nursing fathers and careful
preservers of its Polity and Support, its Order and Honor, its Revenues and
Rights, both Humane and Divine.

The Ecclesiastics of the Roman party are not only very numerous, but (many
of them) persons of noble families, excellent breeding, great learning,
generous spirits, and choice abilities, for Affairs civil and sacred; every
way as well meriting and employing those advantages of Estates and Honors,
which they lawfully enjoy, as any of those are like to do, who would by force,
or under specious pretensions, deprive them of those enjoyments; who can think
it strange, that such persons of eminency, with all their Relations, Friends,
Clientels and Dependences, are very unwilling to come under the hands of such
rifling Reformers, such mad shavers of Religion, who design not only to cut
off some part of the long locks and overgrown hair of Churchmen (I mean the
Riot and Luxuriancy of their Manners, which are the real deformity of any
Christian, much more of any Clergyman) but they intend to treat them as Hanun
did David's Messengers, or as the Philistines did Sampson, shave them so bare and
close, make them so curtailed and cropped, that all their strength, beauty,
esteem and honor shall depart from them, not only in the sight of people of
better quality, but even before the very abjects of the people; who may
afterward safely contemn and scorn them, as persons unable to do them good or
hurt. Who sees not that some men's cruel severities and rude reformings, if they
had their wills, are not to be satisfied with the wool and fleece of
Churchmen, but they study to flea off their very skins? They gape like the
pit, and enlarge their mouths like hell, while any Estate is yet left to the
Church; not only goodly manors, and fair houses, which have properly belonged
many hundred years to Churchmen and the Church of Christ, but Glebes, Tithes,
yea, the material Churches and Chapels must all go down the unsatiable
gulphs, the sacrilegious Gules of some lack-latine Reformers; nothing ample or
settled must be left to any Ministers, either Bishops or Presbyters, be they
never so sound in Doctrine, exemplary in their Lives, of excellent Abilities,
and charitable Spirits, as many were heretofore, and still are, in England.

The greedy godliness of some Reformers would have all Preachers such
spiritual persons as should, like Chameleons, live only upon the air, their
own and the popular breath, with little or no corporal sustenance, urging much
that primitive poverty, which, armed with the conspicuity of miracles, and
attended with primitive charity in Christian people, was no diminution, but
advantage to the Bishops and Ministers of the Gospel; for they then lived among
believers of so generous liberality and grateful beneficence, that they were
the cream and flower of Christianity, esteeming their Preachers dearer than
their right eyes: But we alas are fallen among unsatiable leeches and tenacious
vultures; in an age ingeniously wicked, to mock God, to rob the Church, to
deceive and damn their own with others souls, full of the dregs of hypocritical
cruelty and covetous formality; which loves the goods of the Church of Christ
as much as those in former times did the good of it, when by their munificent
bounty, Christian Princes, Nobility and Gentry, bestowed those many ample and
honorable endowments on the Church of Christ, and his Ministers in all
Countries, where the state of Christians was peaceable and plentiful;) which
gifts now were the great baits of some sacrilegious Reformers, who to be sure
love the world, themselves, and their mammon very well: how they love God and
Christ, the Church and the Clergy, I list not to judge, but leave it to be
known by their good works; by the great things they have either done or
suffered for Religion; by the cost and charges they have been at from their
private purses, to make a gainful Reformation; by that zeal they have to eat
up the Houses of God, to serve God in a way that may cost them nothing to be
sure, and next, get them some good Booty and Advantage from the Church, while
any is to be had.

I therefore appeal to all men of any equitable, honest or ingenuous Senses,
Is it expectable, that persons of so much Learning, Reason, Prudence and
Experience, as the Roman Clergy generally are, should ever think of approving,
much less of embracing such a Reformation, which (besides other foul spots
cast by some upon it, unsuitable to any thing of true Religion) evidently
threatens the utter ruin of their Honor and Livelihood, yea of their very
Order and Function? Will any sober Papist wash in this Jordan, in order to be
clean, which he sees not only so troubled and tumultuary, but so violent and
excessive, that, like a rapid Torrent, it overflowes all banks of Modesty,
Moderation, Equity and Charity, carrying down all before it, and overwhelming
at once both Churches and Churchmen? it hurries them away (without ever
hearing them plead for themselves) into the gulf and precipice of Poverty and
Baseness, of Dishonor and Contempt, of Disorder and Confusion.

What grave and well-advised Romanists will not be much upon the reserve, as to
any thoughts of Reformation, when they see that under that color they are sure
to be undone? They must lose all those personal acquisitions and honorary
enjoyments which they have obtained by the will of the dead, by the laws of
any Christian Nation, by the proportions of Equity and Gratitude, by the
indulgence of God, and the merits of Christ: yea, though they should be content
to admit of all real Reformations in doctrine and manners, yet still they
must, by a pious stupidity and asinine sanctity, consent to have themselves and
their whole Order deprived of all those necessary Supports, comely Ornaments,
and just Honors, which were most fitting for the Christians God and Savior,
for Christian Churches, and Ministers of the glorious Gospel: all these must be
wasted, alienated and embezelled from God, his Church, and his Ministers, in
order to gratify either the exorbitant luxury of some riotous Prince, or the
more thrifty covetousness of some State and Commonwealth, or the ever-craving
and envious necessities of some private mean-spirited people, till they see
Deformity, Beggary, Contempt, Confusion, and all Irreligion, dancing, like
Satyrs and evil Spirits, among the Ruins of Religion, and amidst the
Desolations, not of the pomp so much as of the very power and profession, of
true Christianity.

The evil eye of some Reformers against material Churches.
Which dreadful effects must needs be much in the eye and abhorrence of every
pious and prudent man, who sees by evident experience what some men's
Reformations do mean, when they not only grudge at all settled, just and
honorable maintenance of Ministers, which they would fain swallow up and
divert another way; but they are further as studious to demolish and devour, as
ever their forefathers were to build, even those public Monuments of pristine
Devotion, Gratitude and Magnificence, which became Christians, above all men,
to their bountiful God and blessed Savior. Even those goodly Cathedrals and
other material Churches (which never cost their defacers one penny to build or
repair them) these must, if some men may have their wills (and they have had
it, God knows, too much) be so robbed of all their great endowments and
ancient Revenues, that nothing must be left so much as to repair them, or keep
them up for the honor of Christ, and the use of Christian people, for the
Service of God and the Glory of the Nation: no, they must be so pillaged and
stripped, that they are exposed to the injuries of Wind and Weather, and at
last left so bare and naked, without covering as well as repair, that they
must necessarily drop down with their own weight, daily mouldring away, and
burying themselves in their own rubbish; out of which some wretched
Sacrilegists aim to extract and scrape some profit to their private purses, by
a most prodigious kind of prodigality and unthrifty thrift, which reduces the
cost of many thousands of pounds, and the public Monuments of Piety and
Honor, to a pedling private gain, or a three-half-penny account, sacrificing
so many sumptuous piles of many hundred years duration to the Purses, Kitchins
and Bellies of some pitiful and proling Reformers: all which sacred and
stately Structures were once consecrated to Gods Glory, and dedicated to the
public celebration of holy Duties and Mysteries, in the Name, and for the
Honor of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Can you ( O my noble and honored Contrymen) imagine, that sober
Ecclesiastics, or others among the Papists, are so blind, as not to see these
sad Events, and to foresee their own Calamities in other Countries, if they
should give way to some men's rude reformings? If a sober and settled Reformation
(such as was sometime so conspicuous and renowned in the Church of England,) if
this did heretofore any way invite or incline many Romanists to embrace it, as
some did, with the safety of their civil Profits and Honors, as well as the
Advantages of Gods Truth and Piety; and if the unjesuited Papists could have
found in their hearts (as many did) to apply to that Reformation of Religion,
which preserved, together with the Sanctity, Integrity and Majesty of true
Religion, the honest Interests of deserving Churchmen, as well as of other
Christians, from those popular Rapines and sacrilegious Exorbitances, to which
the Envy, Baseness, Rusticity and Covetousness of vulgar Spirits are prone to
be transported: yet certainly, now, they cannot but with Shame, Horror and
Disdain, look upon, speak, or think of those boundless and bitter
Reformations, which some in later years have aimed at and endeavored in
England; which will endure, 1. First, no Liturgy, or Uniformity of Devotions in
public holy Celebrations, by which to avoid those either Defects or Excesses,
those Partialities and Prejudices, those Improprieties and Scandals, which
necessarily attend holy Duties, and the minds of people, while all Prayers and
solemn Consecrations are left to the Varieties, Sufficiencies, or Deficiencies,
to the private and extemporary confidences of every Man and Minister that lists
to officiate. 2. Next, it will endure no Ancient and Authentic Ordination of
Ministers, nor any degree of Eminency, Order, or Government among the Clergy,
but all must be left to a Presbyterian parity, or higglede pigglede of
Preachers, yea and People too; in which Young and Old, Gray and Green, Novices
and Veterane Ministers must be levelled and jumbled together. Notwithstanding
God and Nature, Age and Years, Gifts and Graces, Prudence and Gravity, Piety
and Policy, have distinguished them, and made them fit to be superior and
subordinate in Reason and Religion, in Piety and Policy, as Fathers and Sons;
yet these must all be blended and confounded in I know not what new consistory
Chaos, which at every meeting creates its raw Moderators and unexperienced
Presidents, turning by a continual Circumgyration and multiplied Epicycles,
its Heads into Tails, and its Tails into Heads; its rulers into ruled, and
its ruled into rulers. 3. Last of all, the new Modes of some men's Reformings
will not endure that any Churchmen, as Ministers, should have any thing
certain or settled, as their own, whereon to feed, unless it be their nails
and fingers ends; no nor any constant either Mansions, where they should dwell,
or Churches, where they should meet with Christian Congregations, to worship
and serve the God of Heaven, in that Order and Beauty of Holiness which
becomes his Name, his People, and Public Service in times of Peace and Plenty.

CHAP. XXV.
A plea for PAUL'S and other Churches in England.
IF such odious, scandalous and sacrilegious Proportions of some men's
Reformations were any way disputable, or less discernable in every City, Town,
and Corner almost of the Land (to which (as Cuckoes in April) this evil Bird of
Sacrilege is flown, every where crying with its harsh and unwelcome note,
Give, give,) yet there is one instance of its malignity and deformity so great,
so visible, that as it cannot be hid, so I cannot be silent of it, even in that
imperial chamber, that overgrown Metropolis of this Nation, the Rich and
Renowned, the Opulent and Populous City of London; where that vast and stately
Temple, which was once dedicated to the honor of the true God, and the service
of our blessed Savior, distinguished by the name of the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, S. PAUL, whose Gospel sounded even to this Island, this Church (I
say) has engraven upon its Ruins, and written on its dust, the dreadful
Characters of what thousands will interpret either a sacrilegious
Covetousness, or a great contempt of Religion, or a Negligence and
Indifferency, as to any sense of public Honor and National Renown, there
being not the like spectacle to be seen in all the Christian World. All which,
both Forraigners and Domestics, present Age and Posterity, will be prone to
impute to the exceeding Disgrace and Reproach of that large and luxuriant City,
which has nothing in all that mighty forest of buildings, comparable to that
magnificent pile; on whose unrepaired and (in a few years) irreparable Ruins,
the irreligion of some men's Reformations, besides the dishonor of that City
(that I say not of the whole Nation) will be so written and recorded in the
heaps of many generations, that no time will wholly remove the one, or
obliterate the other.

Especially when it shall be remembered, how vast a charge was not many years
since laid out, and how great a progress was made, by the Art, Industry,
Piety, Munificence, Care, Cost and Honor of that City and the whole Nation,
toward the reparation of that stupendous Mass: three parts of four were so
admirably restored, even beyond their primitive beauty and strength, that they
needed not to fear the teeth of Time, nor the corrosions of that fuliginous
air for many hundreds of years; such Cost and Art conspired to its
Restoration and Preservation, that in all probability Paul's might have lasted
a Monument of pristine Piety and modern Magnificence, the Crown and Honor of
that City, as long as the world endured; nor should have suffered any other
fate than that which threatens, in not many centuries of years, to shake heaven
and earth.

2 Pet. 3.
But now (alas) all this great Care and Cost is (for the most part) quite lost
and run to wast, for want of adding a little more, to have gloriously completed
what was generously begun. What ingenuous soul (not eaten up with an envious
Eye and a sacrilegious Spirit) did not find vehement Regrets, honest Pity, and
sharp Remorses in his heart, when he saw that goodly Temple of God turned to a
stable by a military either necessity or liberty; when (passing by) he
discerned all the scaffolds which supported those ponderous arches (till the
sides of the Building were confirmed) pulled down, not without the danger and
dread of those which removed them, to burn or sell them; when (after this) he
beheld the lead which covered it flayed off by piecemeal, and turned to
private advantages; when last of all he was afraid to pass through the Isles,
or come near the Arches of that great structure, for fear it should fall upon
him and oppress him with those horrid heaps, which every moment threatened to
fall, their cement being dissolved by rain and weather?

To this Tragic posture is that stately structure reduced, which was the
noblest ornament of that great and renowned City, as it were the center of its
stability, magnificence, and honor: yea, it was justly reckoned among the
chiefest visible instances of the Christian glory and renown of this Nation,
while both Natives and Strangers beheld it not without a sacred horror and
unwonted admiration. I pray God the Ruin of that Church be not a presage of
other Ruins, which will be more unwelcome to many of that City, when their
seiled Houses shall become ruinous heaps.

I know there are of later years, so many pedlars and enterlopers in Religion,
that they are in danger to spoil the grand trade of true Reformation, which
ought to be carried on by a public joint stock of Christian Counsel and
Charity: for their gainful godliness aims not only to make all Ministers of
the Church so mean and miserable, that they shall have just cause to envy the
poorest pesants and the meanest mechanics; but they further design to reduce
all our material Churches, or Houses of God in the Land, to such sordid
deformities, Psalm. 83.12.
that these shall have cause to envy, not only the spruce and costly Houses of
these thrifty Reformers, but their very Barns and Stables, which they will have
more substantial, and in better repair, yea more decent and cleanly, than our
Churches; into which Christians (as Gods Harvest) are frequently gathered
together, to serve and worship their Savior, to praise, adore and admire the
God of Heaven.

While there is no end of the Cost and Curiosity, the Beauty and Richness of
their private Dwellings, yet are these Church-worms, these moths of
Reformation, ever murmurnig and repining at what charge is bestowed, even by
other men, either long since, or late, upon our Churches; and with a most
supercilious demureness and affected zelotry (the better to color over or
conceal their sacrilegious spirits) they are heard very often to cry out, To what
purpose is this wast, this excessive, yea, Objection. Matthew. 26.8.
superstitious cost? What need is there of such goodly stones, such stately
pillars, such massive timber, such costly coverings with lead, when we may
serve God at a cheaper rate, full as well, nay far better, in a Barn or
Stable, in a common Hall or Parlour? Alas, God dwells not in Temples made with
hands, nor is he pleased with such prodigal expenses, in order to his worship:
how much more acceptable were it to him, if this money were bestowed on the
Poor, those living Temples of Gods Spirit?

Ans.
These are the penurious Principles which some whining Reformers, use, to save
their purses, yea, and to fill them, as occasion serves, with the spoils both
of Churches and Churchmen too; which some men, I believe, have already done,
without giving (that ever I heard) any portion as Alms to the Poor: and for
hire, some poor laboring men have been so conscientious Christians, that they
would not be employed or hired by them on any terms to pull down Churches, lest
they should do the work and receive the wages of iniquity.

I cannot but answer these men according to their folly and presumption; the
rather, because they pretend Religion and Reformation of all things to a
spiritual way of worshipping and serving God, which they understand may reach
their Hands, Eyes, Tongues, Heads and Hearts, but not their Purses. That is
their Noli me tangere, the peculiar and reserve exempted from Gods claim and
title, not contained in any Commission of Religion, yea precisely excluded out
of the new Copies and Schemes of Reformation, drawn different from all ancient
Originalls of Judaick or Christian Devotion, by men that are very wise in their
own eyes, and very wary to save their purses. I pray God they be as careful
to save their souls.

That these new Masters may not too much triumph in their own fancies, they may
please to understand, that we other Christians, who love to serve God in the
beauty of holiness and handsomnesse, who are ambitious to honor God and his
worship with our substance, Prove. 3.9.
we are not so uncatechised, as not to know almost as well as these
supercilious and parsimonious censors, that the Divine Immensity is so far
from dwelling in a comprehensive or enclosed manner, 1 King. 8.27. Act. 17.24.
in Houses made with hands, that the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; he
only is his own Heaven, a Center and Circumference fixed in and full of
himself, alone comprehensive of his own incomprehensible excellencies: yet
(under favor of these Seraphick Teachers) the high and holy one that inhabits
eternity delights to dwell among the Sons of men; Prove. 8.31. Rev. 21.3.
not only in humble Spirits, contrite Hearts, and believing Souls (by the
special and invisible residence of his Grace and Spirit) but also in such
visible manifestations as are specially circumscribed by times and places;
where it may not unproperly be said the Lords name is placed, while there it is
solemnly called upon, blessed and praised by the Congregation of the Lords
people, who meet together to worship the Lord in such places, as not only fit
their own conveniences best, but carry some proportion to their affections,
Honor, Reverence, Devotion and Relation toward their great God and glorified
Savior, even before the sons of men, who by the light of Nature require and
expect that the Divine Majesty should be worshipped, not in places of profane
and common use, but such as are specially separated from them, and dedicated or
consecrated to holy Services, agreeable to that relation they bear to the most
holy God, as houses of Prayer, and so houses of God, such as the blessed
Apostles and the Lord Jesus himself disdained not to frequent, among the Jews,
as the place of public worship, consecrated to God.

It Is true, our God needs not such Houses, as to his Omnipresence; but he
requires them so far, as they are evidences of our respects to him. Nor are
Churches only intended for the conveniences of Christians to meet together,
that they may sit warm and dry; but they serve further to express (when God
gives us Peace and Plenty) that high esteem and honor we bear to our God; also
the love we have to the place where his Honor dwells (as to visible Service and
outward Communion:) lastly, they serve to tell the world how large-hearted and
liberall-handed true Christians and well-reformed ones can be toward their God
and Savior, not only equal to, but beyond, if need be, to what Heathenish
devotion and Romish superstition did pretend. If such costly and stately
fabrics of Churches were less needful, in respect of the proportions of Love
and Respect we ought to bear, and express to the Glory and Service of God; if
Christians, at first, might well want them, when they could not in their
Poverty and Persecution either have or enjoy them; yet in a settled and
flourishing State, as Eusebius and others tell us, Christians were ashamed and
most impatient, not to show forth by the cost and state of their Churches, what
was their zeal for God, and high honor to their crucified Savior. Goodly
Churches and Princely Cathedrals every where grew up on the sudden in all the
Christian world, like Tulips, or fair Flowers in a Garden, when the winter of
persecution was gone, and when the springtime of peace began to shine, as in
the blessed time of the Great Constantine; then began Christian Churches,
Oratories, or Dominicals, to outshine the Temples of the Heathen Gods, the
Palaces of Princes, the Balneos and Theaters of free Cities: these great and
lasting Foundations were the Trophies, or triumphant Arches of Christian
Religion, every where erected, and witnessing that it had, by the blood of the
Lamb, and the patience of primitive Martyrs, happily conquered the malice of
Satan, the wisdom and power of the World.

Lastly, if we Christians needed no such Churches for Christ's Honor and our
own convenience, yet Jews, Turks, Heathens, do need them, as notable marks of
our high and honorable regard to our God and Crucified Savior; yea they are
indeed notable pregnant Monuments to all spectators, of the Antiquity of
Christian Religion, and of the munificent Devotion used by our Forefathers. To
me, I confess, any Country seems desolate, that has not the fair Landmarks
of Churches; nor can it ever be either Honor to our Nation, or any Advantage
to the true Reformed Religion, as it will be a great scandal to all that are
not Christians, also a great advantage to the Popish party and profession, for
us in England, or elsewhere, now to soil and deform our Reformation, by the
Rapine and Ruin of those Churches which our Forefathers builded.

I find that (in point of Thrift) men of narrow hearts seem so much children in
understanding, that they usually allege Scripture, as the Devil did, Mat. 3.
partially and fallaciously, which ought to be applied according to its
several scopes and intents; not so to magnify Gods transcendent and invisible
Majesty, as therefore to avile or debase his outward and visible Ministry, or
Glory, which is specially present at such times, and in such places, where his
Worship and Praise are celebrated. These sharking Sophisters cannot but
remember, that our blessed Savior chose for the first Celebration of his
Supper (which is the highest Mystery and solemn solemnity of Christian
Religion) a large upper room ready furnished; Mark 14.15.
the fairest (no doubt) for Space and Ornament in that House: To show us, that
Christians are not confined to Caves and Cottages, nor ought they to affect
Barnes and Stables for their holy Conventions, when Gods indulgence gives them
means and opportunities to enjoy other accommodations, more becoming that Order
and Decency which God requires and expects of us in his Service, unless
himself hinder, and deny us those comely advantages. No men are branded with
blacker and juster marks of Vileness and Unworthiness, than those who either
grudged at, or secretly defrauded, or forcibly took away what was once
dedicated or given to the Worship of God, the Honor of Christ, and the Benefit
of his Church. Thus Christ, the Disciples, John 12.6. Acts 5.3.
and all Christians, ever counted and called Judas a Thief, a Traitor, and a
Devil: so Ananias and Sapphira, by their sacrilege, gave occasion to the first
thunderbolts of Church Censures, which struck them dead upon the place. Who was
ever more odious than Diocletian and Julian the Apostate (a man otherwise of
great Learning, severe Justice, and Stoicall Moralities, as Ammianus gives us
account of him, who followed him to his death) yet is his name execrable for a
witty Persecutor and a perfidious Sacrilegist, while he scoffed at those goodly
vessels of Gold and Silver; also at the fair Basilica's or Cathedrals, in which
the Galilean (as he called our blessed Savior) was served, when he had a mind
to confiscate the Churches Goods and Treasures, that he might the better pay
his Soldiers.

CHAP. XXVI.
CErtainly there are pious prodigalities and holy superfluities, not only
lawful and convenient, Of pious munificence becoming Christians.
but most comely and commendable among Christians, yea in some respects
necessary: when Gods indulgence gives them peace and plenty, then they ought to
be ashamed to serve God niggardly; Malac. 1.8.
to serve themselves with the best, and God with the refuse; to afford him
only such expressions of their Duty, Honor and Devotion, as cost them little
or nothing: it is then a sin arguing a Nabalitick and vile heart, 2 Samuel 24.24.
Isa. 3^.5, 6.
to meditate nothing but vile and illiberall things for God; to use in
Christian solemnities no other but vulgar conveniences and Kitchen-
accommodations, such as their extemporary and every-dayes thrift, allows to
their very Beasts and Servants; no way proportionable to the bounty or God, or
answerable to that Majesty they profess to adore in their Redeemer Jesus
Christ, who not only expects, as a free-will-offering, but requires, as a
proportionable and acceptable service, that we honor him as becomes us, even
before the Sons of men; that the glory of the Gentiles may be brought to
Christ, Matthew. 2.
and such munificence of Gold, Myrrh, Frankincense, and things equivalent, as
may import to Aliens that Christians esteem their Savior as a great King,
Priest and Prophet; yea, as a God, deserving to be worshipped with the best we
can present him withal: which (as Isidore Hispal. Isid. l. 8. Etymol.
Magnificentiam and cultus and sermonis ad Deorum and religionis honorem homines
prim^ excogitarunt: Hinc templa Deum privatis domibus pulchriora, simulacra
corporibus humanis ampliora, lauds eoru^ august^ori eloquentia cel^brabantur,
certis numeris inclusae; Inde vatum and poetarum versus, and Hymni ad Deos, etc.
observes after S. Austin in his Civ. Dei, and others out of Varro and other
Heathens) were the methods they were taught, even by the light of Nature, to
exalt and magnify the Names and Honor of their Gods, by Houses far more
costly and stately than private Edifices, judging it fit to pray in better
rooms than they eat, and drank, and slept in. They added to their Temples
Images of their Gods more ample than humane and ordinary Dimensions; they
adorned all with solemn Ceremonies, and such accurate Eloquence, as chose
rather to set forth the Praise and Majesty of their Gods in the Grandeur and
exactness of Verse, than in the flatness, vulgarity and looseness of Prose;
that by all means they might conciliate an high Respect and Veneration to their
Gods, not only from the Worshippers, but from the very Spectators.

It is a shame that Jupiter, Apollo, Diana, Venus, and Aesculapius, Gods that
never lived, nor died for their Worshippers, should boast of their Temples, to
the upbraiding of Christians; or that the Jews and Mahometans should have
cause to suspect us of a disesteem and slight of our God and Savior, who lived
among us and died for us, by our neglect of the places where we Christians meet
to serve our God and Savior. While we ambitiously dwell in sciled houses, Hag.
1.4.
Gods houses lie wast: poor mortal worms affect Palaces for themselves, and
crowd their God, the King immortal, into a Cottage.

Mark 14.4.
The pouring of that costly ointment on our Saviors head, was not that which he
either absolutely needed or required; but he deserved it, and all that could be
rendered to him, as tokens of Love, Honor and Gratitude: and we see he was so
far from finding fault with it, or complying with the thrifty and thievish
baseness of Judas, that he accepted it kindly, he justified it publicly, and
commended it highly, as worthy to be recorded wherever the Gospel is preached;
that it might be an everlasting example of generous Grace and liberal Love,
capable to give check in all Ages to such dangerous Christians and penurious
spirits, as are prone, under pretenses of Piety or Charity, or any reforming
Frugalities, to quarrel at or condemn parallel expressions of munificent Honor
and heroic Gratitude to Jesus Christ: for the honor of whose name, I thought
it my duty thus far to vindicate, against sacrilegious Vastators, the
sanctity and sumptuousness of those places where the honor of our God and
Savior eminently dwells, in the solemn and public celebration of his Name,
Praise, Merit, and Divine Majesty; Phil. 2.
who abasing himself to the shame of the Cross, and now ascended above every
created name of Power and Honor in Heaven and Earth, ought not to be in any
respect treated in such a vile fashion, as if we thought meanly of him, or with
the Samosatenians and Arians, esteemed him no other than ((...),) a mere Man,
to be served in as mean or meaner way than we serve our selves; which seems the
sense of some wretches, who are glad to see Churches lie like Hog-sties, Dan.
4.29.
full of filth and confusion, and to be made even as Jakes and Dunghils; (which
fate Nebuchadnezzar threatened to those that spoke any thing amiss against the
true God.) A sight and example which, I confess, I take to be as little to the
credit or encouragement of any reformation of Religion, as it is no advantage
to a beautiful face, which possibly is a little foul and besmeared, to scratch
and tear its skin till the blood come, in stead of washing it clean.

I could not forbear to insist on this subject; in which, if I offend some
penurious and sacrilegious spirits of the present Age, I hope I shall please
and promote the desires and designs of more generous posterity, in whose days
it may be God will restore the captivity, repair the ruins, and wipe away the
reproaches unjustly by Papists and others cast upon this Church and the true
Reformation, which indeed never owned any such Principles or Practices as
savoured of Sacrilege, which is a taking away from our God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, from his Church, his Ministers, such things as are dedicated to his
Worship and Service, to the Churches Benefit, and his Ministers Maintenance,
Order and Honor; without which Religion cannot flourish, nor indeed well
subsist, especially among such Christians, as under pretense of love and zeal
for Reformation as friends, daily pillage and spoil Religion as its cruellest
enemies.

CHAP. XXVII.
IT was a speech in old times of better significancy than sound, Luxus
Clericorum Laus est Laicorum, The main hindrances and unlikelihood of a
conjunction between Protestants and Romanists.
The Splendor or Pomp of the Clergy was the Praise and Honor of the Laity:
not that Churchmen should at any time be riotous and luxurious in their
greatest abundance; but it is the commendation of Christian people (as indeed
of all men) so to entertain the Ministers of their God, and Dispensers of their
Religion (specially in times of peace and a Land of plenty) as may set them and
their Profession furthest off from Poverty, and its inseparable companion,
vulgar contempt; that Churchmen might have, not only wherewith to keep up the
outward Decency and Majesty of Religion, but to maintain themselves and their
families, at such a proportion as may extend to charity, liberality and
hospitality. The habits and exercises of which virtues become no men's Hearts,
Hands and Houses, better than Christian Ministers and Rulers of the Church:
nothing more confirming the Doctrine they teach of Gods munificence to mankind,
than their living so, as to be ever giving; Religion is never so acceptable to
common people, as when they not only hear the Word and see the Ceremony, but
taste the sweetness and substance of it in the real fruits of its bounty.

Which pious Policy and charitable Craft in former days kept up the credit of
Religion, both while it was Roman and when it was Reformed, to as high a pitch
in England, as in any Nation under Heaven; while the Clergy enjoyed those
blessings of Gods and man's Donation, which enabled many an one of them to build
and endow many such noble foundations of Churches, Colleges, Hospitals, and
Almes-houses, that any one of them now goes beyond all that ever sacrilegious
spirits did or designed, either for Gods honor or man's benefit, if all their
good works and thoughts were summed up and put together, (though indeed those
men are incapable of doing any good work, as to Charity, who are guilty of
sacred Robbery; stolen Sacrifices were not to be consecrated to God, Deuteronomy. 14.21.
no more than dead carkases.) Every History of England shows at large what good
and great works Bishops and other Churchmen in England did, not only in their
Papal Celebacy, but in their Primitive and later Conjugacy; fruits indeed of
pious and Princely Magnificence; such as now neither the joint abilities of the
indigent and peeled Clergy, nor the gripple charity of whole Counties can or
will so much as keep up or repair; no not so much as to the very fabric of
those fair Churches, which were the honor of Cities, Counties, and the whole
Nation.

Whose vast Revenues being taken away both from Churches and Churchmen, no
wonder if the sordid vastations of them and their deplorable decays, as that
of S. Paul's in London, and of Ely-Minster in that Isle, every where appear as
shameful, scandalous, and prodigious Spectacles to all ingenuous persons, to
Papists both at home and abroad; also to all Forraigners, Christian, Mohammedan,
or Heathen, who come into this Island, who may easily see such sights, as
rather proclaim Saracenism, Barbarism, and Atheism, than such a sense of
Christianisme as possessed our noble Progenitors, who were ashamed to seem base
and niggardly toward a bountiful God and Savior. Every City in England,
besides other Towns, had such stately and durable monuments of pristine Piety
and Charity in them, as were hardly to be destroyed by the malice of Time, in
many Centuries, if the sacrilegious petulancy and malice of Man had not so
assaulted them in these last few years, that the care of learned and ingenuous
men is now how to preserve their Memories and goodly Fabrics, in the Pictures,
and printed Types or Effigies of them; whose beautiful Structures are daily
threated with everlasting and irreparable ruins.

I am the more sensibly sorry and ashamed, to see these deplorable and
execrable ruins, because I know they are great reproaches to my Country, as
well as to the Reformed Religion professed in this Church. The better sort of
English people were ever esteemed as Valiant, as Generous, as Munificent, as
Charitable, as Hospitable, as Pious, and as Devout, as any civil people under
Heaven: I know not by what evil fate or genius we are now so changed, that many
men do not only repine and envy at all plenty and splendour, bestowed on
Churches and Churchmen, nor do they only suffer, through laziness and
neglect, those goodly Temples to lapse and decay; but they do with covetous
hearts, and cruel hands, industriously seek to strip and pull them both down:
which, I am persuaded, no Christian under Heaven, either Greeks or Latins,
Russians or Abissines, Georgians or Armenians, Reformed or Roman, would ever
either act or permit, if they had the honor to enjoy such stately Houses of
God among them; they would infinitely disdain to appear so degenerous from the
patterns of paternall piety.

Yea I should injure the very Jews, Turks, Persians, Tartars, Indians, and
Chinese, if I should believe they would suffer such stately Edifices, being
dedicated to the service and honor of their Gods, to run to ruin; if they
were masters of them, doubtless they would both preserve and employ them to
such uses as they thought holy. Yet these are the beams that afflict some men's
eyes in England, these the Camels they long to swallow down, under the
pretended hunger and thirst of special Reformations; whose impudent appetites
have dared of late years publicly to petition the demolishing of all
Church-edifices whatsoever, pretending they have been guilty of superstitious
abuses: which (if so) is yet the fault of the Persons, not the Places, which
are (without doubt) as capable to be consecrated by pious uses and holy duties,
as desecrated by any past superstitious abuses: besides, no public Edifices of
Churches should, upon this account, ever be preserved in the changes incident
to the various opinions and persuasions, the outward modes and fashions of
Religion; every form seeming to such as differ from it to have in it something
either impious, superfluous, or superstitious, by its Antiquity or its Novelty,
by its omissions or admissions.

If these sad and sordid spectacles, which have so foul an aspect of
sacrilegious profaneness in respect of our material Churches (which are the
most visible tokens and public badges of religious Honor and Reverence in any
Nation) if these cannot but scandalize and scare any sober and ingenuous
Papist, from any thought or inclination to approve or adhere to any such
immoderate and immodest Reformations; how much more will any honest-hearted
Romanist loath and abhor the very name of such Reformers, as he sees daily
spitting upon, and casting dirt in the faces of their own Fathers, the Bishops
and Ministers of their Christian and Reformed Religion, so much heretofore
authorized and reverenced by the voice of the whole Nation in its Parlaments?
whom yet some men have not only sought to lop and crop to the very stub (as to
former endowments of Estate and Honor) but they aim (still in order to farther
Reformations) to grub up the very roots of all Religion and Learning, of
Civility and Sanctity: they would depopulate and desolate the very Nurseries
and Schools of able Scholars, excellent Preachers, sage Counselors and
prudent Governors, both in Church and State: all Universities, Colleges and
Free-schools, must be robbed of their Lands and Revenues; there want not those
who long to see them confiscated, and to make private purchases of them; who
would fain have leave to treat the Colleges and Scholars in them, as Bears
are wont to do the poor Bees, when with their rude and merciless paws they
tear in pieces and overthrow their hives, that they may plunder them of their
honey. Which abomination of utter desolation had ere this befaln all Scholars,
as well Laymen as Clergymen, in England, if Gods good providence had not set
some bounds to the endless projects of sacrilegious Reformers, by the
Moderation, Learning, Justice, Generosity and Prudence of those, whose great
power, and greater minds, were (only) capable to curb that plebeian petulancy
and mechanic importunity, which not content to have taken away the liberal
mangers and large provender of fair Estates and Honors from the Clergy of
England (with which all were dignified, though but few enjoyed them) have
further sought to muzzle the mouths of the most laborious Oxen, grudging the
meanest and painfullest Ministers (who are generally so lean, that they are
reduced to skin and bone) the tenuity yet left them of Hay, Straw and Stubble;
any thing of settled and secure Maintenance, in their little, and many times
litigious, livings. Which cruelty, however at present it would infinitely
gratify and fatten the Popish party, to see all Ministers and Scholars (which
are the light and life, the rational part and intellect, the very soul and
spirit of any Nation) in such a Reformed Church as England was, thus treated
and abased; yet they cannot but stomach and scorn all Reformation, that has
such scratches of sacrilegious Cruelties and rapacious Practices, which are as
the Mothes of Religion, the very Mice and Rats of Reformation, the effects not
of piety and purity, but of envy and fury, great rocks of offense to all sober
men, to all good Christians, to all ingenuous Papists, setting them (no doubt)
at everlasting distances and defiances from all Reformations of Religion, which
have such brands of Covetousness, Contempt, Sacrilege, injustice and
confusion upon them.

When these two precipicious Rocks, and high Cliffs of distance, can be closed,
between which lies that deep Gulf of mutual antipathie, hatred and
abhorrence, which keeps sober Protestants and moderate Papists from passing
over or conversing, as Christians, one with another; When (on the one side) the
Romanists will not be ashamed, ingenuously to own, and consciensciously to
reform, such things as are evidently and grossly amiss, yea confessedly such,
if Scripture, Antiquity, Catholic and Primitive Testimony, yea and many of
their own best Authors may be Judges, (such as are (for example) The taking
away the cup from Christian people, The peremptory defining the manner of
Christ's presence in the Sacrament, and imposing an explicit belief of it
contrary to all senses, common reason, and Scripture Analogy, The worshipping
of any creature, or God under the form of it, as in Bread, Images, Angels,
Saints, Relics, The fallacious pedling with Indulgences and Purgatory, The
adding to the Scripture-Canon, The imposing new articles of faith, besides
other intolerable practices of Papal arrogance and Tyranny, carried on by
Jesuitick Policies, Principles and Practices, against all rules of Morality and
Piety, Honor and Humanity;) when these, and some of the like rank leaven, are
recanted and removed from the Roman party;

On the other side, when the Protestants and all that pretend to any name of
Reformation shall be ashamed, under any cloak of Piety or Christian Liberty,
either to rob from God and his Church, from his service, and special servants
the Ministers of the Gospel, or not to restore to them what is theirs by all
Laws, Divine and Humane, by right of Testamentary Donation, by religious
consecration, by civil sanction and confirmation, by long use and peaceable
fruition, no way forfeitable by Man, or alienable from God, whose the fee,
right and property is, as a gratitude and homage paid to the Honor, Worship
and service of his great Name; When Papists forbear their Superstitious
Sacrilege, and Protestants their Covetous Sacrilege; when the first restore
the Truth, Purity, and Integrity of Christian Religion, which they have long
detained in unrighteousness; when the other restores that Order, Honor, and
Estate, which belongs to the support and government, the decency and Majesty of
Christ, his Church, and true Religion:

Then, and not before, may we expect some happy close among these so divided
Western Churches, whom first Papal policy and pride, now Plebian looseness
and insolency, on all sides factious and schismatic, covetous and cruel
practices, have now no less divided than former different Doctrines, opinions
and ceremonies did, the reconciliation of which many learned and peaceable men
have seriously studied, soberly proposed, and charitably endeavored. The want,
and almost despair now (without multiplied Miracles) of which most desirable
atonement, and the sad consequences which must needs attend the continuance and
increase of desperate defiances, implacable violences, and cruel immoderations
on all sides, these, these (I say) are calamities more deplorable than any that
a Christians eyes can behold in all the world, since they are at once the sin,
shame, and misery of Christendom; besides the scandal and scorn of all the
world. It being a far sadder sight, to see Christians thus rob and spoil,
thus worry and wound one another, than to see them persecuted by Heathens and
Infidels, Jews and Mahometans: as it is far more horrid to see men fighting
with one another, than beasts; or brethren, than strangers. Without any doubt,
the mutual animosities and barbarities exercised by Christians on all sides,
as they will in time open a door for Turkish power to prevail against them,
so (mean while) it makes Christians turn Turks one against another. Besides
that these unchristian Practices on all sides do leave not only the looser
sort of men and women to an Atheistical indifferency as to any Religion; but
the more sober and just Christians on every side ( Protestants and Papists) are
so scandalized and perplexed, that they do not well know what course of Religion
to hold, nor how to steer between the gross errors on the one side, and the
base rapines on the other: It being an hard choice for a serious and honest
Christian, whether he should keep Communion with superstitious and Idolatrous
Papists, or with schismatic and sacrilegious Protestants; the one refusing
to be justly reformed, the other deforming even Reformation it self.

Amidst which miserable distances and disadvantages of Christian Religion, this
sad event and burden of the Lord may be too easily foretold by one of the
smallest Prophets, That as Atheism, Profaneness and Irreligion is like to get
ground on all sides, through the deformities, immoderations, varieties, and
inconsistencies of Religion, so (to be sure) the Papal party, repute and
interest will daily prevail every where, (as of later years it has) against
those of the Protestant and Reformed profession: since they see even the most
famous, settled and flourishing Church of England, (which was the Mirror of
Reformation, the noblest standard of Religion, the ablest Antagonist against
Romish pride and superstition in all the world,) this, even this, sought now to
be so reduced, so battered and divided, so peeled and spoiled, distressed,
deformed, dissipated and despised; and this even by those that pretend high to
Reformation, which must, they say, be attained and perfected by utter
devesting, even this so famous a Church, and its deserving Clergy, of their
former Honor and Estate, Order and Government, Authority and Dignity, Revenues
and Reputation, Uniformity and Unity; all which heretofore they enjoyed by the
mercy of God, and good will of such Princes and Peers, Parlaments and People,
as were the best Christians and best reformed, who justly abhorred those
sacrilegious and sharking arts, which make either Religion or Reformation*
Preachers or true Professors, either avaritious, or beggarly and necessitous;
which their Wisdom and Piety knew would be the way to undermine and obstruct
all true Religion and progress of Reformation; all experience teaching us,
that mankind is naturally prone rather to follow liberal Errors than
niggardly Truths: few men will adhere to hungry Holiness and famishing
Reformations, such as some men have designed and vehemently agitated of late
years in England, little (God knows) to the credit or advance of any true
Reformation.

It cannot then but be most evident to you (O my noble Countrymen) and to all
wise men, that as the sad condition of the Church of England at once pleases
and hardneth the Romanists (who are glad to see her thus wasted, though they
abhor the means and methods of her misery;) so the real interest of the true
Reformed Religion in England seems now much weaker than ever it was, much more
exposed to the objections and obloquies, the Policies and Practices of
pragmatick Jesuits and other spiteful Papists, who with infinite Industry,
with all Arts and Alacrity* daily undermine all the remaining parts, yea and
the very foundation as well as the reputation of all reformed Religion in the
hearts of the people of England. Doubtless, if Popish Priests, which are men
of learning and sober lives, had liberty in public to promote their party,
they would draw most men and women after them, in the Novelties, Distractions,
Confusions and Deformities of Religions, yea and of Reformations here in
England, in despite of all the orderly and Orthodox Clergy yet left in England:
so little would they consider any stop or impediment, that either Presbytery or
Independency, Scotl. or New-Engl. can give them, who have all been made active
and contributive to their own shame, and to the general ruin of this Church,
and consequently to the real advantages of Popery, which professes great
uniformity and constancy in their Religion. Nor can the subtle factors for the
Papacy but expect and hope by degrees, in a few years, to bring in again into
England, the justly feared and abhorred Inundations of the Sea of Rome, in its
superstitions and usurpations: against both which our wise and pious
progenitors, both since and before the Reformation, did in many Parlaments make
several cautions, provisions, Premunire's, and sanctions, to preserve the
liberty, honor, and purity of the Church of England.

For they well knew, that the secular interests and Ecclesiastic designs of
the Church and Court of Rome ever have been, and still are carried on with a
mighty tide and strong current, not only of Papal authority and popular
credulity, as of old, but of Learning, Eloquence, Riches, Honor, Power, Pomp,
Policy, yea and with great plausibilities of Piety, Sanctity, Unity and
Charity, of later Ages. All which popular and potent biasses will easily and
unavoidably over-beaer, in time (as to the generality of people) all those
feeble resistances or oppositions that can be made by such an equivocall
generation and dubious succession of poor, despised and dispirited Ministers,
whatever they are, whether of Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independent
characters; who in great part naked and unarmed, unfed and unstudied, reduced
to a sneaking and starveling habitude, both of Body and Mind, of Honor and
Estate, will prove pitiful Champions for the true Reformed Religion, when they
shall neither have just Ability nor justifiable Authority, to assert the true
and just measures of Religion and true Reformation. Who is there that in
after-Ages will adventure his Soul and his Religion with those men and
Ministers, that can have neither Learning nor Livelihood capable to bear up
with their spirits and parties, or the Authority and Honor of their calling;
especially when they are to encounter with such sons of Anak, such Zanzummims
and Goliahs, who will ever appear on the Papal side, to defy all Reformation
that seems to reproach their deformities?

Alas, will not the predicant (or rather mendicant) Patrons of so divided
Religion and deformed parts of Reformation, seem in their own eyes (unless
they be strangely swelled with the puff and breath of Popularity) but as
Zanies and Dwarfs, as Grasse-hoppers before them, with their threadbare Coats,
hungry Bellies, and servile Spirits? How will these that never had means or
leisure to advance their studies of Divinity or practice of preaching beyond a
modern Synopsis and an English Concordance, being raw and infants in dogmatick
Truths, perfect strangers to Polemick, Historick, and Scholastic Divinity, to
Councils, Fathers, and Languages, how will they be affrighted to read or hear
of the great names of Baronius, Bellarmine, Possevine, Perron, Petavius,
Sirmundus, and many other Grandees of the Roman side, great Clerks, great
Churchmen, and great Statesmen too, who are able to carry with them Troops of
Auxiliaries, Legions of Assistants, being as rich as learned, very wise and
weighty to use and improve all the strength and advantages they have of Estate
and Honor, Studies and Parts, for the advance of their side, in their Errors
and Superstitions? which of late years their followers have done with unhappy
success and great increase of their faction against the Reformed Religion of
the divided Church of England; whose scattered Remains (in a short time) will
be like a flock of silly and helpless Sheep, that have neither safe folds, nor
any skillful and valiant Shepherds to defend and rescue them.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Roman interests advanced by the petty factions of super-Reformers of Religion.
NOr do these wilely Romanists exercise their malice against this Reformed
Church, only with their own strength and dexterity, but they have other
oblique Policies and sinister Practices, by which they set on work the hot
heads and pragmatick hands of all other Sects, who pretend the greatest
Antipathies to Popery, and yet most promote its interests by their Factions and
fanatic Practices; by their heedlesse and headless, their boundless and
endless Agitations, which blast all true Reformation, and bring in nothing but
Division and Confusion.

For among these there are a sort of people who affect Supremacy in Church and
State too, a spiritual and temporal Dominion, no less than does the Pope of
Rome: there are among them many petty Popes, who would fain be the great and
only Dictators of Religion; whose opinionative pride and projects are as yet
of a lesser volume and blinder print, but they every day meditate and agitate
new Editions of their power, and larger additions to their parties and
designs; being as infallible in their own conceits, as imperious in their
spirits, and as magisteriall in their censures, as the proudest Popes of Rome;
not doubting to condemn and excommunicate any private Christians and Ministers,
yea whole Christian Churches, yea and the best Reformed in the world (such as
England was) if they be not just of their form and fashion, or if they will not
patiently submit to their multiform and deformed Reformations, by which they
daily wire-draw true Reformation to such a small thread, that losing its
strength and integrity, it must needs snap in pieces and become useless: the
strange fires of blind, popular, preposterous and sacrilegious Zeal so
overboyling true Religion and sober Reformation, till they are utterly
confounded and quenched with such sordid and shameful deformities, as must
needs follow their Divisions, Distractions and Despiciencies, as to all
Church Order, Christian unity and Ministerial authority. Thus many heady and
giddy Professors have been so eager to come out of Babylon, that they are
almost run out of their wits, and far beyond the bounds of good consciences; so
jealous of Superstition, that they are Panders for Confusion; so scared with
the name of Rome, that they are afraid of all right Reason and sober Religion;
Eccles. 7.16.
so fearful of being over-righteous by following vain traditions of men, that
they fear not to be over-wicked, by overthrowing the good foundations of Order,
Honor, Peace and Charity, which Christ and his Apostles have laid in his
Church: fierce enemies indeed against the Idolatry of Antichrist, but fast
friends to Belial and Mammon, Romans 2.22.
to Schism and Sacrilege; which having no fellowship with God and Christ,
must needs belong to the party of Antichrist, which contains a circle of
Errors, while Christ is the center of Truth: and we know that parts
diametrally opposite to each other may (yet) make up the same circumference,
and be at equal distance from the center; so may Practices and Opinions which
seem most cross against each other, yet, as Herod and Pilate, alike conspire
against Christ and true Religion, like vicious extremes, which are contrary to
each other, and yet uncorrespondent with that virtue from which they are
divided.

They are children in understanding who do not already discern and deplore
(what wise and godly men have long ago foreseen and foretold) that by these
two, Papal policy and fanatic fury, the superstitions of the Romanists, and
the confusions of Schismatics, the happy state of the reformed Church of
England was always in danger to be mocked, stripped, wounded and crucified:
some men already fancy, that they see it weeping and bleeding, crying and
dying, using in its sad expirings the last words of its Savior; first, to her
God, Why have thou forsaken me? next, for her Enemies and Destroyers, Father,
forgive them, they know not what they do. While the Papists on the one side rob
God of his glory, giving religious worship to Creatures: the Sacrilegists on
the other side rob God and the Church, their Mother, Fathers, and Brethren, of
that double Honor, Maintenance and Reverence, Authority and competency, which
is due to them, and was settled upon them, snatching away the childrens bread
that they may give it to dogs, to greedy and grinning men, authors and fautors
of all our rents and confusions; who (as the Psalmist expresses it) run up and
down through every County, City, Ps. 59.6.
Street and Village, grudging if they be not satisfied with the Priests portion.

Thus while the Papists too much pamper and overcharge Religion with Pomp and
Luxury, with superfluous Ceremonies and Superstitions; while the Fanatics
strive to underfeed and starve it to a despicable feebleness and deformity;
both of them are become dangerous enemies to the true reformed state of
Religion, in this or any Church and Nation, whose best temper and healthfullest
constitution is made up of sincere Truth, unfeigned Charity, liberal Piety,
unaffected Decency, a duly- ordained Ministry with just Authority, and
uninterrupted Succession, entertained with holy moderation and humble
prosperity. All which were heretofore as remarkably to be seen in the Church of
England as in any Nation under Heaven: which now is in danger to be put upon
great streights, to run between two Seas and Rocks, like the Ship which carried
S. Paul; uncertain whether it must be destroyed by Papal, or popular
insolences; whether it shall at once be driven and split upon the high rocks
of Popery, or tossed with the Herricano's of vulgar tempests and variety, till
it run upon the flats and shallows of Sacrilege, and be swallowed up by
fanatic Quicksands.

It Is true, these insectiles, the later and lesser fry of novell Sects and
various factions in England, daily multiplying and dividing in their Opinions,
Religions and Reformations, may possibly seem to some men like small Pilchards
or Shotten Herrings, compared to the great Whales and mighty Leviathans of
Rome; neither so dreadful, nor so dangerous to the Reformed Religion: But wise
men may consider that what seems wanting in their Mass and Bulk, severally
looked on, is made up in their number and activity: not only Sea- Monsters may
sink a ship, but small worms, which grow to its sides and keel, will eat it
through and destroy it. It is a great deal of mischief that Mice and Rats, Ants
and Mites, will do in a little time to great bodies, if they be let alone. This
I am sure, some of these petty- spirited, but very spiteful animals, which
some men so much despise, have of late years so excessively spawned and
swarmed by a licentious superfetation of Religions and Reformations here in
England, that they are become like the numerous Locusts, Flies and Caterpillars
of Egypt; not only very busy and importune, but biting and devouring what
ever they can light upon; yea many of them, like Wasps and Hornets, are most
exasperated against those sober Christians and Ministers, who are less patient
to have their Estates, Liberties, Consciences and Religion, at once destroyed
by their gnawing or corroding Reformations.

The fruits and effects of which African mixtures and confusions, every wise
man may easily foretell, being utterly inconsistent* with not only the
Sanctity, Charity, Unity, Tranquillity, and Majesty of Religion, becoming this
Reformed Church and Christian State, but with the very civil Peace, freedom
and secular Honor of this Nation. Nor can any sober person tell what any one
or all of them, in their fractions and factions, would be at, either in respect
of the flourishing of Religion, or felicity of the civil state, beyond (or any
way comparable to) what was formerly professed, practiced and enjoyed in this
Church and Nation, long before Satan had leave thus to winnow the Church, with
Saint Peter, or to smite the State, as he did Job, with these civil boyles and
botches. I know there are some grave and godly men (who are well-affected to
the Church of England, and zealous for true Reformation in a settled and happy
way) who do not account these Modern and Minute Sects, these broken and
divided factions, to be any way very dangerous, and so not considerable to the
public welfare of this Nation, either in Religious or civil respects; because
they think none of them to be of a firm and durable constitution, but rather
as Vermin, bred of putid water, in warm, unholesome, and to them most
indulgent seasons, between Pride and Peevishness, Ignorance and
Licentiousness, Envy and Covetousness, they cannot either continue long, or
propagate any lasting succession, but as animalls of a crude, imperfect and
equivocall generation, having spent that corrupt matter out of which they have
both their production and nutrition, they will (like Magots) dye of themselves:
as did the Gnostics, Montanists, Manichees, Novatians, or Catharists, the
Aerians, Euchites, Circumcellions, Donatists and others in ancient times, whose
folly being made manifest to all sober Christians, 2 Timothy 3.9.
it prevailed no further. Such creatures in time, like Snailes, wasting their
slimy and indigested substance by their own motions. The rage of Heretics and
Schismatics being like that of mad Dogs, which after they have a while fomed
and snapped here and there, run themselves to death, and are tired by their own
cruel agitations. Nor will they find many to succeed them, especially when
once the wisdom and piety of a Christian Nation so far recovers, as to cut off
and curb that popular, licentious and lazy humor, or to obstruct those hopes
of profit, pleasure and preferment, which are the Favonii, the warm winds,
that impregnate these creatures. How few would have deserted, and so defied,
the Church of England, (as they have done) if they had not had other
temptations than those of conscience or religious persuasions?

It Is true, I do not look upon these many-headed and misshapen factions, which
are so highly animated against the Church of England, (being most-what like
Monsters, either excessive in their Seraphick Whimsies, everlasting Novelties,
and affected fancies, or defective in that sound knowledge, that humble,
orderly and peaceable charity, which becomes true Christians) I do not look
upon them as any way apt, or able of themselves to build an orderly and durable
structure, no more than the Brick-layers of Babel, when their Tongues were
divided: for I find they are commonly like Rookes, which strive to make their
own nests by rifling their Neighbors. Little solid or settled, in Reason or
Religion, in Church or State, is expectable from tempers and activities which
are like that of Pioneers and Plunderers, chiefly for undermining and ruining
prostrating and levelling, both Churches and States, all Magistrates and
Ministers that are either within their reach and stroke, or without their mark
and cognizance upon their foreheads.

Yet give me leave to suggest, yea and to urge upon your most serious
considerations (O my Honored and beloved Countrymen) than the consequents
necessarily attending the divided opinions and destructive agitations of those
that may seem the most petty parties, and inconsiderable Sects now in England,
must needs be very dangerous, and may in time prove extremely pernicious to the
peace, piety, honor, and welfare of this Nation; not only in respect of the
Reformed Religion, whose authoritative Ministry and maintenance they will ever
seek to devour and utterly destroy, but even in respect of secular interests,
and civil peace.

For the first, (The integrity and true interests of the Reformed Religion,)
who, that has read what I have already, not more passionately then impartially
written, can be so blind, as not to see, That the pride, petulancy and despite,
the ignorance, licentiousness and covetousness of some of these men, has been
and still is such, that they have not only sought to wast and deforme, to
reproach and defame all that outward order, visible beauty, polity, support and
unity, which became so famous a Church and Nation; but they have further
studied to weaken and destroy the most solid and essential parts of Religion,
by many gross errors, damnable Doctrines, bold blasphemies, high Atheismes
and rude immoralities? all which do naturally boil up in the corrupt hearts
and violent lusts of mankind, when they have any fire of temptation, or
encouragement. What is then so immodest, so impudent against the glory of God,
against the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, against the written word of God,
against the reputation of the Catholic, or any well-reformed Church, against
the Laws of nature, civil societies and common justice, against the good of
men and Christians, their temporal and eternal welfare, which some of these
Abaddons, these Apollyons will not adventure to broach and abet, to act, own
and applaud, when they see their raveries are apt not only to amuse the vulgar
people, but to mend their own fortunes, which are the first and nearest
designs they aim at, Finis operantis and operis.
as the chief ends of the agents?

But the end or effect following their actions, (though possibly not some of
their intentions) will be this, to prepare by these various windings, confused
circulations and distorted wrestings of the Reformed Religion, the way for
Roman factors, Papal interests and Jesuitick designs, whose learned
abilities, orderly industry, and indefatigable activity is such, that by that
time the old stock of Reverend, orderly and authoritative Bishops and
Presbyters, (the truest and most unquestionable Ministers of the Church of
Christ,) are worn out in England, and the reformed Religion is reduced with its
titular and extenuated Ministers to a mere medly, or popular Chaos of
confusions; (the most of sober people being either sick, or ashamed, or weary
of their homebred disorders, and unremedied diseases in Religion) by this time
(I say) the Romish agitators will not only devour all these petty parties,
and feeble factions of Reformers, with as much ease as the Stork did the
Froggs; but they will (in time) utterly destroy the remains of the defamed
Doctrine and deformed Religion, which your forefathers owned, and to the death
professed, as most true and well reformed, with great Honor, Holiness, and
Happiness; which yet the ignorance and insolence, the Illiterateness and
Rusticity, the Barrenness and Barbarity of novel Sects have already rendered
poor and despicable, much to be pitied and deplored both at home and abroad.

I must ever so far own my reason, as to profess that I look upon the
Defamers, Dividers and Destroyers of the Church of England, whatever they are
or seem) to be no other than the perdues or forelorn hope of Popery, which by
lighter skirmishes open advantages to the Popes maine Battaglio; the
Vancourriers, or Harbingers, sent and excited (in great part) from the
Pragmatick Policies of Rome, whose grand interest since the Reformation has
been, not more to advance the House of Austria and preserve the Papacy, than to
regain the Church of England to the Romish slavery.

In whose present calamities may easily be discerned a far greater reach and
deeper Spirit, than is usual to be found in ordinary Sectaries and
Schismatics, who are commonly of low and mean parts, short-sighted and
short-spirited, of very shallow wits and extemporary designs, rarely aiming at
any thing that is of a public concern, of a grand, notable and durable
proportion; but rather gratifying their sudden passions and occasional fancies
or correptions, which are pitifully poor and plebeian, seldom reaching higher
than the pleasure of scratching their own or other men's itching ears with some
novel fancies and opinions, or setting up themselves by a sorry ambition to be
Heads and Leaders, the Pastors and Teachers of some credulous company, which
makes it self into some new mode, and very superciliously calls it self The
Church; not in charity and communion with, but in contempt and defiance of all
other Churches, Parochial, Provincial, National, or Catholic, owning none
of the Primitive, Grand and Apostolical Combinations, or their Successions, to
be truly constituted Churches. By such little arts some of them feed their
bellies and cloth their backs better than heretofore, when they made no such
cakes for their Queens of Heaven, nor Shrines for their several Diana's, but
were confined to their less gainful trades; some of them feed merely upon
popular breath, which, as the wind, will never last long in one point or
corner; lastly, some of them keep up their vulgar Pride and sad Ambitions by
nothing else but by the fame of their Antagonists, the glory they have to
contest with, the Church of England and her ablest Ministers, who are (in
earnest) so much superior to these sorry Rivals and Ruiners of them, in all
Learning, Religion, Virtue, Wisdom, Honesty and Modesty, as the Stars in the
firmament are beyond the glittering of rotten chips in the dark, or the shining
of Glow-wormes in a ditch.

Certainly these petty parties, who scarce know what they drive at, and are
full of varieties in their Fancies, Forms and Factions, these cannot produce so
constant a current and so strong a tide, as is always urging against the
Church of Engl. and the honor of the Reformed Religion; but they are driven on
by a subtle and secret, yet potent impulse, as waves of the sea, not only
dashing and breaking upon each other, but (all of them) battering the Honor
and Stability of the Church of England, as the great rampart or bank which
stands in the way of the Sea of Rome, mightily opposing and hindering
heretofore both fanatic Confusions, Papal Usurpations, and Romish
Superstitions; whose advantages now are evidently prepared and carried on by
those, that under the name of Reformation will most effectually at last
overthrow it.

For after these petty spirits, who have been and are the great Dividers,
Despisers and Destroyers of the reformed Church of England, have a few years
longer played their mad pranks in this sometime so flourishing and fruitful
vineyard of the Lord, (pulling up the hedge of Ecclesiastical Canons, and
Civil Sanctions, throwing down the wall of Ancient Discipline and Catholic
Government, breaking in pieces the wine press of holy Ordination and
Ministerial Authority and Succession, pulling up both root and branch of holy
Plants and regular Planters;) what (I beseech you) can hinder these subtle
Foxes and wild Boars of Romish Power and Policy, to enter in, and not only
secretly, but openly (as occasion shall serve) to destroy all the remaining
stock of the true Protestants, and Professors of the Reformed Religion? who at
first soberly protesting against Popish Errors and Deformities, afterward
praying (in-vain) for a joint and just Reformation, did (at last) reform
themselves, after the rule of Gods Word, interpreted by the Catholic Practice
of purest Antiquity.

What (without a miracle) can hinder the Papal prevalency in England, when
once sound Doctrine is shaken, corrupted, despised; when Scriptures are wrested
by every private interpreter; when the ancient Creeds and Symbols, the Lords
Prayer and Ten Commandments all wholesome forms of sound Doctrine and Devotion,
the Articles and Liturgy of such a Church, together with the first famous
Councils, all are slighted, vilified, despised and abhorred by such Englishmen
as pretend to be great Reformers; when neither pristine Respect nor Support,
Credit nor Countenance, Maintenance nor Reverence shall be left either to the
Reformed Religion or the Ministry of it? without which they will hardly be
carried on beyond the fate of Pharaohs Chariots, when their wheels were taken
off, which is to be overwhelmed and drowned in the Romish red Sea; which will
certainly overflow all, when once England is become, not only a dunghill and
Tophet of Heretical filth and Schismatic fire, but an Aceldama, or field of
blood, by mutual Animosities and civil Dissentions, arising from the
variations and confusions of Religions.

All which, as the Roman Eagle now foresees, and so follows the camp of
Sectaries (as Vultures and Birds of prey are wont to do Armies) so no man, not
blinded with private passions and present interest, is so simple, as not to
know that it will in time terribly seize upon the blind, dying, or dead carkase
of this Church and Nation; whose expiration will be very visible, when the
Purity, Order and Unity of Religion, the Respect, Support and Authority of the
Ministry is vanished and banished out of England, by the neglect of some, the
Malice, Madness and Ingratitude of others, your most unhappy Contrymen:
Then shall the Israel of England return to the Egypt of Rome; then shall the
beauty of our Sion be captive to the bondage of Babylons either Superstition or
Persecution; from both which I beseech God to deliver us.

As an Omen of the future fate, how many persons of fair Estates, others of
good parts and hopeful Learning, are already shrewdly warped and inclined to
the Church of Rome, and either actually reconciled, or in a great readiness to
embrace that Communion (which excommunicates all Greek and Latin Churches,
Eastern, Western and African Christians, which will not submit to its Dominion
and Superstition) chiefly moved hereto, because they know not what to make of
or expect from the Religion and Reformation of the Church of England; which
they see so many zealous to reproach and ruin, so few concerned to relieve,
restore, or pity?

As for the return of you (my noble Contrymen) and your Posterity to the
Roman Subjection and Superstition, I doubt not but many of you, most of you,
all of you, that are persons of judicious and conscientious Piety, do heartily
deprecate it, and would seriously avoid it to the best of your skill and power,
as indeed you have great cause, both in Prudence and Conscience, in Piety and
Policy: yet I believe none of you can flatter your selves, that the next
Century shall defend the Reformed Religion in England from Romish Pretensions,
Persuasions and Prevalencies, as the last has done, while the Dignity, Order
and Authority of the Ministry, the Government of excellent Bishops, the Majesty
and Unity of this reformed Church and its Religion, were all maintained by the
unanimous vote, consent and power of all Estates.

Nay, the Dilemma and distressed choice of Religion is now reduced to this,
that many peaceable and well-minded Christians, having been so long harrassed,
bitten and worried with novell Factions and pretended Reformations, would
rather choose that their Posterity (if they may but have the excuse of ignorance
in the main controversies, to plead for Gods mercy in their joining to that
Communion which has so strong a relish of Egyptian Leeks and Onions, of
Idolatry and Superstition, besides unchristian Arrogance and intolerable
Ambition; that their Posterity, I say) should return to the Roman party, which
has something among them settled, orderly and uniform, becoming Religion, than
to have them ever turning and tortured upon Ixions wheel, catching in vain at
fancifull Reformations, as Tantalus at the deceitful waters, rolling with
infinite pains and hazard the Reformed Religion, like Sisyphus his stone,
sometime asserting it by Law and Power, otherwhile exposing it to popular
Liberty and Looseness; than to have them tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, with the Fedities, Blasphemies, Animosities, Anarchies, Dangers and
Confusions, attending fanatic Fancies and quotidian Reformations, which, like
botches or boiles from surfeited and unwholesome bodies, do daily break out
among those Christians, who have no rule of Religion but their own humors, and
no bounds of their Reformations but their own Interests; the first makes them
ridiculous, the second pernicious to all sober Christians.

Whereas the Roman Church, however tainted with rank Errors and dangerous
Corruptions in Doctrine and Manners (which forbid us under our present
convictions to have in those things any visible sacred communion with them,
though we have a great charity and pity for them; Charity in what they still
retain good, Pity in what they have erred from the Rule and Example of Christ
and his Catholic Church;) yet it cannot be denied, without a brutish
blindness and injurious slander (which only serves to gratify the gross
Antipathies of the gaping vulgar) that the Church of Rome, among its Tares and
Cockle, its Weeds and Thorns, has many wholesome Herbs and holy Plants
growing; much more of Reason and Religion, of good Learning and sober Industry,
of Order and Polity, of Morality and Constancy, of Christian Candor and
Civility, of common Honesty and Humanity, becoming grave men and Christians, by
which to invite after-Ages and your Posterity to adhere to it and them, rather
then to be everlastingly exposed to the profane bablings, endless janglings,
miserable manglings, childing confusions, Atheistical indifferencies and
sacrilegious furies of some later spirits, which are equally greedy and giddy,
making both a play and a prey of Religion, who have nothing in them comparable
to the Papal party, to deserve your or your Posterities admiration or
imitation, but rather their greatest caution and prevention: for you will find
what not I only, but sad experience of others may tell you, that the sithes
and pitch-forks of these petty Sects and plebeian Factions will be as sharp and
heavy as the Papists Swords and Faggots heretofore were, both to your religious
and civil Happiness.

CHAP. XXIX.
The danger of divided parties in Religion as to the civil interests of
England.
FOr however the feebleness and paucity of lesser Sects and Factions in
Religion in some places, their mutual Divisions and intestine Quarrels in
others (being like the Birds called Ruffs, ever brusling and pecking against
each other) may make them seem at present not so dangerous or pernicious, in
regard of civil Troubles and Seditions, as they have been to the
Ecclesiastical Uniformity, Beauty and Honor; yet later as well as former
experiences may not only admonish, but assure you, that besides the Roman
advantages, which are greatest and last, the private Passions and various
Interests even of these lesser Factionists and Sticklers, will not seldom nor
a little hazard your civil peace, when once their several parties and opinions
can get numbers capable to set up their pretensions, under any specious name,
either of Anabaptistick Repentance, or special Calls and Inspirations, or a
Fifth Monarchy, or Christ's Kingdom in this world, or any Saints reigning upon
earth for a thousand years more or less, according as they can get and hold
power over men's bodies and souls, and be supreme to all intents and purposes,
both civil and religious.

I make no great doubt but these men will be found as rigid, cruel and
implacable in their heights and soveraignties, as ever those bloody Papists
were, whose principle was to destroy all they count Heretics, and the others
to destroy all they count not godly and Saints, because (forsooth) not of their
respective parties, either Papists or Schismatics.

England at several times, beside other Countries, has had terrible Essays
what such spirits aim to do (and they will out-doe their own aims) when their
rude hands should be able to keep pace with their giddy heads, malicious hearts
and extravagant tongues. How have they sometime threatened to destroy, not only
Churchmen and Ministers, but all Gown-men and Lawyers; See the History of Jack
Cade and War Tile^ lately set forth.
yea all others in any power or capacity above them, if incompliant with them?

You cannot be ignorant how the pulse of such people beats, when they have
tasted of several Religions, See the Histo^y of Hacket and Coppinger, in Mr.
Cambdens Elizabeth.
and sipped of many Reformations, which, like variety of Wine, so strangely
intoxicate common men and women, that of friends they grow most insolent
enemies against those Churches and Christians which they first despise, then
forsake, at length divide, and at last destroy, as far as lies in their power.

Thus desperately disdainful, unaffable and intractable, grew the Donatists,
Novatians, Arians, and others in St. Austins time, superciliously refusing all
offers of Christian conference and charitable accommodation with him and other
holy men of the Catholic Communion: Aug. Epist. ad Victor. nu^, 122.
yea some of them unprovoked (as St Austin tells us) put Catholic Christians
and Ministers to exquisite tortures, casting unslaked lime with vinegar into
their eyes to burn them out, R^ssidius in vita Aug.
that they might be as blind in their bodies, as their persecuters were in
their souls; railing most bitterly, as Rossidius in the life of S. Austin tells
us, against that holy man and his fraternity of Bishops and Presbyters, because
he did mightily discover, and render detestable their hypocritical madness,
for which these impudent wretches, and impious pretenders to religion, called
him a carnal man, a formal Professor, a rotten Christian, an execrable
person, not fit to live: thus (for the comfort of many unjustly despised, and
untruly reproched Bishops and Presbyters of the Church of England,) was he
treated by these fanatic Factionists, who was one of the most excellent lights
for learned humility, charitable industry, and modest constancy, that ever God
raised up to his Church since the Apostles days.

I will not odiously repeat to you the well known, yet infamous, Set forth by
S^eidan, in his Comm.

By others of late in English


seditions and rustic tumults raised in Germany by the Anabaptistick and other
Spirits, to the destruction of above an hundred thousand poor people. Other
attempts were made by such Zelots upon other Provinces and Cities, sufficient
to tell the world what good stomachs some men have to devour all things civil
and sacred, when once they can be Masters of mis-rule. Their despite is not
only against the learning, livelihood and lives of Bishops and true Ministers
of Churches, either Reformed or Roman, that stand in their way; but all is
fuel that comes under their flaming Fingers: They long to be sharers and
Masters of the Estates, Lands, Places, Profits, Honors, Powers, and Wives of
Magistrates, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Merchants, Citizens, Yeomen, and Tradesmen,
whose barnes, or shops, or houses are better furnished than these Reformers yet
are. Whosoever they or their Prophets and Parasites, should decree, as John of
Leiden did, to be Reprobates (because not complying with their wild opinions
and holy ravings,) presently they were branded for ungodly; next they were
voted as enemies to Jesus Christ; at last they were devoted to Poverty,
Prisons, Banishments and Deaths, unless they chose a voluntary Confiscation
and banishment, to escape other men's inordinate fury. Who can marvel that
these abominable desolaters, in their Principles and Practices, should not be
very sparing of those Supports which men have for their bodily lives and
temporal welfare, where they see them to be such prodigal and pitiless
wasters of all those Ministers and means, which might most contribute to make
men's souls eternally happy in Piety and Charity? of which the Devil never
makes greater havoc, than when he obtrudes excessive, needless, and endless
Reformations, as his grand Impostures, which, like violent torrents, not fill,
but trouble and confound all those purer streams and fountains of Religion,
which had much more of Christian purity and constancy in them, though not so
much of the overflowing fury and muddy inundation.

How can you (O worthy Gentlemen, or your posterity) expect other effects in
the sacred or civil concernments of this Nation, when inordinate liberty
naturally begets licentiousness in Religion, licentiousness variety, variety
animosity, animosity fury, and fury force? the usual Climax or gradation of
all popular and irregular motions in Religion. In which common reason and
natural Divinity (much more Christianity) possessing men that there can be for
the main but one true Religion, as there is but one true God, and his holy will
but one, every man is prone first to presume that he is in the right; next, he
grows so partial to his own persuasions, as to imagine this above all others
best, and only pleasing to God; then he concludes all other ways of Religion
are as displeasing and offensive to God, as to himself. Hence he kindles to a
zeal in Gods behalf, both to decry all other, and to cry up his own Religion;
after this he has potent impulses to propagate his own, and extirpate all
others, as an acceptable service and sacrifice to God. This he first does by
words, disputing, writing, railing, reviling: If these methods of converting
and reforming the wicked world will not serve, he concludes them as his and
Gods opposers to be obstinate; then he flies to the sword, first in vote, then
in use, so soon as he and his party can get number and power sufficient to act
with probable safety: such an opportunity he counts a call of God, an hand of
providence, inviting and directing what to do, in order to set up their new
way, against all others never so ancient, never so approved by good men, and
prospered by Gods grace and blessing: Yea all old things must be done away,
they must make all things new; and their way must needs be the new Jerusalem
meant in the Revelation.

Thus factions in Religion, like Crocodiles, from small eggs at length grow to
great and formidable serpents, with wide jaws, and long tails, threatening to
devour all that will not submit and conform to them; wars, bloodshed, and
death, being the stings of those Scorpions, Rev. 9.7, 8.
whose faces at first seemed as the faces of men, faire-mannered, good-natured,
and well-minded? which was St. Austins charitable censure of the Euchites and
Circumcellions simplicity, so Luthers of the Anabaptists sincerity, till they
saw them growing numerous like Locusts, and appearing like horses prepared for
Battle, having hair and soft dresses like women, but teeth like Lions;
violent exacters of their own Liberty, but insolent oppressors of other men's.

It Is evident in all ages and places, That as few men, when they grow many, are
capable to use and enjoy with modesty and humility that Christian liberty,
which in their paucity and minority they craved of their superiors for
themselves; so few are willing to grant the same freedom to others, now their
inferiors in number and power; morosely denying what they once importunely
desired: which partiality rises out of such pregnant jealousies and reasons of
State, as dictate to all men thus much, That public differings in matters of
Religion are very dangerous to the civil peace of those that enjoy power, and
are quiet under it; which every party secretly envies, repines at, and seeks to
obtain to it self, that it may have its Triumph as well as others, and not
always be a Punie or Underling. We our selves have lived to see upon this
account the Tables so turned in England, that many who heretofore desired a
favorable connivence at nonconformity to the Church of England, are now most
jealous and impatient to grant it to those who are still conform to it in
their judgments, and inoffensive in their practices. The like temper and
carriage is expected by all from those they count Recusants to them; whom they
therefore study to suppress, either secretly undermining, or openly
exitrpating them as rivals and enemies.

Not only those greater birds, Popery and Prelacy, who are thought to affect
rule in the Church of Christ (of which they are most unworthy, if they deserve
to be linked with blasphemy and other villainies) but all those little birds,
who first defiled their own nests, then made new ones, and laid their eggs in
the branches of such Christian liberty (as is hardly granted by them to those
that still adhere to the Church of England,) even these no sooner live and
flutter, but they cluck and flock together, aiming to grow as numerous as they
can: nor will any one of these fail to be dangerous in respect of the civll
peace, when once they are confident of the power, as well as the superlative
Piety of their party, if the present policies of State did not poyse and
balance one party with another, yea awe one by the other: none of them is of so
small courage, and tame Spirits, as not to aim at the Converting, Reforming,
Ruling and subduing of all others. The least of these feeble people, like
Coneys in some Islands of Greece, would make a shift to extirpate all the
Inhabitants but themselves; They no sooner grow up, increase, and multiply, but
they are ready to fight, as the serpents teeth sowed by Cadmus, (which fable
imported, as learned Bochart tells us, nothing else but the Phoenician Colonies
armed with brass, and arriving in the Greek Islands, who presently sought by
force to subdue all the Pristine and Native Inhabitans; (...)
the same Phoenician and Hebrew word signifying brass and a Serpent) This
principle being bred with all pretenders to mend Religion, that there is no
conscience to be made of any civil or Ecclesiastic subjection, no use of
Christian patience and submission, longer than they want power to subdue all
things under their feet, and to assert their due sovereignty.

Those parties, separations, Sects and divisions, which have of later years
unanimously set themselves against the former constitution of the Church of
England, (which was once far above them) are now grown not only very pert and
rigorous, but so various, and each of them so strangely vigorous, that they are
not like the twins struggling in Rebeca's womb, History of the Netherlands.
but like the brats which a Countess in Flanders is reported to bring forth,
equal in number to the days of the year: Nor are they Infants, striving
without much strength, and with less malice, but they are grown adult, manly,
Gladiatorian, Cyclopick; the balancing of whose Spirits is indeed a great piece
of art and policy, and may hold while there is so great a Master of Power and
Prudence as can do it.

But it is certain every party affects prevalency, not content to truckle under
any other, since they have equally emancipated themselves from the authority
and subjection to, yea from the Charity and Communion with the Church of
England, whose authority and eminency was sometime as conspicuous as its order,
merit and glory. Such as now disdain her and seek to destroy her are venial,
if by a retaliation of divine vengeance, they ambitiously strive for mastery
against each other; each aiming to be like the Master- Pike in a Pond, which
(they think) may lawfully devour those that are of lesser size and growth. It Is
certain that every faction in Religion has its fears of oppression, whetting
them to mutual emulations and ambitions, not knowing what party may, like the
beasts in Daniel, get the better over others, if not by arguments, yet by
arms: nothing more frequent than those civil conflagrations or burnings of
Cities and Countries, whose first fires are kindled from the Coals of the
Altars, from Religious firebrarnds cast by Christians in each others faces.

We need not go farther to verify this presumption, than to the late great
Instances so remarkable among our selves here in England, sufficiently proving
that there can be no civil security, where there is such a Religious variety,
as serves to give both occasion and confidence to different parties, both to
excite their private ambitions, and in time to exert them in ways of open
hostility, whenever opportunity is given by any negligence, offense, or
distemper in government or governors; upon the least bruise, the ill humors,
as in foul bodies, will have such confluence to the disaffected part, as easily
causes terrible inflammations, and many times such gangrenes of poisonous and
indigestible humors, as nothing but the sword can cure.

Not only Germany and France heretofore have felt the sad effects of these
Religious factions, frequently embrued in the blood of their Countries; but
Scotland, Ireland and England, have heretofore had many shaking fits of these
Religious fevers, though never any that cost each of them so much letting of
blood as these last Calentures, which have infinitely wasted the people and
spirits of these three Nations, taking their first popular heats (or pretending
so at least) from the zeal each party had for its Religion, not as Christian,
which all profess, but as discriminated by particular marks of lesser Opinions
and Persuasions, which occasion more discords than all their agreement in other
main matters can preserve of Love and Concord, as men, as Contrymen, or
Christians.

How often since the Reformation in England began, and was perfected (to so great
a beauty, for Justice, Piety, Order, Charity, Moderation and Honor, as became
the Glory of God, the Majesty of Christian Religion, and the Wisdom of this
Nation) have the struglings of Religion threatened, and began civil broils, not
only in Henry the eighth's days, both in the North and West (when yet
Reformation was much unhewn and unpolished, people being unsatisfied because
untaught, as to the just grounds of necessary Alteration) but afterward, in
succeeding Princes days, especially in Queen Elizabeth's long and happy reign,
how infinitely did religious discontents boil in some men's breasts? insomuch
that for want of vent in open flames of Hostility (which the public Power,
Policy and Vigilance of those times repressed) they bred all sorts of foul
Impostumations, even to the study of Assassinations, Empoisonings and Treasons;
some so black and barbarous, as are unparalled in former, and will be scarce
credible in after-Ages.

Nor did the discontented Papists only meditate first revenge, then
Sovereignty, by blowing all up at one blow that was sacred or civil in this
Nation; but even that little cloud, which at first seemed but as an hands
breadth, of difference in some outward Forms, Ceremonies and Circumstances of
Religion, as Christian and Reformed, this in time grew so full of sulphurous or
hot vapors, that it looked very black when it was not yet very big in England,
either by schisms or separations, being much cooled and allayed, yea in great
part dissipated and vanished, through the excellent temper of that Government
both in Church and State, which that renowned Queen and her wise Council
preserved; which suffered neither Conformity to grow wanton and lazy, nor
Nonconformity to be presumptuous or desperate, nor yet too popular, by
out-vying the other party either in Piety or Industry.

Episcopacy, as the ancient and only Catholic Government of this and all
other Churches for 1500. years, was then had in due veneration, allowed its
double honor, both in Church and State, in Parlaments and Synods; it was
treated with great gravity and respect by that incomparable Princess;
afterward it was asserted with greater indulgence and passion by King James,
who began that Proverb which his Son saw verified, No Bishop, no King: yet in
the beginning of the late Kings days, Episcopacy and the state of the Church
was even pampered and cosetted by so excessive a favor and propensity, as made
it seem his chief Favorite, not only for reasons of State, but of Conscience.
The Episcopal throne and dignity seemed as immutable as the Kings Scepter and
Majesty; so zealously devoted he was to assert it, so fearful by any
sacrilegious act to diminish it; such a Patron, such a Champion for the State
Ecclesiastic, that upon the matter he was resolved to venture Kingdoms, Life
and all upon this cause, and either to swim or sink with the Church of
England against the Tide of all Faction.

What could be desired of greater advantage and security, than such an
immensity of favor from so potent a Monarch, for the indemnity and stability
of the Episcopal interests and its friends in England? which in the Beginning
of King Charles his reign had what they could hope or desire; his benignity
exceeding the very hopes of Churchmen, his Royal favor confirming all those
Immunities, Honors, Jurisdictions and Revenues, as sacred and inviolable,
which they enjoyed by the Laws, Privileges and Customs of England; to which
the Learning, Gravity, and Merit of many worthy Bishops and other Churchmen in
England bare so great and good a proportion, that few were so impudently
envious, as not to think that many, yea most of them, well deserved what they
soberly enjoyed?

The heat of the opposite Factions, as Non-conformists or Separatists, was so
much allayed, that it seemed quite extinguished: nor possibly could it have
revived to so sudden and dreadful flames, if the immoderations of some men's
passionate counsels and precipitate activities had not transported them beyond
those bounds which politic, and it may be pious, prudence did require; which
easily re-inkindled those old differences which had been so much suppressed,
that they seemed quite buried in England, till they took fresh and unexpected
fires from the cold climate, but hot spirits, of Scotland; which finding
prepared and combustible matter there and here too, soon brake out to such
flames as were not to be quenched but with the best blood in England, and the
overthrow of the ancient Government both of Church and State, even then when
both seemed to be in their greatest height and fixation.

So dangerous, even beyond all imagination and expression, are the sparks of
religious dissentions, if they be either by preposterous Oppositions provoked,
or by imprudent Negligences permitted to ferment and spread in any Church and
State, or if they be not by at powerful way of real Wisdom and true Piety
(which is the best and surest policy) so quenched and smothered, as may take
away from all men of any Worth, Modesty and Conscience, any just cause to
endeavor or desire any such Innovations as those did, who upon Presbyterian
principles first aimed at, not a total change of Doctrine, but only an
amendment of Discipline and Government in this Church; which as they seemed in
a short time to have obtained beyond their first designs, so in no long time
after they were as much frustrated, and soon defeated by other subsequent
parties which sprang up upon the like grounds of religious differences.

After Episcopacy was thrust under hatches, what I pray could be more absolute
and Magisteriall, bigger in words, looks, enterprises, in terrors of others,
in boasts and confidences of it self, than the Presbyterian party was after
once that Leven, by a Scotch maceration and infusion, had diffused it self, and
sowred many peoples simplicity here in England, against the Episcopal
constitution and administration of this Church? How did this high-flying Icarus
in a short time disdain any rival, puffing at all its Prelatick adversaries,
setting its feet on all the Bishops and the Episcopal Clergies neck, as the
Israelites did on the five Kings of the Amorites, before they were to be slain?
which thing was done at Josuahs command, Jos. 10.24.
who was the supreme Magistrate: but these forward Spirits tarried not for any
such command or consent to their dominion, from the Prince of the people; but
their new soveraginty fought to spread it self like lightning in a moment to
the latitude of these three Kingdoms, impregnated and palliated with many
popular petitions for Reformation of Religion, which was in effect no more than
the setting up of a sole sovereign and absolute Presbytery. A novelty in any
other Reformed Church, whose necessity, rather than choice, drove them upon it:
but in England it seemed a mere insolency; yet how was it now to be seen
flourishing with the Scotch sword in one hand, and the Covenant in the other?
How was it heightened by the name and reputation of Parliament? How was it to be
Christened and adopted to Christ in England, by an Assembly of Divines, who
were indeed rather the Gossips and Witnesses, than the Fathers or begetters of
this alien; which was rather a Scotch Runt than of true English breed? For
most, if not all the new Patrons and Godfathers of Presbytery, both Gentlemen
and Clergymen, had formerly sworn to, or subscribed, or asserted, or at least
cheerfully submitted to the ancient legal and Episcopal Government of the
Church of England. From which they were so suddenly, passionately warped, and
partially inclined to Presbytery, that although my self were by I know not what
sleight of hand shuffled out of that Assembly (to which I was as fully chosen
as any, and never gave any refusal to sit with them, further than my judgment
was sufficiently declared in a Sermon preached at the first sitting of the
Parliament, to be for the ancient and Catholic Episcopacy;) yet the Zeal of
some men to put Presbytery into its throne and exercise was such, that I was
twice sent to by some members of both Houses, and summoned by the Committee of
the County where I live, to preach at the consecration and installing of this
many headed Bishop, the new Presbytery: which work I twice (and so ever humbly)
refused to do, as not having so studied its Genealogy and descent, as to be
assured of the legitimation, right and title of sole Presbytery, to succeed,
nay to remove its ancient Father Episcopacy, not as then quite dead, nor (I
think) fully deposed. Yet such was the double diligence then of many English
Divines (men otherwise of useful abilities) that they did as officiously
attend on the Scotch Commissioners to set up Presbytery, and to destroy
Episcopacy, as the maid is wont in pictures to wait on Judith with a bag for
Holofernes his head.

Besides this, Presbytery had then fortified it self with a special piece of
policy, in order to its prevalency and perpetuity; which was, to engage the
better sort of common people, or the Masters of every Parish, and so in effect
the whole Populacy, to that party, by indulging them (as Mr. Calvin did in
Geneva) a formal or titular share of Consistorian or Ecclesiastical power,
under the glorious name of Ruling Elders, on whom, as on less comely members,
they were pleased to bestow more abundant honor, at least in words; for few of
them could really be fit for, or ever capable to use any actual authority,
beyond that of Sides-men, Constables, Churchwardens, or Overseers for the poor.

Yet must the Divine Authority even of these pillars to Presbytery be set up,
though it stands but on tip-toes, and as it were upon one leg, favored but by
one Text of Scripture, and not one example, either in Scripture or all
Antiquity for a thousand years and more, as learned Mr. Chibald proved in that
excellent work of his, which was very seasonably for the design, but not very
honestly, embezled by some fast friends to Presbytery, as I have other where
complained. How loath were many men, as they still are, to understand, that the
Apostle St. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Paul in that single place could not, according to that Spirit of wisdom which
appears in all his writings, there institute two distinct sorts of Elders? but
he only notes those different degrees of ability, industry and merit, which
might be in some of the same kind and order; some being as Preachers and
Bishops, Pastors and Rulers fixed to particular charges and congregations;
others with greater zeal, pains and hazards following nearer the Apostles
steps, in watering what they had but newly planted among the first converted
Nations, yea and in further new planting the Gospel among the Gentiles, which
was the great work of the principal Pastors, Elders or Bishops in those times.

The Apostle too well understood the proportions of justice and remuneration,
to give the same double honor (that is, equal maintenance and reverence from
the Churches) to those whose pains in them must be so vastly different, as
well as their abilities; the work of their supposed ruling, but not preaching
Elders, being no way comparable in Reason or Religion to the work and worth of
those that duly preach and plant the Gospel. The ruling part, as it was
assigned them by these new dividers of Church Government, was such, as required
no great time or pains, nor great abilities; which, if required, could not
easily be had in most Country-congregations, much less in primitive times
among the poor and (for most part) Plebeian Christians: besides the office does
so much gratify most Laymens small ambitions to be in office, and so little
hinders their other trades, that they cannot be thought to deserve any great
reward, much less double, that is equal, honor to him that expends most of
his time, Spirits, and talents in preparing and employing himself for the
Preaching Ministry, which will constantly exercise the best of his power and
abilities. If these Ruling Elders must have equal honor, as to maintenance,
with Preachers, the Church is undone; for it cannot afford it: If Preachers
must have no more maintenance or respect than these Lay Elders will deserve,
Preaching-Elders or Ministers are undone; for they must either starve, or tack
other callings to the Ministry to patch up a livelihood. What is further
brought from Helps and Governments, 1 Cor. 12.28.
to help Preaching Elders to the Government in common, and Rustic or
Lay Elders to a share with them, seems to me to have as little force to
convince any sober man's judgment, or persuade their consciences to submit to
the novelty of them, as that argument used by a good old woman had to confute
them; who being urged by a young Presbyter, for the better countenancing of his
authority, to submit her self to the Examination and Jurisdiction of these
Elders, which were news to her, She replied, rather very resolutely than
rationally, No, by no means, she would not be subject to them, because she had
both heard and read that Elders were Apocryphal, and would have ravished
Susanna.

But in earnest, these Ruling Elders were in prudence, not in conscience, in
reason of State, not of Religion, in Policy, not Piety, first added to the
consistory at Geneva, merely to appease and please the unsettled people, who
having tumultuarily driven out their Bishop and Prince, now upon the Essays or
new modellings of Church and State, would not be quiet, till Calvin allowed
them some that might seem Tribunes of the people in Courts Ecclesiastic as
well as Civil. It Is true, Lay Elders have been continued and used there, and
other where, after that plat-forme of so-disciplined Churches; but not
therefore any way the more or better reformed. For these are rather as Ciphers,
adding some number, train and company to the Ministers, than signifying ought
of themselves, further than prudence and policy may make use of them: But
certainly no Religious necessity commands them as a duty and of divine
Institution, there being an impossibility to find them in every parochial
congregation, where there is seldom any one man of the Laity, who is meet in
any kind to be joined with the Minister, in any such authority, which claims
to be Sacred and Divine; for which God ever provides fitting instruments, Psalm.
68.11.
where he commands to have any use of them. God gave the word, and great was
the company of Preaching Elders, Bishops and Presbyters in all ages: but of
Lay Elders and Ruling only, we read so little, so no use in any Church or age,
that we may conclude, God gave no such word for them. The wise God abhors
unequal mixtures, Deuteronomy. 22.10.
such as the plowing with an Ox and an Ass: and such seems the joining of
Preachers with these Lay Elders in the discipline and government of the Church;
the Ass both disgracing and overtoyling the laborious and more ponderous Ox,
who has more hindrance than help from so silly and sluggish an assistant.
Motly and unsociable conjunctions, in sowing mislane, or wearing linsy-wolsy
garments, are also forbidden by the Lord, Deuteronomy. 22.9, 11.
as emblems of his abhoring all things that make any uncomely and unsociable
confusion, which ought chiefly to be avoided in Church-affaires, that order,
solemnity ability, and prudence, might keep up the Majesty of Religion, the
Churches venerable discipline, and the Ministerial divine authority, even there
where no civil Magistrate would own it. Yet if any Presbyter be so wedded to
these Lay Elders, that he will never be reconciled to Primitive Episcopacy if
he be wholly divorced from his dear Elders, for my part he shall have my
consent to enjoy them, upon a politic and prudent account, where he may
conveniently have use of them. For I do not think the outward Government of the
Church to be made of such stuff or fashion which will not in any case either
stretch or shrink, as those garments might do on the Jews bodies, when they
ware them forty years in the wilderness, provided all things be done decently
and in order, with due regard to the maine end and the best examples. But if
any contend for these Elders upon a divine and strict account of Religion, my
answer is, with St. Paul, we had no such custom in England, 1 Cor. 11.16.
nor the other Churches of Christ in the world, for 1400. years, who were fed
and ruled by Bishops and Presbyters as the only Elders, Pastors, and
Presidents in Ecclesiastical Government.

This is sure, Presbytery was at first so confident of its sure standing in
England, (where it never yet had any footing since Christianity was planted)
that it doubted not to make use of such a wooden leg or crutch as Lay Elders
are to support its new Government and discipline; which was hereby rendered very
popular and specious to many Ministers, and other men of vulgar Spirits, who
were more ambitious of any small pittance of Church Government to pass through
their fingers, than judicious to measure and design the true proportions of it
or themselves, which certainly ought to be most remote from a Democratick
temper, Church Government depending not upon many strong, rash and rude hands,
but upon wise heads and holy hearts; of which no great store is ordinarily to
be found among common and Country People, upon which crab-stocks nevertheless
this graft of Presbyterian government was to be every where grafted on the one
side, not without mighty applause, and great expectation from the
meaner-spirited people of England, in every parish some of which were to be
found, not only among the very Mechanic and Rustic Plebs only, but among
some Citizens, Gentlemen, and Noblemen too, who began to have very warm and
devout ambitions to enjoy the title of a ruling Elder, as a divine honor added
to their other civil honors, gently submitting their and their posterities
tamer necks to such a yoke, as neither they nor their forefathers ever knew;
by which one little Minister with two or three of his Elders, might be
empowered to excommunicate a King and all his Council, as King James
expresses in his sense of their arrogance.

But while the common people of Engl. were every where preparing themselves to
admire, adore, or dread, yea to entertain and feed with double honor, which
was required for its due, this new and strange beast of Presbytery, which rose
out of the sea of Scottish broils and English troubles (being, as was thought,
adorned with seven Heads and ten Horns, coming forth conquering and to
conquer;) in the midst of so great glory, swelling confidences and superfluity
of successes, behold, a little stone of Independency, cut out by no hand of
Authority, rises up against the great mountain of Presbytery, as its Emulator
and Rival. This in a short time has so cloven it in sunder, that it has
quite broken its hoped Monopoly of Church Government; and Independency having
never had any Patent from any Christian King or people heretofore, pleads a
Patent (as does Presbytery) from Christ Jesus, which has been, it seems,
dormant and unexecuted these 1640 years. This some more gross and credulous
spirits do easily believe, though they never saw the Commission. Only as the
more acute and nimble Independents (besides the more profound and solid
Episcopalians) eagerly dispute against the usurped Authority of Presbytery,
alleging that Classical, Provincial, and National Presbyteries are to them
much more Apocryphal than Deanes and Chapters, Bishops and Archbishops; so do
both of them no less urge a pure Novelty, besides the fractions and
parcellings of Government, against Independency, tokens of weakness,
imprudence and inconsistency in Government.

Yet amidst all this stickling, the puny of Independency (which enjoyed at
first the smiles and cajolings of Presbytery, counting it an harmless and
innocent Novelty, because yet unarmed) grew up by strange successes and
unexpected favors of power, to such a stature, procerity and pertness, that it
not only now justles with Presbytery, but it makes it in many places glad to
comply, yea to curry favor with, and to truckle under Independency; which
challenges Seniority before Presbytery, with much more probability than
Presbytery can allege any authority for its rejecting Catholic Episcopacy; it
being more evident, that particular Congregations were first governed by one
sole Apostle, Pastor, Teacher, Bishop, or Presbyter, present among them, than
that many Presbyters ever governed the large and united Combinations of
Christian Congregations and Churches, without some one Apostle or eminent
Bishop, as chief President among them: to which all Church History consents,
without any one exception in all the world.

Thus has Independency, as a little, but tite, Pinnace, in a short time got
the wind of, and given a broadside to Presbytery; which soon grew a slug, when
once the North Wind ceased to fill its sails. Besides this, Independency
confining all its authority to a little body and narrow compass of one
Congregation, has a stroke or knack in it of greater popularity than
Presbytery it self; which having many heads and hands, soon grew terrible to
great men as well as common people, threatening them not only with one sword or
scepter, but with the combined force of many Presbyters and Presbyteries, with
appeals from one Consistory to another, which looked like dew-rakes and
harrowes, armed with so many teeth, that none great or small should escape
them, but he must needs fall under the first, second, third or fourth
Consistorian Power, either Parochial, or Classical, or Provincial, or
National; new names and great words, which common people would hardly learn in
one year, nor understand in seven.

Furthermore, the Magistratick genius and Imperial spirits of this Nation
(intending entirely to govern it, both in Civil and Ecclesiastical respects)
began in time to be better advised, and so to be aware how they or the Nation
fell under the Discipline of any Populacy or Presbytery, whose Rods, nay
Scorpions, castigated King James, during his pupillage or minority in Scotland,
so severely, that he could never forgive or forget their insolency to his dying
day, as he bitterly complains in his Basilicon Doron; every petty Presbyter
that had twenty Marks a year salary to live upon, fancying himself a Peer, not
only to the Lords, but to the Prince himself. This ((...)) many-headed Hydra
of Government, King James did (and so might all wise men) see cause enough
perfectly to abhor both in Church and State; that it was not only folly, but
madness, to buy the experience of it in England at the charge of our own
miseries, when we had our neighbors late examples so near us; that they were
enough to have scared any wise men from such an hare-brain'd and plebeian
Presbytery, as King James and others describe, specially the Learned, Reverend
and Impartial Archbishop of S. Andrews, who modestly sets it forth in his
late excellent History of the Church of Scotland, in its rise, progress,
activity and recesse: which was a Government popularly at first extorted from
Bishops, Peers and Princes, by a company of minute Ministers or petty
Preachers, whose extravancies the wisdom of King James after reduced to a
well-regulated Episcopacy; under which Scotland, as well as England, enjoyed, I
believe, its best days.

Thus when Presbytery had lopped Episcopacy to the stumps in Engl. yea and
thought it had grubbed it up by the Mattock and Pickax of the Covenant; when it
self from a small Shrub had set it self up, began to take root, and to fill the
land, against the will of the chief Cedar in the Forest, fancying it was now
full of sap, both of Divine and Humane Right, as if it were in high favor both
with God and man; yet then it suddenly dwindled and looked so withered as if it
had been Planet-struck, or smitten with a sharp East Wind, when indeed it was
nothing else but the spirit of Independency and other Novelties, which like
Palmer-worms or Caterpillars secretly bred in every corner of the land; and
which have now also made their way even into Scotland it self, sometime the
great Scene and Throne of Presbytery, now very tottering and much weakened, as
to that part of affected sovereignty in Church Affairs.

Nor is this young, tall, and seemingly so thrifty shoot of Independency (which
is yet but slender, and more run up in height than spread in bulk) this is not
so firmly fixed, that it cannot be removed, having little root in Scripture, or
in the true reason of Government and Polity, nor more in any Church-patterns or
practice of Antiquity; being like Jonah's gourd, the child of a night, of
yesterday, in comparison of Primitive and Catholic Episcopacy, yea and a
younger brother to Presbytery: which was but a modern shift used among some
Reformed Churches, when they could not have as they desired, Reforming and
Reformed Bishops to rule them; for else they had never (God knows) dreamed any
thing of such a Presbytery as should tend to the extirpation of Apostolic
Episcopacy. Nor is Independency with all its easy rootings and windings in our
loose and broken soil of England, as yet far spread in the judgments of the
most learned, grave and sober persons of England, looking upon it as
incongruous in its Novelty, Feebleness, Factiousness and popular temper, to the
Genius and interest of the English people, who are never to be long or well
ruled by those whom they think their equals or inferiors.

Even Independency it self (which has a pretty soft phrase, and easier cords
to bind people together in small bodies) will in time find its weakness in it
self, and betray it to others; whence will follow other variations from it,
oppositions against it, and contempts of it. Who knows what way fierce
Anabaptists, ambitious Millenaries, Seraphick Familists, rude Ranters, and
silly Quakers will affect for their Church Government, or any other new and yet
namelesse Faction which may hereafter be spawned, more agreeable to the vulgar
humor, which loves greater Latitudes, Indifferencies, Loosenesses and
Cheapnesses of Religion, both in Opinon and Practice, than learned and modest
Independents will allow?

Who sees not how much the uncivil confidence and childish clownery of Quakers
takes with the vulgar beyond any thing? while to set off their Enthusiasmes
with a greater emphasis, they affect a rude and levelling Conversation, with a
familiarity of Thouing their betters and superiors at every word, fancying
great holiness in their simple and superstitious Yea and Nay, which are not
the sole and confined, but only the shortest expressions of true and honest
meanings; disdaining to use any signs of Duty, common Courtesy, or Respect,
which by the Laws of God and man are due to Parents, Equals or Superiors,
according to the gentle, courteous and humble behavior of all Christians in
all Countries and Ages: yet do these sort of new leaders pretend they come
nearer to Jesus Christ and to God, because they have no respect of any persons
but themselves: and no doubt, in order further to relieve their Necessities and
Obscurities, these men would be content to have all things common, after the
fashion of primitive Charity, when the Churches necessities had an empire of
love (not force) over particular Christians proprieties.

These and the like discriminations of parties in Religion, which are but
lately grown out of the distempers of the Church of England (as worms out of
Job's sores or dunghill) have already not only their Founders and Patrons
(which must be almost deified by their respective Disciples) but they have also
their grand Masters, Abettors, Propagators, Followers and Champions; each
challenges to themselves the titles of Christians, Saints, godly people, the
Church, etc. not as good fellows in a charitable community and Catholic
correspondency, but in a supercilious reserve, almost excluding all others, and
unchurching them who are not just of their modes, who do not follow their
colors, and are not ready to fight under their banners.

To be sure they all bandy against the poor Church of England, agreeing in this
one Antipathy, how disagreeing soever in other things; they study to divide her
Unity, to break her solid Intireness, to enervate her Authority, to infatuate
her Wisdom, to weaken her Strength, to spoil her Patrimony, to destroy her
very Being, and to render her Name odious; with great coyness and disdainful
smiles looking upon any man or Minister that shall but speak of the Church of
England, and counting him presently as their common enemy, if he profess a
filial Regard, Duty, Love, Pity, Adherence and Subjection to it.

Mean while, each of these Agitators for their several parties and interests,
fancy to themselves a great power resident in them, a Divine Liberty and
Authority derivable from them, to begin new Churches, to beget their own
Fathers, to lead their Shepherds, to teach their Teachers, to ordain their
Pastors, to celebrate all holy Mysteries, to consecrate Sacramental Symbols:
thus arrogating all that is Divine or Ecclesiastic to themselves, in their
several methods and capacities. Sometimes the Pastor begets a Flock for
himself, otherwhile a Flock begets a Pastor to themselves. It is no wonder that
they are so greedy and vigilant to shark what they can from the Church of
England and its Ministry, which they cry down as defective, as contemptible, as
useless, as pernicious, as null; crying up their Novelties in opinion or
practice beyond all that was ever used or known by the Church of England or any
other ancient Church.

Thus animated by confidence of themselves, and instigated by contempt of
others, specially of the Church of England, they daily and zealously labor to
make Proselytes to their respective parties; so to increase their numbers, then
to enlarge their quarters: though their hands have hitherto been jointly and
chiefly against the Church of Engl. yet they are ready, as occasion shall
serve, like Ishmael, to be against one another, counting every one against them
who is not for them.

In fine, what does any of them want, but Strength and Opportunity, to set up
themselves and their parties, to lift up their Standards, to display their
Ensigns, to inscribe on their Flags of mutual defiances the names of their
several Factions, to advance their distinct, divided, and (now) discovered
interests and designs, presented under some specious notion or name of
Reformation, of Christ's Kingdom, or Throne, or reign with them and by them, as
soon as they can begin, and as long as they can continue that sacred Empire?
which must, it seems, begin in England; for no where else in the world men's
Heads are so busy, men's Hearts so divided, their Wits so frantic, their
Religion so fancifull, their Pride so insolent, their Wills so wilful, their
Consciences so loose, their Charity so partial, their Unity so broken, their
Liberty so licentious, their Christianity so self-crucifying, their
Reformations so rude, so ridiculous, so ruinous, both to their common Mother,
and to each other.

As for the Church of England, there is not one of these fierce and flagrant
Novellers but they look upon her with such an eye as ungracious children use to
do upon their aged, weak, bedridden and impoverished Mother, whom they think
never like to get upon her legs again, much less to be able to assert her self,
to recover her Strength, Authority, Reputation and Estate, from their
unnatural and rapacious invasions; Her they have devoted to utter destruction,
without any remaining sparks of Honor, Love, or Pity for her; they conclude
her as condemned to perpetual Desolations; each of them resolves to make their
advantages by her Ruins, as some do by the Decays of our Cathedrals: and this
upon no other quarrel, that I could ever see, but because she was, as much
elder, so much wiser and better than any, than all of them, as to all Learning,
Wisdom, Order, Gravity, Gifts, Graces, Charity, Constancy, Unity; these new
modes of Religion and Reformation consisting more in breaking than binding, in
taking than giving, in pulling down than building any thing that might be a
remarkable Instance and Monument, either of pious Magnificence, or munificent
Piety.

Possibly they may, out of principles of policy and self-preservation, keep
some fair quarter to each other, and pretend a correspondency, as brethren in
discontent or iniquity, while they either are curbed by a potent and prudent
hand, as to that civil predominancy and liberty they affect; or while they have
some jealousy of the Church of England's recovery (their sore and just enemy,
in their esteem, when indeed it is their truest friend, and least their
flatterer:) but when they fancy her to be irreparable, and each of themselves
in such potency as can bear no competitor, they will certainly justle each
other for more elbow-room. Their spirits are too big to be confined, when once
blown up with confidence of numbers and successes; neither their herds nor
herdsmen can feed longer together: like Cocks of the game, when they have
sufficiently crowed over the Church of England, they will fight with one
another. Their Principles are, and so will their Practices be, Mohammedan as
well as Christian, rather to be active than passive, to follow the crescent
rather than bear the cross. They are for rule and empire, rather than for
Christian patience and subjection: those were superstitious, or necessitous,
rather than religious Principles and Practices of primitive silliness, more
than simplicity and innocence (as they count them:) the Serpent in them will
devour the Dove, as soon as it grows great enough, that it may be no longer a
creeping, but a flying fiery Serpent.

Late experience too much gratifying, even to a glut and excess, the various,
licentious, factious and cruel Novelties of some men, has thus far manifested
the Folly, Ingratitude, Inordinatenesse, Ambition and Madness of their
Principles, Practices and Spirits, that I see some men can never be content
with moderate blessings in Church or State, nor satisfied with any thing,
unless they may be their own carvers: they are so eager to catch at the
shadows of Novelty and whimsies of Reformation, that they are blindly zealous
to lose the substance of Religion, and deform the best Reformations in the
world; the issues of their Counsels are the issues of Death, and their paths
tend either to Romish darkness or Atheistical indifferencies.

From all which true observations of men's tempers and activities, presages of
future sad events, I cannot but with grief of soul justify (what many men's
immoderate zeal is loath to believe) the wise observations of S. Austin and many
others, who were set beyond juvenile heats and popular fervours;

That Novelties in any well-ordered Church and Religion (though seemingly, yea
and really, as to some degrees, for the better, yet) usually perturb the Church
and State of Religion more than they profit them. Magis perturbat novitas, quam
prodest veritas.
No private men's reformings end without their greater deformities; if perhaps
they add to the Purity and Verity, they take as much away from the Charity and
Unity of Religion. That Passion commonly darkens and sullies more than their
pretensions of Piety do polish or brighten Religion. That preposterous
Reformers instead of snuffing the lamps of the Temple, are prone to put them
quite out: especially when the ignorance and insolence of Laymen undertake to
set the Ark of God upon their Cart, 1 Samuel 6.10.
to draw it with Beasts, and drive it with their whips and whistlings, though
they whistle to the tune of a Psalm; yet Religion always totters, is often
overthrown by them, being never safe but when it is, as the Ark ought to have
been, carried upon the shoulders of able Priests and Levites, such Bishops and
Presbyters as ought to bear it up, and to whose care that sacred depositum is
chiefly committed by Christ and the Apostles. Nor has the learned and godly
Clergy in England ever been so weak and unworthy, as to want either ability or
will, Sufficiency or Authority, to do this service to God and his Church;
however now they are so debased, discouraged, and almost beaten out of the
Sanctuary. Reformations of Religion ever prove either abortive or misshapen,
when they are either begotten or brought forth by Ministers factiousnesse or
peoples fury: tumultuating and irregular ways of reforming any Church do but
cut up and so kill the mother, in hope to save that Bastard-child, which having
neither due form nor legitimation deserves no long life.

We see by too woeful experiences and infinite expenses of blood, that
Churches, when in some things decayed, are easier mended in Fancy than in
effect, in the project than performance; That this Church-work requires not
only proper workmen and skillful Artists, but tender hands and cautious
fingers; That where the Essentialls, Vitals and Fundamentalls of Religion in
any Church, are good as to true doctrine, saving faith, holy institutions, and
honest moralls, the prudentialls and ornamentalls cannot but be commendable, if
they be tolerable; That the peace and safety of a settled Church ought not to be
endangered for circumstances; That it is a dangerous practice of Empiricks, to
give able and otherwise healthful bodies uncorrected Quicksilver, which shall
kill them outright, in order to kill some little itch or tetter upon them,
whose breaking forth to the circumference or outward habit of the body is a
good effect of an ill cause, a sign of firmer health in the nobler and more
retired parts.

I must ever conclude, with S. Austin and Dionysius Bishop of Athens, it is
better, for the Churches peace and Christian charity sake, to tolerate some
inconveniences (for some there will ever be, or at least to some men seem to
be, in the best constituted Churches) than to admit of such hazardous ways and
means of reforming, as will endanger the ruin of Religion and total routing
of a well-setled Church; that it is better in all respects to acquiesce in, or
submit to public determinations and tried appointments of true Religion, than
to be still tampering with untried experiments and essays of Novelty, to the
wast of that Order, Peace and Unity, which ought to be preferred before any
such Truths as are but probable, or so disputable, that good men on either side
have, do, and may hold them in some opposition without danger of their
salvation. It is but a delusion and device of the Devil, which prompts men to
wind up the strings of Religion to so high a note of Reformation, as breaks
both the strings themselves, and the very ribs of that Instrument which they
pretend to set to such a pitch.

An immoderation which has (as I have endeavored to set forth by many sad
instances in this third Book of the Church of Englands Sighs and Tears) so
defaced, deformed, shaken, disunited, weakened and endangered the state and
honor of Religion, as Christian and Reformed, in this Church and Nation, that
it threatens, like a Fistula, Gangrene, or Cancer, a total, though it may be a
lingering, fatality both to Church and State, unless by some wise hearts and
worthy hands the Lord of Heaven vouchsafe to apply such Cures as may stop the
prevailings of such sad Effects, and remove the Causes which began or promoted
them so far, as to give occasion to this famous Church and her Children thus
sadly to bemone themselves.

BOOK IV. SETTING FORTH THE SIGHS and PRAYERS of the CHURCH of ENGLAND In order
to its Healing and Recovery.
CHAP. I.
HAving set before you (Honored and beloved Countrymen) in the three former
Books, first, The design and method of this fourth Book.
the well-formed and sometime flourishing constitution of the Church of
England, (Lib. 1.) secondly, its present decays or destitutions; both in the
causes ( Lib. 2.) and consequences ( Lib. 3.) relating to Ministers and people,
in sacred and civil regards, to the great diminution, detriment and danger of
the Reformed Religion, in this Church and Nation: It is now time to apply my
thoughts and yours in this fourth Book to the Restitution, or recovery of that
which is the honor and happiness of this as all Nations; which (undoubtedly)
consists in the Purity, Unity, Stability, Sanctity, Solemnity, Authority, and
Efficacy of True Religion.

Hitherto I have powered Wine into the wounds of this Church, not so much
suppling as searching them, by an honest severity: The bruises and putrified
sores, which are all over the body of our reformed Religion, were not capable
of Oils and Balsames, of softer and sweeter applications, till the putid and
painful ulcerations were first opened, the cores of them discovered, and the
pus or sanies of them let out; which to conceal and smother by gentle, but
unsincere salves, by civil* but cruel plasters (rather palliating our
miseries, than healing our maladies) were a method of so great baseness and
unworthiness in me, as might for ever justly deprive me of the honor of
faithfulness to God, to this Church, to true Religion, to my Country, to my
own and to your souls. I know the freedom of my pen hitherto, like the
sharpness of a Lancet or probe, may be prone to offend on all sides: few men
are so humble as not to find fault with those that tell them of their faults:
those are commonly least patient of Physicians or Surgeons hands, who need
them most, crying out of other men's severities, which are occasioned, yea
necessitated, by their own debauchnesse and distempers. Yet since my aims are
in this writing upon, or rather ripping up the bilious inflammations of
Religion, not to spare my own disorders, or theirs with whom I may seem most to
symbolize in my opinion and practice, I hope no good man, great or small, will
be causelessly offended with the just incisions, or scarrifyings I have made;
which as the gangrenous necessity of our maladies (otherwise desperate and
incurable) have compelled me to, so the pious, peaceable and charitable
intentions of my soul, inorder to a common and public good, will then best
excuse them, when my Readers shall perceive with how liberal an hand and free
an heart, I do in this fourth Book impart the best of my thoughts, my humblest
suggestions, faithfullest counsels, and tenderest cares, in order to their
happiness, no less then my own, who am infinitely solicitous, and
passionately concerned what becomes of the Ark of God, of the true reformed
Christian Religion in England, jealous lest the Philistines take it, and with
it the glory of our Israel.

I know it may be retorted upon me, That nothing is easier than to complain of
others, nothing harder than to mend ones self; That censors of Epidemick
disorders make themselves public enemies, and subject to ostracisme on all
sides; That both Prince and people, Magistrates and subjects, are prone to
interpret such representations for reproaches of them, as if they were defective
in their counsels and cares of Religion; also as arrogancies in any private
man, to seem either more sensible of, or more solicitous for, or more
consultive in order to those great and public concernments, which no wise men
can fail to discern, no good man forbear to remedy, as far as is in his power;
That it is not so much an heroic, as an inordinate charity, or indiscreet
zeal, for any man to discompose his own tranquillity, by importuning others to
be better than they like to be, or to do better than the distemper of times
will give them leave; that neither Magistrates nor Ministers are to be blamed
or traduced as defective in their duties, because they are not presently
masters of peoples petulancies, nor can suddenly command that great Ship to
steer about, and obey the Rudder of Reason and Religion, which has lately
been carried violently away, as by the sway of its own ponderous bulk, so by
the fierceness of mighty and contrary winds, also by the fatality of those
secret, but irresistible tides of Providence, when Divine Justice and vengeance
has struck in with humane passions and transgressions, at once to use them and
to punish them.

I am so far from reproching any that are in power, and those least who are in
greatest place, that (in earnest) I pity them for what they cannot act, as
effectually, as I charitably presume they soberly design and desire in respect
of that Christian unity and harmony of Religion, which every wise and good man
must needs be unfeignedly ambitious to enjoy and promote. The obstructions of
which arise, not from depraved and dangerous State-policies, (as some suspect)
purposely fomenting Divisions in Religion, (which no prudent Governor but sees
cause to fear, and will study to avoid) but from those headstrong furies and
animosities, which accompany the vulgar, when once (like Stone-horses got loose
from their stalls, traice, and bridles) they find themselves at such a liberty,
as is beyond the switch or spur, the curb or whip of their riders and
governors; whose riotous and boisterous courses are hardly to be stopped, till
they have either tired, or entangled, or hurt, or confounded and overthrown
themselves and others; till which time, it is not safe for their Keepers to
come too near their wanton heels, or forcibly to reduce them, like wild Asses
and Unicorns, to their wonted stations and cribs. Nor is (perhaps) the dilatory
cautiousnesse of wise men herein to be blamed so much as commended, while they
temporize for some time with the Populacy, till experience of their own folly,
disorders, dangers and miseries, has taught them how much safer they are under
other men's orderly restraints and government, than their own licentious choice
and freedoms, as in Civil, so in Religious Concernments.

I believe the mutual feuds, jealousies, and animosities in England among the
divided Factions in Religion, have hitherto been so eagerly bent to advance
themselves, and to depresse their rivalls, that it has been a work of great
Prudence, no less than Policy, so far to balance them, till Time had
discovered to them their common deformities and dangers, by their disagreements
and defeats; besides the general decay and mutual debasing of what each
highly pretends to advance, The Reformed Religion.

Nor do I doubt, but those Powers and Counsels, under which Providence has at
present subjected our Civil and Ecclesiastic Interests, will so far with
favor interpret my endeavors, and accept of them, as they must needs appear
to all sober men, only studious to serve the public good, and not to advance
any private interest or particular party in Religion. Nor shall I be taxed (I
hope) for self-conceited and too presumptuous, as if I supposed all men to be
blind or dim-sighted besides my self, while I offer them this Collyrium, or
Eye Salve: No, I know my own obscurity, tenuity, and infirmity. Nor do I here
offer my own private sense so much, as the general votes, prayers, hopes and
expectations of all moderate and impartial men, so far as I have been able to
observe the pulse of their hearts, and desires of their souls: yea many such
as have heretofore highly engaged for or against any faction, during the
transports of their first fits and Paroxysmes, even these, being grown (now)
much cooler and better composed in their spirits, do seem to breathe after
nothing so earnestly, as some such happy composure of our religious
distractions, as may most advance the general interests of the Christian and
Reformed Religion against the common enemies of both; and therein so secure
their respective and particular privileges, or innocent immunities in point of
Conscience, as may least tempt them to fear the being opressed by others; or,
by way of revenge, to seek the oppressing of any others that would lead a godly
and peaceable life.

What good Christian, that lists not to be Atheistically profane, what honest
Protestant, that cannot comply with the Roman errors and insolences, does not
deplore the scratches, the wounds, the blood-sheds, the deformities, the
decays, the deaths, which the Reformed Religion has lately suffered here in
England? Who is so brainsick or barbarous, as not to see that our common
safety is in our religious unity? that our civil honor and happiness cannot
be secure, until established upon the pillars of Christian purity and harmony?
To this mark I press thus hard; at this design I earnestly drive; this is the
prize I aim at, during the remain of my short race in this world: as I know I
do not run alone, so I hope I shall not run in vain, but being assisted with
Gods gracious Spirit, which is full of meekness and wisdom, I trust I shall
enjoy the concurrent suffrages, good wills and prayers of all those that wish
the prosperity of true Religion and these British Nations.

To pour in the balm of Gilead with the more order into the wounds of this
Church and its Reformed Religion, I shall first set forth the confessed
difficulty of the work, I mean the closing and healing of Religious breaches in
any Church or Nation, where once differences are exasperated; and not only
men's opinions and passions, but their civil interests and secular designs seem
engaged.

Secondly, I shall show the necessity of some happy composure; 1. in respect of
Religion, as Christian and Reformed, 2. as to the civil peace, 3. as to the
honor, 4. as to the gratitude of the Nation.

Thirdly, I shall manifest the possibility or feisablenesse of the work; both
as to the nature of it, and the inclinations of all sober men to it.

Fourthly, I shall endeavor to propound what I conceive the proper methods and
means of effecting it, to be used, 1. by Ministers, 2. by Magistrates, 3. by
all sorts of people, that have any principles of Piety and Honesty toward God
and Man.

CHAP. II.
FOr the first; I know it is a work of great difficulty, The difficulty of
repairing a decayed Church.
and so of most ingenuous, as well as pious, industry, to buoy up Religion,
when once, like a great Ship, it is sunk in the seas of vulgar errors, or
bilged in the owse and mud of factious confusions, or plunged into
licentiousness, irreverence and irreligion; By which not only the baser and
more brutish lusts of men are sought to be indulged to all sensual luxuries,
but the more spiritual wickednesses which usurp upon the highest places of
men's souls, (such as are Envy, Revenge, Ambition, Covetousness, Vainglory,
Emulations, and Hypocrisies) these study to be gratified in the several
designs and interests which men's corrupt and base hearts do fancy most
agreeable to their contents. In nothing are men, and women too, more opiniatre,
more morose, more touchy and obstinate, more proud and peremptory, more fierce
and contradictive, more gladiatory and offensive, than to be stopped or
opposed, curbed or restrained, questioned or dissuaded in those opinions or
practices which they have stamped with the marks and impressions of their
Religion. This, as the Colors, Ensign and Standard of their lives and
honors, of their credits and comforts, must be preserved with the greatest
vehemence, hazard and impatience. Every one fancies, that, as they need, so
they use the special power of Gods Spirit in all their pious pertinacies,
which will not endure to have what they call their Religion evicted or wrested
from them, by the pleasure or power of any man living.

The difficulty here of winning people from the error of their ways, of
redeeming and overcoming them with a gentle conquest, when once their lusts,
errors and ignorances have bound them as Captives with the chains of their
opinions, is so great, that, as it must not discourage, but rather whet the
edge of pious and charitable industry in Magistrates and Ministers, so it will
exercise all their honest policies, their Christian prudence, and charitable
patience; having herein to contend not only with the pragmatick follies of
people, and a kind of variable wantonness or madness, but also their
rudenesses and reproaches, their ingratitudes and contempts, their menacings and
assassinations, who often meditate even the death of those, as greatest tyrants
and persecutors, that will not let them live at what rate and riot of Religion
they list.

The Primitive Fathers and Christian Emperors (whose learning and power most
asserted the Orthodox and true Religion) had never more cause to muster up and
employ all the forces of their Tongues and Pens, of their Counsels and
Policies, of their Senators and Soldiers, than in those cases where they
endeavored to stop the contagions, or recover from the Apostasies of Religion,
such as were deservedly branded for Heretics and Schismatics.

How tender severities, how mild angers, how soft rigours, how gentle zeal, how
meek wisdom; how charitable chastisings, were they forced to use, (I mean, the
Fathers of the Church) in their Polemicks and Apologies, in behalf of true
Religion, against Epidemick or popular errors! And no less solicitous were the
godly Emperors, to dispense their enforced, yet merciful, cruelties, so as
might most preserve the honestly erroneous, and only destroy, refute and
suppress their extravagant, desperate and damnable errors.

Here the torrent of Tertullian's rougher eloquence, the sweeter fluencie of
St. Cyprian's zealous candor, the invincible sinews of Athanasius his style
and resolution, the liquid gold of St. Chrysostom's tongue and pen, the gentle
dews and plentiful showrs of St. Austins holy and humble soul, the strong
tides, vehement storms of St. Jerome's mighty genius, which prostrates all it
cannot carry with it; Here the Gregory's and Basils, Irenaeus, Hilary, Optatus,
and all other Worthies of old, (who were Champions for the Truth, and contended
earnestly for the faith once delivered, and the unity of the true Church of
Christ, against all opposers and factious seducers) used all religious force,
and pious engines, that were proper to apply to the restitution of Religion, and
reparation of the Church, when it was either scattered and persecuted by
Infidels, or defamed and divided by Schismatics, or poisoned and corrupted by
Heretics. Nor were they more industrious to use the power of arguments in
their own Sermons and disputations, than cautious how they stirred up the
spirits of Princes to apply the power of Arms in the matters of Religion,
further then for its necessary defense from the pragmatick petulancies and
real insolences of Manichees, Arrians, Circumcellians, Donatists, and others,
whose hands they thought might by such methods be justly curbed and resisted;
although their hearts were not to be so softened, nor their errors so confuted.

Indeed the reparations of Religion, and the restoration of any lapsed or
decayed Church, is a work not to be done by sudden pulls, merely by ropes and
cables: unseasonable applications of violent and coercive means are prone to
harden men's hearts, to exasperate their spirits, and to make them both more
refractory and pertinacious in their religious errors, extravagancies and
affectations. The work is much more easy and proper to be effected by such
discreet and sober counterpoisings of Reason and Religion, of Grace and Virtue,
of Wisdom and Charity, in worthy Magistrates and Ministers, as may in time, by
insensible degrees, as it were outweigh those sad and heavy depressions which
are brought in and maintained by peoples sinister passions, petulancies,
prejudices, or superstitions, to the splitting of any Church, and sinking of
Religion; these must be counterpoised by that gravity, sanctity, majesty,
solemnity, due authority, just encouragement, and honest advantages, which
pious Princes and godly Magistrates cheerfully and liberally afford to the
orderly Preachers and sober Professors of true Religion; forbidding in the
first place any men to make a prey or spoil of the Church in any kind, or to
advance any secular emoluments by their schismatic and sacrilegious
extravagancies. Few men ever separate from, or fight against the Church, or
true Religion, but as Soldiers of Fortune, in hope to plunder them. Nor is it
the honor so much, as the profit of the victory, that vulgar spirits aim at,
when they contend against the Bishops and Pastors, the honor, order and
stability of any Church and its Ministers.

Besides this first difficulty, in restoring any shattered Church and Religion,
which proceeds from the ruder passions and impatiencies of the licentious
vulgar, Wise men have further to contend with those tempers in common people,
which are most humane, soft, and commendable in them; that is, their pitties
and compassions, which make them prone to sympathize with any persons or
opinions, never so bad and base, when once they see them violently oppressed,
and, as they suppose, persecuted for that which they profess as their
Religion, which they are ready to judge less confutable by Scripture and right
reason, when they see it set upon by Swords and Pistols, by Fire and Faggot, by
Prisons and Confiscations. People are ready to oppose all force with pity, to
adopt any opinion that they see rather punished than convinced; whom they
cannot help with their hands, they relieve with their hearts, their prayers and
tears; which, by softning men's minds, make an easy way for any error or
heresy to insinuate into their consciences, though recommended by nothing but
the patience or pertinacy of the sufferers for it. Hence some wise and calmer
Statesmen as well as Churchmen, blamed the severity of burning used in Q.
Eliz. days against some Anabaptists; and once in King James his reign, against
an impudent Arian, (for which Mr. Calvin and the Geneva Consistory had given
him an example in Servetus:) In whose ashes (as King James said) while men rake
to find a Martyrly patience, they often find an heretical pravity, and such
damnable, yet desperate errors, as he after thought were better smothered by
prisons or banishment, than exposed to light by those horrid fires which burn
men alive, or subject them to such remarkable sufferings, as stigmatize their
errors on the hearts of many their pitiful spectators.

How have we found even the dry trees of Pillories in the last Kings days, so
fruitful in popular compassions, that the supposed petulant and intemperate
spirits of some men, who suffered on them, made thousands adhere to them; who
otherwise would, in calmer proceedings, have utterly abhorred their folly and
faction, their popularity and arrogance? Hence many wretched men, that despair
by other means to be remarkable or infamously famous, affect to be sufferers;
ambitious by their seeming Martyrdoms to gain reputation to their rotten,
erroneous, and seditious opinions.

Downright force is indeed very effectual to do not only great executions
upon the outward man, but to make strong confutations, and seeming conversions,
upon men's opinions and persuasions in respect of civil right and justice: For
vulgar minds are loath to look beyond outward events, and willingly resolve
their Consciences into Providence; prone to conclude, that all is just and
righteous, that is potent and prosperous. They easily fancy with themselves,
and flatter others, that those have the better cause, who have the better end
of the staff. True Religion (indeed) exactly regards the Word of God, and the
intrinsic measures, even in Civil affairs, of Truth and Justice. But easier
Superstition dotes on the Superficies or Idol of Success, counting all is
well, when the event is not ill; willingly suffering themselves to be carried
down that stream, where prevalent power carries dominion with it, and commands
subjection to it, (which prudent compliance with the outward man seems not
only venial and tolerable in common people, but commendable even in all sober
men, as to civil and secular affairs, while nothing interferes with those
inward moralls, nor contradicts those necessary Articles of Christian faith,
which are indispensible at all times, and on all occasions to be believed,
asserted and obeyed.

But in matters of Religion, common people are not generally so tame, nor so
soon cowed or overawed by mere force and club-law: by which methods the Duke
D' Alva lost his Master the King of Spain those fair Provinces of the
Low Countries. For besides their natural restivenesse, stubbornness and
doggednesse, they are mightily heightened in these tempers and humors by the
imagination of zeal, and resolutions of necessary perseverance in any way that
they have chosen for their Religion, though it be never so extravagant, yea
ridiculous; especially if bare force be applied to remove them, then they are
as ponderous as the congealed Mountains, or Northern heaps of Ice, which no
Engines can remove; but the warmer Sun will secretly thaw, and easily melt
them, so that they shall of themselves dissolve and fall asunder.

It is obvious to all men to hold and grasp that fastest, which any seeks to
wrest or extort from them; and all spectators of such contests, are ready to
judge, that that side either wants, or distrusts its rational and persuasive
power (which is most proper to be applied to the minds and consciences of men,
in matters of Religion) when they see much use is made of persecutive and
compelling power; which is rather brutish than humane: such as Balaams passion
used toward his Ass; Numb. 22.22.
but it was not used by the Angel toward Balaam, who being the more perverse
and refractory beast of the two, yet the Angel by Gods commission only
reasons, argues, and persuades with him, while he with fury smites his Ass
once and again. Not only Piety and Christian Charity, but common Reason and
Humanity teach all good-natured people to frown upon force, and look sadly upon
sufferers, upon any Religious account, unless (as Hacket and his accomplices)
where men's blasphemous opinions and riotous actions, like mad-mens, are such,
that they break all those bounds which Morality, Modesty, Civil Justice,
Public Peace, the honor of established Religion, and the Reverence of the
Dive in Majesty, do prescribe to all men, no less than to all Christians.

State- breaches, or Civil fractures, like flesh-wounds, will in time be
healed by a kind of weapon-salve: I mean, that Sovereign power of the Sword,
which prevails, will in time either depresse or extirpate contrary factions;
either so over-awing them by fears, or winning them by rewards, that they will
with patience and prudence rather embrace a safe and quiet subjection, than
adventure upon dangerous and improbable commotions. But the violent strokes
made against men's Religion, reach even their very hearts; n defense of which
all their spirits gather together, resolving (if they have any courage or
sincerity) rather to die, than deny or desert what they at present count their
Religion.

The casting of good store of water, or blood, upon civil conflagrations,
will, at last, quench them; and prevalent power will make a shift to build it
self new mansions or palaces, out of those ruinous materials which were much
burnt and wasted, but not quite consumed, by those fires. But religious
burnings, like the flames of jealousy, are contumacious, rising like wildfire
most violently against all means that are used suddenly and forcibly to smother
and extinguish them. Many of all sorts of Religions have chosen rather to be
burnt themselves, than to have their opinions quenched, and their Religion
suppressed; especially if they can have the glory to be Champions for a side,
or Patrons of a party, and have many spectators or sectators to be their
applauders.

Putid humors and noxious ulcers once broken out, and far spread in any Nation,
(as now in England) upon the account of Religion, (like Saint Anthonies fire,
or sharp Erisipylas) are safest healed by lenitive purgations, rather than cold
applications outwardly. Factions in Religion, like Fistula's or running sores
in foul bodies, are in least pain and danger, when they have some vent allowed
them, by which the venomous humors may leisurely spend themselves; and those
pestilent opinions which carry with them pernicious practices, so drain away,
as most keeps them from recoyling upon the head, heart, or other noble parts.

All sudden skinning over, or closing of the orifices, by which those sharp
humors are obstructed, but not purged, is very dangerous and diffusive of the
mischief, making the source of the malignity to flow higher, if it be not drawn
away by such gentle dieticks, or healing applications, as strengthening the
sound parts, assisting the weak and purging the disaffected, enables them by
little and little to cast out what ever was unsound in them, and noxious to
them.

Nothing makes the nestitutions of true, but decayed and divided Religion, more
difficult in any Nation, than those mutual corruptions and passions, those
animosities and transports which disaffect both the People as Patients, and
many times the Magistrates and Ministers as Physicians. And nothing renders
that work more facile and feisable, than that calmnesse, moderation and temper,
which ought always to be in Physicians, whatever violent fits and distempers
appear in the Patients. Governors in Church and State must ever expect such
distempers in peoples minds, especially when they are touched upon the tender
place of their Religion, with which men's consciences seem so vehemently to
sympathize, that Reformers had need carefully to furnish themselves with such
meekness of wisdom, as is the best antidote for their own security, and
against the others malady.

Then there will be hopes of healing in Religion, not when Toleration or
indulgence is granted to all opinions and professions, which list to christen
themselves; but when such a public way of solid and sincere Religion, both as
to doctrine and practice, is seriously debated, duly prepared, publicly
agreed upon, and solemnly established, as carries with it most of clear
Scripture-precept, and Saintly pattern, in faith and manners, in virtues and
graces, in duties and devotions, in order and authority, in honesty and
charity, with the greatest uprightness and impartiality toward God and man.

However Epidemick contagions may for a time be permitted something of
necessary connivence, that they may more freely breathe out themselves; yet
this great remedy and sovereign medicine in due time ought to be applied, which
consists in the owning and establishing of such a Religion as has in it
whatever is holy, necessary, useful, comely, and commendable in any of the
pretending parties. This once approved, and fixed by grave counsel, and
public advice of all Estates, as the Standard of the public profession and
practice of Religion; being also asserted and propagated by Preachers of most
indisputable authority, of pregnantest abilities, and of most exemplary lives,
orderly and unanimously agreeing among themselves, hereby meriting and enjoying
the double honor of public respect and maintenance; these gentle, rational,
and wholesome methods of Religion, will certainly in a few years, by Gods
blessing, either drein, or drive out, by secret and gentle workings, all those
pestilent distempers in Religion, which vulgar minds, by a corrupted Liberty,
as by a licentious and foul diet, have contracted, to the great disorder and
deformity of any Church or Nation professing Christianity.

For in a short time, such as are truly conscientious, by the fear of God, and
love of true Religion, will cease to be either pertinacious, or contentious, or
factious, or inconstant, when they are convinced of so excellent a way, as they
cannot but conclude to be safe; since it is holy and true, sober and settled,
comely and charitable. Others that are mere Politicians in Religion, either
formal Pharisees, or false hypocrites, or fawning Parasites, ready to change
and comply with any party and persuasion, in order to secular advantages, even
these will soon give over their factious agitations, their pragmatick
sticklings, and popular sidings and shiftings in Religion, when once they find
which way the wind or stream of public favor and civil interest do drive.
The Mils of Factions in Religion will soon give over their motions, when once
they perceive no grist of Profit, or stream of Preferment, or breath of vulgar
Applause is brought in to them.

There is no wonder to be made at those late sad and mad extravagancies, which
of later years have prevailed against the reformed Religion once settled in
England; while the Majesty and Honor of this Church and State, the sanctity of
our Laws, Civil and Ecclesiastic, the solemnity of Gods public worship and
service* the authority and maintenance of his Ministers, have all been (through
our civil broils and tumults) unhappily exposed to infinite arrogancies,
spoils, contempts, and insolences, even of common people; while they saw so
many prisons and bonds, so many sequestrations and silencings, so many deaths
and dangers, attend not only the Bishops, but the Presbyters, the chief
Preachers and prime Professors on all sides of that reformed Religion which was
established in England. No wonder, if while the populacy see great Preachers
and Professors cast so much dirt, and spit in each others faces; while they
suspect that all piety, honesty and Christian charity, are made to truckle
under State- Policies, and bend to worldly interests; no wonder if the vulgar
desperately leap into the Sea of confusion and faction, out of that ship which
they saw not only so leaky and crazy, that it was almost sunk, but so set on
fire, that they despaired to quench it: No wonder if they venture upon either
inventing what new ways of Religion they list to fancy, or despising all
wonted public forms and professions; since they think themselves not only
encouraged, but in a sort exemplarily commanded, and almost compelled to cast
off with scorn that Reformed Profession of Christian Religion, which had so
great a Name of Wisdom, Law, Honor and Holiness, Glory and Happiness, as
that had which was established in the Church of England, (never to be mended,
as to the main and substantials of Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
Devotion and Government; however in some circumstantials, something might
possibly be altered, or added, by the sober counsels of wife and peaceable men,
who had both ability and authority for such a work.)

Whose great difficulty now is chiefly heightened by that popular froth and
vanity, those animosities, and arrogancies, those infinite variations and
confusions, with which vulgar fury and passions have deformed, the face divided
the body, yea almost devoured every joint and limb of Chiristan and reformed
Religion in England.

It Is true, these will in time very much waste, sink and vanish of themselves,
while one Faction justles, crowds and confounds another; the new ones (as the
night-mares) insulting and overlaying the Elder: But this is only as the
changing of a Captives Chains, this will but bring in religious rabbles or
successions of confusions, but no sound recovery, or just Redemption and
restitution of true Religion, and any due Reformation, until people see the
public marks of Divinity autoritatively set upon Religion, when it is set
forth and settled with such Truth and Holiness, such Order and Honor, such
Bounty and Beauty, such Unity and Tranquillity, such Favor and Benignity, as
becomes the Majesty of that profession which imports man's highest relation and
union to their God and Savior.

If after such a wise restoration and public establishment of Religion, there
should still appear some such licentious and disorderly Spirits, who, like old
wild birds, are impatient of any restraint, and will rather pine away and dye
with sullenness, than exchange their fancied freedom for the best cage and
food in the world; yet it is far more pious and charitable to set just bounds
of restraint and check to their affected liberty, than to suffer them to injure
the public welfare, or hinder the happy settlement of Religion, by their heady
and endless extravagancies; from whence arise the greatest difficulties and
obstructions which lie in the way of wise men: which yet are not so insuperable
as to occasion any sober man's despair, or to damp his Prayers, or to
discourage his worthy endeavors; in all which honest industry will whet it
self to a greater edge and brightness upon the rocks of difficulty, which are
but the whet-stones of true Christian piety and charity, when God shall please
to give such just power, and fair opportunities, as may best answer the
necessities and importunities of those public cases wherein divided and
decayed Religion is so highly concerned, that nothing is less to be dallied,
delayed, or dispensed withal.

CHAP. III.
Grand motives to a public restitution and fixation of the Reformed Religion.
ANd such indeed to me seems the case of Religion, as Christian and reformed
in England; whose necessary restitution and speedy reestablishment to Unity and
Uniformity may be justly pressed upon all persons of worth and wisdom in this
Nation, not only by softer notions and plausible insinuations, but by the most
cogent demonstrations, and potent persuasions, that can be applied to the minds
of Men and Christians, as to (1.) Conscience, (2.) Prudence, (3.) Honor, (4.)
and Gratitude.

First as to the Conscience of our duty to God and Man, in Piety and Charity,
what, I beseech you, can be more urgently incumbent upon all good men's
Consciences, than the public advantages of Gods Glory, and the eternal good
of men's souls? Both which are highly concerned in the vindication and fixation
of true Religion, as Christian, and as Reformed.

1. Reason from the glory of our God and Savior.
For the Glory of the great God, and the Honor of our blessed Redeemer (which
ought to be the chiefest designs of every good Christians highest Zeal and best
endeavors,) it is most evident, that nothing tends more to their dishonor and
disparagement in the eye of all the world, both at home and abroad, that when
Aliens and Infidells, Jews and Mahometans, Atheists and Epicures, Scepticks,
and Politicians, debauched, profane and ignorant livers, shall see that
Religion (by which this Nation professes a singular regard to the Divine
Majesty and Honor) to be shamefully divided, supinely neglected, and sordidly
despised, and by vulgar insolency prostituted, as to that public Solemnity,
Majesty, Authority, Ministry, Order, Peace, Uniformity, and Stability, which
befit that high and holy relation wherewith true Religion invests men, as
obliging them to the supreme Good, the blessed holy, and only Eternal God our
Savior, to know, own, fear, love, reverence, imitate, obey and enjoy him in
the greatest exactness of duty, and sanctity of Devotion: and this not only
privately and retiredly, but publicly and socially; where the exemplary
solemnity, harmony and beauty of holiness, not only conciliate an honor to
true Religion, but they are the highest instances men can publicly give, as of
their pious regards to God, so of their charitable tenderness toward all men
as their neighbors;

Who being naturally most averse from that Religion which is the best and
holiest, should have the fewest discouragements, damps, or scandals, either
wilfully cast, or negligently left in their way, lest they either avert to
downright irreligion and atheism, or divert to those broader and easier paths
of Superstition; which (as among the generality of Papists, so among all Sects
that affect a popular and loose way of religion) indulge many things to men's
lusts and passions, even while they most recommend and set off themselves with
such ostentations of Novelty, Liberty, Facility, and formal Sanctity, as may
be most taking to their vulgar followers, and plausible to the humors of most
people, who are prone to measure religion rather by their senses and fancies,
their ease and appetites, their worldly benefits and interests, than by their
understandings, judgments and consciences.

I have formerly showed at large in all the instances of true Religion, both
for the Substance and Form of it, the graces and duties, Lib. 2. c. 4, and 5.
that the Generality of people, if left to themselves, are so lost, that they
are loath to be sought and found to any true Piety or happiness; as being in
love with their being wantonly wicked and miserable: They will ever choose
disorder, yea death, while they forsake all orderly and holy ways, as to any
true, serious and powerful Religion, unless wise Magistrates and worthy
Ministers be better to them than they ever will be, or design, or wish, to
themselves. If they may eat and drink, plow and sow, buy and sell, build and
marry, dispute and wrangle, trifle with God, and baffle with their own
consciences, very little or no Religion, as strict and true, will serve their
turns; liking that best which leaves them most to themselves, where they have
least restraints, though never so holy, just and comely; but may enjoy such
pastimes and indulgences in their profession as most gratify their humors and
fancies, their wantonness and petulancy, their covetousness and barbarity,
their vanity or villainy.

Certainly, if the Goodness of God had not first by Primitive Bishops and
Preachers, after by wise Magistrates and valiant Princes, first reduced, then
preserved, humane societies to some settled forms of civility and order, piety
and polity, beyond their own licencious extravagancies, this, as all nations,
had to this day continued in their native savagenesse, without reverence of
Man, or fear of God. Nor would the several inventions and varieties of
peoples Lunatic Religions, (which possibly they would every new Moon pick and
choose of themselves) these, I say, would have been so far from advancing the
common Peace and welfare of mankind, that no fuel would make their fury burn
more vehemently to mutual destructions, than what naturally rises from the
Trash and Dross, the Straw and Stubble of those opinions and persuasions which
people are prone to adopt to be their Religion and Devotion; with as little
Verity and Charity, as they have nothing but Variety and Vanity.

So that endless differences and deadly defiances in our Religion, among us as
men and Christians, cannot but tend, as to the dishonor of our God and
Savior, so to the infinite detriment and damage, as of our selves and our
neighbors at present, so of posterity to after-ages; Who will with
astonishment and horror read the Histories of our times, so desperately engaged
to reform Religion, that they well-nigh ruined it; so pertinacious to retain
their Christian and Reformed profession, that they almost made a shift to lose
both; as hunters do that game which they only scare from them while they
eagerly, but indiscreetly, pursue it.

2. Reason from prudence and civil policy.
Secondly, besides conscience to the Glory of God, the honor of our Savior, and
the good of Souls, all civil prudence and true policy not only invites, but
necessitates sober and worthy men to study and endeavor the restitution and
establishment of true Religion, in this or any Nation, to its true proportions
and just fixation, as Christian and Reformed. Now although nothing can in true
Oratory be (among Christians) added, after the weighty considerations of Gods
glory, Christ's honor, the hazard of our own and others souls to eternal
darkness, ignorance, confusion and misery, (all motives being as the dust of
the balance compared to these;) yet, because I must level the force of my
persuasions, as arrows, to the proportions of most men's principles and
designs in point of temporal interests, as well as draw them home to the head
and height of Spiritual and Eternal concernments, give me leave to represent
and inculcate that consideration, as to Religions necessary settling, which of
all other makes the quickest and deepest impression on men's minds, the neglect
of which will certainly forfeit all that reputation of wise Men, great
Statists, and good Politicians, even after the worlds calculation of wisdom,
which Magistrates and Gentlemen are ambitious to obtain, and leave to the honor
of their Names and Memories.

It is this; There is no hindge upon which the civil Peace and Secular welfare
of you and your posterity does so much depend and move as this of True
Religion, which is at no hand to be left to a plebean Liberty and vulgar
latitude, but to be confined and settled upon its own weight and basis to its
Verity, Certainty, Sanctity, Solemnity, true Ministry and due Authority. In
vain shall you hope to enjoy the Peace of men in worldly affairs, if you want
the peace of God, if you have nothing but wars and jarrs, distances and
defiances, as to Religion, both with God, your Ministers, your selves, and with
one another.

Which Sacred Fires will infallibly kindle horrid conflagrations, not only
from those hot disputes and attritions which concern the principal Articles
and more solid parts of Religion, which are held necessary to salvation, but
even from the lightest and smallest materials, which seem but as the chips and
parings, the bark and leaves of Religion; even these, like tinder and
touch-wood, are prone to strike and entertain such sparks in small and vulgar
minds as will set all on a light fire at last.

Which is most evident in our late Holy Wars, where few men of any modesty or
honesty did at first stickle so much about the weighty points of Religion, in
Doctrine or manners, tending to true Faith or practical Holiness, (objects
too deep and weighty for the weak and shallow brains of most Novellers and
Vastators;) few, I say, or none of any worth did or do contend about true Grace
or real Virtue, who shall be most Holy, Penitent, Humble, Faithful, Pure,
Patient, Just, Charitable, Meek, Devout, Sincere, inoffensive to God and Man:
No, the Lord knows, a little touch, or dash and color of these serves the
turn with most men, that are most eager for any side and party of Religion in
their rude disputes and uncharitable janglings. The greatest strifes, the
sharpest emulations, and most unfeigned feudes of Religion arise from
principles of Envy, Revenge, and Ambition in men's Spirits; when once they are
divided upon any spark or pretext of Religion, their ambitious Zeal, like fire,
presently ascends and lifts them upward: The grand interest of their Godliness
is (like the Sons of Zebedee) who shall be chief, what person, what party,
shall prevail and rule over others, who shall sit on the right hand of Christ,
judging the rest, not as brethren, but as subjects and vassals. For all
pregnant factions in Religion are not only solicitous to preserve themselves
in some honest liberty and modest tranquillity; (as a candle whose confined
flame keeps within its own socket and compass:) but they presently meditate
the extinguishing of all others. They aim indeed at Conquest and Sovereignty,
every ones fingers itch at the Scepter of Jesus Christ, that is, at such power
and authority, as may govern the souls and bodies too, the consciences and
carkases of other men both in Church and State; that they may (in Christ's Name)
have Dominion over the opinions and judgments, the minds and spirits of all
men, subduing them, if not at first by disputation and arguments, yet at length
by Fightings and Arms, by silencings and imprisonings, by plunderings and
undoings.

For which purpose each party, the better to justify its insolency and cruelty
against all others, holds forth some Ensign and Flag, as of difference, so of
defiance; either as to some lesser matter of Opinion and Doctrine, or (rather
than fail) of some mere outward Form and Discipline, yea of some sorry
Ceremony and Custom no way essential to true Religion: Yet from hence the
eager, but weaker, Zelots on all sides, ( Episcopal, Presbyterian and
Independent) have and do foment those miserable flames, which have not only
scorched, but almost consumed this Church of England. For, these petty contests
readily fall under vulgar capacities, as more obvious and sensible; these fit
the humors of the minue people and petty Preachers too, who are (naturally) as
proud and imperious, as masterly and surly, as the greatest Clerks or Scholars,
whose learned abilities may better excuse their pertinacies, ambitions, and
other insolences.

Who is so blind as not to see that from the first differences which were
spawned at Frankfort, and hatched at Geneva, about Nonconformity and Church-
Discipline, the Presbyterian and popular Spirit has always grumbled and
mutined at that eminency and government which Episcopacy (for the maine) has
enjoyed from the beginning, not of Reformation only, but of Christian
Religion? From whence some other men's Spirits, (too high perhaps and
Prelaticall) out of jealousy, have, on the other side, sought to engrosse and
exercise more of a sole, arbitrary and absolute power, not only above, but
apart from, all Presbyters and people, than was ever challenged or used in the
Primitive Constitution, in the first and best practices of Episcopacy, which
seems to have had more of Aristocracy, by the joint Counsel and assistance of
select and Grave Presbyters, than of absolute Monarchy, or sovereign and sole
authority, further than an eminency of Office, Order, Place, and Presidencie,
might keep an united and regular power in their more ample and combined
Churches, which consisted of many Christian congregations and Presbyters.

But as the Duke of York first professed with oath, that he aimed at no more
than his Duchy, yet afterward aspired and gained the Kingdom of England, by the
name of King Edward the fourth; so some Presbyters at first pretended only to
claim a coordinate exercise of Counsel and assistance with Bishops, in some
things, consisting with a modest and orderly subordination to them as chief
Fathers of their Ecclesiastical Tribes and Families; yea I knew some chief
Rabbis of them have professed that they cried down and covenanted only
against the Tyrannick Government of Prelates, and the overgrown train of their
Officialls, showing some reason to regulate Episcopacy by reducing it to the
modesty of Primitive patterns: Yet this motion was no sooner begun among us,
but (we see) it increased to such a violence, as kindled the ambition of some
people and Presbyters so hot against all Bishops, that the best of them (and
many of them were incomparable men, excellent Christians, and most admirable
Bishops) were counted Refractory, Popish, and Antichristian, with all their
abetters, because they would not tamely contribute to their own utter
destruction, and presently consent to the reproach of this and all ancient
Churches, where Bishops I think were as well known, and as long used, as the
Sacraments or the Scriptures. Yea at last the contention grew so sharp, that it
not only whetted many tongues and pens, but it came to swords, ending (if it
be ended) in much blood, Presbyters challenging to have not only a meet share
and concurrent influence (as was ancient in Ignatius, and St. Cyprians, and St.
Austins times, and which might be very fitting and useful in
Church Government) but they will have all or none, and this upon Christ's title:
Bishops (as usurpers for 1600. years) must have no fair quarter, nay none at
all; but persons and power must be wholly exautorated, extirpated,
impoverished, contemned, abased, undone. Though they had done nothing but what
either the Laws commanded, or the Prince (in whom by law was the chief
Ecclesiastical as well as civil power) indulged, yea and required them to do,
yet no medium, no moderation can be expected between Caesar and Pompey, Sylla
and Marius, Antonius and Augustus, when men's Spirits are heightened by
jealousies and emulations to seek each others destruction.

After all this, the peremptory reign of Presbytery, (which cost this Church
and Nation so dear) was not long-lived, nor could be well established, though
at first it looked so big, and grasped on the sudden even at three Kingdoms;
For before it was warm in its nest, or well seated in its Throne, we see
Independency got hold on one end of its Scepter, or quarter-staffe rather,
threatening, in the right of Christ Jesus, and in the behalf of all Christian
common people, to wrest it quite out of the hands of Presbytery, either by
legerdemaine, or maine force, unless it might go at least half with it in the
spoils of Episcopacy, and that share of Church Government which they pleaded
was due not only to a few Preaching Parsons and ruling Elders, but to the
whole congregation, as being holy, the Lords people, the body of Christ in
particular.

This check made Presbytery much more tame and tractable than it was wont to
be, when it first whetted its tushes so sharply, and brisled so fiercely
against all Episcopacy, root and branch, hoofes and horns; no regulation, no
remission, no moderation, no merit of so many Godly, Learned, Moderate, yea
Martyrly Bishops, heretofore, and even then in England would serve the turn.
After all this trouble, the more grave and sober sort even of those
Presbyterian and Independent Ministers are brought (as we see) into no small
straits, and reduced to this great Dilemma of policy, whether they should
choose to put their heads again under the Bishops hands, or under the common
peoples feet; whether it be more for the honor of their Ministry to be
subordinate to grave and worthy Bishops, as Learned Moderators, Presidentiall
Fathers, and elder Brothers, or to be thus everlastingly haunted with evil and
unclean Spirits, to be thus hampered with the giddy and ungrateful vulgar, who
are very petulant and saucy companions, very sour and insolent masters.

Nor is this Triumvirate of Episcopal, Presbyterian and Independent
Antagonists and rivals, the boundary of men's religious Ambition and contentions
in England; There are other Names and Titles, and daily will be more and more
new Sects and Factions, which will have their Godly agonies and pretentions, no
less than those three have had.

Yea, the least and most unsuspected, the feeblest and silliest of them, will
serve either to kindle new, or to continue successive fires of jealousies,
troubles, seditions, and wars in this Nation. Take them all together, and leave
them equally to their several principles, and contrary operations, they will
be like the complication of many diseases in one body, as the Quartanes,
Dropsies, Scurvys, Hectic Fevers and Consumptions of this State and Church:
not only shaking often, and daily dispiriting, but (in time) quite destroying
the Beauty, Health, Strength, Peace, Safety, and Honor of this Nation, whatever
it be, Commonwealth or Kingdom, Aristocracy, Democracy, or Monarchy. For while
men's Spirits are sharpened by daily contentions in Religion, to anger,
emulations, and ambitions who shall be greatest in popular esteem, in
prevalency of parties, in number of Sectators, in novelties of opinions, and in
presumptuous practices, they not only sour to secret animosities, but break
out to open enmities, from the least differences. For the true life and power
of Religion, (which consists in a Knowing, Humble and Charitable Zeal for Gods
glory and each others good, this) is taken off and extremely dulled (as the
edge of sharp knives by cutting of cork,) while men's head and hearts are wholly
busied in whitling and hewing those small points and softer parts of Religion,
which consider (at first it may be) only the ritualls, externals and polities
of it; yet in time these continual droppings undermine and overthrow the very
fundamentals, which consist in the Unity of the Faith, the Sanctity of Manners,
and the Sincerity of Christians Charity to each other, which held better in
Unity, Health, Beauty, and Strength amidst heathenish persecutions, than they
ever did, or can do, amidst Christians contentions, needless and endless
janglings of Preachers and Professors among themselves.

For these rising most-what not from the holy and humble warmth, but the
wantonness and luxuriancy of men's Spirits, (especially after long peace and
settling upon their Lees) do naturally break out to such boyles and tumors of
Factions, as swell every Opinionist and his party to the hope of having a
turn, or share at least, in rule and Empire; wherein the present prevalent
party is ever jealous and impatient of having any equal or rival either to
affront or disturb them; and the depressed parties still conceive they are
injured, and often complain of being persecuted: Nay they are filled with
Whisperings and Murmurings, with Envies and Animosities, (though they be let
alone and connived at by way of Toleration) when they see the public rewards
of Valor, Learning, Industry, Parts, and (as they think) of Piety it self,
only or chiefly bestowed on those that adhere to, and symbolize with the
prevailing party, which is the only rising side; all others despairing to
rise, till the great Resurrection, unless by power or policy they can
undermine or overthrow the predominant faction.

In these nests of Religious differences and zealous emulations are the eggs of
all civil discontents, popular seditions, and pernicious rebellions, commonly
laid and hatched, to the infinite hazard, and many times utter ruin, of
civil States; which are never so safe, as when all parts of them, like the
parts of a globe or sphere, fairly correspond with each other by the unity and
entireness of the same Religion; whose content or orb is the holy Scripture,
whose center is Gods glory, and whose circumference is Christian love,
unanimity or Charity, without any of which Religion is but a Rhapsody of men's
opinions, passions, and ambition.

From these holy confinements when once Christians come to divide as to their
Religion, they soon fall to defy, to destroy, yea to damn one another: Every
party has such high paroxysmes of zealous hopes and presumptions for their
way, that they presently ascend Gods Throne, and Christ's Tribunal, severely
judging all men but themselves: which judicial and uncharitable arrogancies
have (as we see) at this day, not only in England, but in all the Christian
world, so filled and inflamed men's minds with cruel counter-curses and angry
Anathema's against each other, that if Gods last doom should echo after the
clamours and censures of Christians passions, we must all be damned, every
mothers child of us, notwithstanding that we all profess to believe and serve
the same God and Savior. If not every particular person of each party, who may
have more moderation and charity, yet to be sure the froth and scumme, the
populacy and vulgarity of them, (which are always boiled highest) these
mutually condemn each other, not to a Purgatory or a Limbo only, but to a
very Hell of infernal and eternal torments.

Thus many Protestants utterly damn all Papists, as if God had no people in
that Babylon of Popery; the Honesty, Humility and Simplicity of whose Faith,
Works and Hearts may bring them out of the contagion of Romes Plagues,
Policies, and Superstitions. Papists on the other side universally damn all
Protestants, (though they hold all the ancient Creeds and Articles of Faith,
though they practice all Christian necessary duties, and keep to the Primitive
Order of the Catholic Church) only because they will not tie the keys of
Faith, Conscience, Scripture, Religion, and Church Government, to the Popes
girdle, or absolutely submit to him in a blind obedience against Reason,
Scripture and History, as to the surly Jaylour, rather than the safe keeper, of
Christian and true Religon. In like manner the violent Lutherans call the
Calvinists Devils, and the passionate Calvinists defy the Lutherans as
lukewarm Protestants, and smelling too rank of Rome. Look to the eager and
acute Arminians, the Socinians, the modern Pelagians, the Anabaptists,
Catabaptists, Familists, the Seekers, Ranters, and Quakers: As the Independent,
Presbyterian, and Episcopal hands, so these are generally full, either of
firebrands from hell, or thunderbolts from heaven; which are eagerly cast by
the more violent Spirits in each others faces, as Heretics or Schismatics, as
Antichrists and Hypocrites, as deceived and deceiving. Nor will the Zealots and
bigots on any side make any great scruple (if they have power) to destroy those
whom they account no better than desperate and damnable even in their Religion.

Amidst and against all which factious discriminations of Religion, every
Nation and Polity, which either is, or would seem to be wise, must seek to
preserve its safety, by establishing some Uniformity and Unity in its public
profession: For no nation is far from misery, that is pestred with variety of
Religions, and is fixed at no certainty. The sad example of this Church and
State of England, (besides our neighbors) is an instance as unanswerable as
palpable; for the Church of England stood Neuter as to all the sides and
factions of Christendom, yet held so far Communion with Greek and Latin,
Reformed and Roman, Lutheran and Calvinian Churches, as it saw they held
communion with the Scriptures, and with the ancient Catholic Symbols, or
Councils, which were the best boundaries of Christian Religion. It had, if not
more, yet as much Solidity and Sincerity, Piety and Proficiency, Gifts and
Graces, Charity and Moderation, Order and Good polity, as any, yea all of them;
far less of Partiality; Popularity, Novelty, Oppression, Superstition and
Confusion, than almost any one of them; while the favor of God and man shined
upon her, strangely blessed with Peace, Plenty, Honor and Prosperity, while it
kept its Ecclesiastic Order and Uniformity in Religion, which was the chief
soder or cement of civil Tranquillity. This Palladium once stolen away by the
Jesuitick subtilties, and other factious policies, how have the Temples and
Towers of our Troy, the Churches and Palaces of our Jerusalem, the Oratories
and Houses both of God and man fallen to the ground! not with their own age,
infirmity, or weight, but battered and subverted chiefly by those Engines which
factious fury and devout ambition puts into all men's hands upon the score of
their Religion: a fate which still threatens all the remains of Religion and
Peace that have yet escaped, if God be not so merciful to this Land, as to
show us some Balsam that may heal the Divisions and Wounds of our Church and
Religion, which will easily fester and inflame the body politic of any Nation;
for civil Peace cannot be firm where public Piety is not sound and settled; nor
can any Kingdom or Commonweal be established, in which true Religion is
either baffled or abased by being divided and distracted.

But suppose that you (O my Noble Countrymen) and your posterity should enjoy a
moments miserable prosperity, and a pitiful kind of peace, merely upon the
account of a mere Mohammedan power, and Gladiatorian Prevalency of one side,
possibly over-awing all other parties and pretensions of Religion, or so
counterpoising them by secular policies to some consistency, as does rather
distort and depresse, than advance or encourage the progress of that true
Piety and Christian Charity, which are the surest marks of Christianity and of
Gods favor to any people; yet, I presume, you are so piously prudent, as to
consider

First, that such worldly tranquillity and prosperity are scarce worth owning
or enjoying apart from that sweet harmony and fruition which goes with true
Religion, and flows from it, when it keeps the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace, when its sacred ointment is diffused from the head Christ Jesus, not
only to the chief members of his body, but even to the skirts of his clothing,
the use and capacity of the meanest believer, in an holy Unity and happy
Uniformity, not only of true Doctrine, but of comely Order and charitable
Communion. This mortal life, with its highest natural ornaments and civil
accomplishments, is no blessing, separated from the means of a better life, or
from the enjoying of them in such a way of Unity, Order, Decency and Charity,
as not only becomes a Christians conversation best, but most advances his
comfort: Our miserable moment is no further valuable, than it may be
serviceable to a blessed Eternity. True Religion, and the sweet enjoyments of
it, sets humane societies and souls above the form and fate of beasts, much
more than common reason and civility can do, which the Heathens and Infidels in
all ages have enjoyed for a time.

Secondly, next, you cannot but conclude, that whatever civil peace you and
your posterity may enjoy* not settled upon religious grounds, it cannot be
either very secure or sincere, and so not long lasting: for it must needs be
either very Tyrannous, if any one Factions power and ambition gets uppermost,
and seeks to force all others to obey or comply against their judgments and
consciences; or it must be very querulous and quarrelsome, if all enjoying an
equal toleration, yet each side nourishes such Distances, Defiances and
Jealousies against others, as puts them always upon their guard and fence,
breathing them (as it were) with daily contests and private skirmishes, thus
preparing them for blood and war at last. When they have sufficiently preached,
and prayed, and scribled against each other, when they have disputed, and
discommuned, and unchurched, and unchristened one another then (if they are
numerous) they are ripe and ready to rifle and plunder, to kill and destroy, to
despise and devour one another, as mutually damning each other.

All Histories of the Church do loudly proclaim to us, That neither Church nor
State, Kingdom nor Empire, Monarchy nor Commonwealth can be long-lived or
flourishing, where true Religion, once generally professed and venerated among
them, grows to be divided and despised, abased and impoverished, even by
Christians themselves. The sad experiments of which Eusebius tells us, Eusebius.
l. 8. hist. cap. 1.
when he sets forth the meritorious causes and originals of all those dreadful
vastations which befell Christian Churches under Diocletians persecutions: Also
of those barbarous inundations which followed in St. Austins days, who died
while the City in which he was was besieged. The chief rise and occasions of
those hostile incursions sprang from the factions, inquietudes and contentions*
so rise among Christians, neither Bishops, nor Presbyters, nor People agreeing
as they should, but often breaking forth to tumults, riots and seditions, by the
popular furies of Manichees, Novatians, Donatists, Arians, Circumcellians and
Pelagians; or by the discontents and ambitions of Presbyters, or by the pride
and oppressions of some Bishops, to the infinite dishonor of Christianity, and
to the inviting of contempt and insolence from the common enemies of it. For
who can think those Christians worthy of any Peace, Honor, or Respect from
strangers, who so little love or value their Brethren, yea their Mother and
Fathers, as not only to despise them, but to destroy them?

The African, Asiatick and European, the Eastern and Western, the Greek and
Latin Churches (if we had not the late testimonies of our own and our
neighbors calamities) sufficiently tell us, that no comet presageth greater
calamities, or more public mischiefs to any Nation, than these dissensions in
Religion, which setting men's hearts most on fire, are hardly quenched, but with
their blood, tending and often ending in the ruins both of Churches and States.

These, these gave opportunity to that raging Sea of Mohammedan pride and
perfidy, which easily swallowed up so many famous Christian Churches in Asia,
Africa and Egypt, and at last the whole Grecian Empire, when the banks of
Christian Unity, as well as Piety, were broken down by Christians themselves;
who in vain boast of Piety, Miracles and Martyrdom, unless they keep true
Charity among themselves.

As no men deserve more noble and durable monuments to be made, not of
marble-stones, but of thankful hearts, than they whose wisdom successefully
endeavors to compose unhappy differences, as to Religion, in any Church or
Nation; so no men are more and more justly to be blamed than they, who sitting
long at the helm of government in Church and State, and being sufficiently
furnished with power to prevent or speedily remedy such distempers, yet have
either occasioned and exasperated them by needless and unseasonable rigors, or
else connived at and too much indulged them by careless remissions and
negligences; from whence some small vipers or faction (which in my memory were
so charmed, that they seemed quite dead in this Church) have so revived, that
they have grown to such vigor and activity, as with their teeth and claws
forcibly to make way for their own unhappy birth, by the corrosions or eating
through at last of those very bowels of the Church of England, in which they
were tacitly, and (indeed) either by too much confidence, indulgence, or
indiscretion most unhappily bred and fostered.

No Christian State or Church can be too vigilant or unsecure in this point,
the suppressing and preventing of all religious fewds and disturbances, whose
first conception commonly springs from, either some odd stroke in the heads,
or some putid humors in men's hearts, wherein long peace and plenty makes men
either wantonly refractory against other men's forms and opinions, or
pertinaciously zealous for their own inventions, many times not more
superciliously than unseasonably; every one being so loath to sweep away the
cobwebs they or others have made, either late or long since, that they rather
choose to set on fire and burn down the whole house, in which they all had
their safe abode and first breeding.

Certainly such petty serpents in Religion, which afterward swell big with
their uncharitable poisons, should by wise Governors in Church and State, be
charitably and timely prevented, and, if possible, stifled in their birth;
which had been (I think) no hard matter in England, if such discreet and
seasonable applications of piety and power had been used, as all Charity
allowed, and all honest policy commanded, before ever those popular and
many-headed Hydras came to such a prodigious birth, as scared both Fathers and
Mothers, yea and those very mid-wives who most officiously waited to assist
those strange and monstrous productions, which were scarce ever seen or heard
of heretofore in England.

What prudent and Heroic Spirits there are yet left, whose power, managed with
Christian justice and wisdom, with piety and charity, may happily quell these
licentious vastators of Christian and reformed Religion, also of the peace,
honor, and happiness of this Nation, I must leave to the all-wise and almighty
God, of whose mercy we may not despair, while we have leave and hearts to pray
to him. Nor can I yet give over the Church of England, as quite forsaken of God
and good men, or only to be pitied and deplored by the best of my Countrymen,
since no wise or worthy man, who has observed the sad and bad effects of
religious factions and dissensions among us, but must needs be now not only
out of love with them, but in as great fear and abhorrence of them, as he has
any favor and good will to the peace and prosperity either of his Country or
this Church, to the promoting of which as conscience binds him, so all prudence
and policy invites him.

CHAP. IV.
THirdly, Sense of true Honor calls for the establishment of Religion.
to these I may further add that great spur of generous industry, which we
call Sense of Honor, or an impatience that worthy persons have to come short in
any thing of that which does best become them, or is by God and good men
expected from them. I know how touchy even small minds and petty-spirited men
are in point of reputation there where no true honor lies: But mere shadows
and imaginary punctilio's deceive them under the notions of honor, after that
vulgar rate and esteem which gives many Gentlemen quicker resentments of any
affronts, neglects, indignities, or injuries done to themselves, than of
blasphemy to their God and Savior; more sensible for the honor of their
mistresses of pleasure than for their Mother or Fathers; I mean not so much
natural and political, as Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, the Church and the
Pastors of it, such by whose care they have been bred and born to Christ,
baptized in the Name of the blessed Trinity, brought up in the true Christian
Faith, nourished, confirmed and sealed by the body, the blood, and Spirit of
Christ, directed in the ways of Holiness and Eternal Happiness. Certainly
the Command binds all Christians to Honor these parents as much as any.

No sense of Honor should be more quick and sensible, than that which reflects
upon our highest concernments, in which not only our private, but our public,
not only our temporal, but our eternal welfare is wrapped up, and so
confined, that if in this we fail or miscarry, all is lost that a great and
gracious soul can consider.

If you were a Nation pinched with poverty, overawed with slavery, despicable
for your weakness, base for your cowardice, brutish for your ignorance, dull
with stupidity, dejected by tenuity, or barbarous through want of learning and
civility; if you were now to begin the principles of Christianity, and knew not
what belonged to true Religion, (which is the highest honor and happiness of
any Nation;) if that were the present State of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Commonalty of England, that they were now beginning to be Civilized and
Catechized, I should think my labor lost, my oratory vain, and my importunity
improper, thus to conjure you by the highest sense of Honor, to study the
settlement of true Religion, before you were acquainted with the sense of
Civility, Religion, or Honor: Or if I thought you had not so much pregnant
light of Religion, as might make you sensible of the truest and highest points
of honor, or not so much apprehension of honor, as might make you most
zealously tender in the behalf of true Religion; I would not be so impertinent
as to think to move you beyond your inward principles.

But when I consider you as a people pampered with plenty, exalted with
liberty, renowned for strength, dreaded for valor, enlightened with knowledge
in all kinds, accurately vigorous, actively industrious, as the chief of the
Nations, as the princess of all Islands, heightened to all magnificence,
polished with all good literature and civility, old Disciples of Jesus Christ,
many hundred years ago converted to Christianity, and never wholly either
perverted by Heretics, or subverted by the many barbarous invasions and
warlike confusions which you have endured; when I contemplate the grandeur, the
power, the wisdom, the majesty, the public piety (heretofore) of this Nation,
the antiquity of this Church, and the prosperity of its reformed condition
heretofore; I cannot but with all humble and faithful respects tell you, That
it is not worthy the name and honor of the English Nation, so famous for
Learning and Religion, for Scholars and Soldiers, for Magistrates and
Ministers, for Christian Princes and Christian people, (scarce to be paralleled
in all the world) It is not for the Honor of such a Nation, to halt between,
not two, but twenty opinions; to variate thus between the true God and the many
new Baalims, between Christ and the many Belials, who will endure no public
yoke of Religion or Church Government, but what themselves fancy and frame,
though never so different from that which this and the Catholic Church in all
ages, not only used and submitted to, but highly rejoiced in, as the only
order that Jesus Christ and his Apostles had settled in all parts of his Church.

It is a shameful posture for wise and sober men, for ancient and renowned
Christians, to be thus inconsistent, as divided between a doting upon former
superstitions, (which some impute to us) and indulging modern innovations
(which others reproach us for.) It Is ridiculous to be always dancing the rounds
of Religion, and giddily moving in the mazes of endless Innovations, which are
but private, and for the most part Childish inventions, the effects either of
proud and imperious, or of peevish, popular and plebeian Spirits, who aim not
at the public Peace, Piety and Honor of the Nation, so much as at the
gratifying their own little Fancies, Humors, Opinions and interests; whose
Novelties (never so specious and plausible at first, yet) soon appear
pernicious to the public, so far from mending and reforming the State of
Religion, that they threaten to mar all, if the goodness of God and the
moderation of wise men do not prevent. Private forms and inventions, never
duly examined or solemnly allowed by the public Representatives of any Church
in National Synods or Councills, nor from thence recommended to, and approved
by, the Representatives of the civil States in full and free Parliaments, but
surreptitiously broched at first, afterward Magisterially obtruded, by some
pragmatick Preachers, upon any Church or Christian people, these prove no other
in the end, than like the ashes scattered over Egypt, productive of sores and
boyles swelling to great pain and insolency.

Especially in such a Church and Nation as this, which was of the highest form
both for Christianity and reformation; where God had (to our admiration, and
his eternal praise) blessed the former settled State of Religion, and the
Churches excellent constitution, under those reverend and renowned Bishops,
assisted by Learned, Orderly, and Worthy Presbyters, whose pious and profitable
endeavors had long ago advanced this Churches honor and happiness to as high
a pitch in point of Doctrine and Devotion, and all spiritual experiences, as
any Church ever attained; and further had improved its welfare in point of
Discipline, if they had not been ever curbed and hindered by the jealousies and
impatiences of some Princes or people, who would by no means endure the
ancient, just, and holy Severities of Christian Discipline should be exercised
by the Clergy against their Haughty and Licentious manners, no not when the
Ecclesiastic State of England was in its highest elevation and luster for
Learning, Honor, Order, Estate and Unity: How much less are they now to be
exercised by poor pusillanimous and petty Preachers, with their pitiful
Lay Elders?

Yet amidst all the obstructions (either in Doctrine or Discipline) which
either the pride and policies of men, or the subtilties of devils have hitherto
put, amidst the peevishness of Schismatics, and the spite of Romanists,
amidst all the damps and dispiritings that this Church of England and the
worthy Clergy thereof have long found and felt from all sides that were
factious and had evil eyes, or evil wills against them; yet even then did the
Lord of his Church so highly exalt them and this Nation in the eyes of all the
world, to such degrees of Piety, Learning, Peace, Plenty, Honor, Love, and all
prosperity that could bless any Christian Church or Nation, that in good
earnest there was no need any of these new patches should be put as deformities
to that old garment, which was so goodly and graceful for true Christian
Religion and due reformation, that no novelty from private heads or hands could
mend it; especially when obtruded as a rent, or forcibly pinned upon it as rags
and hangby's of Religion, by every petty Master, whose fingers itch to be
meddling and innovating in Church affairs, without any public and impartial
counsel and authority.

Such preposterous endeavors, no way worthy of the honor of this Nation, nor
contributive to its happiness, God has already soon all sides blasted, that
they have been not only unprosperous, but many ways pernicious,
dishonorable, and ridiculous, divine vengeance at once discovering their
follies and confuting their confidences, which instead of further settling or
better Reforming Religion, (as was on all sides vapored and pretended) have, as
much as in them lies, reduced a famous and flourishing, a well-reformed and
united Church, almost to ruinous heaps and sordid confusions, to the great
shame and dishonor of this Nation; both reproching your pious progenitors, and
you their posterity, as if for this last hundred years, none of them or you
had served God as they and you should have done, with holy and acceptable
service, because neither they nor you did permit every man or Minister to
choose what Religion he would broach, what Opinions he liked, or to use what
Discipline he pleased, or beget what Churches and Pastors he fancied best: and
this after every freeman had either in Person or by his Proxy consented to
that religious establishment, which bound all men either actively to obey, or
passively to submit with silence and patience, because it was of his own
appointing, being the result of all Estates in this Nation, who without doubt
were much more able to consider and conclude what was best for the public
Piety, Peace and Honor of this Church and State, than any private man could
do, whose self-overvaluing and overweening is generally the first step of their
own and other men's undoing; yea many times from these practices, which at first
are not much regarded, much mischief accrews to the public, as the plague is
thought to begin first in private alleys and by-lanes, or from some one man or
woman that has a foul body or a very stinking breath, which easily poisons the
ambient air in which they walk, especially when disposed to putrefaction, and
so diffusive of the Infection to others. The stop and cure of which Epidemick
pestilence, (which beginning from some men's ill lungs or lives has now seized
upon Religion it self and this whole Nation) by your applying seasonable
Antidotes and safe defensatives, is a work most worthy of the Wisdom and Honor
of this Nation, which can be in no point more concerned or conspicuous, than in
this of true Religion, so settled and maintained as best becomes both the
Majesty of Religion, and the renown of the Nation.

Fourthly, to which great and good work, you stand obliged not only in duty to
God, in love to your Savior, Sense of gratitude invites to restore and
establish Religion.
in charity to posterity, and in just respects to your selves, (all which are
great ingredients in true Honor) but further, give me leave to tell you,
something of Gratitude and just retribution lies upon you, as to the ancient
Clergy or Ministry of this Nation, who have faithfully served God and his
Church, you and your forefathers, for many years, in all Ecclesiastical
duties and religious offices.

If you and your Forefathers (most honored Gentlemen, and beloved Countrymen)
did well and worthily in a grave and orderly way of public consent, and by due
Authority, purge this Church and redeem this Nation, in its Doctrine and
Duties, its Ministry and Worship, its Discipline and Government, its just
Liberties and immunities, from the dross and druggery of Romish errors and
superstitions, of Papal Tyrannies and Usurpations, reserving or restoring that
Purity, Decency, Authority, Order and Uniformity of Christian Religion, which
became the wisdom and honor of this Church and Nation, by the exactest
conformity with the Catholic Church, in its purest and primitive constitution;

If you have effected and enjoyed this happiness, by Gods blessing chiefly
upon the pious Counsels, devout Prayers, potent Preachings, and learned
Writings, as of the first reformed and reforming Bishops, and Presbyters
subordinate to them, so of their worthy Successors in the same Orders, Offices
and Functions, who have (many thousands of them) confirmed their Doctrine,
sealed their labors, asserted and authorized their Ministry, by their holy
lives and comfortable deaths, yea some of them with their patient sufferings
and Martyrdomes; If the Clergy of this Reformed Church in their several
stations and degrees, have by the Divine assistance ever since preserved this
holy depositum of the true Christian Religion, duly Reformed, according to the
Primitive gravity and Scripturall verity, for above one hundred years, to your
and your forefathers inestimable honor and happiness; and this, as with great
Learning and all sorts of holy abilities, so with no less industry and
fidelity, (though not wholly without humane frailties and personal
infirmities, which God in mercy will pardon, and man in charity ought to pass
by, where there was so much integrity and proficiency, so much of commendable
worth and constant excellency, as to the maine;)

If you cannot deny the many signal testimonies which God has given of his
being well-pleased with this Churches Reformation, with the Ministry, Worship
and public Profession of Religion in this Nation; not so much by that long
peace, plenty and prosperity, which you and your pious predecessors have (to a
wonder) enjoyed at home, besides the great Honor and renown abroad; nor yet by
those national and signal deliverances from deep designs and imminent
dangers, which threatened the utter subversion of Church and State; (these
preservations and lengthnings of our tranquillity being then surest signs of
Gods favor, and approbation of our ways, when they are honestly obtained,
thankfully received, and modestly enjoyed) but (beyond these conjecturall
fruits of common providence) we have those special tokens and testimonies
wherein the Lord has, as I conceive, evidenced most clearly his good pleasure
and liking to this Church of England, its Religion, Reformation, and Ministry,
namely by those eminent gifts, and undeniable graces of his Spirit, which in
great and various measures he has plentifully poured forth upon the Godly
Bishops, and other good Ministers of this Church who were subject to them, to
the edification of his faithful people among you in all spiritual blessings,
even to the admiration of our neighbors, the joy of our friends, and regret of
our enemies:

If the excellently Learned and Godly Bishops (whose names and memories are
blessed) assisted by other able, orderly, and painful Ministers of this
Church, (who being duly sent and ordained by them, were humbly obedient to them
as to spiritual Fathers,) if they have carefully and happily steered for many
years the sometimes fair and rich Ship of the Church of England, (in which so
many thousand precious souls have been embarked for heaven and eternity,)
between these two dangerous gulphs (the Scylla and Charybdis) of Papal
Superstitions and uncharitable Separations, steering it by the compass of Gods
word, with such Christian prudence, order and decency as is therein commanded
or allowed; in which happy conduct they and their successors were still very
able, willing, and worthy to have proceeded, if the wrath of God (highly
offended for the wantonness, wickedness and unthankfulness of the generality
of people under so great means and mercies,) had not justly suffered so rude
storms, of both religious factions and civil dissensions, to arise, which
having torn the tackling, rent the sails, loosened the junctures, unhinged
the rudder, broke the maine mast, cast the chiefest Pilots and skilfullest
Mariners overboard, quite defaced the lesser card or compass of
Ecclesiastical Canons and civil laws, have (at last) driven her within the
reach and danger of both these dreadful extremes which she most declined,
leaving this poor weather beaten Church, after infinite tossings, like a
foundered ship, in a troubled Sea of confusion, attending one of these two sad
fates, either a Schismatic dissolution, or a Papal absorption; either to be
utterly shattered in pieces by endless factions, or to be swallowed up at last
in the greater gulf of Roman power and Policy, which cannot but have always
a very vigilant and intentive eye what becomes of the Church of England:

If the Ministry of the Church of England, (whilst it was yet flourishing and
entire, as a City united in it self, as an orderly family or holy corporation,
consisting of Fathers and Brethren, of Bishops and Presbyters, might justly
challenge before God and all good men, this merit and acknowledgement from you
and your forefathers, that for Learning and Eloquence, both in preaching and
writing, for acuteness and dexterity in disputing, for solidity and plainness
in teaching, for prudent and pathetick fervency in praying, for just terror in
moving hard hearts to softness, and feared consciences to repentance, for
judicious tenderness in comforting the afflicted, and healing the wounded
Spirit, lastly, for exemplary living in all holy and good ways; in all which
particulars becoming a Christian Church, neither you nor they have had any
cause to envy the most Christian and best Reformed Churches in the world, as to
that honor and happiness, which consists in the excellent abilities, honest
industry, due authority, regular order of Ministers, also in the decency,
usefulness and power of holy Ministrations; all which blessings experience
sufficiently tells you, were formerly enjoyed by many gracious and judicious
Christians, far beyond what has been, or ever can be hoped under these
modern divisions, deformities, distractions and dissolutions, which do
(indeed) threaten in time utter desolation to this Church and the true Reformed
Religion, if Gods mercy and wise men's care do not prevent:

If nothing but ignorance or malice, blindness, or uncharitableness,
barrenness or bitterness of Spirit in any men, can deny this great truth,
this honest, humble, just and modest boasting, to which the injuries,
indignities, and ingratitudes of these last and worst times have compelled
sober Ministers, as they did St. Paul, who ought to have been better valued and
commended by them:

If you ( O Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Yeomen of England) are so knowing, that
you cannot be ignorant of this truth, and so ingenuous, that you cannot but
acknowledge it in behalf of the Church of England and its worthy Clergy, while
you and they enjoyed Piety, Peace and Prosperity; if beyond all cavil or
contradiction, this right ought to be done to Gods glory, this Churches honor,
the ancient Clergies merit, and your own with your forefathers renown, (that
after-ages may not suspect them for Heretics or Schismatics, nor you for
Separates or Apostates, as forsaking that good way, in which they were reformed
and established in the purity, power and polity of true Religion:)

If all these suppositions be true (as I know you think they are) how (I
beseech you,) can it be in the sight of your most just God and merciful
Savior, (who so abundantly blessed this Church and his servants the Ministers of
it, in teaching, comforting, and guiding you and your pious predecessors souls
to heaven) to change and cast off such a Ministry and such Ministers? Yea, how
can it be in the censure of pious and impartial men, other than a most
degenerous negligence, a Mechanic meannesse, a most unholy unthankfulness for
you, or any Christians, to pass by with silence and senselessness, with
carelessness and indifferency, all those sad spectacles of Church-divisions and
distractions, of Church-mens diminutions, debasements and discouragements,
lately befaln them (by a divine fatality and justice) partly through the
imprudence of some Clergymen, severely revenged by the malice or mistake of
some Laymen, whose heavy and immoderate pressures have fallen chiefly upon those
Ecclesiastics who were Christ's principal Vicegerents, Messengers, Ministers
and Ambassadors, his faithful Stewards, his diligent Overseers, his vigilant
watchmen, his wife dispensers of heavenly Mysteries to your Souls.

From whom so many Apostasies have been commenced and carried on, by infinite
calumnies, indignities and injuries against them and their orderly authority
and function, as if you and your Children had lately found more grace and
virtue, better Ministerial sufficiencies and proficiencies, in some Tradesmen
and Troopers, in Mechanic ignorance and illiterate impudence, in the glib
tongues, the giddy heads, and empty hearts of such fellows as are scarce fit
to be your servants in the meanest civil offices; as if these were now fit to
be your Pastors and Teachers, your Spiritual inspectors, and rulers of your
Souls, beyond any of those Reverend Bishops, and Learned Doctors, and other
Grave Divines, who heretofore (through the grace of God) dispensed to you, by
their incomparable gifts and real abilities, those inestimable treasures of
all sound knowledge and saving wisdom, of grace and truth, which were carried
on with comely order, and bound up with Christian unity.

Doubtless, the forgetting of those Joseph's, who have been so wise storer^s
and so liberal distributers of the food of eternal life to our hungry souls,
who have brought forth, as good Scribes instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven,
out of the good treasuries of their hearts, things both new and old, (the
Learning of the ancient Fathers, Councills and Historians, set off with later
Experiments and Improvements of all spiritual operations and gracious
comforts,) the forgetting, I say, of these Ministers cannot be worthy of that
pious gratitude which becomes noble-minded Christian. How mean, uncomely, and
much below you, must it needs appear to all wise and sober Christians in the
present age and all posterity, if you suffer their holy orders to be despised,
their spiritual offices to be neglected, their divine authority to be usurped,
their primitive orders and constant succession to be interrupted, their persons
to be abused and shamefully treated, their support, as to double honor, to be
so abuted, that their maintetenance shall be very small, sharking and
uncertain; also their respect and esteem none at all, especially among the
common people, whose civil and religious regards are much measured either by
the bag and bushel, or by the examples of their betters, their Landlords and
Governors?

The wilful dividing, debasing, discrediting, disordering, and discarding of
the ancient Clergy, as to their Ordination, Government, Ministry, Authority,
and succession in England, (which was most Christian, Catholic and reformed,)
must needs be, as the sin and shame, so the great injury and misery of you and
your posterity, being the ready way to bring in, First, a scrupulous
unsatisfiednesse and unsetlednesse, as to our former Religion, as if either not
true or not reformed; Secondly, next it raises a jealousy and suspicion of
any Religion, under the name of Reformation, as if it would not long hold, and
had no bottom or bounds; Thirdly, after this follows a lukewarmenesse,
coldness, and indifferency as to all Religion whatsoever, as Reformed and as
Christian; Fourthly, then will there creep in by secret steps a general
Apostasy at least from our pristine wise Reformation, and happy constitution
of Religion, to the Roman errors, superstitions and usurpations, which wait for
such a time and temper in England, whereby to make their advance upon peoples
minds, wildred and confounded, when they shall see the shameful retreates,
recoilings and variations made in England by the Reformed Religion upon it
self; whose disorders, disgraces and deformities necessarily following the
contempt of their Ministers, or the change and rupture of their Ministerial
descent and succession, will make most, if not all men, in time to recede from
it, and rather adhere to its grand Roman rival, and its implacable enemy,
Popery, whose policies will bring you and your posterity, by the contempt and
want of true Bishops, to have no Pastors or Ministers of any uniforme validity,
of Catholic, complete, and most undoubted authority. If any man may be a
preacher that lists to pirk up into a Pulpit, certainly in a few years you
shall have no Preachers worth your hearing, no Ministers of any reputation and
authority, either among the Idiots and vulgar, or among the more ingenious and
wiser sort of people, who are not naturally either very solicitous or
industrious in the concernments of Religion, or the choice of their Ministers.

If neither God nor good men have any further pleasure in their servants, the
ancient Clergy of England, if they really are as useless and worthless as
they have been made vile and reproched by some men's tongues and pens, if they
have deserved to be thus tossed in an eternal tempest of factious divisions,
vulgar depressions, and endless confusions, beyond any other order or rank of
men; if this be their evil fate and merit, after all their studies and pains,
after all their Praying, Preaching, Writing and Living, to the honor of this
Nation, and the great advantages of the Reformed Religion; if to have equalled
at least, if not exceeded the Clergy of any Church in any age since the
Apostles departure, be the unpardonable fault of the Reformed Bishops and their
Clergy in England; if their very sufferings, as the vipers seizing on St. Paul's
hand, make them appear to barbarous and vulgar minds as sinners, therefore
despicable, because they are so much despised, and so thought fit to be
destroyed; if this lingering and shameful death of being thus Crucified, is
that by which the Clergy of England must glorify God, if this bitter cup must
not pass from them; truly it will be a merciful severity to hold them no
longer in ambiguous calamities; but rather wholly to expose them to the last
outrages of Fanatic, Popular, and Schismatic fury, the Lions that hunger and
roar to have these Daniels wholly cast into their dens and jaws; that so your
eyes may no longer see your poor, despised, distressed, and miserable Clergy,
many of whom (both Bishops and Presbyters) are forced (as you know) to embrace
the dunghill, being destitute of order, honor and estate, some of them having
neither food convenient, nor any abiding place, nor any fitting employment;
that so that Episcopal Clergy (now rendered so odious) who (under God) formerly
redeemed you and your forefathers out of the bondage and darkness of Egyptian
superstition, may by an Egyptian Magic and fate, be drowned in the Red Sea of
vulgar contempt, popular confusion and inordinate oppressions; that thus the
new Jannes and Jambres may not only resist, but wholly prevail by their
enchantments against your Moses and Aarons.

But if your Consciences (O worthy Gentlemen, who are the Beauty, Strength, and
Honor of this Nation,) do on the other side tell you (not with faint and
dubious whispers, but by loud and manifest experiences, proclaiming to all the
world) that the ancient Clergy of England have (generally) deserved better of
you, by their Learning, Preaching, Praying, Writing and Living; what (I beseech
you) can be more worthy of the Wisdom, Justice, Piety, Honor and Gratitude of
this Nation, than to assert with their public love and favor, the dignity of
their worthy Divines, the honor of their Clergy, the Sanctity of their
Religion and Reformation, against that plebeian petulancy and insolency which
has so pressed upon them, and daily depresseth all their Authority? not only
by reason of some Laymens folly and insolency, but even by their variations
and inconstancy who presumed to be Preachers, and challenge upon what score
they please a share or lot in the Evangelicall Ministry.

Truly it is high time to redeem the Sacred Orders, the Divine Authority, the
Catholic succession, the ancient and authentic dignity of the Evangelicall
Ministry in the Church of England, from the obloquies, contempts and
oppressions of ignorant and unreasonable men, who are great enemies to the
piety and prosperity of this Nation, and but back friends to the Reformed
Religion, being at so deadly a fewd against the ancient Clergy and Catholic
Ministry of this Church; whose total extirpation, both root and branch,
Bishops and Presbyters, they have so resolutely designed and restlessely
endeavored, that they long for nothing more than the natural death of all the
reverend Bishops, and all Episcopal Ministers, who yet survive, being civilly
dead and buried in obscurity. O how infinite jealous are all Novellers lest the
English world should (at last) see the dangerous mistake of exchanging gold for
copper, Learned, Grave, Orderly, duly-ordained, and authoritative Bishops and
Presbyters, (of a primitive stamp, and Catholic Edition) for a scattered and
tattered company of new-coyned Pastors and Teachers, who have either not the
metal, or to be sure not the mint and Character of such a Ministry as was ever
current in England, (and in all the Christian world?) whose care was not to
broach every day new fountains (as Sampson did with his Asses jaw bone) of
Ministerial office and authority, when ever factious Presbyters or fanatic
people thirsted after the novelties of parity or popularity; but they ever kept
to that cisterne, those conduits or pipes which were first laid by the
Apostles, and derived from Christ's grand Commission, as the source and fountain
of holy orders, which was deduced by orderly Bishops and Presbyters to all
parts and places where any Christians owned themselves to live in any
Church Order, fellowship and communion: which was never known in the Christian
world for 1500. years to be any where separated from the Episcopal
oversight, regulation, presidency and jurisdiction; if all Scripturall and
Ecclesiastical records do not deceive us, which never show us any Church, of
greater or lesser dimensions, without some greater or lesser Apostles, as
Bishops, presiding and ruling over Presbyters, Deacons and people; which
neither Aerius nor St. Jerome himself of old, nor the disguised Wallo
Messalinus, or Blondel of later days, did ever so much as endeavor to
disprove by any one credible instance, of any Church in any age.

Upon so deep and large a foundation did the Clergy, Ministry and Church of
England formerly stand, till the Scotch Pioneers and other Engineers undertook
with their pickaxes to undermine and overthrow the Catholic antiquity of
Episcopal authority; which work some novelizing Presbyters beginning to
transgress, gave occasion to puny Independents to go beyond them.

Neither of which parties have yet, (nor are ever like, for ought I see) so to
mend the State of Christian or Reformed Religion in England, beyond what it
enjoyed in former days, as to make any learned or wise man so much in love
with their various novelties, that they should abhor that uniforme antiquity,
to which the Episcopal Clergy of England did conform.

The enjoyment of whose renowned worth, learned labors, and everlasting
Monuments of true piety, this nation has so little cause to be ashamed of or
repent, that there is no Jewel in the Diadem of English glory, which it ever
had or will in any age have so much cause to boast of and glory in, as the
excellency of its Clergy or Ministry, both Bishops and Presbyters, for the last
Century; whose private failings and personal infirmities (the crambe often
alleged to an impudent hoarsenesse by some detractors, whose uncharitable
Synecdoches impute the faults of every part to the whole) will never be
sufficient to justify this nations general unthankfullnesse to the memory and
merit of its former Ministry and Ministers, taken in the completion of their
harmony and orders, as made up of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, that
threefold cord of Ecclesiastical polity and unity, which is not easily, and
ought not rashly, much less rudely and ingratefully, be broken by any Nation
pro^essing Christian and reformed Religion; but rather it should be carefully
twisted and wisely recomposed, where either prelatick extravagancie, or
Presbyterian arrogance, or popular petulancy, have ravelled, unloosned, or
dissolved the entireness of its meet subordination and its ancient
constitution.

CHAP. V.
The hopeful possibility of restoring true Religion to unity and settlednesse
in England.
TO which temper and method of Ecclesiastical Unity, Order and Authority, as
piety, policy, honor and gratitude do invite the wisdom of this Nation,
(which I have hitherto in many instances demonstrated;) so my next endeavor is
to encourage all sober and good Christians to desire and advance, in all worthy
ways, that happy Restitution and Primitive settlement in our Religion, by
setting before you and them the possibility of effecting so great, so good, so
necessary a work; while many difficulties do not yet run us upon that rock of
utter despair which shipwrecks all industry, but they are easily counterpoised
by that not only possibility, but hopeful probability, which seems to appear
in the inclinations of the wisest and best men of all Religious interests and
parties in this Nation, who have learned wisdom either by their own or other
men's follies.

For this Good the wise God has brought out of the evil of our follies and
miseries, that the sad consequences (possibly not intended by many, but)
pursuing our late deviations and transports on all sides in this Church, (where
the projects and practices of particular men rather served their private
passions and presumptions, than the Divine Institutions, Christ's glory, or the
Churches general good,) these have already so fully confuted their Authors and
abettors confidences, by the sin, shame, weakness and fatuity of them, that
they need no blacker marks or deeper brands of dislike, than those which they
have with their own hand set upon their foreheads; having brought the things
of Religion to so great a deformity as it is this day, by their praeter, subter
or super-conformities, either beyond the use, intent, or indulgence of the
laws, or beyond the constitutions and customs and interests of this Church.

Thus while either restive and sullen, or busy and pragmatick Spirits will
needs be breaking that hedge which their wise forefathers made, serpents have
bitten them: while they would take burning coals from the Altar without tongs,
(which the Seraphin used as the ordinary means) they have shrewdly burned
their own fingers, in so much that many, if not most of them, I believe, would
be glad they were every way fairly healed, to as great a soundness of Order,
Honor and Unity, as they formerly enjoyed; of which they were as weary as
unworthy, whose indiscreet forsaking that medium and measure of their
happiness, which was wisely established by public counsel and authority,
has been of late so many ways unblest and unsuccesseful, that their very
going out of the right way which was the way of Peace, Truth, and Order, has
somewhat prepared their feet for an happy return. Every one that is so blessed
as to see their unlucky extravagancies, has learned to esteem the good old way
better than heretofore they did; when private presumption tempted them to
prefer their own novell fancies before the public establishments of such a
famous Church and renowned Nation as England was.

I make no question but many men are grown wise by their own woes; others at a
cheaper rate have bought wisdom by observing the fruits of their neighbors
folly, rashness and weakness. Some have deeply suffered for their former
Hydropick fulness, restivenesse and laziness in Religion, contracted by long
peace, great plenty, and high preferments; which it is far more honor to use
piously and profitably, moderately and wisely, than to enjoy pompously,
superciliously, luxuriously and idly: others are brought almost to utter
consumptions of Religion by their own Calentures, and those Hectic fevers
which have so long afflicted themselves and (as contagious or spotted
sicknesses) infected others. Some of all sides and sorts have suffered. I am
sure all are threatened, because each party has by their passionate transports
rather studied to advance their private opinions, parties and interests, than
the common and public good of this Church and Nation; mutual sufferings
(which have taken from all sides the confidence of their innocence) have so
wrought upon all men of serious piety and honest purposes, as by this fiery
trial to purge them from their dross of common infirmities, and to refine
them for some further service to this Church and State. Nor do I doubt, but as
other wise and good men, so particularly Ministers of parts and piety, could
they once amicably and authoritatively meet, confer and correspond together,
would sincerely and cheerfully (by Gods blessing) agree upon some expedient to
recover the truth, order, honor, peace, uniformity and authority of the
Reformed Religion and its Ministry in this Church and Nation; that neither
they, nor you, nor your posterity may be ever thus possessed, distorted, torn
and tormented with evil Spirits, which sometimes cast us into the waters of
cold and Atheistical irreligions, otherwhile into the fires of intemperate
zealotry and contentions. For so has the Church of England passed through all
the poetic racks and tortures, which (if not remedied) will be the portion of
your posterity, one while rolling Sysiphus his restless stone of endless
Reformation, whose recoilings and relapsings sink the true Reformed Religion to
lower deformities than ever it was in: after this they must be put upon Ixions
wheel, tossed up and down with continual circulations and giddiness of
Religion, as every man's whimsicall brains list to turn it round; whereas
Religious orderly motions ought to have, as their due bounds and circumference
of truth, so their fixed center of Christian unity and public communion, both
which would in no long time (by Gods blessing) be regained in England, if some
men's private policies and sinister projects did not (as wedges) still hinder
the closing and agreement of honest and impartial men, in such ways as would
restore Religion to its just honor, Authority and consistence; from the
enjoying of which, after all the specious pretenses made on all sides, we are
still as far remote, as Tantalus was from eating those fruits or drinking those
waters, which only deluded, but never satisfied his famished soul.

Yet many good grapes and some fair clusters are still left upon this battered
vine of the Church of England, in which I hope may be a blessing, which neither
the little foxes of peevish Schismatics have much bitten, nor the greater
bores of Romish seducers have wholly subverted. Many well-meaning people, and
not a few Preachers too, who formerly had their Midsummer-fits, and shorter
Lunacies, as to their religion, are now so sober in their senses, and well
recovered to their right wits, that having once tried that vanity and vexation,
that froth and futility of Spirit, which attends all factious inquietudes, and
exotic innovations obtruded upon a well- settled Church, they are resolved ever
hereafter to avoid and abhor them; as being no better than specious poisons,
delicate delusions, spiritual debaucheries and religious lucuries, which
growing from plethorick tempers in men's souls, (especially where they are high
fed with duties) do easily tempt them that are less cautious and moderate both
to wanderings and wantonness in Religion, first to simple fornications, and at
last to gross and foul adulteries; to which men (otherwise of commendable
strictness and purposes) are easily betrayed, if (as Dinah) they give way to
the temptations of novelty, curiosity, popularity, and ambitious vanity in
Religion, there, where it has been well and worthily settled by public
counsel and joint consent; yea and has been happily enjoyed for many Ages,
with almost miraculous, I am sure very mavelous prosperities, so as it was,
beyond all dispute, here in the Church of England. The inconsiderate ruflings
and disorderings of whose religious constitution, many men (of all sorts) are
now ready to recant and expiate, if by any honest endeavors they may recover
the order, unity, beauty, authority and stability of Religion in this Nation.

To whose Ecclesiastic communion I perceive many (heretofore more warm than
wise, more credulous than considerate) are now cordially returned, as to their
judgments and consciences; to which, no doubt, their conversation would
willingly conform, if once they could see any ensign of religious uniformity
authoritatively set up in England.

Many Ministers would willingly recant and return from their violent and vulgar
transports, if they could but have a protection for their foreheads, or a
skreen to hide that shame and discountenance, which they fear hangs over them
for their levity, from the common-peoples censures and scorns. Not a few
Ministers (sometimes orderly and regular enough) would fain get free from those
popular limetwigs, which have too long held them, if they did not fear to lose
some of their feathers, either as to their reputation or maintenance; who
flying from that good sense which was heretofore set in the Church of England
for their defense, would needs light on that bare hedge for their refuge and
perch, which proves to most of them no better than the beggars bush, fuller of
gins and snares than of berries or food.

O how glad would hundreds of popular preachers and preaching people be, to be
commanded by superiors to make (not verbal, but) real retractations of their
errors, seductions, surprises, schisms, and apostasies? that so their
variableness in Religion might seem to arise not from their private innate
levities, but from either fatal or sovereign necessities; which are always
good salvo's, and go for current excuses among common people, either to plead
for their extravagancies, or to justify their changes, especially when they
are reduced to the better.

Many Ministers of Presbyterian and Independent practices rather than
persuasions or principles, now (together with their followers) who formerly
were highly a-gog, (even when they were yet in their down, pin-feathered, and
scarce fledge) in those fine speculations and rare projects which they had
fancied for erecting new models of Church-work, after the forms of
Consistories and Elderships, Classes and congregations of Corporal
Spiritualties, and Spiritual Corporations, which were to be reared out of the
ruinous, nay out of the most entire parts of the Reformed Church of England,
which was by them to be wholly ruined, though it were by the Laws of God and
man, by constitutions Ecclesiastical and Civil, both wisely formed and
happily fixed in the Primitive and Catholic form of order and dependency; yet
even these men and Ministers of destruction, not edification, with their late
Chapels of Little-Ease, would I am confident be now very glad to be handsomely
sheltered under the protection of some such Episcopal seat, fair Cathedral
or Mother Church, with which England formerly abounded, to the great honor of
the Nation, no less than of the Clergy and Ministry of all degrees: the Slips
and Shrubs of Churches, (which some have lately planted) thrive so ill, that
they wish them fairly removed and reingrafted into that ancient stock, that
goodly and venerable tree of Episcopacy, which was so flourishing and so
fruitful to all orders of Christians in England, and in all ancient Churches,
ever since the first plantation of Religion in this Island, or the other world.

O how would all sober Ministers and others rejoice to come under that shade
and superintendency which might not sadly overdrop, but gently protect every
Minister and member of the Church, in their several branches and boughs? Who
sees not by experience that verified which St. Jerome told them long ago, That
a regular Episcopacy is the best, if not the only defensative, both in the
Catholic and particular Churches, from the scorching heates of factions and
schisms, to keep men from those shiftings and tossings in Religion, from those
uncharitable rendings and separations, which are so uncomely and inconvenient,
yea so noxious to the Churches of Christ, and therefore to be conscienciously
avoided by all good Christians?

Besides, this constitution containing in its bosom the true interests of
Presbyters and people, as well as of Bishops, redeemes the Clergy, beyond any
other form of Church Order and Government, from that which is very intolerable
to men of learned piety and ingenuous Spirits; that is, the sordid dependence
upon, yea and slavish subjection (even in religious concernments) unto those
Lay-dictators, and plebeian humors, who are generally very crosse-grained and
spitefully peevish to men of more learning than themselves. Vulgar minds are
always contemptuous to their teachers, and rugged to their Monitors, but most
unsufferably insolent, when they find either Magistrates or Ministers
dependants upon their benevolence; never triumphing more unfeignedly than when
they see those deformed spectacles which this last age has often shown them,
namely, those grave and worthy Ministers, who taught them in the name of Christ
on the Lord's Day, the very next day pale and trembling, to appear before them
in some Country Committee, compounded of Laymen, yea and of some Tradesmen,
who are generally not guilty of much learning in any kind, and least in
Divinity: yet these are the men that must catechize, examine, censure and
condemn Ministers in the sight of their people, both in points of Doctrine and
in practices Ministerial, for which some one Minister is able to say more in
one hour, than most of those Assessors or silly Spectators can understand in
ten, or ever have read in all their lives.

What ingenuous Christian blusheth not to see Ministers of excellent learning
and lives so disparaged, so degraded, so discouraged, by the Incompetency of
those who must be their Judges, when many of them cannot so much as understand
the state of the question or matter in dispute? What Christian is there of so
popular, plebeian, trivial, and mechanic a spirit, as not to desire to see
proper and meet judges set to examine and determine matters of Religion, for
doctrines, manners, and discipline? in all which there are many cases so
obscure and intricate, that they require men of very good learning, of composed
minds, of sober judgments, and unbiassed consciences, to debate and determine
them, being very dubious and disputable in truth and holiness, in faith and
morality; which when some silly Saints and devout bunglers will undertake to
manage and modelize beyond their line and measure, after their rash, rude and
slovenly fashion, it is not to be expressed how much detriment both Religion
and its sacred Ministry suffer through the ignorance and passion, the rusticity
and confidence, the petulancy and impertinency of such ridiculous arbitrators
and incompetent judges, who are so far from being fit for any such Authority
and Judicature, that they are not only not equals, but in most points very
much inferiors to those whose doctrine and manners, whose callings and
consciences they presume not so much to search as to insult over, with as much
unfitness and unreasonablenesse, as if Divines should arrogate to themselves
the Judicature of Common Law, or of persons and cases Martial; so that both
Pleaders and Judges, Soldiers and Commanders should fall under Ministers
decision in all debates incident to their functions and affairs.

Every man not ambitiously vain and fulsomely foolish, does now wish in his
soul to see that grave, solemn, idoneous and equable dispensation of Religion,
both in its Mysteries and Ministry, its Doctrine and Controversies, its
Scandals and Indignities, as may best become the Honor and Majesty of
Christianity, most avoiding those improprieties and absurdities, which have
been sufficiently manifested in our late confusions; which have chiefly risen
from want of that wise settlement in Religious administrations which would lay
out every part and parcel of them, so as is proper for them both as to
persons, places and proportions, after the order and method anciently* used
both in Gods Tabernacle and his Temple.

Indeed nothing can be managed orderly and happily in Church or State, in
Civil or Ecclesiastic affairs, unless they pass through such wise hearts
and pure hands, as can both well understand them, and discreetly discharge
them; so as may conciliate in all men's minds an inward reverence to their
persons that do dispense them. Which respect arises not from parchment
Commissions or popular approbations, but from personal and real
sufficiencies; which appearing to all sober men both in reason and Religion,
give them the greatest satisfaction, and thereby as it were charm the common
people not more by fear, than love and shame, to preserve that peace, and to
observe those orders which they see wisely settled, and authoritatively used in
any Church or Christian Commonwealth.

CHAP. VI.
THe happiness and honor of which religious harmony and authoritative order,
Of means to recompose the differences of Religion in England.
as every Christian is ashamed not to seem at least to desire, and all honest
men (no doubt) do really intend as their chief end and design, so the
greatest differences now perpetuating our Religious distractions in England,
seem to arise from the several means propounded, and methods prosecuted by
men, possibly of honest meanings, but of differing minds; who (each presuming
their own ways to be best for the Reforming, reconciling and establishing of
Religion,) grow so divided in the use of their means, as still to hinder the
attaining of the end: just like Physicians, who honestly and heartily aim at
the cure of their patient; but every one of them so urges the taking of his
particular receipt, that either they give him no physic at all, or so various
and contrary prescriptions, as first confound, and at last kill him, more by
the mutual repugnancy of their Medicines, than by the Malignity of the disease.

Such is the state and fate of the Church of England, as to my observation;
having, I hope, many honest and upright hearts in it, but possibly not so many
wise heads and wary hands, which in all public healings do well to be joined
together, these as fittest to effect what the other design. God forbid I
should be so vain as to imagine there is any thing in my tenuity fit to be
offered to that piety and prudence, which I know is in many of my Countrymen;
so great a presumption of wisdom were my greatest folly: I only crave the
leave and pardon of all wise men, so far as I adventure to express their
sense (as I suppose) to the public; which every man will not do, although he
heartily ownes it, and every one is not apt to do, although he vehemently
approves it.

Many men, yea all men naturally, have the same principles of Mathematics in
them, but not the same leisure and genius to study and dilate them, as did
Archimedes, Euclide, Ptolemy and Alphonsus. Some that have capacity and leisure
enough, yet may want calmness and composure of mind, being partly agitated by
their passions, partly biassed by their worldly affairs and private interests;
and not only prepossessed by their sides and parties, but wholly engrossed and
addicted to them.

My leisure being great, my private and partial interests being none, my temper
neutrall and indifferent, addicted to no side or party, that either shoots
wide, or short, or beyond the Church of England, (the only mark or Butt which
is and ever has been the measure of my best aims and actings, my words and
writings) possibly I may obtain so much favor of you ( my wise and worthy
Countrymen) as you, will at least bear with my folly so far, as I shall
represent to you, and others your inferiors, what is my sense, and, I presume,
yours too, in order to reconcile our differences, and compose our distractions
in matters of Religion.

1. From Ministers or the Clergy.
The methods of our Healing and Recovery must have regard to the originalls and
progress of our maladies and distempers, which I impute to Ministers
Divisions, Peoples Distractions, and Magistrates perhaps not indifferences so
much as Diversions (hitherto) by reason of many secular Incumberances, so
pressing upon them, that they have not yet had time and leisure since they had
power, so to intend the settling of Religion in England and Church affairs, as
the matter it self deserves, as God commands, and as all sober men in the
Nation both desire and expect.

My first address must be to men of my own Profession, who own themselves as
Ministers of the Gospel: For these are so generally charged to be the
fountains, fautors and fomenters of our English troubles both in Church and
State, that few men pity them, but rather justify the miseries befaln them on
all sides, as the grand occasioners of their own and other men's calamities;
which, they say, had not their first fire or flame from civil ambitions or
discontents, so much as from those which appeared in Church-concernments.

Indeed all ages of Jewish and Christian succession have showed us, that from
Prophets and Priests, from Bishops and Presbyters, from mal-admissions and
mal-administrations of Holy Offices and Functions, evil has gone out into the
whole Church and State. No sooner has God by the preaching and sufferings of
worthy Bishops and other Ministers planted and settled, purged and reformed his
Church in any Nation, but the Devil crowds some of his Chaplains into Christ's
Chapel: such were Arrius, Eutyches, Paulus S^osatenus, Apolinaris, Novatus,
Donatus, and many others, Churchmen by their Profession, but pests to their
Churches by their presumption. Thus did those drones or wasps rather of
Religion follow and infest the first Lutheran essays of Reformation in
Germany: when he had (as Sleidan tells us) notably triumphed over Eccius and
other Sophisters of the Popish bran and Monkish bellies, then had he to contend
with those peevish and hot heads, which brake out into Fanatic fancies and
Anabaptistick furies; Anno 1527.
such as Carolostadius, Murecer, Storkius and others were, whose Names and
Effigies are alike terrible. Nor have there been wanting in England since our
true Reformation, (the most perfect and best in the world, because the least
popular, most orderly, graduall and authoritative) such strange spirits, so
curious and captious, so quarrelling and reproching, so perpetually tampering
and botching with this Church, and its reformed Religion, that no sooner had
this Church any settled plantation and quiet, but it had (on every side) many
petty pruners, perturbers and supplanters, who from the first to this day
cannot be made to believe, that this whole Nation in all Estates, both civil
and Ecclesiastic, ever had either so much piety, purity, or policy as
themselves: half a dozen fierce non-conformists, who had kindled their matches
at Francfort or Geneva, were always confident of themselves, and cried up by
their Disciples, to be greater lights for burning and refining of Religion,
than all the Kings and Queens, all the Lords and Commons, all the Bishops and
Convocations, all the Martyrs and Confessors; whose cruel fires, aiming to
consume the very vitals of the true reformed Religion, were no sooner quenched,
but these foreign infected Ministers began other fires of lesser fagots, which
at first did pretend only to singe the overlong hairs of the reformed
Religion in England, but now at last we see they have roasted it round, and
turned this Church, like Saint Lawrence, from side to side, over the gridirons
and burning coals of various factions, which have each their Anti-Ministers,
their Cata-Presbyters or counter-preachers, bandying one against the other, and
setting all people together by the ears as well as themselves.

The first and most effectual means to recover the settled State of the
reformed Religion in England to a peace and uniformity, following the methods
of our miseries, must begin with us of the Clergy or Ministry, what names or
titles, what principles or patterns soever we pretend to follow: It Is true,
many, if not most of us, were loath to see and hard to be convinced of our
pristine errors and indiscretions, our immoderations and transports, our Popish
and popular compliances, our Jesuitick evasions and pretentions, our politic
Salvoes and distinctions, our pompous and empty formalities, by which we made
either the power of godliness odious, or factions popular, innovations pious,
and factions plausible, until God overtook us all with his just, though sharp,
chastisements. Some Churchmen ^hought their hill so strong it could never be
removed; whereas no policy availes, without true and exact piety, to bear up
the honor of Churchmen, when once people see without spectacles. Other
Ministers fancied that if the high places of Archbishops and Bishops, of
Deanes and Chapters were taken away, presently their valleys would ascend, (as
the earth is said to have done under St. David's feet as he was preaching in
Wales) that their Molehills would swell to be all Mountains of God, of equal
height, on which their Jerusalems should be built after new Church-models
either of a Presbyterian or Independent fashion, whose small and, as to the
Public peace and benefit, ineffectuall, p^oductions have hitherto so little
justified their inventions or discretions, that their mutual divisions and
several diminutions, besides the general abatement and abasement both of
Religion, Reformation and Ministry, do make the whole face of this Church
appear rather like Babel than Jerusalem; which was a City at unity in it self,
not made up with patches and botches, by fits and jobs, with deformed angles,
crooked walls and swelling windows, (like some narrow lanes in London, whose
sides seem built in spite to defy and darken one another) but designed and
wrought by such a juncture of wise Counsel from grand Architects as had well
forecast and fore seen their work, as those did by divine revelation, who were
to build the Ark, Tabernacle, and Temple for God, as Moses, David, Solomon,
Zerubbabel, and Ezekiel; who had leisurely and exact visions, sober and orderly
revelations, after due and Mathematical proportions or plat-formes given them,
and were not hurried on by sudden raptures, extemporary snatches, and
passionate surprises, which are the Convulsions of Religion; no fit tempers or
motions to build or repair the Church of Christ, which even in Primitive
defections, (as we read in the Epistles Correptory or Consolatory to the seven
Asian Churches or others,) were taught by the Spirit of Christ and the
Apostles, not to seek out new Forms, Fashions and Inventions, to make
Divisions, Schisms and Separations, either in or from the Respective Churches,
or from their Angels or Bishops, the Presidents or Presbyters.

But in their Reformations they were to keep their former Church Communion, in
the grand and Apostolic Combinations, which were constituted and proportioned
by the guidance and wisdom of Christ's Spirit: both Pastors and people were to
remember from whence they were fallen, to have due regard to their several
Rulers and Overseers in the Lord; to return to their first love of truth and
peace; Revel. 3.2.
to restore what was decayed, to preserve what remained and was ready to dye;
to hold fast what was wholesome, sound, and good, while they tried and pared
off what was evil and superfluous; Jude 3.
to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to them; to keep to that
form of Doctrine, with those Catholic Traditions and Customs which they had
received: They were not to invent new ways of Churches or Pastors any more
than new Doctrines or new Gospels.

I am for Primitive Sanctities and Severities in all sorts or degrees of
Ministers, no less than for Primitive subordination and communion: Ambitious I
am for restoring the Piety and Purity, as well as the Polity and Unity of
Pristine times. And although I find many Ministers so ill natured, so peevish
and crosse-grained, that they can sooner vomit up the meat they have digested,
than recall or recant any error or extravagancy they have adopted and fomented;
yet I hope better things of the major part of my Fathers and brethren, who are
men of more calm and ingenuous tempers, furthest from juvenile fervors, from
private designs and popular dependences.

Nor do I doubt, but all Ministers that are worthy men, will easily recede, not
from their Religion and Consciences, but from their various superstitions and
presumptions, from their immoderate values and Idolatrous adorations of some
petite opinions, and novel imaginations, which they have of late years taken
up, if once they could happily meet and parley together, not in arbitrary
Junctos and Associations; but being thereto called and encouraged by the
command and Counsel, the Gravity and Authority of those their Superiors, who
are most able to advance the good of this Church, and the restitution of the
Reformed Religion.

If you ( O worthy Gentlemen) should find us Ecclesiastics more restive,
pertinacious or obstinate than becomes us, 2 From Magistrates and Laymen.
either to retain our needless indulgences, or superfluous severities and
rigors of opinions and practices; it will be your honor and candor to supple
us, and by your exemplary persuasions gently to compel us to be such as best
becomes us and your selves. You cannot give us, the Ministers of England, a
more signal and ample testimony of your love and regard to us, than by your
exacting from us in our several places, not only all moral severities and
sanctities of life (which are indispensible to our calling and duty) but all
those real Ministerial strictnesses in all points of holy Ministrations, to
which our greatest enemies do so much pretend themselves, and complain of us
as most defective in them, either as to care, or diligence, or love toward our
people. But (I beseech you) let these sacred exactions, as to our lives and
Doctrines, as to our ordination and Ministration, be first, Scripturall, as to
the maine ground, rule and end of them; next, Rational, as to Order, Decency
and Gravity of them; lastly let them be Primitive and Catholic, not Novel and
Fanatic, but as much as may be conform to the pattern of all ancient
Churches, who had their formations and fixations from the Apostles, long before
any of these modern disputes and factions arose, or passion had seized any
Ministers judgments as to their particular sides and interests.

But let us not (for Gods sake) be urged (as some design) utterly to forsake
the Church of England, to renounce our own former both practices and
persuasions, our standings and understandings too, as Ministers (which were so
much grounded upon Scripturall directions, Apostolic exemplifications,
Catholic imitations, and national constitutions;) only to conform to some
private men's modern fancies, or to prefer, as to Church-ordination,
Ministration and Government, the novelties of Amsterdam or Geneva, before the
antiquities of Antioch and Jerusalem.

Nor yet may you leave us so far to our selves, as to suffer every one of us to
invent and do whatever seems good in his own eyes. Alas, many of us are weak in
our Learning, Religion, and Reason; strong only in our Passions, Prejudices,
and Presumptions; easy and soft in our Judgments, heady and obstinate in our
opinions, prone to be biased with private interests, and abused with popular
pretentions. While we mean well, yet we are ready to do very ill, having much
in us either cold and doting, or young and raw, or over-hot and uncomposed;
never worse governed than when we are left every man to govern our selves, or
our private flocks, after our own various fancies and affectations, which are
most-what very partial, plebeian, imprudent, impolitick: not many of us
understanding the proportions of true Church Government any more than we do the
designs and dimensions of the most noble and magnificent buildings, which were
never erected and perfected by the occasional concurrence of every spontaneous
workman, that listed to join his head and hand, to carry on what figure and
form he thought best; but they are the effects of mature Counsel and grand
advise from wise Master Builders, who first agree in the whole model or Idea,
before they put the parts in execution.

The truth is, no sorts of men are less tractable (generally) than we that
profess to be Ministers. If we have little Learning, we are envious, peevish,
and jealous against those that have more; if we have much, we easily grow
proud, high-conceited, dictatorian. Some of us are very rusticall, morose and
refractory; others of us very imperious, supercilious and magisteriall; few of
us of so wise, calm and safe tempers, as to be left to our selves in things of
public Office and Order, lest we grow heady and extravagant: Nor are we of so
humble and meek Spirits, as to be willingly led by others. If left free, we
grow insolent, popular and factious; if under any Government or restraint, we
grow touchy, refractory and petulant; not easily kept within our own or others
bounds, until by pregnant reason and prevalent power, meeting together in wise
and resolute magistrates, we are at once convinced and commanded, persuaded and
overawed to keep those honest bounds of order and subjection, which do not
only best become us, but ought to be least arbitrary, because most necessary
both for our own and the public good: most of us will be good subjects even to
Church Government as well as State, when we see we must be so; and few of us
will be either quiet or content, when we find that we may be what we or the
vulgar will, by loose Tolerations and indiscreet indulgences, which betray
Ministers no less than other men to many dangerous extravagancies.

To cure (therefore) the distempers of Religion, and to restore some Health,
Beauty, Order and Unity to this sick, deformed, disordered and divided Church
of England, the first applications, as I humbly conceive, must by wisdom and
power be made to those that profess to be Ministers of the Gospel, who must
have, as broken, or started and dislocated bones (whose flesh and muscles are
highly swollen and enflamed) not only wholesome diet and Physic given them, but
such splinters and ligatures as may be at once gentle, yet strong; not bound so
hard as may occasion pain or mortifying, nor yet so loose as may suffer any
constant dislocation or new flying out. To such ruptures and inordinacies, the
many notions and raptures that Scholars and Preachers get by reading and
conversing (besides the pregnancy of their wits, and ambition of their own
Spirits) are prone to tempt them: no preacher is so mean, but he would feign
appear some body; if he despair of his own merits, as to public notice and
preferment, then he applies to popular arts and lesser engines. Discontent and
ambition are observed, both in old times and of later, to have been the great
perturbers of the Churches peace; which some have written even of Mr.
Cartwright himself, a man of excellent Learning, Mr. Fullers History of the
Brit. Church.
yet unsatisfied when he had not the good fortune to be so much favored and
preferred by Queen Elizabeth, as others were who bare a part with him in
public Acts at Cambridge before that popular, yet politic, Princess;

Who had no greater art in her Government than this, to give not only shrewd
guesses at men's tempers and geniusses, but exactly to calculate the proportions
of their spirits and parts, and accordingly either to refuse them, or employ
them in Church or State. Nor could she easily have kept this Church of England
from flying in pieces in her days, when many notable Ministers wits did work,
like new beer or bottled Ale, to blow up the Government of the Church, unless
she had, besides the Canons agreed in Synods, and the good Laws passed in
Parliament, applied such wise, able and resolute Governors to the Helm of the
Church, as were Parker, Grindall, Whitgift, Sands, Matthewes and others; whom
the storms (yet safety) of the Church in those times showed to be excellent
Pilots, and excellent Prelates, no less than excellent Preachers: Whose names
and authority had then been made as odious and unpopular, as now all Bishops and
Episcopal Clergy have been, if (under God) the resolute power and ponderous
authority of the Princess had not preserved them, besides the Gravity, Piety,
and prudence of their own carriage; which abundantly stopped the mouths of
their clamorous enemies then, and further justified them to all posterity, to
have been, as the true Sons of wisdom, so deservedly the venerable Bishops and
Fathers of this then famous and flourishing Church.

I well know that Ministers in England, above all sorts of men, do stand bound
in conscience and prudence to use all fair means for the speedy settling and
happy restitution of the State of Religion in this Church; because however many
of them profess to be great patrons of piety, and sticklers for Reformations,
either old or new, yet most, if not all our Church-deformities and miseries,
have been and still are imputed chiefly to their immoderations, passions, or
indiscretions, when too much left to themselves: Some driving so furiously to
conformity, that they went beyond it; not only over-shooting themselves, but
the good Laws, Canons, and Customs of this Church, hereby putting the common
people into high jealousies of superstition, by their too great heats, and
surfeits of ceremonious innovations and affected formalities: Other Ministers
were so jealous and impatient of what they fancied, rather than felt, to be
burdens in Religion, that they not only cast off some superfluous loades of
new ceremonies, but the very comely Garment, Girdle and Government of this
Church; yea some of them at last flung off all their clothes, and tare off (as
Hercules in his fiery shirt) much of their own skins, by a frantic kind of
excess, severely revenging even other men's real or imputed faults upon
themselves and upon the whole Church, committing greater injuries than ever
they did or indeed could suffer, while they possessed their souls in patience
and peace; whereas now they have left themselves and this whole Church, (as the
Tortoise did, that was weary of its shell, and put it off) almost nothing for
safety, comeliness, or honor, but are nakedly exposed to all those dangers
and deformities which attend any Church, Religion and Ministry, which being
once ungirt as to order, unity and Government, will soon be unblest as to all
holy improvements either in Piety, Verity, or Charity.

Hence, hence it is, that such a crowd of importune and insolent mischiefs
have (as the Sodomites upon the Angels and Lot at his door,) not only rudely
pressed, but notoriously prevailed too far upon all Ministers and the State
of the Reformed Religion: chiefly the jealousies, feuds, factions, animosities,
immoderations, indiscretions, divisions and dissociations among Ministers; who
can never expect to see common people return from their madness and giddiness
to sober senses, until they see their Preachers to recover their wits, and
their pastors to become patterns, as of piety and zeal, so of humility and
order of charity and unity, of gravity and constancy, of meekness and wisdom;
and not to be like mad dogs, so daily snarling and snapping at one another, so
biting and infecting their own and others flocks with their poisonous foam and
teeth, that (at last) they disorder the whole frame of the Church, and endanger
the civil peace of the Nation: whence some men have been ready to think it were
a part of wisdom and State Policy, to put in execution the counsel and
resolution which once Queen Elizabeth took up in some time of Her Reign, even
to forbid all preaching and praying, as to ministers own inventions and
composures, because she found most Ministers passions so inseparable from their
pulpits, if they were left to themselves.

The want of Christian harmony and correspondency in public and lawful
conventions, with unanimity and fitting subordination among Ministers in
England, for these last twenty years (good God!) what havoc and confusion,
what waste and desolation, what scorn and contempt has it brought upon the
whole Ministry, the Church and the State of Reformed Religion; not more in the
order and peace, than in the power and purity of them! while several Ministers
in their partial conventicles and mutinous meetings go several ways, seek
only to draw Disciples after themselves, not to lead them nearer to God, and
Christ, and this Church, but to their own private opinions, parties and
interests, according as they can possess people to comply with their new
Ministerial authority, new Church-waies, and new spiritual projects, which
being so horribly divided, the good only way of Christianity is almost
destroyed; for none that are novell can be so authentic and authoritative, but
they are by some suspected, by others denied, and by most despised. Hence
mutual loathings between people and people, Pastors and Pastors; hence that
nauseous abhorrence in many of all Sermons and Religious service; hence that
Atrophy or indifferency of most people to the blessed Sacraments; hence that
rudeness and irreverence showed by many in all Religious duties; hence that
looseness in moralities, that rottenness in opinions, that coldness in
devotions, that boldness in blasphemies, that impudence in heresies, that
fondness after novelties, that boasting in schismatic rendings; hence so many
new and strange secular policies are grown up, as thistles in the good field of
this Church, instead of Primitive simplicities; hence so many gay and cunning
hypocrisies spring up (like cockle and poppy among wheat) instead of sober
honesty and Christian charity, which were heretofore so abounding in England.

A pious and prudent closing, a sincere and thorough healing of those wounds
which Ministers have given themselves, this Church and the Reformed Religion,
by their easiness, credulity, inconstancy, popularity, and impatience to bear
any thing, and also by their too much confidence in secular Counsels and arms
of flesh, (while they served diverse lusts and passions of men and times more
than the Lord;) this would advance the real interest of all parties, so far
as they are Christ's, and bring the whole frame of Religion to such an happy
consistency as becomes the honor of such a Nation, and such a Reformed Church
as England sometime was.

In which paternal presidency, fraternal assistance, and filial submission,
might all meet together, to satifie all calm and sober Spirits, that are
either of Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independent persuasions; which are (I
think) the most considerable parties (yet) in England, both as to their
numbers, abilities, and worth.

I know it is very hard for weak and wilful men to reclaim themselves or
others from those transports, which they have not chosen, but ventured upon; it
is the work of wise men to recant their own errors, and to recall people from
those scatterings and extravagancies to which they have been once thoroughly
scared and cunningly driven. History of the Church of Scotland, by S^otswood
Archbishop of S. Andrews.
I have much admired, while I have read the prudent Arts and pious guiles which
King James (a Master of great Learning, Wit, and Eloquence) used, whereby to
calm the hot Spirits of Ministers in Scotland, so as to reduce them to that
excellent Church-frame and Government, of which many popular, factious and
covetous Spirits were not more weary than unworthy; by the overthrow of which,
I believe, the jealous Presbyters in Scotland, and that Church and State, have
got so little, that they may well put their gains in their eyes, and yet see
both their folly and their misery, rather weeping for their destroying, than
justly triumphing in their extirpation of so excellent a constitution of a
Church, as indeed they enjoyed with as much happiness (had they known it) as
they obtained it with much difficulty. Great bodies (we see) cannot move
regularly or handsomely, unless they have such respective heads and
presidents, as may be principles of order and union, of proportionate motions
and useful operations.

The want of which (with the dissolving of all Ecclesiastical subordinations
into popular parities, and reducing National Convocations or Synods into
partial Assemblies and Associations) all sorts of sober Ministers have found
by woeful experience to be so pernicious both to their private and the public
interests of Religion, that I believe most of them are now very solicitous how
to heal themselves, lest they further appear Physicians of no value to the
people, who can never think themselves either well taught or governed by such
Ministers as know not how to govern themselves, and yet are impatient to be
governed by any other but themselves; who being either mean, or weak, or
wilful men, taken singly, will not be much abler or stronger, or more valued,
in any arbitrary, precarious or partial ways of self-combinations or
Associatings.

CHAP. VII.
Of the late Associations projected by some Ministers.
I Am neither wholly ignorant of, nor averse from, those later projects and
Essays of Associations, which some Ministers have presented to the world, and
(as I hear) practiced among themselves in some Countries, with what good
success or public advantage I do not yet understand: however this plot of
Associating does proclaim to all the world, that the generality of Ministers
are very sensible of that shame, solitude, feebleness, contempt, dissipation
and diminution, to which their late divisions have exposed them, even among
those people whom they most gratified with eating that forbidden fruit, which
by a surfeit of liberty has brought so great sickness and mortality upon the
life of Religion, as Christian and Reformed; also upon the honor of the
Clergy, and the happiness of the people of England. I see the sense of their
own and the peoples nakedness, (as to Ecclesiastical union and Government)
has made Ministers seek for some covering for themselves, though it be but of
fig leaves, in comparison of that goodly Garment which God had formerly clothed
them withal, after the manner of all ancient Churches, who were governed,
adorned and defended by Episcopal Eminency, Presidency, and Authority,
strengthened with Presbyterian Counsels, and further helped by the service and
care of Deacons, or Overseers for the poor, to complete the well-Governing of
the Church with Charity, Wisdom, and Orderly Authority: So that neither the
Wise, Strong, Great, or Rich, might be extravagant and unruly; nor the Simpler,
Weaker, Lesser, and poorer sort of Christians be neglected and contemned.

A method of Church Government, certainly, not more ancient and Catholic, than
complete in all the requisite proportions of Government, which had in it not
only all principles of reason, polity and prudence, but was further commended
and confirmed by the ancient patterns of Gods own appointment among the Jews,
by Christ's Doctrine and example, together with his Apostles practice and
appointment, evident in their writings, and in the imitation of all Churches
from the beginning. The want and waste of which Primitive and Catholic
Government as I do unfeignedly deplore in the Church of Engl. so I am glad to
see any of my brethren so sensible of it, as to make what handsome shift they
can for a while to unite and defend themselves, til the mercy of God and the
wisdom of Governors shall restore such ancient order, unity and authority to
us, as may be most happy for us on all hands. And although I think these
Associatings to be as incomplete as they seem partial, yet they are so far
considerable and commendable, as they seem to invite and draw Ministers to some
Ecclesiastic union and fraternall society; which may be in time much for their
own Honor, Safety and Happiness, as well as the peoples peace; especially if
such closures arise not from a continued confederacy of factious Spirits
against true Episcopacy, but rather as preparations for it, so far as times
may bear, or bring on the due restitution of it, not to its pristine pomp and
splendour, (which is not expectable) but to its Primitive Order, Power, and
Spiritual Authority in the Church; which without doubt is the Conservative,
the Crown, the Consummation, the Center of all Churches Government.

Short of which what ever popular and plausible prefacings these projects of
Associating may make, to endeare some Ministers by the parity of their
Oligarchies in Presbytery, or to draw in common people by their specious
Democracies in Independency, yet (I confess) I expect no great or durable good
from either of their partialities. First, because they are but private men's
projects, not the results of the public counsel and united wisdom of this
Church and Nation. Secondly, they are in their constitution defective, as to
the true proportions of good Government and Polity, which must have ability,
order, entireness and authority; which are not to be found in the parity or
plebs either of Ministers or people. Thirdly, they are as new, so precarious
and arbitrary, therefore unauthoritative and unauthentick, easily baffled and
despised by any that list to be recusant and refractory. Fourthly, as they are
divided no less than Oligarchie and Democracy, so they may be dangerous to the
Authors, abetters and executors of them, when ever those that a^e or shall be
in civil power, list to bring them to the trial of a Pr^munire; which statute
binds up the hands of all Pragmatick Presbyters and people, from acting of
their own heads in Church-affaires without Law.

This I am sure, the policies of Statesmen are easily jealous of Churchmen,
nor can the Clergy discreetly act any thing by way of public influence in
things Ecclesiastical, for which they have not the public Counsel and
consent. Possibly these Associations, if friendly and ingenuous, may be some
seeming shelter to some poor Ministers from the urgent storms of popular
contempt and insolency, like the undergirding of that crazy and weather-beaten
ship, Acts 27.17.
in which St. Paul was imbarqued and ready to perish, until the tossed vessel
of this Church may be brought into a more commodious haven and fully repaired.

But if the aim of Associatings be no more than a cunning complicating of
Presbyterian and Independent principles and interests together, that they may
rule in their Duumviracy, exclusive of all primitive Presidency, and slighting
all pleas for Episcopacy, which has the only Catholic and Classical
precedents for authentic ordination and full authority in the Church, all will
be no more than daubing with untempered mortar, by which they may foul their
own fingers and other men's faces; but they will never erect any stately and
durable structure, capable to supply the room of that Primitive, Apostolic
and Catholic Government, in comparison of which these precarious and poor
Associatings of Ministers are but a setting up a stanty hedge, instead of a
good quick-set or a brick-wall, for the sense of Christ's vineyard.

Presbytery has been already so baffled in England, and Indepency has so
little place or credit, both are such exotic novelties, and so incompetent for
Church Government, that neither single nor sociall, ravelled nor twisted, they
will ever have any considerable power, nor be able to give any protection to
either Ministers or people, much less will they promote the Reformed state of
Religion, or the peace of the Nation.

The community of Ministers and people, though never so much Associated in such
levelling factions, will still appear, both to their enemies and friends, but
as so many silly sheep, who, fearing to be further worried by wolves and dogs,
do flock together indeed with great eagerness and crowding, but they are not
thereby much the safer, if they have neither fixed folds, nor able, valiant and
watchful shepherds to oversee and defend them, with such eminent power and
lawful Authority as becomes the masters of such Assemblies, and the chief
Fathers of those Families which make up the most complete Churches of Christ.

As it is hard to draw a true circle unless the center be fixed, or to build a
firm arch without the binding and centre-stone be added to the rest; so I
firmly believe, that neither the interests of people by Independency, nor of
Presbyters by Presbytery, will ever be advantaged to any honorable, happy, or
durable condition by these Associations, if they arrogantly and factiously
usurp the rights and power of Primitive Episcopacy, which has been always as
useful as venerable in the Church of Christ, either used, or approved, or
desired by all learned and sober men, and asserted by infinite, pregnant and
unanswerable testimonies, both ancient and late.

Nor will, I hope, the Antiquity, Sanctity and Majesty of Primitive and
Catholic Episcopacy ever want such Princes and Peers, such Presbyters and
people, as both in true polity, and in good conscience, will so approve it, as
to prefer it no less before all modern models, than the first temple was
preferrable before the second, or either of them before the Tabernacle.

If these Associations do only intend, as some of them pretend, to take in all
interests, with reservation of latitudes and freedoms, both of different
principles and practices, to all sorts of Ministers, will they not prove at
last Dissociatings, and amount to no higher edifying of this Church, than the
laying of brick and sand without lime, which will never make a durable and
strong building? For they will soon divide and dissolve who are held together
by no other bond than their own will and pleasure. Possibly thus far they may
be of use, as means somewhat to discover more the rubbish and ruins of our
late distractions, which have made Ministers so much strangers, that they are
enemies to each other; yea, possibly they may, by drawing them to some amicable
conventions and Christian conferences, occasion better understanding between
many of them, and so by Gods blessing in time produce some such counsels as may
be worthy of them and the public. But if their aim be slily to get into some
hands such popular advantages (by their soft insinuations of seeming equanimity
and moderation,) as shall further displace and disparage the former Catholic
Government of this and all ancient Churches, they will be but as new patches
put to an old garment; which will make the rent and deformity the greater.

Certainly, the state of the Reformed Religion in England will never be happy
till it is settled, nor settled till it be uniform, nor uniform, till the office
and authority of Ministers be valid and venerable, nor will this ever be,
until the sanctity and samenesse of ordination, together with the use of
Ecclesiastical power and holy Ministrations, be rendered so August, so Sacred
and Complete, as may be most conform to Scripture and to pure Antiquity; for
while Ministers are of diverse makes and moulds, they will be of diverse minds,
nor can they produce other than multiforme Christians, of different fashions
and deformed factions in Religion; which do as necessarily bring forth infinite
mischiefs in any Church or Christian State, as the itch breeds scratching, and
scratching fetches blood. As the blessed Apostles, so their holy successors
kept to one way of Religious Order and Power; which preserved the unity of
faith and love among Christian Bishops, Presbyters and people.

I confess, I do sometimes in my sad and retired solitudes hope, that our
common calamities may, by Gods softning and calming grace upon men's spirits,
make both all Godly Ministers and all good people so wise, as humbly, sincerely
and charitably to search into the clear steps of Primitive prudence,
Apostolical order, and Ecclesiacall Authority, which had due and tender regard
to all sorts of Christians, so as to keep up a meet subordination with a
Christian communion; To which end I was willing to hope this show of
Association might conduce.

But when I find in some of them nothing that looks civilly upon Episcopacy,
many things cast reprochfully and scornfully upon the excellent Bishops of
England and all the Episcopal Clergy, who were not inferior in any regard to
the best Associators; when I find that some of them have the confidence to
exclude all that have of late years been ordained by any Bishop with
Presbyters, though such an one as the late most venerable Bishop of Norwich,
Dr. Hall, ((...)) when I see that some rigid Presbyterians, and popular
Independents, affect with great Magistery to Duopolize all Church Power, to
grasp into their hands and bosoms (as the sides of a drag-net meeting
together) all Ministerial Authority; not only not owning the best surviving
Bishops with any respect, nor yet in any fair way applying to any of them,
after all their undeserved indignities, but spitefully and professedly
abdicating all communion with them, under the name of Bishops, reducing them
((...)) to the level and parallel of Presbyters, (which the 630. Orthodox
Fathers, Council. Chalcedon. Can. 29.
in the fourth general famous Council of Chalcedon, (which all Ministers of
England approved and (I think) subscribed to) call ((...)) an absurd and
unreasonable practice, yea ((...)) a great sacrilege; and Zonaras upon that
Canon makes it a ((...)) fighting as Giants against God, as a dethroning of
Christ, the Bishops eminent authority and presidency in the Church being a
lively representation of Christ's sitting in the midst of the throne, who did
(undoubtedly) delegate his visible authority of governing the Church to the
chief Apostles, above the 70. and all other Teachers; after which manner and
proportion these chief Apostles, who were the first and great Bishops after
Christ, did both commit and derive their authority to the following Bishops
their successors, who were a lesser sort or second edition of Apostles: when I
see what an Idol some Ministers and people make of their Scotch-Covenant, by
which great Engine, or Military Ram, they still think themselves bound to
batter Episcopacy, as if their Covenanting against it as it then stood in
England, were an obligation to persecute all Episcopacy for ever; when in
earnest, the least variation of its former constitution both satisfies and
absolves from that bond, which some men still superstitiously venerate, as if
it were an image fallen from heaven, a matter of divine precept and institution,
and not rather of humane machination and politic invention; (which we are sure
it was,) as if it were the solemn result of the pious or of the peaceable and
public sense of this Nation, and not rather the issue of troubled brains and
broken times: indeed many forget that the Covenant smells more of fire, smoke
of sulphur and gunpowder, than of the Spouses myrrh and perfumes, of Christian
Love and Charity:

Again, when I consider how passion and pride betrays many men to rashness,
rashness to folly, folly to obstinacy, obstinacy to presumption, presumption
to animosities, and these to unchristian fewds, everlasting despite and
bitterness, which must still be vented as choleric humors once in a month
against the most innocent and Primitive Episcopacy, yea against the most
deserving and yet most suffering Bishops, of this Church, and of all the world,
old and new: when I see the personal errata's and exorbitances or infirmities
of some few Bishops, by most uncharitable Synecdoches, (which put a part for
the whole) are in a pitiful fallacious way of vulgar oratory urged against
all Episcopacy and Bishops in any orderly eminency or presidentiall authority
in the Church, contrary to the faith and honor of all antiquity, and the
former happy experiences of this Reformed Church: when I find how wary and shy
some Ministers are (in their zeal and forwardness for their petty
Associations) to seem to own even their own judgments and real inclinations
toward any such condescentions, and close with Episcopacy as may reflect upon
their former transports; how loath they are really and freely to offer such
proposals as are equable and ingenuous, pure and peaceable, to the Episcopal
party, who aim at no more than such a paternall presidency and order, as may
best preserve the undoubted power of ordination and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as it was Primitively settled in and transmitted by the hands of
the first Bishops, who immediately succeeded the Apostles:

When I see (as I plainly do) this partiality, restivenesse, and cowardice in
some Ministers of good parts, then do I almost sink in despair ever to see or
enjoy (while I live in England) any thing in the Order, Government, and
Discipline of this Church, that may look like the Primitive pattern; which was
indeed a Catholicon, approved in all Churches, used in all ages, and submitted
to by all sorts of good Christians; the only proper Antidote (I think) against
the poisons of our times; far beyond any of these kind of new confections,
which tampering and partial Empiricks may make or boast of, and prescribe to
those that list to be their tame and credulous customers; who will find that
all these new Balsames of Covenanting and Associating against Episcopacy, are
not only not soveraignly or solidly healing, but full of noxious, festering,
and pernicious qualities, scalding one place while they seem to skin over
another. So that if I should only look to the arm of flesh, or at some
Ministers inconstant, ungrateful, violent, partial and intractable spirits,
there is little hopes that either they or their Sectators will return to any
happy close and general accord, without a miracle: and indeed it would be as
strange to see some Ministers return with meekness, and submit to their
lawful and worthy Bishops, as their Fathers, or Chief Heads and Rulers of
their Ecclesiastical fraternities and families, under any the most innocent
qualification and temper of Episcopacy, as it was to see Saint Dennis his Corpse
or trunk take up his head and carry it 3. miles after it was cut off, as the
French Legends report of that Martyr; so prepossessed and prejudiced some
Ministers and their Disciples are against the Order and Honor of their own
calling and function, no less than against the happiness of this Church, both
Ministers and people, against the peace also and prosperity of the reformed
Religion of this Nation; all which are so concerned in a right Episcopacy,
(wherein the real interests of Christian people, sober Presbyters, and worthy
Bishops should be all preserved) that in earnest I cannot see how they can,
without such an orderly Communion and venerable Authority, ever be happy,
because not united either in principles or practices, in opinion or affection.
I believe no good Christian is so blind as not to see, that faith cannot in
this world be separated from charity, that Churches divisions are their
confusion; as leaky and unhooped vessels let out much, if not all the good
liquor in them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of civil assistance from Laymen to restore this Church and Religion.
THerefore, leaving these my hotter-spirited brethren to take breath, after
their earnest pursuits against Episcopacy, and their zealous agitations for
either Presbyterian or Independent interests by the new juncto's of their
Associations; expecting in time to find them in a much cooler temper, as
already I do all sober and moderate Ministers, who unfeignedly approve, and
heartily pray for Episcopacy in its Primitive proportions; I shall in the next
place apply my self to You of the Magistracy, Nobility and Gentry of this
Nation, if possibly your spirits, less engaged, and so less imbittered in
Church-contentions, may incline to the meditations and embrace the motions of
Ecclesiastical peace and accord in this Church and Nation.

Act. 16.9.
Saint Paul saw in a vision a man of Macedonia coming to him and calling for
Help. It is not a vision in the night, or a dream of distress, but the
noonday or meridian of this Churches miseries, which presents to you many
thousands of poor people daily overgrown with Ignorance, Lukewarmness,
Licenciousnesse, Unsetlednesse, Superstition, Faction, Atheism, and all manner
of Irreligion; also many hundreds of poor Ministers, (for none is to be
esteemed rich, or renowned, where all are either envyed or condemned by one
side or other) of all persuasions, Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Independent,
many of them endued with excellent parts, most of them with competent and
useful abilities, all these, and in them the whole Church and Nation, call to
you, Come and Help us; Help to redeem us from that vulgar insolency, reproach
and contempt into which we are fallen (both our persons and profession) by our
mutual divisions, our childish contentions, our uncharitable factions, our
unseasonable ambitions, our unreasonable revenges, by our immoderate, popular
and implacable passions; Help us, Eusebius. in Vita Constable.
as Constantine the Great did those Bishops and other Churchmen who were met
at the famous Council of Nice, to burn and bury all those complaints,
quarrels, libels, jealousies, disaffections, reproaches, dissentions, and
mutual disparagings, under which the Ministers and Ministry of England now lie
and labor; Manasseh being against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and
Judah against both; Episcopal Ministers against Presbyterians, and these
against Episcopal, and Independents against both, and some against them all.

Help to restore us to a condition beyond slaves and villains, reduce us to
the state of ingenuous freedom, such as the Law affords all honest and
industrious men: Reform and reunite us, if it be possible, but not with Swords
and Staves, with Pistols and Prisons, not by the arbitrary Discipline of
Soldiers, and absolute Tribunals of Committee Men, not by plundering,
sequestring, silencing, and ejecting us out of all upon mere politic
jealousies, or only venial infirmities; (when for the main we carry our
selves in all things Righteously, Soberly, and Peaceably.) Do not expose us to
men of new lights, to men of erratick judgments and fanatic fancies; who lay
as much Religion upon their new Disciplines and Church-modellings, as upon all
the Doctrine, Piety, and Charity of Christianity. Leave us not to the novel and
illegal power and partiality of such men, who will try us with passion, and
judge us with prejudice, destroy us with pleasure, and undo us without appeal
or remedy; who greedily receive accusations against us as Ministers, without
letting us see or hear our accusers; which are not always two or three,
according to Gods command both in the Law and Gospel, but many times ( testis
singularis) only one, sometime none, besides some men's jealousies,
disaffections, and surmises against us, Tit. 3.10.
who seldom give us two admonitions (after the Apostles order) but at first
dash they quite blot us out of their book of life, utterly routing us and our
families, disabling us ever after to plead our innocencies, or exercise our
abilities, or supply our necessities, in any convenient way of living.

Help to redeem, if not our persons, which are made by vulgar scorn, as the
filth and offscouring of all estates in this nation, yet at least our Function
and Profession, which was ever esteemed holy; redeem it from those invasions,
intrusions and usurpations, which are made upon it by illiterate, mechanic,
sordid and simple people, who can have no true or tolerable authority to be
Ministers of holy things, when they have no competent abilities, and who being
on no hand duly consecrated, set apart, sanctified or ordained for such holy
Ministrations, cannot but profane, abuse and abase them, by their abominable
arrogancies and sacrilegious usurpations, which are the greatest abuses of you
and the whole Nation.

Help to restore the dignity and Authority of the Evangelical Ministry to its
Pristine honor and reverence, to that Sanctity and Majesty which becomes the
deputation and vicegerency, the Command and Commission of your blessed God and
Savior. Let not that lie despicable and trampled under the feet of vile men,
which is a means (and the only ordinary) to instruct, to convert, to
sanctify, to confirm, to comfort, to save your and your childrens souls. Let
not that office and function be made trivial, despicable, and execrable among
men, which is holy, high and honorable in Gods esteem, as his Embassage,
venerable before the good Angels in Heaven, and terrible to the very Devils in
Hell. Let not the preaching of the Word be slighted, mocked, and laughed at, by
the unautoritative insolency and unsufficiency of unordained and impudent
praters, who will never make powerful Preachers. Let not the solemnity of
public prayers and Sacraments be made ridiculous, vain and void, by the
simplicity and barrenness, the nonsense and flatnesse, the slovenly rudeness
and confusion of those undertakers to officiate, whom no man (in Christ's name)
has duly authorized or sent according to any Primitive pattern, or Catholic
custom in this and other Churches. When the Authority of Ministers is doubted,
denied, divided, despised on all sides, it is impossible there should be any
unity or charity among either Ministers themselves, or those to whom they thus
brokenly Minister holy things; nor can there be any reverent and sacred esteem
of those things, which they so administer, with so much variety, dubiousness,
and inconformity.

Civil respect to Ministers of the Gospel will follow, where there is a
religious regard to their Ministry, as sacred and Divine, indeed as Christ's,
for so it is, or it is none upon any religious account: Therefore I forbear to
urge you with any importunities, in order to restore the Pristine honors and
dignities, the many privileges and great plenty, which the Clergy enjoyed in
England. I know those are unseasonable motions in an iron age, amidst so many
sacrilegious Spirits as envy even those pittances that yet remain of oil in
the cruses or meal in the barrels of poor Ministers, who are (generally) in a
low, depressed, squeesed and almost exhausted condition: not only public
exactions, but private sharkings of people, in many, if not most places, have
reduced heretofore convenient livings to pitiful tenuities. Ministers affect
indeed to wear longer hair than they were wont; but their condition is now so
much shorn and shaved, since the Scots rasor was first applied, that most of
them are very bare and quite bald, to the great joy of Papists and the viler
sort of licentious people, who want but one vote more to perfect their desired
Reformation; That is, to take away all tithes and glebes, rather giving them to
Moloch or Beelzebub, than to Christ, his Church and his Ministry, to whom
these are paid by many men so grudgingly, sharkingly and superciliously, that
few Scholars of any generous minds and parts will apply themselves now to be
Ministers; and many grave men, heretofore devoted to that calling, are content
to be silent, rather than to preach to ungrateful and gainsaying people; yea
some Ministers think it better to starve with honor, than to be fed with scorn,
preferring any calling before that, which must first work, then beg or contest
for its wages.

But as the poverty and tenuity of Ministers, the popular contempt of their
persons and calling, the neglect and irreverence of holy ministrations, the
intrusions and usurpations of petulant people upon their function; as all these
could not have grown upon them, had they not been scattered and divided among
themselves (for by these cracks and leakes those bitter waters have prevailed
thus far to sink and depresse them:) So the reducing of Ministers to some unity
in their judgments, to uniformity in their Ministrations, to an identity or
samenesse for their Ministerial power and ordination, also to a decent
subordination and government among themselves, these methods would be most
effectual, beyond any thing I can think of, to remedy all those great
inconveniences and mischiefs under which they now labor and groan. From
Ministers mutual separations, affrontings, reprochings, oppressings, and
despisings of one another, common people have learned the language and carriage
of clownery and contempt: For how can people see any thing worthy their civil,
much less conscientious respect and love toward any Ministers, when they see,
hear, and read, how they depreciate and scorn, envy and malign, shun and
abominate one another on all sides, each invalidating or disparaging the others
authority to officiate, and almost annulling all they do in holy duties as
Ministers? Be they never so able and fit as to their gifts, knowledge,
utterance, holy lives and good report in all things; yet still they are thought
by some side or other either to enjoy more than they merit, or to arrogate more
than is their due, or wholly to usurp that which is no way their due.

Certainly, it is not a more pious and Christian, than heroic and prudent
work, to reconcile the discrepancies and feuds that are grown among Ministers
of several forms and names, as to their ordination, or admission to their
Ministry. And, since there are on all sides men of very good abilities,
commendable lives, and useful parts in this public service, as Ministers of
the Church, it is infinite pity that Christians should be by any prejudices
deprived of the common benefit to be had by them; or by factious and frivolous
discriminations, if their Ministerial Authority be frustrated of those many
blessings which all good Christians might happily enjoy, both publicly and
privately, by a firm union and uniformity among all true Ministers, both in the
origination of their power, also in the manner of the derivation and
dispensation of it: Which harmony as (without doubt) it would highly contribute
to the honor of the reformed Religion, so it would much obstruct the advantages
which Popery gets by the scandal of Ministers discriminations and divisions in
this point. For what sober-minded man will not rather adhere to what seems
uniform, though an error, than to what seems divided, though a truth? Men will
rather turn Seekers, Quakers, and Enthusiasts, than weary themselves in
dancing after every Ministers pipe, and the new tunes they set to both their
Ministry and holy Ministration.

For my part, I should rather choose to live in a solitude as a private
Christian, or retire to any corner of the land as a Minister, than to
correspond with such societies of Preachers as are either evidently
Schismatic in their principles, or only formally and partially Associating
in their politic practices, which do but declare their spirits to be at as
great distance from their duties, both to their betters and their equals, as
ever they were. I prefer a cottage in a smooth and peaceable wilderness,
before such palaces as are built among briars and thorns. I am sorry and
ashamed to see those Ministers who are able and worthy to use the trowell for
edification, should be so eagerly employed at the swords, for mutual
destruction: Since they generally agree to preach and live Christ Crucified,
since they do for the maine correspond in doctrinalls of faith and morality,
yea in holy Mysteries and Ministrations; what a misery is it they should not
all endure the same imposition of hands, or the same holy and Catholic
ordination? yea what pity is it, they should not all dare to say publicly and
Ministerially the same Creed, the Lords prayer and the ten Commandments; to
all which I suppose they all are ready privately to say Amen? How sad a
prospect is it, to see those men who profess such zeal for Church Government
and good Discipline, to be so little governed or correspondent in any wise
communion and discreet subordination among themselves? And all this while every
plausible preacher is ambitious rather to ordain and govern others after his
own fancy, than to be ordained and governed as a Minister after the
Apostolical pattern, and that one ancient form which was universally owned
and uniformly used in Christ's Church, both for the ordination and subordination
of Ministers.

CHAP. IX.
IN order therefore to invite all able, A scrutiny of what is good or bad in
all parties.
Orthodox and honest Ministers to some Christian correspondency and fraternall
accord, it will not be amiss for me to present both to your equanimous
wisdom, (O worthy Gentlemen) and to your piety, what I humbly conceive the
best Medium to be used in so great and good a work, which must be tenderly and
impartially carried on by a serious discovery and discerning, First, what is
really good, useful, and commendable in any party, that this may be allowed
and preserved, agreed to and embraced by all; Secondly, what either is or seems
defective or superfluous, evil or inconvenient, scandalous or dangerous on any
side, that this may be either pared off and removed, since it may be well
spared, or else in reason and Religion, in piety and charity, so qualified and
moderated, as may comply with what is truly good and useful for the public
on all sides.

First then to begin with Episcopacy, not as it enjoyes or loses the benefits
of secular favor in estate, honor, or jurisdiction, (which are not essential
to it, any more than cloths are to the man) but as it appears in its
Apostolic primacy of Order, in its Catholic center of Unity, in its chief
power for Ordination and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; which it ever enjoyed
among good Christians, though it were never so poor and abased by civil
powers, as it was in Primitive times of persecution for 300. years.

The real good of true Episcopacy (which undoubtedly has the clearest, 1. The
best and worst of Episcopacy.
best and most ancient title to ordination and Church Government, according to
the custom and prescription of all Ages for 1500. years) is Decency, Order,
Unity, Authority, Stability, Paternall Presidency, Grave Government, with
subordination of younger to the elder, and inferiors to superiors, agreeable
to the rules of right reason, and the measures of the best polities, military,
civil and religious. Here are the aptest remedies and conservatives against
Schisms, the fittest mediums for Catholic Councils, for correspondencies,
conventions and Communion of Churches, not in popular rabbles and heady
multitudes, but in their chief Presidents and representatives. In this is best
kept up, as an Uniformity of particular Churches, so a Catholic Conformity to
the Church universal, when Primitive, purest and most persecuted, which
without any peradventure did follow the Apostolic prescription and pattern in
all things of so universal use and reception.

Upon the head of Episcopacy, as upon the hill of Hermon, has the dew of
heaven, the blessings of God, as in temporal enjoyments, so in all spiritual
gifts and graces, most plentifully fallen, and from that to all the lower valleys
and inferior parts of the Church. To this it is that all the most learned,
moderate and wise men in all the Christian world, of what ever party or side
they are in other things, whether Latin or Greek, Lutheran or Calvinian,
Protestant or Papist, all agree in this, that Episcopacy is the ancientest and
aptest, the wisest and noblest, the only Apostolic and Catholic,
consequently the best and compleatest of Governments in the Church; containing
in its right constitution and use all the pretended excellencies of all other
Governments, and something more than any of them, as the crown and perfection
of all.

The evils, defects and dangers incident to Episcopacy, (and rising not from
the function or employment, but from the persons of Bishops,) are pride,
ambition, secular height and idle pomp, a supercilious despiciency, and Lordly
tyrannizing over other Ministers, and the flocks of Christ under their
inspection; arrogating a power to do all things imperiously, arbitrarily and
alone, without any due regard either to that charitable satisfaction which was
anciently given to Christian people, or to that fraternall counsel and
concurrence, which might and ought in reason to be had from learned and grave
Presbyters, or such Consistoryes of choice Ministers, who possibly may for
wisdom, piety and ability, be equal to the Bishop, however they are inferior
in order and authority.

As the complete good of presidentiall and paternall Episcopacy deserves above
all other forms to be esteemed, desired and used in the Church; so it may
easily and happily be enjoyed, if the personal faults and failings of Bishops
be prevented and avoided, which is no hard matter where Bishops are chosen (as
anciently they were) by the suffrages of the Presbyters or Ministers of the
Diocese either personally present, or, to avoid noise and tumult incident to
many, by their proxyes and representees chosen and sent from their several
distributions. The Bishop thus chosen is easily kept within bounds of
moderation, if he do nothing of public concern validly and conclusively
without the presence, counsel and concurrence of his appointed Presbyters;
being further responsible for any misgovernment, to such conventions of the
Clergy as are meet to be his judges, and are by the Laws appointed so to be.
Certainly these limits, supports and ornaments of Episcopacy, would easily
restore it to and keep it in the compass of its Primitive beauty, honor, and
usefulness to the Church.

2. Trial of Presbytery.
The good of Presbytery (especially in conjunction with Episcopacy) is grave and
impartial counsel, serious discussion and well-advised deliberation, arising
from many learned and Godly men, which is as the joint and concurrent
assistance of all the Clergy; whose public suffrages may carry all things
Ecclesiastic as with less partiality, so with more authority, most
satisfactorily to Ministers and people too, yea and with less odium or envy
upon any one man as Bishop or President, in cases that seem less popular, or
in censures that are more heavy.

Beyond all this some men cry up Presbytery in its Aristocratick influence, as
the great Choak-peare of Antichrist; as the best receipt in the world to make
the Pope burst in pieces, like the pitch and hair which Daniel mixed to split
Bell and Dagon: This, this they say is the strongest sense against all tyranny,
usurpation and ambition in Churchmen, the great conservative not of an
absolute parity, but of those ancient privileges which are due to all
Ministers; also of those liberties and indulgences which are the peoples
darling, while they see all Church Matters managed not by private and partial
monopolies, but by public and general complacencies of all sober and good
men, at least the major part of them.

The evils of Presbytery in a parity or equality are, emulation, faction,
division among Ministers; the younger sort naturally mutinying against the
elder, and the graver sort thinking themselves more wise and worthy than the
younger. Hence grudgs and coldnesses, cavils and contradictions, sidings and
divisions; Hence adherings to several heads and patrons of factions, in
different opinions or practices. Then follow popular adherencies, and such
declamatory endeavors as may most draw people to several Masters: all which
are sufficiently evidently the experiences of Franckfort of old, of Roterdam in
later years, also of new and old England; besides the intolerable petulancies
and troubles by Masterly Presbyters in Scotland for many years in King James
his minority, and King Charles his too. All these have loudly proclaimed that
malapertnesse, rudeness, insolency, effrontery, factions, confusions, are the
genuine fruits of an un-sub- Presbytery, as indeed of all Government which is
made up with parity or equality, which is rather a lump or mass of flesh, like
monstrous and abortive births, than any comely polity or symmetry befitting an
organized body, which must have some prime part for the honor, order and
regulation of the whole, which must needs be loose, diffused and confused, if
it be not cemented, centred and fixed (yea ruled and awed) with some eminent
part and principal power, which having virtue from the whole, gives also life,
vigor, firmation and Majesty, as to the whole body, so to the Government and
polity, what ever it be, civil or Ecclesiastic; being as the Hoopes or Curbes
of vessels, which keep all the pipe-staves together.

The want of which authoritative order, decorum and majesty in Government, is
prone to give such temptations to young and hotheaded Ministers, (besides
giddy and surly people, moving them to ambitious novelties, to popular and
preposterous practices) that men of parts cannot easily resist them. Besides,
the generality of people, either of meaner or better quality (especially in
England) will never have such reverence to petty Presbyters in a levelled
parity, as they will have when they see Ministers united, guided, honored and
animated by a person of that Gravity, Age, Worth and Eminency, that not only
the best Ministers own him as a Father, but the best Gentlemen, yea Noblemen,
will reverence him as a man of excellent Learning, Piety and Wisdom; whose
censure or sentence no man of modesty or conscience can despise, when they are
managed with so much reason and Religion, with such order and honor, with such
gravity and integrity, as become such Bishops and such Presbyters, happily
united in a comely subordination.

3. The Trial of Independency.
The good that Independency pretends to hold forth to the people of God, or
Christ's little flock, in its several parts and lesser parcels, is a more near
union and endeared love of each other, a closer care and watching over each
others souls, more frequent and familiar intercourses between Pastor and
people, exercising of their own, exciting and discovering of their brethrens
gifts and sisters graces, nearer Communion with each other, after the fashion
of bodies, though small, yet so complete and confined to themselves, that they
are neither subject nor responsible to any but their own chosen members,
officers and pastor; whose Tribunitian, not imperatorian, power is immediately
founded (as they say) in the very plebs or herd of people, as derived
immediately from Christ, and so completely endued with all Church Power or
spiritual authority, that they are to Try, Elect, Ordain, Censure, Rebuke,
Depose, Excommunicate and give over to Satan any part of their body. They
further profess an Art or Receipt they have above all others to keep all
ordinances of Christ most entire and pure from all humane mixtures and
inventions, most set off and adorned with that Simplicity, Sincerity, Fervency,
Charity and Sanctity which becomes the Gospel; all which are most eminently
manifested in the precincts of their little bodies, their Independent or
Congregationall Churches, far beyond what ever either Episcopacy or
Presbytery, severally or socially, could attain unto. These are the gloryings
of Independency.

The evils laid to the charge of Independency are, first, novelty and
inconformity to all pious antiquity. A way untaught, untryed, unthought of by
any Christians that owned themselves as parts of the Church Catholic, and
related to its grand community or sacred society. It meanly and miserably
confines the Majesty of Ecclesiastical power, and shrinks its authority; it
draws the Churches polity and communion to so very narrow and small a
compass, that Independency seems to act rather by distorted and convulsive
motions, than by that equable harmony of parts which attends all orderly bodies
in their concurrent motions. Farther, it exposes particular Churches or
congregations, together with the honor and safety of Religion and all Christian
States, to petty parties and fractions, to popular, nay plebeian humors: It
abaseth the honor of the Evangelicall Ministry, weakening the power, and
diminishing the dignity of all Christian societies, mincing and destroying
those ancient Grand and Goodly combinations, which were Apostolical and
Primitive, in the respective Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, the 7. Churches of
Asia, and many others, cutting them into small chips and shreds. It places the
sole and absolute power of the keys, for Doctrine and Discipline, there where
no wise man, much less the wise Redeemer of his Church, would place them, even
among the vulgar, where are seldom found any fit subjects capable to
understand, much less to manage and use them. That such are the common sort
and major part of all people, no wise man is ignorant: though they may be
plainly and simply good, yet seldom are they so prudent, so knowing, so
composed, or of such credit and reputation, as is fit for any Government either
in Church or State to be committed to them, as the grand Masters and absolute
Dictators; which they seem to be in the Independent model, which either has
so many heads that it has no feet, or so many feet that it has no head.

Furthermore, Independency seems like the flats and shallowes of ponds and
rivers, the proper beds for all Faction and Schism to spawne upon; the
seminary that breeds, and noursery that feeds all the vermin of Religion;
while every silly soul, that can but get two or three to conspire with his
folly, and flatter his new fancy, may without fear or wit make a Minister,
begin a party, and beget a Church, built and distinguished by some new
character of opinion or practice, as its badg or sign-post.

Besides this, Independency is indicted by many sober men as a felon or
plagiary, a sacrilegious robber of other Churches, one that steals away
Children from their Spiritual fathers, sheep from their flocks and shepherds,
seducing servants from their Masters, and children from their parents, true
Religion, worship and devotion, yea from all Christian Communion with them;
entising them first to straggle, then to separate, then to starve rather than
return to the good pasture and fold whence they have once wandered.

Lastly, as it affects an equal and yet enormous power in every part of the
whole body; so it exercises this authority with such confusion and passion,
with so much Childishness and petulancy, that there is little or nothing of
due subordination, fear, reverence and submission, as to any Divine Authority,
as of Conscience of or for Christ's sake; but every one takes offense when he
lists, grows froward and insolent, divides, and so destroys (as much as in
him lies, and at as easy a rate as one does crush a worm) those petty bodies
and puny Churches, which are indeed but Infants, Embryo's and Pygmies, compared
to that stature and strength, that procerity and puissance, which of old was
preserved, and ever ought to be in the Church of Christ, when it has its peace
and growth; not shred into poor patches and pitiful parcels, but united,
maintained and managed in conspicuous combinations, in ample and august
proportions; in which may well be contained many thousands of Christian people,
some hundreds of worthy Presbyters and Deacons, under some one or more
venerable Bishops, in so holy, so happy, and so handsome a subordination or
dependency as was of old, that whatever was done by the Authority of those that
ruled, or the Humility of those that obeyed, all was done with Charity and
Unanimity, while excellent Bishops knew how to keep the true temper of
Christian Government, and both Presbyters and people concurred with them in
filial obedience and fraternall love.

CHAP. X.
The reconciling of the real interests of Episcopacy, Presbytery and
Independency.
THus we see every party or side, however it justify or magnify it self, yet
it falls under either the blame or jealousy of its rivals, as defective or
excessive; yet not so much in the fundamentals of Religion, or main points,
either for Doctrine, Worship, Duty, or Manners, as chiefly in matters of
Ordination, Discipline, and Government: Nor is the difference here so broad,
that any side denies them as necessary both in the parts and whole, in greater
and lesser proportions, for the Church of Christ; but the real dispute is, who
shall manage and execute them, in whom the chief power and Authority shall
reside, whether eminently in Bishops, or solely in Presbyters, or supremely in
the people, as the Alpha and Omega, the first recipient and the last result of
Church Power.

All sides (except Fanatics, Seekers, and Enthusiasts) seem to agree, as in
the Canon of the Scripture, so in the soundness of the faith, in the sanctity
of divine mysteries, in the celebration of them by such as are some way
ordained and authorized for that holy service; also in the participation of
them by such only as are in the judgment of Charity worthy or meet to be
partakers of them. All agree in the main Christian graces, virtues, and morals
required in a good Christians practice; yet still each party is suspected and
reproched by others: the brisk Independent boasts of the Liberty, simplicity,
and purity of his way, yet is blamed for Novelty, Subtilty, Vulgarity and
Anarchy; the rigid Presbyterian glories in his Aristocratick Parity and
levelling community, which makes every petty Presbyter a Pope and a Prince,
though he disdain to be a Priest, yet is taxed for petulancy, popularity,
arrogance and novelty, casting off that Catholic and ancient order, which God
and Nature, Reason and Religion, all civil and military policy, both require
and observe among all societies.

Episcopacy justly challenges the advantages, right and honor of Apostolic
and Primitive Antiquity, of universality and unity, beyond any pretenders; yet
is this condemned by some for undue incrochments and oppressions upon both
Ministers and peoples ingenuous Liberty, and Christian privilege, by a kind of
secular height and arbitrary sovereignty, to which many Bishops in after-ages
have been betrayed, as by their own pride and ambition, so by the indulgence of
times, the munificence of Christian Princes, and sometimes by the flatteries of
people.

Take away the popular principle of the first, which prostrates Government to
the vulgar; Take away the levelling ambition of the second, which degrades
Government to a very preposterous and unproportionate parity; Take away the
monopoly of the third, which seems to ingrosse to one man more than is meet for
the whole: each of them will be sufficiently purged (as I conceive) of what is
most dangerous or noxious in them, for which they are most jealous of, and
divided from each other. Restore to people their Liberty in some such way of
choosing, or at least approving their Ministers, and assenting to
Church Censures, as may become them in reason and conscience; restore to
Presbyters their privileges in such public counsel and concurrence with their
Bishops as may become them; lastly, restore to Bishops that Primitive
precedence and Catholic presidency, which they ever had among and above
Presbyters, both for that chief Authority or Eminency which they ever had in
ordaining of Presbyters and Deacons, also in exercising such Ecclesiastical
Discipline and Censures, that nothing be done without them: I see no cause why
any sober Ministers and wise men should be unsatisfied, nor why they should
longer stand at such distances and defiances; as if the Liberties of Christian
people, the Privileges of Christian Presbyters, and the Dignity of Christian
Bishops were wholly inconsistent; whereas they are easily reconciled, and, as a
threefold cord, may be so handsomely twisted together, that none should have
cause to complain or be jealous, all should have cause to joy in and enjoy
each other: Bishops should deserve their eminency with the assistance, counsel
and respect of their Presbyters; Bishops and Presbyters might enjoy the love,
reverence and submission of Christian people; both people and Presbyters might
be blessed with the orderly direction and fatherly protection of the Bishops;
all should have the blessings of that sweet subordination, harmony and unity
which best becomes the Church of Jesus Christ, both in the Governors and
Governed, in Ministers and People; wherein we see the most Antiepiscopall
Presbyters and refractory people cannot but be so sensible, by their own
sufferings, of the want of some principle of order, some band of unity, and
some ground of due Authority among them, that they are forced to make use of
some Moderator, Chaire-man or Prolocutor, as a kind of temporary Pilot, and
arbitrary Bishop; there being no regular moving of popular bodies in Church or
State without such an head or President (as the rudder of a ship,) whose order
as it is useful, so then most when it is fixed and confirmed with a valid
power and venerable authority, which are the maine wheels of all Government.

As for the Sacramental scrutinies and other holy severities to be used in any
part of Christian Discipline, with charity and discretion; Of Sacramental
scrutinies to be used.
however the Presbyterian and Independent preachers have very much sought in
this point to captate popular applause, and exalt themselves above measure, as
if they exacted far greater rigors of preparatory sufficiency and sanctity,
than the Episcopal Clergy ever did or do either require or practice;

Yet is this but either a vapor, or a fallacy, or a calumny, in respect of the
constant judgment and general practice of the best of those that were and are
of the Episcopal judgment, and hold Communion with the Church of England. For
these do (according to the pious and prudent appointment of the Church of
England,) not only profess, but strictly injoyne, and seriously exact of
others, as they practice themselves; First, competency of sound knowledge in
the fundamentals of Religion, as to faith and obedience to God and man; which
may be saving, though it be but plain, and no less sanctifying and sincere,
though it have less of that subtilty, curiosity and sublimity, which some
preachers pretend to, and exact of their Seraphick Disciples, who must seem to
fly before they can well go: Secondly, the Episcopal Clergy require pure
hearts, good consciences, faith unfeigned, charity without dissimulation, an
holy and orderly profession, and in sum, an unblamable life becoming the
Gospel.

In cases of gross ignorance and real scandal, they abhor and avoid, as
much as any, to admit men ( profana facilitate) with a profane easiness, Cypr
ep. 10. and 26. Prosana sacilitate Sanctum Christi corpus prosanare.
as St. Cyprian speaks, to the profaning of the Lords body and Blood. They do
not knowingly and willingly cast pearls before swine, or holy things to dogs,
as the same Father speaks. No, the learned and Godly Episcopal Ministers are
and ever have been as zealously intent as any, to preach the Gospel plainly,
powerfully, to all; to Catechize and instruct diligently the younger sort; to
examine carefully the first candidates and expectants, before they are entered
into the list or Catalogue of Communicants, or admitted to the Lords Supper,
being self-examiners as to their faith, repentance, charity, sincerity; they
exhort, admonish, comfort, reprove, yea suspend and refuse some, according to
that power which their place and duty requires of them. Not that they love or
affect to be either arbitrary, sole or supreme in their censures and
suspensions or excommunications, well knowing both their own passionate
frailties, and other men's touchy impatiencies; and therefore they desire and
are glad to be guided and governed by others, as under authority, both to be
asserted by, and responsible in all things to them as their lawful superiors,
to whom appeals properly may and ought in reason to be made either by
themselves, or any of the people, in cases of Ecclesiastic injuries by
excesses or defects.

As for special grace and effectual inward conversion, which some men now so
much urge as the only mark of their Members and Disciples, the Episcopal
Ministers do as earnestly pray for it, and zealously labor to effect it (as
workers together with God) in peoples hearts, as any the most specious
Presbyterians or Independents. They are heartily glad to find any signs or
shows of grace, much more any real fruits and effects of Gods Spirit in
Christians lives and deeds, as the most pregnant tokens of true grace, and the
best grounds of the judgment of Charity: but they do not pretend to any spirit
or gift of infallibly discerning grace in other men's hearts; nor do they affect
either to make or to glory in impossible scrutinies into men's consciences; nor
do they Pharisaically and pragmatically exercise Magisteriall censures, either
alone or with others, in any consistory, conventicle or congregation of Elders,
or Priests or People, as to those inscrutable points of true grace, or of the
Spirit of God in men's hearts, which is the secret of the Lord, conceiving that
the visible polity and outward communion of the Church of Christ do not depend
upon any such characters or discriminations of grace, (which are inward and
invisible, known to none but Gods and a man's own spirit) but upon such a
confession with the mouth, 1 Cor. 2.10. 1 John 4.2, 13. Romans 10. 9, 10.
and profession in the outward conversation, as are both discernable by man's
judgment of charity, and approvable both in reason and Religion, as sufficient
grounds for Church Communion, according to the example of Christ toward Judas,
and of the Apostles toward Simon Magus, both which were admitted to visible
Church Fellowship, to the Lords Supper and to Baptism, not for the true grace
they had, but for the outward confession and profession they made to believe in
Jesus Christ and to embrace the Gospel.

Whereas the inward grace is as easily pretended by specious Hypocrites, as it
is believed by credulous Christians, Acts 8.13.
when they list to comply with and flatter one another in the way of soft and
formal expressions, or of false and affected Language; which may easily have
God and Christ, grace and Spirit on men's tongues, when these are far from their
hearts.

Da populo phaleras, lay aside the late fine words and flourishes used by some
Presbyterians and Independents, who would seem more precise and devout than all
other preachers; come to solid truths, to holy lives, to good works, to
self-denying and mortifications of potent lusts, as the best discoveries of
gracious hearts; God forbid any of them should in these grand and costly
realities, (whatever cheap formalities or phrases others affect) go beyond the
practice and experience of worthy Episcopal Divines, and other Christians of
their adherency and communion, who hardly believe that these very professors of
such new modes of Religion, these exactors of new rigid experiments, as to
inward grace, as if it were to be tried by man's day or Tribunal, do (in
earnest) find themselves much improved in any Spiritual gifts, graces or
comforts, since they peremptorily forsook the Communion of the Church of
England. In opposition to which they have had either no Sacraments for these
twice 7. years, or only after such a new way of partial discriminations, as
looks very like uncharitable schism, censorious and imperious faction.

Divines of the Episcopal persuasion do indeed modesty and humbly content
themselves with the Scripture discoveries and Primitive characters of
Saintship, with what then first entitled Christians to a Christain visible
communion or Church Fellowship as Saints in profession. They count it no shame
to be sometimes charitably deceived as to true grace in others, but a great sin
and shame to be uncharitably censorious, flatteringly confident of some, and
needlessly severe to others. They see that the pretenders to be so great
critics in this new way of trying either Ministers or Church Members, are
(many times) grossly and childishly abused by some men's crafty insinuations and
pretensions; otherwhile they are unchristianly rigid, and incredulously severe
against other men's sober professions and unblamable lives. They well know that
man's eye can look no further than the outward appearance, the polished case of
men's confessions and conversations, 1 Samuel 6.7.
God only looks into the Cabinet of men's hearts and consciences. They judge it
a great pride and popular arrogance in such pitiful men, (who were and are
but very obscure Masters in Israel,) to set up this new court or inquisition of
((...)) Heart-discoverie, which is a very High Commission indeed, yea a very
high presumption, when poor men have no such Power, Authority or Commission
given them from God, no precept or pattern in Scripture; where we know that the
Master of the harvest (the blessed God) tolerates, as to man's Discipline, those
to grow in the same field of his visible Church in this world, who differ as
much in point of true grace, as wheat and tares do in their nature and worth.
So that as the curiosity and confidence of Episcopal Divines is far less than
that of those other preachers, so their candor, modesty and charity is much
more becoming wise, grave and sober Ministers; whose care must be humbly to do
that work which God has required of them, and to leave his own operations,
discoveries and judgments to his all-seeing eye and Almighty power, as St.
Facies singuloru^ videmus, corda sc^utari non possumus; d^ his judicat
occuliotum scrutator, c^ to venturus, and de arcanis cordis jud catu^us. Cyp.
ep 53.
Cyprian expresses the sense and practice of Christian Bishops and Presbyters
in his time, as to Church-scrutiny and examination.

The strictness of worthy Episcopal Divines is such in things that are
rational, grave, wise, and truly religious, that no man exceeds their desires,
designs, endeavors and principles, in soundness and diligence of preaching,
in the warmth and discretion of praying, in the sanctity and solemnity of
celebrating Christian mysteries, in the serious dispensation of Ministerial
power, and the useful execution of Church Censures or Discipline, even to
fasting, prayers, tears, penitential mortifications in themselves, and due
restitutions to others in cases of injury, so for reconciliation and some
special works of bounty and charity, which may testify a self-revenge, and
most satisfaction to others.

They are ambitious to excel in nothing more than in well-doing, and patient
suffering, in all the ways and offices of Piety, Humility, Obedience, Peace
and Charity; yea such is their moderation, concession, and recession from their
wonted practice and indulged privileges or power by man's law, that they not
only approve, but desire the joint counsel and concurrence of grave and
worthy Presbyters in all things of Ecclesiastic Ministry and public
concernment; yea they allow Christian people their sober Liberty, as of
presence and conscience, so of objection and approbation, in all proceedings
where they are interessed; that they may either fairly testify their full
satisfaction, or else produce the grounds of their dissatisfaction, in all
things that concern their advantages in Religion. All which the glorious
Primate of Armagh testifies in his late printed Treatise of reconciling
Episcopal and Synodicall power in the Church Government.

If the earnest pleaders for Presbytery, and the sticklers for Independency,
which are the professed extirpators of Episcopacy, had the same equanimity and
calmnesse in them as the moderate Episcopal men have, I do not see what could
hinder them from giving the right hand of fellowship to each other: certainly
it cannot be the real concernments of Christ's glory, and the good of Christian
souls, but particular factions, oblique biasses, and some partial popular
respects, which continue such mis-understandings, distances and animosities
between the Episcopal Divines, the Presbyterian Preachers, and the Independent
Teachers; who thus severed from each other lose all the great advantages and
blessings which they and the whole Church might enjoy, if they could wisely,
humbly and meekly close in one subordination and harmonious order, as did all
Christian Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons and People in Primitive times; of which
St. Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, St. Ambrose, St. Austin, St.
Jerome, with many other writers, give us a thousand clear instances and happy
experiences.

The inordinate heates of the chief patrons and ringleaders, as to any of
these new ways and parties, would soon allay and cool, if their petty
policies, secular interests, self-seekings and popular complacencies were
wholly laid aside; if these wedges were once pulled out of men's hearts, their
hands would soon close together: Momentary advantages would soon give way and
vanish, if all Ministers were possessed with that great and good Spirit, which
directs all believers to things that are eternal, chiefly looking at Gods
glory, Christ's honor, the Churches peace, and the salvation of all men's souls.
Petty spirits, opinions and projects are the pests of the Church and of
Christian Religion; these betray it to the enemies of it, such as seek to abase
it, to divide it, and to destroy it.

CHAP. XI.
True Episcopacy stated and represented to its Antagonists.
And here, because I suspect and see that the design of the new Associating
parties seems chiefly to unite Presbyterian and Independent principles and
interests together, that Presbyters and people (as Teaching and Ruling Elders)
might fully possess themselves of all Church Power, (though to their own
confusion and this Churches desolation) excluding all Ministers of Episcopal
principles; pleas and persuasions, further than they list humbly to submit to
truckle under and comply with those Ministers who resolve to ordain, to censure
and suspend, to excommunicate and anathematize, to dictate and regulate all
things in Religion, without owning any authority in, or making any ingenuous
offer or address to, the venerable Bishops yet surviving in Engl. or to those
Divines who are still conform to the Church of England; but all the claims and
interests of Episcopacy must be either smothered, or slubbered over, or
shuffled into the meteor of a moderator, and the phantasme of a Prolocutor; as
if there never had been, nor yet were, any thing considerable either in the
persons of these Bishops and Ministers, or in those many strong pleas and
clear allegations of Scripture-pattern, and divine prescription of Apostolic
practice and imjunction, of Catholic imitation and persuasion, in all the
consent of ancient Councils, Fathers and Historians, yea in the judgment of all
the best Christians, Presbyters, and people of old, nay nor in the confessions,
votes and desires of the most learned and pious Reformers both at home and
abroad, that either enjoy Episcopacy, or feel their want of it, and heartily
wish for it; but all must be slighted as childish or popish, as obsolete or
ridiculous, which is brought and believed by so many excellent persons, in
behalf of Episcopal eminency and authority:

Yea, as if all the losses, sorrows and sufferings of so many pious, learned,
reverend and most excellent Bishops in England, (together with the miseryes of
many orderly and worthy Clergy men that were subject to them and the laws) were
so just, that they were never to be pitied, nor any way relieved; as if all
the insolences of many Presbyters, and the petulancies of many people, were
highly to be commended, as great helps and furtherances to a new Reformation of
Religion; as if there were nothing of uncharitableness, oppression, revenge,
sacriledg and exorbitancy, so much as to be thought on or repented by any one
of them, no less than complained of by their Episcopal brethren, (who are
become their enemies because they have told them the truth, and charge them
with inconstancy, immoderation, popularity, schism, faction, sedition and the
like;) so stiff and unrelenting are some Antiepiscopall men to this day, who
after all these representations of truth wipe their mouths, and harden their
hearts, as if there were no error, evil or transport in their hands or hearts,
always aggravating by a vile and vulgar oratory the rigors and tyrannies of
some Bishops, as if all were to be blamed, none to be commended; and highly
magnifying the zeal themselves have for a through Reformation, that is, that
they might freely and fully gratify their own and peoples ambitions, by
setting Episcopacy and all Bishops quite beside the saddle, on purpose to make
way for themselves, who are for the most part as fit to govern Churches alone
as apes are to build houses.

I crave leave in order to promote a fair and firm accommodation, (with all
ingenuous freedom and candor) to make some more particular application of my
desire and designs, to those Ministers of the Presbyterian and Independent
ways, who have opposed their faces, sharpened their tongues or pens, and
hardened their hearts most against all Episcopacy, even in the most innocent,
useful, regular and moderate constitution of it.

I mean that Primitive order and paternall residency which was universally
acknowledged to be eminently in one President, as Bishop or chief Pastor over
many Presbyters in his Diocese, after the pattern of the 12. Apostles, who were
by Christ's appointment above the 70. and so their declared successors, as
Timothy, Titus, Archippus, and those others who are called the Angels of the 7.
Asian Churches, with many others to whom they derived, not only their example
and practical constitution, but their Authority and Power Ecclesiastical as is
evident by the Canons and Rules set forth, not only in ancient Councils, but
in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, for the settling and managing of
Church Order, Discipline and Government, in such a way as clearly gives not to
any consistory, or company of Presbyters and people, but to one man a Paramount
Authority, as Bishop or Superior, both in Ordination and Jurisdiction above
others as his inferiors, and so subordinate to his spiritual power so far as
to reprove, examine, censure, reject, etc.

All which being to me immovable and immutable foundations for the
establishing of Episcopal presidency (as the only succession of that ordinary
Apostolic power and authority which is necessary to be always in the Church
of Christ) they do make me daily by these considerations more restive and less
compliant to any new ways or Associatings than perhaps otherwise I should be,
both by the sociablenesse of my temper, and my earnest desire for another way
of happy union among Ministers of worth and moderation.

This uncorrespondency, to which I am upon those grounds compelled, is with the
greater regret to me, because I know the learning, the industry, the zeal, the
piety, the ingenuity, the potency of some of those (my dissenting brethren) in
their preaching, writing, praying and living. I am charitably persuaded of many
of their sincerity, in aiming at Gods Glory, and at the purity of holy
Ministrations. I do not see wherein many of them differ from the best
Episcopal Divines, ancient or modern, as to any main matter of Religion in
doctrine or duty. Nor can I find any reason yet alleged by any of them,
sufficient to justify that pertinacious distance and defiance which (of later
years only) they have taken up against Episcopacy, merely upon the account of
jealousy and impatiency to choose and admit a learned, grave and worthy
Bishop, as a fixed Father or constant Governor and Grave Moderator,
authoritatively to preside among them in their several grand distributions or
Dioceses, after that order and eminency which were most comely for them, and
most unquestionable, as to the fixing and completing of Church Order and
Government, to all sober Christians satisfaction.

I will not tax or suspect the soberest of my Presbyterian or Independent
brethren of such pride and arrogance, as can endure no superior or chief among
them; I rather conceive it was a Sympathethick impulse at first from those
Scottish motions and pretentions, which swerved them not only from the former
good constitution of the Church of England, to which they heretofore very
orderly and happily submitted, but also from their conformity to the Catholic
Church in that point, to which I believe their judgment heretofore, ahd
inclination now, may incline and lead them, as apparently best for their
public and private interests. Some are prone to suspect, that the best of them
did not heretofore submit so humbly and heartily to their Lawful Superiors
and Governors in the Church, as in duty and conscience, by the laws of God
and man they ought to have done others challenge them for want as of piety and
honesty, so of Christian charity, yea and of common humanity or compas^ion; for
their forwardness and fierceness to undo all Bishops and all dignified
Clergymen* at least for their ready consent to their utter ruin, holding the
garments of those that stoned them to death; never so much as praying heartily
for them while they were in power, nor yet pitying them in their miscarriages
or calamities, no nor so far interceding for or listening to any just
moderation, which was often proposed and offered, as might have been not more
happy for the Bishops, than for themselves as Presbyters, yea for this whole
Church and all Christian people in England.

I am willing to hope that many Ministers mutations began with good affections,
and were carried on at first with principles of sincerity and zeal, though not
with that knowledge, meekness and wisdom which was requisite. But to many of
them that are now the most haughty, stiff and obstina^e against all
accommodating with Episcopacy, I cannot but still appeal, whether they do not
in their consiences find that either at first or afterward, some secular
advantages and private hopes did not a little warp and sway their inclinations
to novelties; whether they felt not the secret, but dissembled strokes of
discontent, anger, envy, revenge, popularity, ambition, feigned jealousies,
inordinate affectations of liberty, exciting and animating them to the utter
extirpation of Episcopacy; whether they did not by a self-conceit generally
imagine themselves, not only jointly but severally, as fit and able to govern
the Church in the whole or in parcels, as any, yea all the Bishops in England;
whether any of them do believe the case of Episcopacy to have ever been fully
heard, freely discussed, and impartially stated, by the peaceable wisdom and
piety of this nation; whether many of these Ministers, (as Politicians and
Statesmen) did not rather comply with the stream and vogue of times running
fiercely against Episcopacy, than with their own clear convictions in reason,
law, scripture, antiquity, conscience; whether they kept that equanimity and
moderation in all things of this nature, Phil. 4.5.
which became wise and good men of an Evangelicall Spirit and temper, or were
not biassed, yea transported by something that was popular and sinister;
whether they do not think that the violence and precipitancy of some of their
examples, was beyond all solid arguments to drive many well-meaning Ministers
and People to such heady and hot petitionings against Episcopacy, and to such
pitiless Antipathies against all the most excellent Bishops, which were then,
and still are England. Last of all, I appeal to all sober Ministers, whether
they do not think that Episcopacy, as now it is stripped and divested of all
secular greatness, and reduced to Primitive poverty, might be as safely
restored, as any of their crude and new Associations in their several stations
and formations, with their mutable moderators and temporary Presidents, either
in greater or lesser Circles, which are but the thin parings, small shreds, and
weaker shivers of Episcopacy: whether they do not in their consciences think
that some righteous and just compensation ought to be done to good Bishops, and
to the case of true Episcopacy, which have suffered so hard measure a long time
now in England; that so we might not in this nation (beyond any place in the
Christian world) cast eternal and indeleble reproaches* not only upon this
Church, since its first plantation, but upon the Catholic Church of Christ in
all ages and places, as if wilfully (for ignorantly they could not) they had
from the beginning swerved from the Apostles prescript and example, in the
Order and Government, Discipline and Authority which was to be in the Church of
Christ.

I will not suspect any honest-hearted or worthy Minister of having been so
base and sacrilegious in his Spirit, as therefore to cry down Episcopacy root
and branch, new and old, good and bad, out of secret hopes of filthy lucre and
secular glory, expecting some benefit by plundring the personal estates of
Bishops, or by sequestring the revenues of their Churches, or gaging to buy at
last some good peniworths of them. These temptations were so black and base, so
sordid and Plutonian, that they may not be suspected of any Ministers or other
men, but those whose notorious actions have put them beyond all suspicion.

Presuming therefore in charity, that those precipitant alterations in
Church Government, which have produced so sad consequences and calamities in
this Church, were from principles of honesty and purposes of integrity in the
best Ministers on all sides at first; and finding now that the itch of former
novelties is past, and the pleasure of Ministers scratching one another is now
very little, because of the rawnesse and soreness of all their common
conditions, besides the distractions and confusions of ordinary people; and
foreseeing that this painful posture is not only very grievous to all honest
Protestants, but dangerous to this Church and Nation, if they be not speedily
healed; Give me further leave to ask of the greatest Zelots and sticklers
against all Episcopacy, and the admirers of either Presbytery or Independency,
whether (after they reflect upon the rough means used, and the sad events
which have followed the design of extirpating Episcopacy, and introducing any
other ways) they do still believe, was pretended, that either the God of
order, or the Savior of his Church, who is the Bishop of our souls, and the
exemplary Institutor of Episcopal eminency in his chief Apostles, for Power
and Authority over all parts of his Church, (who accordingly transmitted their
ordinary power and superintendency to others, as Bishops, or successive or
minor Apostles in all Churches,) whether (I say) they do in earnest believe
that God, or Christ, or the Apostles, ever were or are such enemies to all
Episcopal order and presidentiall eminency as has been vulgarly clamored and
passionately pretended; so that now after 1600. years prescription and
succession of Episcopacy in all Churches, God is not to be pleased unless
Episcopacy be extirpated, and Presbytery or Independency, as ways of parity
and popularity, be brought in. Can they sufficiently wonder at the patience of
God and our Savior Christ, that for 1500. years bare with Episcopacy, yea
continued it in the peaceable possession of Church Government, as to the
Primacy and priority of it, both in Order and Authority, without any notable
check from any Martyr or holy man. It Is strange that Aarons Rod should never bud
before, nor Presbytery challenge its Divine right in all that time, nor Christ
ever enjoy the freedom of his Kingdom and Scepter, till these last and worst
times.

Do they in earnest think that no Scripture, no word of God, old or new, no
precepts and paternes of the Apostles, no Primitive practice, no true
testimonies of Fathers, Councils and credible historians do any way favor a
right Episcopacy, further than they were misunderstood, warped and wrested by
all antiquity from the mind of God, the will of Christ, and the way of the
Apostles, only to gratify the ambition of some few Bishops and Clergymen,
who made way for Popes and Antichrists? It Is strange all should conspire thus to
eject Christ from his Kingdom and Government, or to abuse the whole Christian
world, from holy Polycarp, Polycrates and Ignatius his days, all Primitive
Bishops, yea from St. John's days, and yet none detect or decry the fraud, none
persevere in the first way, if it were, as is now pretended, Independent or
Presbyterian in the many shepherds or many sheep, without any prime pastors and
Governors among them as Bishops.

Yea further I demand, whether their divisions, at least into such a Dichotomy
as they now are in, be not a just jealousy to sober men, that both of these
novelties may be in the wrong, since both of them cannot be in the right;
whether regular Episcopacy may not yet be as the virtue or medium between these
vicious extremes which are made up either of parity and popularity, or of
Tyrannick and Papal Episcopacy; whether they now find that either of thse new
ways have any thihg so much to plead out of Scripture for themselves, as
Episcopacy has, or the thousandth part so much out of any good Antiquity;
whether they be not pure novelties of later invention and unprosperous use,
hardly yet formed, and never well settled in this or any other famous or
Reformed Church that enjoyed its just freedom, without the oppression of either
sacrilegious Princes, or heady and mutinous people.

Can any learned and sober Minister, either Presbyterian or Independent, now
flatter himself, that there is no light or shadow, no show of Reason or
Religion, of Scripture or Antiquity for Episcopacy? Can they any longer wonder
(without ignorance or impudence) that learned and moderate Episcopal Divines
are so firm to their first principles and persuasions, which are not easily
answered, or with any reason overthrown by any ancient example? at least
Episcopal men are very excusable in adhering to their ancient and Primitive
way, till they find these novell opposites to Episcopacy, and rivals to each
other, so well reconciled by a firm Associating together as may wholly supply
the Office, Power and place of Episcopacy; which yet they have not done as to
the Order, Polity, Peace and Unity of the Church, or to the satisfaction of the
most learned and godly men at home and abroad.

Where, I beseech you (O my good and gracious brethren of Presbyterian and
Independent principles,) where do you think were the Eyes, the Learning, the
Wits, the Hearts, the Honesty, the Conscience of all holy men in all Churches
before your time? Can you prefer the factious fancies of one Aerius, or
Acolythus, or Ischyras of old, before all the famous Bishops, Presbyters and
Councils? Can you honestly plead St. Jerome for your Presbytery, till you
reconcile him with himself, who is plain and punctual for Episcopal
eminency, and only pleads (at most) for the joint Counsel and assistance of
Presbyters (in which rank himself was?) which I and all sober men do earnestly
desire, as best and safest for the Church, yea and for Bishops too. Shall one
David Blondel, or Walo Messalinus (that is, Salmasius) men indeed of excellent
Learning, yet obliged (as Pet. Moulin confesses of himself in his Epistolary
dispute with the most Learned Bishop Andrews) to plead what might be for the
enforced stations, and necessitated conditions of those Presbyterian Churches
with which they were then in actual fellowship and Church Communion, shall (I
say) these two men, which are the greatest props for Presbytery (who yet are
allowers of Episcopacy, though not as absolutely necessary, yet as best for the
Polity and Government of the Church, where they may be had) be put into the
balance against all the ancient and modern assertors of Episcopacy? or shall
the votes of the late Assembly be a just counterpoise against all the chief
Reformed Divines at home and abroad, as Calvin, Peter Martyr, Bucer, Zanchy,
Chemnitius, Gerard and many others, who are all well known to be for Episcopacy
and Bishops, if they will be Fathers and Fautors of the true Christian and
Reformed Religion, as Bishops in Engl. were? Did not Deodate from Geneva and
Postqua^ comperisset Presbyterialem statum citra Episcopalem in iis ecclesiis
co^sistere non posse, etc. Vide Salm^siii vitam, p. 50. Consulebat Episcopos
non omnino tollendos, etc.
Salmasius from Leiden, write hortatory (though concealed) letters to the chief
sticklers (of late) for Presbytery in England, advising them to acquiesce in
and bless God for such a regulated Episcopacy as had obtained and might best
be retained in England? Have not others (abroad) much deplored their want of
such Episcopacy and such Bishops as England happily enjoyed since the
reformation and ever before?

Can the late Scotized Assembly modestly pretend to better light, clearer
spectacles, more discerning eyes or more honest hearts for Religion and due
Reformation, for Christ's honor and this Churches happiness, than all the
ancient Councils or the modern Convocations, and National Synods of Engl.? Or
can it now at last seem either an unreasonable expectation in Episcopal
Ministers, or an unconscientious condescension in those of the Presbyterian and
Independent parties, to turn their Extemporary Presidents or Momentary
Moderators into fixed and deserving Bishops? can it be an hard matter for them
to conform to uniforme Antiquity, who have so long gratified various novelty?
What great matter were it for them so far to satisfy the consciences of
Episcopal men, yea and the interests of all sober Ministers, as not to suffer
any further Innovation, or longer abscission, or total interruption, or final
abruption to befall the Catholic Order and Authority of Episcopacy in this
Church? the restoring of which would no way injure their own true interests, as
Presbyters or patrons for the people, who might both have and enjoy all those
ingenuous Liberties and Privileges which they justly claim, short of an
absolute, sole and sovereign power in Church Government, which is never to be
trusted either in common peoples or common Presbyters hands. I ask these
Acephalists, who will endure no head but that on their own shoulders, whether
the City of London is worse governed, because it has a Lord Mayor among and
above the Aldermen and Common Council; whether the Colleges in the
Universities, or the Companies and Fraternities in Cities, are less happily
ordered, because they have Presidents or Masters and Wardens in them and over
them; whether they think it were better for an Army to have no Colonels or
Commanders in chief, but all military Counsels and transactions should be
managed in war and peace by a mere Democratick or popular way, as every
soldier fancied his own valor and ability. I doubt not but in all these parts
and proportions of good Government, sober men stand convinced that they are
then best, when Counsel and Order make up the Majesty and completenesse of
Authority, by subordination of all and the suffrages of many joined to the
eminency of one worthy person in their several precincts, stations and
jurisdictions. Nor can I think that chief Governors can be heretical,
irrational, irreligious or Antichristian only in the point of
Church-Goverment, as if this polity and fraternity beyond any other were
exclusive or incapable of that order and eminency which is the Crown and
completion of Government, which is used in all other Societies, and ever was so
in the Churches of Christ.

In order therefore to draw the designed plat-forme of Ecclesiastical
Communion from the novelty, partiality and popular policies of Associations, to
its just proportions and due dimensions, my last quaere or proposal to my
brethren the Ministers is, whether all things considered in cool thoughts and
conscientious tempers, it were not worthy of all Learned, Godly and sober
Ministers, first to unite themselves in their judgments, counsels and
desires, with all singleness of hearts and mutual brotherly kindness; and then
humbly to crave leave of the civil powers to permit them, to cast themselves
into such prudent and orderly combinations for Church Government as might best
suite, as with the peace and prosperity of this Church, so with the Primitive
and Catholic way of Christ's Church; thereby satisfying all honest desires and
pious interests of all considerable parties: That neither Bishops should be
wholly ejected as superfluous, nor yet Presbyters despised as mere ciphers, nor
Christian people any way oppressed as slaves or beasts; who having each of them
their several honest interests and just uses, will better attain their desires
in an happy conjuncture than in any separations, which first weaken them apart,
then destroy them all.

Nor may this model of Church-union and Government be thought a mere Idea or
Utopian fancy; experience of all times, and the best times for Religion as
Christian and reformed, that ever England or any Nation enjoyed, assures us,
that it is not only feisable, but every way most commendable, as most
agreeable to every honest interest, and indeed every way completest, for the
glory of God, the honor of Christ, the good of this Church, and the Communion
with all other either Christian or Reformed. For by this means the scandal
and shame of late Schisms would be removed, the ancient Ecclesiacall
succession continued; the grand power of Ordination will be neither various nor
defective, neither innovated not altered; the Ministerial Office and Authority
will be most authentic and undoubted; the minds of all Learned and sober men
will be satisfied, their heads, hearts, tongues and hands united, Christian
charity and brotherly Communion best restored; the reverence and Majesty of
Religion, also the honor and dignity of the Ministry as Christian and Reformed,
would be mightily recovered; the Peace and Unity of this famous and
well-reformed Church would be established, and the tranquillity of the Nation
highly settled and confirmed upon the best foundation of peace that can be among
mankind.

In all which things we have and do on all sides so far extremely suffer, as we
differ by such unreasonable distances and uncharitable defiances, first among
Ministers, which are presently followed with all disorder, lukewarmenesse,
irreligion, profaneness* arrogance, Atheism, Affectation and Faction among the
people in England, chiefly, as I conceive, upon this account, The needless
variating, shifting and changing of that Primitive plat-forme, that Apostolic
and Catholic order and succession of Ecclesiastical Authority and
Ministerial power in this Church, which has ever been owned with religious
reverence and conscience in Engl. ever since it was Christian, preserved as
sacred by the most pious Princes, honored as Divine by the most Religious and
reformed Parlaments, prospered by the special benignity and grace of God,
peaceably enjoyed by all devout, judicious and humble Christians, to the
unspeakable comfort of their souls living and dying, when they knew who were
their Bishops, Pastors and spiritual Fathers, owning them with all due respect
and love as in Christ's stead, submitting to them for conscience sake, as to the
Lord, and receiving from them good instructions, just reproves, holy comforts,
and heavenly Mysteries, not as from man, but God; after the rule of the
Scriptures, and the example of the best Christians in all ages, who looked upon
Episcopacy or the Government of the Church as fixed, completed and exercised
chiefly by Bishops assisted with worthy Presbyters, not only as a book of a
larger volume, greater print and fairer binding than Presbytery or Independency
(that is, the sole power of Presbyters or people by themselves) but they looked
upon the Episcopal eminency as having more in it of Apostolic power and
Ecclesiastical Authority, both in point of ordination and jurisdiction, than
is either in Presbyters or people by themselves: Bishops and Presbyters being
as the eyes and hands, which are not more members of the body than the legs
and feet, yet they are the more noble parts, and have more of public use and
virtue as to inspection, direction and operation, for the common good of all
parts in the body.

No wonder then if the honor of all Religion be much abated, if the renown of
this Reformed Church be thus abased; no wonder that Presbytery it self is so
baffled, and Independency despised; no wonder that all the Office, Power and
Authority of Ministers, together with their persons, be reduced to such a low
ebb, and almost quite exhausted, when Bishops, the grand Cisternes and chief
Conduites of all Ecclesiastical Orders and Ministerial Authority (as derived
from Christ and his Apostles) are not only bruised and cracked, but utterly
broken, cut off and cast away; whom (yet) no Presbyter or Independent of any
learning or forehead can deny actually to have been in all ages used and
esteemed as the constant successors and immediate substitutes of the Apostles,
first invested with that power by the Apostles themselves, after their decease
chosen by the Presbyters, and after consecrated by other Bishops, to be as the
prime receptacles, conservators and conveyers of all Ecclesiastical Power and
Ministerial Authority: not only as Teachers of Divine truths, preachers of
the Gospel, and dispensers of holy Mysteries in common with Presbyters; but as
chief Fathers, Pastors and Rulers of those larger flocks which constituted
those famous ancient Churches, which were not limited to the bounds of one
family, or one congregation, or one little parish (in which one Preacher or
Presbyter may in ordinary duties suffice,) but they extended to such ample
combinations, as contained large Cities and their Territories, in which were
many thousands of Christians, many congregations, and many Presbyters, who all
made but one Church or polity Ecclesiastical under one chief Pastor or Bishop,
residing with the Presbyters at first in the chief City: afterward these were
fixed to particular parishes or villages by the care of the Bishops.

Without whose authority and consent nothing of consequence was done by any in
the public managing of Religion, without the just brand and censure of
Schismatic arrogance: it being ever judged, that Bishops had derived to them
an higher degree of Apostolic power and Church- jurisdiction, than ever was or
could be in any one or many Presbyters or people without them, who could not
regularly nor never did (unblamably) ordain, of themselves or by their own
sole Authority, any Ministers, or exercise the censures of the Church in a
plenary and absolute jurisdiction, without deriving their power from their
respective Bishops; without whom and against whom few ever acted in any age of
the Church; and never any good Christian refused subjection to and communion
with their lawful and orthodox Bishops; no nor did ever any Heretics or
Schismatics proceed to such extravagancy as to reject and disclaim all
Episcopal order, till of later years: whose example has little in it to make
it compared with, much less preferred before, Catholic customs and Primitive
patterns of all ancient Churches, what ever glosses the wit of men, or their
craft, or their successes, or their Godly and necessary pretenses, may put upon
their variations and schisms.

CHAP. XII.
Objections against Episcopacy discussed.
IT is not now my design either to spin out, or to wind and sum up that long
and tedious thread of dispute* which has been so much snarled and entangled of
late years in England by popular pens, or cleared and unfolded by more able,
learned, and impartial Writers. Who is not weary now and ashamed of those
threadbare allegations drawn from the samenesse or promiscuous use of Names;
1. Object. From the samenesse of their Names, Bishop and Presbyter signifying
but one office and power.
which we know vary with time, and must yield to use and custom? as if
Apostle, Evangelist, Bishop, Presbyter, Pastor, Preacher, Teacher and Ruler,
(they may add Deacon, and Servant, and Minister) were all one in the
equivalency of their power, order and authority in the Church. For any one, nay
all these names are in the latitude of their sense given to some one man or
officer in the Church, yet in the more strict, precise and Emphatick sense,
they denote different gifts, orders, authorities, dispensations and functions
(as well as degrees) in the Church of Christ; which did never confound Deacons
with Presbyters, nor Presbyters with Bishops, nor all with the Apostles;
because the chief Apostles (who contained in their ample authority and
commission all Ecclesiastical powers eminently under Christ) are sometimes
called Presbyters, Compresbyters, and also Deacons or Ministers of Jesus
Christ, and servants of the Church, deriving all these powers in their several
degrees and orders to Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons after them. To the first
(as to a lesser sort of Apostles, but chief Rulers or Overseers in the Church)
they gave the eminent and peculiar power of ordaining Presbyters, and
exercising spiritual jurisdiction over them, as is evident in the power that
Timothy and Titus had given them by Commission from the great Apostle St. Paul,
who certainly in this was conform to all other Apostles in their several
Bishoprics or Distributions. To the second, as Presbyters, (or a lesser kind
of Bishops and Apostles over private and particular congregations) they gave
power to preach the Gospel, administer Sacraments, and assist their chief
Pastor or Bishop in governing the Church according as they were required and
appointed to their several duties and charges. But no where in Scripture (that
I see) do we find either the sole or chief power of ordaining Ministers, or of
exercising any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over them by correption, or
rejection, given to any one or more Presbyters, as such, unless men list for
ever to play the children, and cavil with the identity or samenesse of the
names used of old; which calls Apostles Presbyters, as a word of honor, and
Presbyters Bishops, as overseers, and all of them Deacons, as servants to
Christ and the Church, and all may be called Apostles too in some sense, as
sent by Christ on his work.

Which Crambe is so fulsome a ((...)) cavilling about words, to confound all
good sense and order, that all sober men are now weary of it, when they clearly
see that all ages and actions of the Catholic Church have sufficiently
declared, beyond any fallacy of identity as to Names and titles, the real and
actual differences of persons and duties, or offices, to which words may (at
first) be indifferently applied without implying any such confusion of places
and powers in the Church, any more than when the name of ruler is applied, to
supreme and subordinate Magistrates, or when the name of Officer is given to
Corporalls, Lieutenants, Captains, Colonells and Generals, or that of
Alderman to such as are so by age, or office, or estate; just as if one should
obstinately maintain that the petty Constables of every parish, the High
Constables of every Hundred, and the Lord high Constable of England or France,
were the same things, as to office, power and honor, because the same name of
Constable is applied to all of them.

It may with as much reason be urged, that every Master of Arts in a College,
and the Master of the College are the same in office, place and power; or that
every one who is called Father by nature, age, affinity, adoption, merit, or
relation, either Domestic, Civil or Ecclesiastical, presently may challenge
the same Authority over us, and the same Duty or Obedience from us, as our
natural parents have and do expect, because all are called Fathers. So we
shall have many Gods and Lords, to justify the Polytheisme of the heathens,
because there are many that are in Scripture called Gods and Lords, as the
Apostle tells us. 1 Cor. 10.


These Sophistical equivocations from names and words, have been indeed the
bushes or thickets, the borrowes and refuges a long time of those men who aimed
to bring in all factions, innovations and confusions into this and other
Churches, only under such empty colors and fallacious pretentions, out of all
which they have been lately so stripped and ferreted by many learned and
unanswerable assertors of Episcopacy in its just presidency and authority, that
they are now naked and ridiculous to all sober spectators, who see that all the
judgment and practice of antiquity, besides the Scriptures analogy, is so
clear and distinct against all their petty cavillings and popular levellings,
that the real differences of the powers, orders, degrees and offices in the
Church, (as begun by Christ, exercised by the Apostles, also continued in that
method and series through all ages,) are not less evident than their
peevishness and pertinacy are, who list to urge the first indifferency or
latitude of words, against the after and evident distinctions of things
declared and confirmed by the constant judgment and practice of all Churches;
which is (in my judgment) the best and surest interpreter and distinguisher of
what ever seems wrapped up, or any way obscured and confused in
Scripture-expressions; otherways we must with the Papists own as many
Sacraments and Mysteries as these words are applied to in Scripture, either in
the Greek or Latin. Presbyters might well enough be then called Bishops in a
general and lower sense, when there were so many Apostles as chief Bishops
above them: which Name of Apostle the modesty of after- Bishops refusing, they
contented themselves with the peculiar title of Bishops, and confined that of
Presbyter to that second order or degree of Clergymen, as that of Deacon to
the third, which yet in their latitude are applied to Bishops and Apostles
themselves.

I know there have been many things speciously urged for Presbytery, and
odiously against Episcopacy; all which have been so abundantly answered, that
it is time they were forgotten, and all enmity buried with them. My aim in
this pacificatory address to all worthy Ministers, is not to revive the cavils
and disputes, but to reconcile all interests, to compose all differences, and
to satisfy all demands. Only, because I know there is no closing or glewing
of pieces together with firmness, where there is not first made an evennesse
and smoothness on all sides, for their apt meeting; I shall here further
endeavor fairly to take away some remaining roughness, swelling and
protuberancy, which possibly may be still in some sober men's minds, as great
hindrances of the desired closure and composure of all sides.

Obj. Secondly that Presbyters did choose and empower their Bishops of old.
I know it is further urged by some, that every Presbyter singly, and much more
socially, (that is, in a joint body and Associate fraternity) may be rationally
thought to have the full power and divine authority of a Bishop, to all ends,
offices and purposes, since it is well known in all antiquity (as St Jerome
tells us,) and it is confessed by all Episcopal men, that Presbyters as such
primitively chose their respective Bishops, as at Antioch, Jerusalem,
Alexandria, (from S. Marks time) and in other places so that Bishops may seem
primarily to receive all their authority and eminency from Presbyters, who
certainly can confer no more upon any of Bishop, than is radically, seminally
and eminently in themselves; as a superior Magistrate that nominates an
inferior or a Corporation that chooses a Major or chief officer, or as
Fellows of a College who choose a Master or President over them, or as an
army (which is St. Jeromes instance) who choose their Imperator or General.
From this ancient and well-known privilege of Presbyters to choose their
respective Bishops, many conclude their joint power at least to be equal to
any Bishops, yea superior to them, as causall and efficient, insomuch that
they may, if they please, exercise it apart from, and wholly without any
Bishop, by choosing none to be over them or among them, but serving their
occasional meetings with a temporary Moderator rather than a constant
Superintendent.

Ans.
To this it is easily answered, That however Presbyters of old did, and of right
(as I conceive) ought, by the leave and permission of Christian Princes, to
choose and appove the persons of their Bishops, as being the fittest men in the
Church to judge of a Bishops sufficiencies for that place and charge, yet it no
way follows that any Bishop has his Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power from
them, as the original of it, any more than of his temporal Barony and
revenues, to which he is admitted by the Presbyters election of him; but only
he is by their election and comprobation duly admitted, and regularly enabled
to exercise that power, whose root (as that of Presbyters) rise and foundation
is from a far higher principle and greater authority: Just as the Fellows of a
College choose the Master, President or Warden, at least they admit and accept
of him to the possession, enjoyment and use of that power, which is not in them
jointly or singly without their Master; nor yet is it derived from them to the
Master, but he has it from the first Founders Will, and the Statutes or
Customs of the College. In like manner, the chief Magistrate of any City or
Corporation, though he be chosen by the Commons or Fraternities in it to his
chief place and office, yet his power and jurisdiction is not from them, but
from that Charter or Grant which gave the first constitution to that power and
polity. So in an Army, Officers may choose their General to a power above
them, which he enjoyes and exercises beyond what any one or all of them has
right unto, or any capacity to use; yet does that power accrue to him from
those principles of Right, Reason, Order, Polity and Authority, which is
derived and vested in him by the suffrage or consent of many, who have right
and reason thus to advise for their common order and safety, by preferring one
above themselves; by whose suffrages and consents, as by the Suns beams united
in the center of a burning-glasse, a greater heat and luster of authority is
raised, than is in any one or many beams scattered and divided.

By virtue of which principles of reason, order and polity, as these other
civil instances, which act by their several Charters and Statutes, are neither
left at liberty to choose or not choose any to be their chief Magistrate or
Governor; nor yet may they in right reason or law exercise that paramount
power without him, but they are bound in conscience and duty, as well as by
custom and charter, to choose such a chieftane, and so to invest him in that
power paramount above them; yet do they not give the power to that elect
person, but the person to that power which was settled before them.

So in the Church of Christ, Presbyters of old did freely choose (indeed) their
Bishops, at least they consented afterward to accept of him whom the Prince, or
possibly the people in some cases, nominated as a worthy and deserving person;
yet neither people, nor Prince, nor Presbyter did confer upon any Bishop that
power Episcopal or that eminent Ecclesiastical Authority, which he had
properly in himself to use and exert it after he was thus chosen, consecrated
and installed. No, he had it from that grand Charter and Catholic Custom
which was in the Church of Christ; by which the first Apostolic Canons or
Scripture-Statutes and Institutions not only founded, but derived this
Authority as received from Christ, and by the Spirit of Christ conveyed it to
their Successors the Bishops, in the name and power of Christ, for the orderly
governing of his Church in all places; which has been, and (I think) ought
where God hinders not, to be continued in the Churches of Christ by the like
successive choice or approbation of Presbyters in the want and vacancy of their
Bishops. Nor do I doubt but Ministers are sinfully wanting to that duty which
they ow to Christ and his Church, when they cease to do, as much as in them
lies, what they ought in this point to do, and might do if themselves did not
hinder, their choosing and having their lawful Bishops, as well as people their
Presbyters, according to the Primitive rule and Catholic pattern, which has
the force of a law: it being no less necessary for the Church to be orderly
governed and thus united, than to be taught and communicated to in holy things.

Nay, those two or three Bishops which, after the great Nicene Council, were
required to join in the more solemn consecration and investiture of every
Bishop, did not impart of their own power, but solemnly declared and blessed as
good and worthy the choice and investiture of him that was first duly elected
by the Presbyters, and then further confirmed by their publication and
benediction, which benediction was never, that I read, done by any Presbyters,
as being now inferiors to him whom their consent and suffrages had chosen to
that Episcopal degree and eminency above them, who as Presbyters might choose
their Bishops, but yet not depose him; this work requiring their appeal to the
higher power of a Council or Synod of many Bishops, who were in that joint
capacity above any one Bishop, and so only capable to be his judges, upon the
complaint of Presbyters or people against him. As Presbyters have their Office
and Authority by Bishops ordination as conduits, but not from them as
fountains of it, (there being but one spring of it, which is Jesus Christ) so
Bishops have their power by Presbyters election, as instruments or mediums, but
not from their donation, as the source and originals of their power and
authority, Obj. 3d. That Presbyters are as able and willing to ordain as any
Bishops.
which is Christ's.

Thirdly, Some Presbyters and Independents do with great brow and confidence
urge, that Bishops are wholly superfluous, because Presbyters and any ordinary
Preachers, two or three or more of them, are very able and willing every where
to beget their like, every petty Presbytery is become a seminary or spawner to
ordain Ministers and confer all degrees of holy orders; for which they think
themselves no less fitted than for preaching and administering Sacraments,
which (they say) are employments requiring greater abilities, and no less
authority: yea many Country-Presbyters have made themselves and one another of
late Chorepiscopi or Country- Bishops, ordaining Ministers when, where and how
they list, without any Bishop among them.

And this (they say) with very good success and acceptance to Country People,
who besides the pleasure they take in any daring novelty and insolency in
Religion, protest to find no less judgment, discretion and gravity, than was
heretofore pretended to be in Bishops for that service: Nor is it to be doubted
(say they) but the ordination, authority and Commission of such Presbyters is
as valid as that done by Bishops, since these Godly Ministers do so try and
examine such as come to be ordained, that they commonly pose the best Scholars
and soberest men that come to them: Further they pray and preach as well as
most Bishops did, yea they very gravely exhort and charge the ordained brother
with as great weight and severity, both for gifts and graces Ministerial, as
ever the Bishops did, though it may be not with so much pomp and formality.
Hence they deny the necessity and use of Bishops, yea they deny any flaw or
defect to be in their new Presbyterian and popular ordinations for want of any
other Bishops but themselves, who are as pert in their novelty as ever any
Prelates were in their antiquity.

That these Heteroclite or equivocall ordinations have of late been acted in
England with much self applause and popular parade by mere Presbyters, I well
understand; but quo jure, Ans.
by what right from God or man, by what authority civil or Ecclesiastical, I
could never yet see; yea, I am sure no law of God or men heretofore ever was
thought to give any such power to mere Presbyters without, yea against their
lawful Bishops: insomuch that many learned and sober men have much blamed, at
least suspected, these Presbyterian transactions for Schismatic
presumptions, these ordinations for disorderly usurpations, at least in such a
Church as England was, where there were (and still are) venerable Bishops of
the orthodox faith, reformed profession and ancient constitution, willing and
able to do their duty in the point of ordination.

Which in all (ordinary) cases appears to have ever been their peculiar right,
specially derived to them as Bishops from the Apostles, through all successions
of times and Churches, without any interruption; except when some factious and
insolent Presbyters ventured to be extravagant and usurpant, whom all the
learned Fathers, venerable Councils and good Christians in the Church every
where condemned as most injurious, because usurping that Authority which no
Apostle, no Council, no Bishop ever gave to any that were mere Presbyters in
their Ordination and Commission, no more than the Laws or Canons of this
Church and State. Nor is there (as far as I can perceive) any one place in
Scripture, that by any precept or example invests either one or more simple
Presbyters with the power of trying and examining, of laying on of hands, of
giving holy orders, as from themselves alone, of committing or transmitting
what they had received to other faithful men that should be able to teach. 2 Timothy 2.2.
All which were given to Timothy and Titus as chief Bishops.

The Pope of Rome (indeed) animated by those flatterers which would make him
the sole Bishop by Divine right, and all other Bishops as surrogates to him,
dependants upon him, and derived from him (as if there had not been 12 or 13,
but only one ^^sion ^lick Chair, or prime seat of Episcopacy) has some ^eath
given power of ordination to such as were but Presbyters, as and read of some
Abbots and Priors; but it was always to the great scandal of the best Bishops
and Presbyters of the Church, as contrary to all ancient Orders, Canons and
Customs of the Church, unless he first made them as Chorepiscopi or
suffragane Bishops. But in earnest, it is hard to judge whether Popes or
Presbyters be most enemies to Catholic Bishops.

As for the pious pomp and the specious apparences, the formal dressings and
verbal adornings, which they say are used by Presbyters in their late
Ordinations in England, though I never saw any of them, yet I have heard and
read so much of them, as gives me to judge far less to be in them of authority,
true, complete and valid, than ought to be. For besides the persons not
empowered or commissionated to that office, there is, as I hear, no
transmitting, and so no receiving, of the holy Spirit, as to that Ministerial
Order and Power, which is thereby derived to Ministers as from Christ, whatever
there may be of godly solemnity and plausible formalities, which are (usually)
more studied and affected to please the people, there where men are most
conscious to the defect of authentic, real and righteous power. But all these
saintly shows (to wise men) signify nothing, no nor the personal abilities
either of the ordainers or ordained; who cannot by their personal power,
knowledge, virtues, graces or private gifts, make any Officer in State or in
Armies, in War or in Peace, much less in the Church and Ministry of Jesus
Christ. Alas, no private capacity in any man can make the least petty
Constable, or Bailiffe, or Corporal, or Sergeant, without they first have a
public and lawful Commission from the fountains of Authority, to give them an
Authority far beyond any private arrogance and presumed sufficiency of their
own.

Possibly, extraordinary cases may in time be their own excuses in such
Churches where Bishops may be all dead or banished; or where such as are
Orthodox cannot be had, and they that are will not ordain any Presbyters,
without imposing upon them such things as are erroneous and unlawful: but
nothing can be pleaded that I yet see, no nor does the candor and charity of
Bishop Usher know how to excuse such Presbyters from being Schismatics and
factious, presumptuous and disorderly, who first cast off and forsake such
Bishops as are of the same faith and reformed profession, worthy and willing,
able and ready, every way authorized by Church and State to do their duty. The
contempt and rejecting of such Bishops is (I fear) a great sin before God, I am
sure a great grievance to such Churches as first suffer those distractions. And
no doubt it is, as a great, so a needless scandal to most Churches and the
best Christians in all the world; nor can it be other then a foul reproach and
scorn cast on all pious antiquity, nor will it prove other than a lasting
misery to any Church and Nation that wilfully continues that guilt and defect
upon themselves and their posterity, especially when God ^s them sufficient
means to remedy that mischief, to supply the ^fects, and to compose those
differences, which are ever follow^ ^he wa^, much more the needless expulsion
of Primitive Episcopacy. For whose power and authority while either Presbyters
or people are scrambling, they do but make Religion a May Game, and bring (as
we see) both themselves and their Ministry into contempt: for no Presbyters or
people can while the world stands ever stamp such an honor and Authority
Ecclesiastical upon themselves, as was in all ages and by all Churches consent
(besides the Scripture-Character and Apostolic signature) set upon Primitive
and Catholic Episcopacy, which ever united, centred and confirmed power in one
man; not over all, which the Pope affects, but over their Dioceses or Provinces.

A 4th. Obj. 4. That Episcopacy was the root of the Papacy.
Objection much flourished by some popular Preachers against Bishops and all
Episcopacy in any Authority and eminency above Presbyters, is, that Episcopacy
is the root of Popery; that Prelates were the parents of Antichrist; that every
Bishop has a Pope in his belly; and that the Pope is no other than an
overgrown Bishop; that to rout all Popery, and raze the foundations of Romes
pride, all Prelacy or Episcopacy must be stubbed up.

My answer to this is, that this objection sounds as little of truth as it
savours much of malice, Ans.
especially in any Presbyters of any learning and ingenuity, who well know the
abasing of Bishops is the design, and has been the magnifying of the Popes of
Rome beyond their line and measure of old; That if Episcopacy could have held
its Primitive and ancient parity, according to the Apostolic seats and
paternes, that one Chair of Rome had not so far exalted it self in this
Western Church above all those that are therefore called Gods, because the
power of Christ and the word of God came to them as much as to Rome, and is to
be derived by them to their successions.

It Is certain that Bishops did not at first (as Nimrod) set up themselves by any
private ambition: they were either constituted by the Apostles yet living, as
Irenaeus, Eusebius, Tertullian and others tell us; or when the Apostles were
dead, the Presbyters of every chief city and Territory or Diocese did (as S.
Jerome tells us) choose some Apostolic and eminent person from among themselves
to be their Bishop; not compelled hereto by any civil powers, nor by any
popular force or faction, but merely moved so to do by the precept and pattern,
the constant custom and imitation of the Apostles, which were so full of
pregnant reason, necessary order, and holy policy, that nothing could be better.

If any then be to be blamed for giving occasion to the Papal ambition, and
what some count the great Antichrist who is, (as Isid. Hispal. defines, by so
much the more Antichrist, by how much more he professes Christ, yet lives or
teaches contrary to the rule and example of Christ) it must be either the
Apostles themselves, who first designed Bishops as their successors, or the
succeeding Presbyters of every Church, who to avoid Schism and Confusion,
first chose successive Bishops in every Church after the death of the Apostles;
not only in obedience to their commands, and conformity to their pattern, but
in order to preserve necessary polity, Primitive unity, and Apostolic
authority in the Church of Christ.

And yet now (behold) by a strange vertigo or change of Counsels, Presbyters
must in all have pull down all Bishops, the better to avoid Antichrist, who
lies as much in confusion as error, in schism as in heresy; none of which
will ever advance Reformation or settling of true Religion. So that it is an
intolerable insolency and rudeness of some men, to say or suspect that every
Bishop, whom the Apostles themselves, or the Presbyters after them, first
constituted, were but spawnes and embryo's of Antichrist, when many, yea most,
if not all the first and best Bishops for 300. years were not only excellent
preachers and wise governors after the way of the Apostles, but such resolute
Martyrs and confessors, as few of the more delicate Presbyters and
softer-fingred Independents of our age would willingly carry the least stick of
their fagots, or touch the least coal of their fires, or bear the least stroke
and burden of their torments. As then the Papal Tyranny, so the Presbyterian
Parity, and Independent Anarchy, may and will give (I fear) greater advantages
to Antichrists, than ever Episcopal order and eminency either did or can do
while wisely settled and managed.

Obj. 5. That Bishops are prone to be severe and tyrannick.
Fifthly, another great bugbeare or terriculament which scares some from looking
back with the least cast of favor on Episcopacy, is the terror they pretend to
have had of some Bishops sharpnesses and severities, of which say they many
godly men feel the smart to this day.

Ans.
My answer is, I do not go about to justify or excuse any unreasonable,
unseasonable, indiscreet or uncharitable actions of any Bishops, who are justly
to be blamed, so far as they exceeded their Commission and power, by the Laws
of man or Christ, and the Church, given to them not for destruction, but
edification. Though some Bishops might show themselves to be but men, yea and
some of them to be harsh and rash enough in their passions, yet these failings
and infirmities they neither had nor discovered as they were Bishops; no more
than tyrants do tyrannize as they are Magistrates, or Judges are corrupt as
they are Judges, or Presbyters are partial, popular and imprudent as they are
preachers. It must still be granted that not only some, but very many, yea
most Bishops in England since the Reformation were as Angels of God in their
light and love, in their excellent learning and worthy living every way; which
sufficiently proves that piety and Episcopacy may as well meet in one man, as
piety and Presbytery, or sanctity and Independency. If any of these good
Bishops seemed sometime too severe to some that were rudely refractory against
the laws then in force in this Church and State, possibly those very persons
that most complain of them will be found not short of the sharpest of them: if
any of these complainers have suffered by any Bishops rigors, I am sure they
have had their full and excessive revenge upon them. But to avoid the feared
exorbitancy of Episcopacy for the future, it will be sufficient effectually to
restore that ( Commune Consilium Presbyterorum, (...). Ign.
) common Counsel and concernment of worthy Presbyters to their pristine use and
assistance, without which Bishops should do nothing public and authoritative
(according to the Canon of the Council of Cartharge, and agreeable to the
judgment, as of St. Jerome, so of St. Council. Carth. 4* can. ^3. Consessus
honorem cum Episcopo habent Presbyteri. Cyp. ep. 46. and 55. and saepealibi*
Communi Presbyterorum consilio regebantur Ecclesiae. ^en. Epist. ad Euag.
Cyprian, Ignatius, and all the ancients) This (as I formerly touched) is the
best preservative of Bishops authority, of Presbyters privileges, of peoples
liberty and the Churches safety. As I believe Episcopacy by this time sees it
did it self as much wrong as any men could design, in doing many things of
public concern without the presence, counsel and concurrence of their gravest
and most discreet Presbyters; and as I think that modest and sober Presbyters
shall do not only themselves a right, but the best Bishops too, in their
Christian advise and assistance, to bear ( partem solicitudinis) part of the
care, trouble, odium and envy, which is prone to offend all good Bishops, as
all good Governors in Church and State: so I conclude that violent Presbyters
have done themselves, the Bishops, the people and this whole Church, as much
injury and indignity as they well can, by rudely rejecting and obstinately
refusing (as much as in them lies) to readmit the Order and Honor of Episcopal
Presidency, which indeed was the common Honor of the whole Clergy. Episcopacy
we know preferred many Ministers of the Gospel to be as Lords and Peers in
England; whereas Presbytery and Independency have purely levelled and abased
all Clergymen to a plebeian condition, if not to be slaves and vassals, yet to
be very vile and servile, even in the esteem of the vulgar. Certainly it was in
prudence to be desired by all wise Presbyters and other Ministers, rather to
bear much under the burden of the Episcopal yoke (which was to them more (
honos than onus) a dignity than any depression;) than thus by a precipitant
impatiency to run themselves and their whole Order or function into a plebeian
slavery, while they affected an inordinate liberty. It is better for birds to
be fed in their cage or restraint, than by wandering from them to be starved.
The best Bishops were wisely severe, and most venerable when least remiss; the
most rigid of them were not more imperious or intolerable than some Presbyters
have been to all Bishops.

The last, but greatest, terror to some men is, Obj. 6. The jealousy lest
Bishops should recover their lands.
that if any thing like a true Primitive Bishop should revive and
authoritatively act again in England, especially fortified and assisted with
such a strength of wise and grave Presbyters, orderly combined with their
Bishops, there might be great danger of the Clergies recovering the Lands and
Revenues which once belonged to Bishops and other Churchmen in England.

Thus the jealous hearts and mis-giving consciences of many men do beat within
them, Ans.
who have bought Bishop^ (...) other Church Lands; which do make them as
vigilant over the Bishops Sepulchers, as the Jews and Soldiers were over
Christ's, lest the second error of losing Bishops Lands should be worse than the
first of taking them away, not only from very worthy Bishops then in lawful
and unforfeited possession, but from the whole Clergy, yea from the service of
the whole Church, and of Christ, and of God, who had a sacred interest in them.
By what right they were alienated, and are now possessed, let them see who
first did seize upon them, and upon that title have either sold or bought them.

For my part, I can look upon Episcopacy in its Primitive poverty and present
bareness, with as much respect and reverence as in its greatest pomp and
superfluity. I value it and desire it not for state, but conscience, not for
secular ambition, but spiritual satisfaction. Let them keep the lands that
have justly got them, or paid a valuable consideration for them, provided they
will but help to restore Primitive and Catholic Episcopacy, without which
Ecclesiastical authority, yea and Ministerial power, seems to me and to many
wiser men, if not wholly dead, and void or null, yet very defective, dubious
and infirm; as one that is lame and maimed, yet is still a man, having an esse
or being as a true man, but yet esse defectivum, a being short of that fullness,
firmness and perfection which might be, were he so complete as he ought to be
according to the pattern of God and nature.

The Herculean work of resuming Church Lands, and restoring either Revenues or
civil Honors to Episcopacy, is not to be expected without a miracle, such as
shall shake heaven and earth, despising all humane opposition, and making the
unjust keepers to be like dead men; for no thunderbolts of divine vengeance are
more penetrant and irresistible, than those which fall upon the head of
sacrilege, as both Humane and Divine Histories tell us.

True, I think it were an act worthy of this Nations pristine piety and
renowned munificence, to add something comely for Hospitality and Charity,
besides civil respect, to Bishops, if they will have any. Nor were it (as I
conceive) a work less becoming the Honor and Devotion of England, to
repurchase and restore those ancient Church Lands or patrimony to the Church,
than it was to take them away, and sell them to lay-hands. But in this I am not
so solicitous: the honor of all Bishops, and so of Presbyters, will be,
diligently and wisely to do the work of God, which (its probable) will never
want the respect, love and liberality of all good Christians, as was seen in
Primitive times, where Bishops were never poor, if Christian people were in
plenty, peace and unity. As Mephibosheth said to David, so do I to all my
Countrymen and brethren, Let Ziba take all, as to Bishops Lands, so as those
Bishops may return in peace which are after the Lords mind and the
Scripture-rule, the Apostles pattern, the Primitive judgment and Catholic
practice in the Church of Christ. The less there may be of riches and secular
honors added to Episcopacy, the more it must provoke both Bishops and
Presbyters to holy industry and eminent virtues, which are the best foundations
of true honor.

CHAP. XIII.
MY chief ambition is not to procure civil honors or estates to Bishops,
Earnestly exhorting Ministers of all sides to an happy composure and union.
but so to reconcile all sober Ministers and others to true Episcopacy, as may
promote that Christian union between all Ministers (that are worthy of that
name and office,) and all sober Christian people in England, which may most
remedy and avoid those miserable factions and sad divisions which we see are
the pests of true religion, the moths of all Reformation, the advantages of
superstition, and nurses of profaneness; against which St. Paul in his
Epistles, and St. Clemens in his to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4.
so much inveighs, as carnal and not spiritual methods of Religion.

I should heartily rejoice to see before I die the dry land to appear, this
deluge of factious confusion not only to abate but to be quite spent, by which
Christian Religion and true Reformation has lost (together with Episcopacy) in
one score of years very much of that public Majesty and Authority, that Power
and Improvement, that Love and Honor, that Sanctity and Solemnity, that Charity
and Unity, which they formerly had and held in England for above a hundred
years, highly to the glory of God, to the happiness of this Church, and to
the Honor as well as Peace of the Nation.

It is great pity that any man who bears the name of a Minister of Christ
should appear to the world other then an able, wise, humble, holy, peaceable
and orderly person; that we may not cease to be sociable and reasonable
creatures so soon as we undertake to be Preachers, as if we presently turned
Tragedians when we grew Theologians, Divines in profession but Devils in our
dissentions; that none of us may be so far bereaved of our wits, as to fancy
that we Ministers or Clergymen, beyond all men, may not enjoy nor endure that
comely and holy subordination which is lawful and most necessary in all other
societies and fraternities of men, and no less among those that are Presbyters
or Preachers, where (we see) God and nature, age and gifts, learning and
prudence, distinguish even these men so far, as makes some one or few very fit
to govern, and the other, though many more, only fit to be governed. There is
much folly, rashness, juvenility, indiscretion, presumption and vulgarity to be
seen even among the community of Ministers as well as other common people; who
can never be safe or happy, unless they be settled in some comely Government,
Ecclesiastical as well as civil, yea and governed by some men that are much
wiser than themselves.

Certainly Religion cannot prosper or be glorious in the eyes of the world, as
Christian or Reformed, if it be not uniforme as to the main, both in its source
and course, its origination and dispensation: For every notable difference
(especially in the same Church and State) seems to the several parties and
divided sides as a great deformity in their adversaries. Religion will never be
uniforme, if the Ministers or dispensers of it be not wisely united, not only
in their doctrine, but in the derivation and reception as well as dispensation
of that holy Authority by which they officiate: for otherwise one Minister is
prone to magnify himself against all others of any other make and mold, to
disparage all that is done by others as sacred, to draw disciples from one side
to another, persuading people, according to the feuds which were between the
Samaritan Jews and Priests of that Temple against those of Jerusalem, that
what is done in holy duties by such as are not of his stamp and form is
unauthoritative, presumptuous, invalid, mere nullities, and profanations of
holy mysteries, without Spirit, Life, Power or Efficacy; an histrionick
pageantry of Preaching, Praying, Baptising, Consecrating, Celebrating,
Censuring, Binding, Absolving, Terrifying, Comforting, as in the name of
Christ; when indeed there is either no power or authority, but a new one, that
must needs be a false one, either usurped, or obtruded, or pretended, by those
that have nothing to show for their Commission, Order and Derivation of such
spiritual power, either from the Scripture, or the constant practice, or the
Catholic Custom of the Church of Christ.

Thus everlasting feuds, distances and defiances will follow among people and
Pastors, where an harmony is not in this maine point of ordination, or
Ministerial Authority; which certainly were no hard matter to effect, if
Ministers would so far agree (by an Episcopal subordination in an uniformity
of ordination, and all other Ecclesiastical Ministrations) as no Ministers or
peoples just claim and interest should be either neglected, excluded or
oppressed.

1. First, the rights of people should be so far satisfied, that no man should
be ordained a Minister, but in the most public and solemn convention of the
Diocese, Sacerdos plebe praesente sub omnium o^ulis deligatur, and dignus atque
idoneus omnium publico judicio ac testimony comprobetur. Cyp. Ep. 68.
after public notice given of his name, and demand what any could say against
his being ordained: in like manner, no Minister should be obtruded upon any
people by patron or Bishop, without hearing what they had to object against
him, and rational satisfaction given to them; which was required in St.
Cyprians time.

2. Next, the rights of Presbyters should be so far satisfied, that none should
be ordained a Presbyter, until he had passed the orderly trial as of the
Bishop, so of any Minister that list to examine his sufficiency, or his manners
and life; after which done Presbyters should not only be present at the
solemnity of preaching and praying, but such as could conveniently of the
eldest and gravest Ministers, might lay their hands with the Bishops, or
Presidents, upon the ordained, both in their own and others behalf, as a
testimony of a joint consent on all sides to his ordination.

3. Last of all, the rights and claim of Episcopacy or Bishops would easily be
satisfied, and very compliant with the other of Presbyters and people, if no
ordination might pass without either the presence of the Bishop as President,
or of such a Presbyter as in the Bishops necessary absence should be his
suffragane or Vicegerent, nominated by him, and allowed by that Presbytery over
whom the Bishop presideth.

This method and moderation would (as I humbly conceive) both complete and
settle, in all sober men's judgments, the ordination of Ministers, and (giving
satisfaction to all just demands or ingenuous pretensions) it would powerfully
and happily unite both Bishops, Presbyters and people; as answering all the
claims and expectations considerable of Episcopal, Presbyterian and
Independent parties, as to the maine point of unanimous and uniform Ministry.

Among whom a like correspondency would easily* (if wisely and meekly) be
carried on in all other Ecclesiastical affairs of public concernment, for
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, Censures, Appeals, Admission, Abstention,
Excommunication, Absolution, Synodal conventions and the like. It is not
imaginable how great an harmony, honor and happiness would hence arise, to the
infinite content and comfort of all good Christians, to the great advantage of
the Reformed Religion, to the peace of this Church, to the happiness of the
Nation, to the Glory of God, and to the unspeakable quiet of many thousands of
poor souls; who are now agitated with infinite Scruples, Fears, Angers,
Jealousies and Despites in Religion, according as they are engaged and
exasperated in their first entrance or beginnings: all these would peaceably
and comfortably apply, by Gods help and Ministers harmony, to the improvement
of their souls in faith and repentance, in truth and love; to lead holy and
orderly lives; to hear with diligence and reverence; to receive with frequency
and charity; to pray with understanding and fervency; to do all things with
meekness and wisdom; lastly, to die with earnest desire and blessed hope of
further enjoying that Christian and sweet Communion with God, with Christ
Jesus, and his holy Servants, Saints and Angels, in an other life, of which he
has had so blessed experience and pleasing a fore-taste even in this world,
where the only heaven a good Christian can have consists in the happy
Communion he has with God and good Christians, without which all society is
but solitude or worse, an harmony no better than what may be found in hell,
which is a conspiracy in sin, and conjunction in misery.

This holy Communion is so much the more divine and joyful even in this world,
by how much it enlarges it self to greater numbers and extentions; true
Christian love being loath to be confined to a narrower compass than the
Christian and Catholic faith is, but coveting (as light and heat) most ample
dilatations and Catholic diffusions, seeking (if possible) and as much as in
it lies, to live peaceably with all men, and cheerfully with all that are of
Christ's family, or the household of faith, who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity.

By these and such like peaceful methods of prudence and love, of moderation
and mutual condescension among Ministers, (without further disputing or urging
any of their former principles upon which they seemed to differ, much less
casting any further reproaches upon each other,) I do not see but, by the
blessing of God upon them, they might all meet in an happy union and accord in
Church Government, according to those principles of right Reason and Religion,
of Piety and Polity, of Scripture-Canons and Catholic Customs, in which all
sober Ministers must necessarily agree, as the best rules of Christian
prudence, the surest methods of holy order, and the firmest bonds of Christian
Communion. To which maine ends as all good Christians should chiefly bend all
their Counsels, Prayers and endeavors; so, I do not conceive they are so
strictly confined and limited by any precise rules or forms of any externe
Polity and Order, but they may, as occasion requires, for the peace of the
Church and edification of Christians in love, use such a liberty in their
mutual condescendings and compliances, as shall no way offend the blessed God
of Truth, Order and Peace, nor violate any of their own consciences, while they
bear such a tender regard to other men's, as they desire may be extended to
themselves.

The contentions and confusions in Religion must needs be endless, if they be
left to the natural passions of most men* Then they may find happy
conclusions, when those that are Rulers and Teachers of others, and so not
only more learned, but more prudent, unpassionate and composed (as Magistrates
and Ministers ought to be, beyond any men) when (I say) these men do apply the
utmost of their Piety, Power, Parts, Zeal and Discretion, by fit means to
compose all controversies among themselves, which will then soon decay and dye
among the common people. The Spirits and reputation of Ministers are commonly
the chief sparks and bellows, that first kindle, and after increase to
public flames, the fires of dissentions and disaffections, both among
themselves and the people: once extinguish or moderate these enormous heates
among Ministers, there will be no such conflagrations of Religion among
ordinary people, which have of late been more like the black and confused
eructations of mount Aetna, than the sweet and holy fires of mount Sion, or the
flames and perfumes of Gods Altar and Temple.

Which that I might be some means to restore to this Church and Nation, I have
thus made my amicable, humble and Christian address, as to all good men, so
chiefly to all my Brethren and Fathers of the Ministry in England; who are
persons of any competent abilities and considerable worth, as to the duty and
dignity of that great and holy, that dreadful, Angelick, Divine employment.

I confess I cannot but passionately deplore, as other men's, so my own
solitude for these many years, by reason of that uncorrespondency as to any
fraternall meeting with any of them in any public way; being hereby deprived
of that great Comfort, Improvement, Joy and benefit, which might be had by
those excellent abilities and graces which are in many of them. It is great
pity, good and able Ministers should be longer severed, whose brotherly union
and frequent convenings in orderly and public meetings, would not only set a
greater edge and brightness on their studies and parts, which alone and
confined only to Country-auditors and associates grow rusty, flat and dull;
but they would highly advance the progress of the Reformed Religion, both in
profession and power, giving hereby a mighty check as to the increase of
profaneness and atheism, so of Popery and superstition; mightily conducing also
to the general peace of the Nation, by allaying those unchristian feuds and
uncivil heates which every where so much at present affect, infect and
disaffect the minds both of Ministers and people. But these meetings of
Ministers must be authoritative, not arbitrary, not precarious, but subpenall:
otherwise the restiveness, laziness, wantonness and factiousness of some will
mar all; either forbearing all meetings, or perturbing them, if they be not
kept in some awe as well as order by their betters and superiors.

If I knew any Motives more prevalent, any words more pathetick, any charms of
love more effectual, any grounds of piety or polity more pregnant; if Writing,
Preaching, Praying, Beseeching, if any Words, any Tears, any Sighs might work
upon Ministers of all sides, to bring them to this blessed accord, to public,
friendly and fraternall meetings, to grave, orderly and comely conventions
(which would be of great use as well as honor to them) I should in nothing be
more prodigal of my time, spirits and pains: Then would Ministers be able to
redeem their Persons, their Office, their Orders, their Sacred Authority,
their Religion, from vulgar contempt, from mechanic arrogance, from those base
prostitutions and levellings, to which those ((...), terrae filii) sons of the
earth, vile and m^ane men, have of late years debased, as the holy Ministry,
so all heavenly Mysteries: then would that rust and rusticity, that plebeian
Spirit and ungenerous temper which possesses many Ministers out of fear and
flattery, be removed; then would that scurfe and moss, that barrenness and
canker which is now upon Christian and Reformed Religion, be taken away, and
that floridness with fruitfulness, that beauty with holiness be restored,
which Tertullian so excellently sets forth among Primitive and persecuted
Christians in their assemblies, In which were highly conspicuous a reverentiall
fear of God, a modest and mutual regard to each other, Tertul. de praes. c.
43. Ubi metus in Deum, ibi gravitas modesta, diligentia attonita, cura
solicita, communicatio deliberata, promotio emerita, subjectio religiosa,
ecclesia unita, Dei omnia.
a most intentive diligence to duties, a most solicitous care of themselves and
others, a most prepared and deliberate communicating in holy things, carried on
by the most deserving eminency of some, and the most religious subordination or
conscientious subjection of others; all parts of the Church and Clergy were
happily united, and God was all in all, his glory the center, his love the
circle or band of all their aims and actions, their hearts and thoughts.

The venerable piety and almost Divine Majesty of such conventions (wherein
Bishops, Ministers and people were of one heart and one mind in the Lord)
advanced the reverence of their censures, monitions, reproves, abstentions and
excommunications to so great a regard and just dread, that no good Christian
great or small disdained the authority of the Bishop, or slighted the judgment
of the Clergy, which judged and declared the mind of the whole Church, because
according to the mind of the Lord Christ, and of God himself.

Then was it that lapsed and scandalous sinners were soonest brought to be
penitents, in so humble, yet comfortable a manner, that as St. Hier. ep. 36.
Amb. de poen..1. c. 16. Sulcarunt lacrim's genas, and vultum fletibus
exarabant; mortis speciem in spiranti corpore praeferebant.
Jerome says of Fabiola, and St. Ambrose of others, They furrowed their faces
with sorrows, and plowed their cheeks with tears; they paved the Churches
with their prostrate bodies, which were so penitently pallid and deplorable,
that they seemed only living corpses and breathing carkases. So few Christians
did then entertain their sins with smiles, or laugh at those Teachers that
reproved them, or schismatically separate from those Orthodox Bishops, with the
Clergy, that justly censured them, as obnoxious to Gods judgments, and
unworthy of Christian Communion till they amended: no man or woman ever lived
or died in peace of conscience, whose soul was justly wounded with these
arrows, the censures of the Church; they either drank up their sensual and
proud Spirits, and brought them to repentance, or they sank them into a
desperate state, both of obstinate sin and eternal horror.

Such holy and happy Assemblies of Ministers, consisting of authoritative
Bishops and orderly Presbyters, were far more to their honor and comfort,
more befitting their breeding and learning, their labors and industry, their
parts and worth, their sacred function and dignity, than to be pitifully
scared and overawed by Country-Committees, and a new sort of Tryars, where
grave Ministers are often catechized, chastised and contemned by such men as are
(some of them at least) of very moderate, that I say not mean, abilities
(except their estates be instead of all reason and Religion, all learning,
worth and wisdom,) very incompetent judges (God knows) of the Doctrine and
Manners of Ministers, unless in matters of civil misdemeanors, for which
there are higher courts and abler judges appointed, to hear and determine
matters according to law, with more honor and less partiality than Ministers
can expect from such men as are very sorry Magistrates and worse Ministers.

This is a certain maxim, the cheapnesse and despicablenesse of Ministers
arises chiefly from their mutual divisions and dissociations. Their union and
harmony will be their Honor, Safety and Happiness. I pray God show us all, and
guide us in the ways of his and our own peace.

And (in earnest) it is high time for us as Ministers of Christ, and as sober
men, to give over our popular Projects and pragmatick activities, our secular
policies and state agitations, by which we have all gained far less than if we
had only intended the Cross of Christ, and imitated the patience as of our
great Master, so of the best of our predecessors; not to concern our selves so
much in Crowns and Soveraignties, in Kingdoms and Commonweales, in Parlaments
and Armies, in Killing and Slaying our brethren upon Christ's score* as in
saving our own and others souls. What was of old falsely and odiously objected,
has of late been too much verified in many of us, Number. 16.3.
You take too much upon you, O you Sons of Levi, both in sacred and civil
affairs. Let us learn to rule our own passions, to obey actively in all
lawful and honest things our superiors, and passively in others: Leave it to
God to rule this, as all States and Kingdoms, by what hands, heads and hearts
he pleases. Let us in all times do all things, rather in a Ministerial then
military fashion, Honestly, Humbly, Meekly, Charitably, Unanimously, and the
God of peace will be with us in this private and public posture; we shall
better bear the frowns or favors either of Princes or people, who will never
be our friends, if we be our own enemies.

CHAP. XIV.
HAving done my duty to those that are of my own profession, Humbly exhorting
Magistrates to assist in so good a work.
as Ministers (how ever they differ at present in the derivation of their
orders and exercise of their Ministerial Authority) my next address must be
to those persons whose influence, sociall or solitary, personal or
Parlamentary, either is, or may be, most effectual by their Counsels or
Commands, by their proposals or power, to recover the Purity, Order, Unity and
Stability of Religion in this Nation.

It is not fit for me to presume to suggest to persons so much above me in
prudence and experience, as well as power and reputation, any thing that looks
like counsel or advise. I know Superiors are prone to take those suggestions
for affronts from inferiors, as if they thought themselves wiser than those
that rule them.

But yet our humble petitions have acceptance with God^ himself, not as
suggestions to his wisdom, but submissions to his will, and supplications of
his goodness. No Christian Empire was ever so imperious as to disdain the
prayers of any that craved their favor and assistance in just and fair ways.
And since I find few Ministers of any party will begin or join with me in such
a request to those that are our Superiors, better I presume to supplicate
alone, than that no man of any calling should importune the Sovereignty,
Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, in a business of so great and public
concern, before the mischief spread too far, and the cure be desperate; which
will then be, when there shall be few sound minds, honest hearts, and whole
parts left in the Land, all or most being infected with Ignorance, Irreligion,
Atheism, Profaneness, Popery, or indifferency; the inevitable effects that
will follow the divisions, distractions and debasings of the Clergy, both among
themselves and the common people.

To you therefore, that are the highest and greatest, the honorablest and
richest, the wisest and strongest, the most noble and generous, the most
knowing and ingenuous persons, do I with all humble importunity recommend this
real Cause of God and of Christ our Savior, the cause of the Christian and
Reformed Religion, the cause of this Church and Nation, the cause of your own
and your posterities welfare.

Is it not high time, after so many tossings and Tragedies, in which this
Church and its Ministers have had so great a share, at last to speak
comfortably to Sion, Isa. 40.2.
to tell her that her warfare is accomplished, to take off the filthy garments
wherewith her Ministers of all sorts have been clothed, Zech 3.3, 4.
to cover their shame, to bury their mutual reproaches, to restore the honor
and authority of their calling, to encourage and improve in ways of public
conspicuity and harmony those excellent abilities which are in many of them;
which divided and at distance from each other, are either quite lost, or
perverted to maintain popular parties and factions against each other? Many
Ministers have been and are silenced, being thereby driven to extreme poverty;
most are dispersed and despised, not only by vulgar insolences, but by
mutual animosities, jealousies, distances and defiances. Few of us have that
Christian courage and constancy, by which the Primitive Bishops and Presbyters,
as an united Clergy, were still preserved entire among themselves, when most
persecuted by enemies: we are so divided, that we are justly dejected and
easily destroyed. Many of us have by our follies forfeited the honor of our
function; some of us by our secular policies and compliances have prostituted
the sanctity of it to the fedities and insolences of Laymen. We have dug
those pits into which we are fallen, and filled those dungeons with mire in which
we now stick.

Jer. 38.
It is a memorial of everlasting honor to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, that he
helped with great tenderness and humanity to draw the Prophet Jeremy out of
the dungeon, where he was ready to perish.

England has now for many years had many Prophets in dungeons of disgrace and
darkness, yea all are sunk into the dirt and mire of obloquy and contempt on
one side or other. I beseech you, be not tediously or anxiously inquisitive,
how we came there; but apply of your goodness and nobleness fit means to
draw us out. Let not the Christian and Reformed Ministry of this Church, which
was the most renowned in all the world (without any doubt, offense or envy I
speak it) let not this be (like Elisha) the scorn of fools, the mocking-stock
of children, the May Game of Papists, the laughter of Atheists, the object of
fanatic petulancy and vulgar insolency, the wonder and gaze of all forrainers,
the grief and astonishment of all sober men at home and abroad, who for some
years have beheld the factious and divided, the disputed and despised state of
Ministers, the poor and pitiful shifts they have made to keep their heads
above the waters, not to be quite overwhelmed with Poverty, Anarchy and
Contempt, while alone and solitary they signify not much, and jointly or
socially they are now nothing at all; having no public harmony or fraternall
correspondency, no concurrent counsel, no Synodicall convention or
Ecclesiastical Authority, being never summoned by Authority to meet or consult
together, never so far countenanced as to have any thing of public
concernment, to advise or execute in order to the general good of Religion:
their names, their persons, their calling, their ordination, their preaching,
their praying, their consecrating and dispensing of holy Mysteries, their
censures and reproves, or whatever discipline any of them affect or dare to
exercise, according to their own fancy and private Authority, all they do with
the greatest Gravity, Solemnity and Sanctity, is vilified, slighted, abhorred,
and as it were spit and spewed upon by some bold foreheads and foul mouths,
on one side or other, without any other remedy or redress, than what their
private discretion or their patience, either willingly or perforce, supplies
them.

These, these ( O noble Gentlemen and worthy Christians) are now your Divine
Teachers, these are your ghostly Fathers, these the best and brightest of your
Clergy at present; generally esteemed and treated as the filth and offscouring
of all things by vulgar minds: yea many of your modern intruders into the
Ministry are no better than the very scum and refuse of all Trades and
Occupations: if necessity pincheth them, or pride provokes them, or shame
banisheth them from their first stations and mechanic employments, presently
they dare to preach, when they can do nothing well. The most illiterate and
plebeian spirits, who are fitter to serve swine than the souls of Christians,
( ad haras magis quam anas apti) men that want all things befitting preachers
of the Gospel, except only Lungs and Tongues, such as are quite broken and
despairing as to any other way of living, these aspire to be your preachers:
how enabled, how examined, how ordained, by what authority they are sent I know
not; but I am sure they run amain, striving by all popular acts to outrun,
yea and overrun, the Ancient, Grave and Sober sort of Ministers in England,
whom they look upon as their sore enemies, eagerly persecuting them till they
run themselves out of breath. Then being tired in one place, they ramble to
some other, till use and confidence has so completed them in boldness, that
they dare own themselves in all companies, (but such as are grave, good and
learned) to be Ministers of the Gospel, after any new mode and fashion that
they list to take up.

Nothing can be a work of more Christian piety, prudence and compassion to this
Nation, than to redeem the Ministry of it from that pitiful posture and sad
condition whereto it is at present condemned by that divided, despised, and on
all sides either doubted or denied, authority, which Preachers challenge to
themselves. All are represented by some or other to the people as Falsarii,
Cheates, Impostors, Seducers. Certainly it were worthy of the Wisdom and Honor
of this Nation, to remove (as all others, so) in the first place this great
grievance, scandal and stumbling block out of the way of all Christians; to
take away this reproach of our Reformed Religion, whose God, and Savior, and
Spirit, being but one, its Faith, Gospel and Sacraments the same, its
Ministerial power and Authority can be but one in the true Authority and
Authentic Commission, both as to its Original and Derivation. There is no
speedier way nor easier to sow up the rents of Christ's garment, to cleanse and
close the wounds of his body in this Church, than to pour the Wine of healing
and the Oil of Union upon the Ministers of the Gospel, by persuading, yea
commanding and conjuring them to be of one heart and one mind in the Lord.

Nothing is more worthy that Wisdom and Power, that Piety and Honor* (to which
you, as Gentlemen, and Christians, and Reformed, do pretend) than to advance by
your counsel, industry and authority, so Christian a work as the settling of
Religious Order and Unity, an harmonious Government and Uniforme Authority
among the Ministers of the Gospel. I know all the Gates of Hell will be
against the design, and oppose it with what ever power and policy can be found
among the Devils: But the work (like that of building the second Temple) is
Gods. Honest endeavors will be their own rewards; how much more the desired
effect, if attained? which is so good and great, that no minds truly great and
good but earnestly desire to see that day, when they may behold the uniforme
face of a National Church among us, such a Reformation as is without any
remarkable defect or deformity, specially so black and fundamental as these
are, the Divisions, Distractions, Confusions among the Clergy, the vilifying
and nullifying of all Ministerial Order and Ecclesiastical Authority; that
such an Honor and Respect may be restored to your Ministers, as may exempt them
and all religious Ministrations from profaneness, scurrility, contempt; that
your Ministers may be such men of Learning and Worth, of Wisdom and Meekness,
of Fraternall Love and Kindness, that they may both deserve and rightly use
the just favor, supports and respects given them; the benefit of all which
will most redound to your honor and the happiness of your posterity, when they
shall behold such Religion, such Reformation and such Ministers, as they shall
see cause to reverence, love and value in conscience.

Religion is nothing if it be not esteemed as sacred; sacred it cannot be if it
be once ridiculous; and ridiculous it will be, if once it appear either to
have or make many strange and antic faces before the people, who have all this
inbred principle in them, that as true Religion can be but one, so it ought to
be Uniform, and its Teachers Unanimous, both in their Divinity and their
Authority: for variety in Ministers breeds incertainty, inconstancy in holy
duties, inconstancy breeds indifferency, indifferency breeds levity, levity
futility, futility folly, folly presumption, presumption atheism and
licenciousness among people, who from many Religions grow to any, and from any
Religion to none at all; common people having neither capacity, ability or
leisure to disintangle Religion, when it is offered them all snarled with the
factions, disputes and janglings of their Ministers. They cannot wind up any
great bottom of piety, who all their lives are untying the knots and undoing
the snarles of the scaine of Religion, which ought by the wisdom of Christian
Magistrates be presented to them in the most easy, comely, orderly,
authoritative and well-composed form that can be, and all little enough.

If the Christian and Reformed Religion, which has been so famous and
flourishing in England, be left to the coldness and indifferency of some, the
looseness and rudeness of others, also to the inordinate fervors and
contentions of a third sort, (which are the predatorious flames and Gangrenes
daily mortifying the native heat and moisture of Religion, which consist in
truth and love;)

If all things of solemn Mysteries, sacred order and Divine Ministry, be still
left to dissolve, first into plebeian ignorance and insolency, next into open
profaneness and atheism, and at last to shift for shame into Popish
Superstition and Roman Communion; must not the fate of your, either miscreant
or miserable, posterity necessarily be such, that their teeth will be so set on
edge by the sour grapes you have eaten and left for them, that they will not
endure sound Doctrine, much less wholesome Discipline? Thus untaught and
ungoverned, unbred and unfed in Religion, can you expect other from them than
all debaucheries, immoralities, and such Atheistical indifferences and
impudencies as the heart of man easily runs into, if left to it self, as the
Horse and Mule, without bit or bridle of Religion and conscience to restrain
them? May they not have cause, in their sad reflections upon the Beauty, Order,
Honor and Happiness of Religion in England, which they may read of in former
days, (besides the many afflictions and civil dissentions which have and will
inevitably follow divided Religion, to an irreligion in any Nation) may they
not in their doubting, dying and despairing retreates, have cause to count you,
yea and to curse you, as their careless and cruel parents? who are never
quiet or content, till you settle your honors, estates and civil affairs in
some safe posture, as you imagine; but are wholly negligent as to any religious
establishment, which many men fear, oppose and abhor, lest in clear waters
their faces should appear the fouler; varieties and uncertainties of Religion
being most fomented by those whose piety is wholly resolved into policy, who
never tasted how gracious the Lord is in the ways, means and fruits of true
Religion.

But for you (O my noble Countrymen) that have seen and rejoiced in that
glorious light of Reformed Religion which shined so long and illustriously in
the Church of England, how can you with any conscience or comfort leave the
world, and leave your posterity with your Country exposed to such variety,
uncertainties, distractions, deformities and confusions, as to the Reformed
Religion and its Ministry? which makes them look like the Temple of God in
Jerusalem, after Nebucadnezzar and Nebuzaradan had visited it with fire and
sword, so defacing and deforming it, that it was the pity of all good men, and
the scorn of the wicked.

As Augustus Caesar was wont in his most impotent passion of grief and vexation
to tear his hair, and cry out (Rid, Vare, Legiones) O Varus, Sueton. in
vita Aug.
restore the Legions of brave and veterane soldiers, which thou have so
unadvisedly or unworthily lost, (when they were slain by the Germane
surprises) so may you hear the soberest Christians and truest-hearted
Englishmen in their grief and shame cry out, Reddite nobis Religionem
Reformatam, Uniformem, Christianam, primaevam, Catholicam; Reddite Ecclesiae
Anglicana priscam pietatem, pacem, ordinem, pulchritudinem, patrimonium,
regimen, Majestatem debitam, and decus antiquum: Reddite nobis patres, fratres,
filios spiritales; Episcopos atate, virtute, authoritate venerandos;
Presbyteros literatura, industria, humilitate, unitate, ordine conspicuos;
Plebem probe instructam, modestam, sobriam, mutua charitate amulam, non
effr^nem, infrunitam, laceram, non erroribus lascivam, non novitatibus foedam,
non scabie rigentem, non nimia petulantia deformem, non irreligiose Religiosam,
etc.

This was the voice of the Church of England, while it dared to speak Latin,
which being now scandalous and reproachful to many, as the language of the
Beast, not understood by them, She is forced to express her Prayer in English
for men's better understanding. Restore, restore I beseech you to me, to your
selves, to your country, to your posterity, the purity, the peace, the
sanctity, the solemnity, the sobriety, the order, the honor, the unity, the
solidity, the stability, the power, the efficacy, the fruits and works of true
Christian and Reformed Religion; Restore to us the happiness of living, not
only united in one civil polity as men, but in one Ecclesiastical
Correspondency, Combination and Communion as Christians. It is more for our
honor and peace to be Members of one Church, than of one Commonwealth; to have
the same Religion and Devotion, than the same Laws and Statutes.

Restore to us those prime veins and Catholic conduits of Ecclesiastical
order, of Church Power and spiritual authority (under Christ) those paternall
Pastors, those Primitive Bishops, those successive Apostles: That so we may
have such Presbyters as have the Catholic Character of due Ordination, and the
most undoubted Derivation of Ministerial Authority upon them, being at once
able and willing, duly proved and empowered by Christ's deputed Ministers and
the whole Church, to consecrate and dispense holy Mysteries to us; not in the
new names of Presbyters, or people, or Parlaments, or Princes only, but in the
name of Christ and his Church, according to the commission he first gave to the
Apostles, and they transmitted to their successors in a constant, undoubted,
and uninterrupted succession to this day.

Redeem this ancient Church and renowned Nation from those lice and flies,
those locusts and frogs, whose importune malice and wantonness seeks to deface
and devour whatever yet remains of the Reformed Religion in England.

Redeem all sober Christians, whose little life affords them no leisure to
play with Religion; redeem them from the Rents and Schisms, the rags and
tatters, the breaks and divisions, the fragments and fractions, the chains and
fetters, the childish and ridiculous janglings, the scandalous and pernicious
liberties, with which pragmatick Spirits seek to poison and to imprison their
judgments and consciences.

Nothing is, at least ought to be, more pressive and urging upon your Honors
and Consciences (who are persons sensible of these two great regards to God and
man) than these concernments of true Religion; whose influence reaches to the
eternal interest of your own and your posterities souls. Nor is their lapsed
estate to be helped by fair words and soft pretentions, by demure silences and
^ary reserves, by State-stratagems and politic artifices, by vaporing of
reformations, and conniving at popular insolences, as if they were
tendernesses and liberties due to conscience. No, the recovery of Religion is
to be effected by potent convictions and impartial suppressions of all
enormous opinions and actions, by serious trying of errors, and establishing of
sound Doctrine, by just restraining all inordinate liberties, by encouraging an
able and uniform Ministry, by discountenancing all fanatic novelties, by
composing al uncharitable divisions, and by punishing all pragmatick
arrogancies, which evidently vary from, or run counter against, that truth,
order, ministry, authority and holy Discipline of Religion, which Scripture and
all Catholic conformity to it have commended to all Christians as Christ's will
and appointment; which being accordingly settled in this Church and State, ought
not to be contradicted or rudely contemned by any new lights, by pretended
inspirations, or the novel inventions of any man or men whatsoever, seem they
never so holy, so devout, so well-affected, so sincere, so saintly. This and
other true Churches of Christ did know very well what belonged to the unity,
sanctity, charity and constancy of Religion, as Christian and Reformed, long
before the new fry of any Factionists or Enthusiasts were known in the English
or Christian world.

Then will the honor of the Reformed Religion recover, take root, flourish and
fructify again in England, when it is by due authority and just severity
cleared of all that rust and canker, that mossy and barren accretion which of
later years it has contracted, chiefly for want of those Ecclesiastical
Councils, sacred Synods and Religious Conventions, which (being called and
encouraged by civil authority) will best do this great work of God and the
Church; freely and impartially, solidly and sincerely, learnedly and honestly
discussing all things of difference, disorder or deformity in Religion. These,
these would (by Gods blessing, and your encouragement) remove in a short time
all that putid matter, from which the scandals, offenses and factions do
chiefly arise, and by which they are nourished in the licentious hearts and
lives of some men, who dare do any thing that they safely may against Religion.
These, as the ablest and meetest Judges of Religion, would soon discern
between the vile and the precious, and separate the wheat and the chafe in
Christ's floor, wisely using the flaile and fan of his word and Spirit.

CHAP. XV.
Counc^ls or Synods the proper means to restore lapsed Religion.
THerefore is our Religion so miserably lapsed and decayed, through the
ignorance, negligence and impudence of men, because it has not for these many
years been under such hands as are most proper either for its care and
preservation, or its cure and recovery. Courts of Princes and Councels of
State, the Spirit of Armies and the Genius of Parliaments, are not (alone) apt
agents or instruments for this work, though they may be happy promoters, and
authoritative designers and contrivers of it. Saint Ambrose and others of the
Ancients observe, that it never went well with the sound part of the Church,
when the disputes of Religion (as between the Arrians and the Orthodox) were
brought into Princes Courts, and determined by their Counselors and Courtiers.

It was not more piety and modesty than prudence and generosity in Constantine
the Great, when he had conquered Licinius with other enemies, and entirely
obtained the Roman Empire, when he had power absolute and sovereign enough to
have made what Edicts he listed for Religion, yet that he then called the
Bishops of the Church throughout the Roman world, Eusebius. vit. Constable.
and other venerable Teachers attending them, to discuss the differences in
Religion, to compose the breaches, to allay the jealousies, to reform the
disorders, to search and establish the true faith, to confirm the ancient
Government, to add vigor to the just Discipline of the Church, and due
authority to its true Pastors or Bishops. All which were happily done by the
wisdom, piety and moderation of the famous Nicene Council, in which
Constantine himself was often present as to his person and Counsel, though he
never voted or determined any thing of Religion among the Fathers of that
glorious Assembly, lest he should seem to over-balance or overawe the truth by
his authority, or to eclipse the Church by the State.

This, this was that Primitive and Catholic way of Ecclesiastical Councills
and Synods, used first by the Apostles, and after by all their successors, the
Martyrly Bishops and Pastorly Confessors of the Church, which endured the fiery
trialls of heathenish and heretical persecutions, who had Ecclesiastical
Councills and Synods of Churchmen for their relief and remedy, before they
had the favor of Christian Princes for their refuge or defense.

To this proper method for Reforming of any Church and restoring Religion, Of
Ecclesiastic Councils called by Christian Princes.
all Princes that were true Patrons and Protectors of the true Church have
applied their powers and counsels for the repairing of decays, rectifying
disorders, condemning heresies, vindicating fundamental truths, composing
differences, and restoring peace in the Church of Christ; calling together such
Synods and conventions of the Clergy as did bear most proportion to those
inconveniences or mischiefs which they sought to remedy, either in greater or
lesser circuits, according as the poison and infection of Heresy or Schism
had spread it self. The welfare of Religion and healing of the Church of Christ
was never (heretofore) left to every private Christians fancy, or to particular
Presbyters, nor yet to single Bishops, to act according as their opinions,
passions and interests might sway them; nor was it ever betrayed into the hands
of only secular men, either Civil Magistrates, or Gentlemen, or Tradesmen,
who are as fit (generally) for Church-work, as Clergymen are to marshall
Armies, or to manage battles. The building of Gods Tabernacle and his Temple
required men of extraordinary gifts and excellent Spirits, proper and
proportionate to those works: As the Leviticall Priests of old did judge, not
only of plagues and leprosies, Deuteronomy. 17.8. to v. 14
but of all controversies about the Law and Religion, to whose determination
all men were to submit under pain of death. Numb. 16.48.
And as Aaron standing between the living and the dead stopped the spreading of
a plague and mortality among the people; even so has the Lord ordained the
Evangelicall Ministers to be as shepherds, feeders, defenders and rulers in his
Church; also as Physicians and Fathers of the flock of God, whose lips ought to
preserve knowledge so as to discern both the contagion and the cure, applying
(as their duty is) such ((...)) sound Doctrine and Discipline, as are both
wholesome food and healing physic. Certainly all other Lay-undertakers and
tamperers with Reformation and Religion, are but as Empiricks and Mountebanks,
having neither that ability nor that authority which is requisite in Religious
undertakings: But after much pains and charge they always leave Reformation
and Religion, Church and Clergy, more unsearched and unsound, unbound and
ulcerous, than they found them: God never following those with the blessing of
the end, who disdain to use those orderly means which his holy wisdom has
directed them to; who lay the Ark of God upon the cart, 1 Samuel 6.7. etc.
and think to draw it by the beasts of the people, when it should be orderly
and solemnly born by the shoulders and hands of those that are consecrated to
that holy service as the Priests of the Lord: which method is not only more
for the honor and solemnity of Christian Religion, than for the glory of the
blessed God, that his name might be sanctified even before the world, in the
managing of true Religion, not flightly or slovenly, not with unwashen hands
and preposterous confusions, but with that holy respect and humble reverence
which is due to the Majesty of that God and Savior whom Christians profess to
worship.

It Is ridiculous for Princes and Statesmen to have the best Musicians for their
pleasure, the most learned and experienced Physicians for their bodily health,
the most able and renowned Lawyers for their secular Counsels, the gallantest
soldiers for their military officers, the best Mathematicians for their
Engineers, and the best Mariners for their Pilots, that so these things might
succeed to their worldly honor and happiness; and (yet) in matters of Religion
to content themselves either with no idoneous Physicians and fit medicines, or
with such quacking applications and applicators as are no way apt for the work,
having neither skill nor dexterity to handle so tender, yet so dangerous, sores
and wounds as those of Religion many times are, not only affecting the heads
of men, but coming nearest the very hearts of them: yea and I may say these
Church-distempers affect the very heart of Christ himself, both God and man.

We find secular Magistrates and Judges many times (with Herod and Pilate)
ready to set Christ at naught and condemn him; soldiers we know have mocked
him, Mark 15.16, 17. Luke 23.11.
buffeted him, crucified him, and parted his garments among them: But they were
his choice Apostles, with other ordained Ministers, that professed and preached
him. These, these first planted, fenced and watered Christian Religion; these
preserved, propagated and pruned the Church of Christ to this day, as the
husbandmen or laborers of Christ's own sending into his vineyard, as workers
together with God in the great work of saving souls: with these Apostles and
Ministers he promised to be (meaning them and their true successors) to the end
of the world; as he has been to this day, never failing to assist Godly
Bishops and other faithful Presbyters of his Church, to do his work, as in
private so in public, when they did orderly meet as his servants, in his name,
to his glory and his Churches good, suffering themselves to be impartially
guided by his word and Spirit, without serving the factious interests and
sinister policies either of Prince or people.

Then, then was it that Councils and Synods appeared to all sober-minded and
humble-hearted Christians as the Star did to the wise men at Jerusalem, Mat.
2.9.
guiding them to Christ with exceeding great joy, in orderly ways of truth and
peace becoming Christian Ministers and people; which was the blessed effect of
the first Church- Council we read of, Act. 15.22.
where James Bishop of Jerusalem with the Apostles of the Lord (as chief) and
other Elders or Presbyters, being met in the presence of Christian people, did
so consult, discuss and resolve the dissensions then risen in the Churches, as
to send their determinations with this style and title, It seemed good to the
holy Ghost and to us: ver. 28.
whose Canons were read and received not only with reverence and conscience,
but with joy and consolation. So welcome and useful to all good Christians are
those means which are fitly and wisely applied, after Gods method and the
Apostles pattern, to the relief and recovery of the Church.

The care of summoning and convocating such Ecclesiastical Parlaments when
need requires, is worthy the piety and Majesty of Christian Princes and
sovereign Magistrates, in whom that Authority resides, as nursing Fathers of
the Church: but certainly the management and transaction of Religious affairs
in them by way of devotion, disputation and determination, is the proper work
of Churchmen, that are Godly, Learned, Wise and Honest, both of Bishops as
fixed and chief Rulers of the Church, and of grave Presbyters as the
Representees of the other Clergy, chosen, deputed, entrusted and empowered by
them, fully and freely to deliberate and determine in those great concernments,
as Gods word and their own consciences shall direct them, without any to
overawe them or to dictate to them.

I am not ignorant of the jealousies and prejudices that many (even wise and
good Christians) have of such Assemblies, Synods, Convocations or Councils, as
are made up only of Ecclesiastics or Clergymen: Whose often unhappy successes
Gregory Nazianzen (that great Divine, and good Bishop) complains of in his
days, when the Arrian faction, by the partiality of Emperors infected with
their poison, strongly vyed in their Conventions against the Orthodox
decisions, the ancient Faith and Catholic customs of the Church, setting up
ever and anon in their juncto's and conventicles (as St. Hilary expresses it)
Diurnall Creeds and Menstruous Faiths, being many times but ((...)) theevish
Synods, furtive Conventicles, suborned and slavish Assemblies, either
transported by humane passions, or biassed by partial affections, or levened
with popular factions, or overawed by secular powers and sacrilegious
policies, which made such conventions, as the hills of the robbers,
predatorious oppressors of true Religion, pillagers and spoilers of the Church
of Christ, of which too many sad instances have been in ancient and later days
both at home and abroad.

Especially when such Assemblies meet not summoned by lawful Authority, not
chosen with Ecclesiastic freedom, not sitting with completeness of members,
not voting or disputing with rational, ingenuous and Christian liberties: but
all things must be carried not after the Nicene but Tridentine fashion, as if
the holy Ghost were sent to the Assessors in a carriers cloke-bag, or a
soldiers knapsack; the most learned and sober men must be mute, and not dare
freely to speak their minds, without being posted and exposed to popular
hatred, even to the outraging and hazard of their persons, unless they speak
to that key and tune to which the organe of faction is set.

These methods of Church- Councils and Assemblies, I confess, are so
Mechanic, so Tyrannick, so Satanick, that nothing is more mischievous to the
Church of Christ and true Religion, whose condition instead of being thus
mended, is always marred and betrayed to further errors, factions and
confusions. I pray God deliver his Church from such Conventions, where either
Laymen shall over-number and overawe the Clergy, or Clergymen shall
vassalate their consciences to gratify any potent party and novell faction, to
the prejudice of that truth, faith, order, ministry and government which were
once delivered to the Churches of Christ. Not only England, but all
Christendom has cause to curse the day when such snares and stratagems of
Satan began to be laid in Synods and Assemblies, from thence to take effect on
the whole, or any part of the Christian Church; as eminently in the second
Council of Nice, the last of Trent, and that at Westminster: the first setting
up Images in Christian Churches, to the scandal of Religion; the other a
thousand new imaginations never owned before as of Christian faith; the last,
which is the first of any that cried down Episcopacy or Prelacy.

But the abuses incident to good things, through the distempers of men and
evil hearts, must not exterminate or deprive us of the right use of them; for
then we should not only forsake our wits and reason, but our meat and drink,
our clothes and sleep, yea and the light of the Sun, and breathing in the air,
yea our very Sacraments and Scriptures, our frequent Sermons, and extemporary
as well as set prayers, yea and our Presbyters as well as our Bishops; for in
all these hony-combes or hives, do hornets, wasps and drones very often shroud
themselves; by these, as St. Austin observes, all errors, heresies and schisms
seek to support and shelter themselves.

But where such Ecclesiastical Synods and Councils as were the first so famous
General ones, of Nice, Ephesus, Chalcedon and Constantinople (besides many
other Provincial and National Synods, in Asia, Africa and Europe, also here
in our Britany, of which the most learned Sir H. Spelman has given us a
liberal account, as Sirmondus of those in France*) where, I say, they were
lawfully called by the chief Magistrate, or freely convened by the Bishops
consents, and impartially managed, with the fear of God and love of his truth,
so as becomes men of learning, gravity and good conscience, in so grand
concernments as import the peace of the Church, the satisfaction and salvation
of men's souls: in these cases it cannot be denied, nor sufficiently expressed,
with how happy successes God has always blessed those meetings; their pious
results and peaceable determinations being the votes of that public Spirit of
Christ, to which the private Spirits of all true Prophets and Preachers, no
less than of Christian people, will, as they ought, be subject: Truth and
Peace have for many years after flourished in those Churches that have been
most blessed with the frequency of such Synods. As frequency of Parlaments, when
they are as they ought to be, (the highest, fullest and freest Counsel of the
Nation) is the best preservative of our civil peace, and of the vigor of our
Laws; so would frequent National Synods (rightly constituted and managed) be,
as I formerly demonstrated, the best Conservators of the purity, peace and
proficiency of our Religion as Christian and Reformed.

When Convocations of Ministers should meet and sit, not only for form and
fashion, to be the Umbra's of Parlaments, to put on their gowns, to tell the
clock, and to give their moneys, but to look seriously and effectually into the
state of Religion, that it suffered no detriment by any practice or pretention,
by profaneness or superstition, by any defects or excesses, under the colors
of affected novelty, or antiquated Antiquity; if the hand that held the scale
and standard of Religion, were here fixed by Authority, that National Synods
should be the Conservators of Religion, it is not imaginable how much all
worthy Ministers would study to improve their studies and employ their parts to
increase their gifts and graces, that they might be meet helps in so grand and
public services for God and his Church: such as now are like bitten and
over-dopped shrubs, would then grow to the procerity of tall trees and goodly
Cedars.

What is there so great, so glorious, so useful, The great use of National
and frequent Synods.
so advantageous for Religion and the good of the Church, that might not here
by many acute eyes, diligent hands, able heads and honest hearts be effected?

1. How might all new opinions, which the luxuriancy of men's imaginations are
prone to conceive and bring forth, (it may be with no evil minds, as honest
women often do monstrous births) be here timely and duly examined, and either
smothered or allowed to live, being either fully confuted or seriously
confirmed?

2. How might the purity, solidity and profundity of true Doctrine here be
contained and maintained, as the waters for the Temple were in the brazen Sea?

3. How might the first Catechisticall principles or foundations, with the
second and third stories of Religion, be here methodically digested and
prepared for the use of all sorts of people, younger and elder?

4. How noble an appeal and impartial a Sanctuary would both Doctrine and
Discipline here have; which none could in reason or modesty either wave or
refuse?

5. How might the Devotionall parts of Religion be here admirably composed, and
so disposed as might supply both the infinite defects which have followed the
late indirect Directory, and the apparent wants which are found of a fitting
public Liturgy? The disuse of which has not only exposed the solemnity of
public Prayers and Sacramental consecrations to each private Ministers Spirit
and abilities; but to his defects, disorders, excesses, errors, indispositions
and extravagancies: yea they have brought a very great neglect of public and
private duties among all people, through the ignorance and indevotion which is
grown among us. Further, they have occasioned infinite partialities,
whisperings, tumults, strifes, disdaines and divisions among all sorts both of
Ministers and people; who have not only the word of God, but the water and the
blood, both the Sacraments of Christ, in great respect for men's persons, parts
and gifts. One Minister will have Sacraments, another will have none: one is
cried up, another cried down, as consecrating and officiating better or worse
than another: one is very long, flat and tedious; another too short, obscure
and concise: one affects such strange words and odd phrases in his
consecration and distribution, as either amaze or scandalize the receivers,
which I have known: some Ministers do all by their own either constant or
occasional forms; others covet to imitate the patterns and expressions of
leading and popular Preachers. I humbly conceive much good might be done, even
in this particular, if all Ministers were tied to use some one grave, devout,
complete and emphatick form, such as should be established with all due regard
to the former Liturgy, and yet permitted with that, to use what further
prayers and praises they thought convenient, or their fervent hearts moved them
to, for their own and their peoples occasions; of the discreet performing of
which, they should have other judges besides themselves, who should not suffer
them to be tedious, extravagant or impertinent.

6. By such Synods moving in a constant orb or fixed sphere, how easily might a
noble Commentary upon the whole Scripture be composed and commended to the use
of this Church, for the clearing of the Scripture-sense and meaning, and for
confirming the Readers of them in the true faith; which many not understanding
with the Eunuch, wrest to their own destructions for want of an interpreter?
For neither Geneva notes, nor Diodates touches, nor the late endeavors of some
of the Assembly, do in my judgment come up to that light and luster which
would be required, and might be attained, in so admirable and useful a work,
whereto much good materials are already prepared by the excellent labors of
English Divines upon most parts of the Scripture. To this Commentary might be
added such directions for Readers more at leisure, as might commend to them
those excellent English or other Authors, who had wrote well on any one book,
or chapter, or verse, with reference to the most remarkable Treatises or
Sermons, which have been set forth in the Church of England, which beyond any
Church, ancient or modern, had a fullness of such spiritual gifts or
prophesying powered forth upon it; which are now generally shrunk and withered,
much abated and quite buried, chiefly for want of such public employment,
improvement and encouragement, as Ministers are capable of and aptest for.

7. By the concurrent influence of such public Counsels, all difficulties in
Doctrine, Discipline and Church Government might easily be maturely debated,
gravely resolved, exactly stated, and wisely composed.

8. More compendious, clear, easy and constant ways of instilling Religion
to common peoples grosser minds might be prescribed, than those are of loose,
rambling, arbitrary and diffused preaching, where after twenty years preaching
(yea and with great applause many times as well as good pains,) yet poor
people are most-what very ignorant or raw as to the very first and maine
principles of Religion; which I humbly conceive might be drawn up into so many
short discourses and clear Summaries, as might every Lord's Day take up one
quarter of an hour, or little more, before and after noon, in the Ministers
distinct reading some one of them to the people in such a constant order, as
once in every half year might finish the whole series of them: which might be
printed for the use of such as can read, and for others that cannot read,
this frequent inculcating and constant repeating of those main points, so set
forth, could not but much improve the sound understanding of plainer people in
the doctrines, mysteries, graces and promises, precepts and duties of true
Religion; which now they learn either not at all in some necessary points, or
so rawly, raggedly, loosely and confusedly, that it comes far short of that
judicious and methodicall solidity which they might attain, if they were
clearly, uniformly and constantly taught, so as they could best bear and
hear, understand and remember. Nor would this be any hinderance to preaching,
praying or catechizing, but a great furtherance to them all; and what ever
people had beside from the meanest- gifted Minister, they might be sure to have
every Lord's Day one or two heads of good Divinity well set forth to them, yea
and one or two chapters of the Bible well explained to them, till the whole
were gone through. Which would be a great means to prevent the odd, idle and
addle senses, by which silly or pragmatick-spirited people pervert and corrupt
the Scripture, not only by their private and weak, but by their ridiculous,
erroneous and blasphemous interpretations: the variety and looseness, besides
the easiness and flatnesse of most men's preaching, does rather confound than
build common people in Religion; all which by constant Synods might be amended.

If the Church of England were so barren of godly, able, learned and honest
Ministers, that a good and safe choice of fit members cannot be made every time
such venerable Synods and useful Assemblies should meet; if we of the Clergy
are all so degenerated as to become (of late years) either dunces and
unlearned, or erroneous and corrupt in our judgments, or licencious and
immorall in our manners, or partial and imprudent in our designs, or base and
cowardly in all our dealings, that we are not to be trusted in the mysteries or
managery of our own calling and function; truly it is pity we should be owned
any longer as Ministers of Christ in this or any Church, being so unfit for our
own sphere and duty.

Nor can I understand how it should be that Mechanic Artificers, Merchants,
Tradesmen and Soldiers should still be thought fittest to be advised with in
their several ways and mysteries of life; only the Clergy should be thought
so defective in all abilities and honesty, as not to be trusted with any advise
or counsel in public matters of Religion, no more than with any place in any
civil counsel or transactions. Parlament-men they may not be; while the most
puny-gentry, petty Lawyers, and trivial Physicians, while Merchants and
Milleners, Goldsmiths and Copper-smiths, while Drugsters, Apothecaries,
Haberdashers of small wares, and Leather-sellers, and while every
handy-crafts-man and prentice aspire to be not only Committee but even
Parlament-men, yea and it may be Counselors of State. Only Clergymen must be
wholly excluded, (as Monks condemned to their beads and bellies) while those
lay-Masters challenge not only all civil Counsels and Honorable employments
to themselves, but they further seek to engrosse even those great concernments
of Religion; not allowing any Ministers, of what ever size their Learning,
Wisdom and Worth be, to move in their own mystery or joint and public
interests, further than as they are impounded to their parish-Pulpits, and
tedered to their texts or desks. Every sorry and silly mechanic dares to
arrogate as great, (nay far greater) Empire-influences and latitudes in the
public management of Religion, than the best Divines in England may ever hope
to attain, or adventure to use, in any sphere private or public, unless there
be a more indulgent and equal regard had to the worth and calling of Ministers
than of late years has been had.

O happy England, whose Laity* and Communalty of late has so excelled thy
Clergy! or rather O miserable England, who either have such Church men as are
not fit to be advised with or not trusted in Religion; or which art so
unworthily jealous and neglective of them, as not to trust or use them in those
great and sacred concernments for which they were educated, and in which they
were heretofore not only thought, but known, to be as able as any Clergy in
all the world, till they were thus divided and shattered, thus disabled and
disparaged, most of them rather by popular discouragings, prejudices and
oppressions, than by any real defects in themselves either of Piety, Learning
or Honesty!

I cannot sufficiently pity and deplore thy sad and miserable fate ( O my
Country) which either abasing or abusing, at least not using thy worthiest
Clergy for such public ends, deprivest thy self of the most sovereign, nay
only ordinary means under Heaven whereby to recover thy self to the former
Beauty, Honor, Luster, Stability and integrity of true Religion which thou
did enjoy* everlasting divisions, deformities and confusions will be thy
portion, without a miracle, if thou trustest to those Egyptian reeds, the novel
pretensions and usurpations of ignorant and arrogant Laymen, of inspired and
aspiring Levellers, which will pierce into thy hand and heart while thou
leanest on them. Nothing can restore or preserve the health and soundness of
Religion but those ways which are tried, Authoritative and Authentic, which
have Gods Image, Christ's Power, the Spirits Wisdom, the Apostles prescription,
and the Catholic Churches Character upon them; which may first persuade men's
judgments, and then oblige their consciences to obey for the Lords sake.

All methods used in Religion that are perverse, popular, novell, arrogant or
invasive, contrary to the sacred and venerable methods of Gods direction and
the Churches Catholic Custom, are like sluices and banks ill-bottomed, soon
blown up, having neither depth nor weight, foundation nor superstruction to
make them good. Nor shall I ever think the Laws of Parlaments more binding to
obey in civil things, than such Canons of Church-Councils are obligatory as to
submission in religious matters; where nothing is decreed contrary to Gods
express will in his Word, nor beyond those general latitudes and Commissions
of Charity, Order, Peace, Decency and Holiness, which God has indulged to his
Church.

Certainly the Wolves, Foxes and Boares, Heretics, Schismatics and heathen
persecutors, had long ago scattered the several flocks of Christ into corners,
and dissolved the face of any visible Church on earth, if after the several
sad dispersions and vastations of them, the chief Pastors and Bishops of the
Church, (succeeding to the ordinary power of Apostles) had not either in
Oecumenick Councills, or in their particular Diocese and Provinces, taken care
with their brethren to call together and settle in Holy Communion of faith and
manners the remains of their dispersed Presbyters and disordered people. To
which good work of calling Councils and Synods, for the rectifying and
restoring of Religion, all good Christian Emperors, besides the Bishops, did
cheerfully contribute both their favor and Treasure, as the most noble way in
the world to employ them.

Shall the Counsels and powers, the tributes and revenues of Christian
Magistrates and people, be only laid out in making war at home and abroad,
only to recover or keep up their civil peace, or to build their own houses?
and is nothing to be laid out to maintain the Faith of Christ, to keep the fort
of Sion, and to build the Towers and Temple of Jerusalem, to restore and
preserve the Purity and Peace, the Sanctity and Solemnity, the Order and
Authority of Christian, yea Reformed Religion? Must that be left (like Paul's)
to impair or repair it self as well as it can? or only be committed to the
care of such men as are commonly better at pulling down than building up
Churches, who neither know how to begin nor how to end any Church-work, having
neither heads nor hands, materials nor skill, line nor rule fit for such
business? And when they have done all they can in bungling and new ways,
neither the Clergy or Ministers under their power, nor the Laity or people
under their command, will much more regard, as to conscience, what is so done
by only Laymens magisterial decrees and imperial appointments, than they now
do consider the Covenant and Holy League, or the Directory and Engagement, new
models for Religion, cut out not so much by national Synods and Councils as by
swords and pistols, and accordingly both esteemed and used by all men that are
of sound and judicious minds, not corrupted with partiality, credulity,
popularity and novelty. For how can those bind the conscience of the Nation in
the most indifferent things of Religion, who never had the choice, counsel or
consent of all Estates in the nation, either to advise, or determine, or
enjoyne any such things, which require (to make them valid and conscientiously
obligatory) the Sovereigns call, the Clergies counsel, and the Parlaments
sanction?

CHAP. XVI.
The method of restoring a settled Church and united Ministry.
I Well know how hard a work it is for the best and wisest of men to stop the
leakes of Religion, to repair a broken Church, or to buoy up a sunk and lapsed
Clergy, when once they are either overwhelmed with the corrupt Doctrines and
licentious manners of Preachers and Professors, or split with intestine
Schisms and Divisions, or debased with vulgar usurpations and presumptions, or
oppressed with the secular policies and sacrilegious injuries of violent and
unreasonable men; who are always afraid lest the renewed light and restored
vigor of true Religion, with the due Authority of its Ministry in the Church,
should give any stop or check to their extravagant lusts and enormous actions.
To which purpose such pragmaticks will be sure either utterly to hinder all
good means that may effectually recover the true interests of Religion and its
Ministry, or else they labor impertinently to apply such only as they know
will render them more uncurable, and set them next door to an impossibility.

Which will be the State of the Church of England, if the Recovery of Religion,
as to its visible Beauty, Order, Unity and Polity, be either managed by
Laymens Counsels and activities only, excluding all Ministers from all
public, equal and impartial consultations; or if, on the other side,
Church-affaires be wholly left to the various heads, divided hands and partial
designs of such as are now called Preachers, and pretend to be Ministers;
among whom (commonly) the weakest heads have the most pragmatick hands, and men
of least abilities are greatest sticklers, though it be but more to puzzle,
confound and destroy themselves and others. On the other side, such Clergymen
as have most of solid Learning, sober Piety, sacred Authority, and real
Sufficiencies for such a work, will be either afraid or ashamed to act or
assist in it, if they have not some public Commission with equal and
impartial encouragement from those in power. For certain, mere mechanic and
illiterate preachers, (such as some people now most affect) will never be able,
if willing, to do any good in so great and good a work, no more than wasps are
like to make honey: Ignorance and disorder, faction and confusion being for
their interest, as muddy places are best for Eeles. Other Ministers, though
never so willing and able, yet, as tools that are blunt and have no edge set
on them, can never carry on such a work handsomely, unless their late rust and
disspiriting, their poverty and depression be taken off; unless their mutual
contempts, distances and jealousies be fairly removed; unless they be restored
to such Charity, Comfort and Courage, as becomes Learned and Godly Ministers.
Such a constitution, as was heretofore most eminently to be seen in the
Ecclesiastical Synods and Convocations of the English Clergy, while they
enjoyed, by the favors of munificent Princes and the assistance of unanimous
Parlaments, those many noble privileges both of Honor and Estate, together
with their undoubted Ecclesiastical Authority, which were by ancient and
modern Laws settled upon them; which kept up the Learning and Religion, the
Credit and Comfort of the Clergy of this Nation, to so great an height both of
Love and Reputation, that neither the petulancy of people nor the arrogance of
any parasitick preachers either dared or were able thus to divide and wound
them and the Church, through the pretenses of such Liberties and Reformations
as knew no bounds of modesty or common honesty, so far were they from any true
grounds of piety or Christianity.

Nor will the divided and depressed State of Religion in this Church ever
recover its pristine vigor, its due authority, its holy influence or its
honorable esteem, unless you (O my noble and honored Countrymen, who are
persons of most public eminence and influence) be pleased to make it one of
the chiefest objects of your Counsels, Prayers and endeavors, to revive the
drooping Spirits, to raise the dejected estate, and to re-compose the shattered
posture of the Clergy or Ministry of England; in whose ruin the Reformed
Religion will be ruined, and in whose recovery true Christian Religion will be
recovered to its just harmony, stability, and honor: for it is impossible that
Religion as Christian and Reformed should enjoy either unity, reverence or
authority, while the chief Pastors, Preachers and Professors of it are in so
dubious, debased and divided a condition.

Since then the Religious happiness of this Church and Nation chiefly depends
and moves upon this one hindge, give me leave with all humble and earnest
advise to commend to your Christian consideration, First, the preservation of
the very being or essence of a true and authoritative Ministry, upon which
depends the visible polity and orderly being of any true Church, also the
powerful dispensation and comfortable reception of all holy mysteries;
Secondly, the ( been esse) well-being or flourishing estate of such a true
Ministry, by which it may be kept in such order, honor and unity, as may redeem
it both from vulgar arrogancies, contempts and confusions, also from mutual
factions and divisions; by which means (of later years) the very face of a
Church, as to any National harmony, fraternity, subordination and Communion in
England, is either quite lost, or so hidden, deformed and disguised, that not
only the sacred dignity and authority, but the very Name and Office of a true
Minister, is become odious, infamous and ridiculous among many people, who
either will have no Ministers at all, or only such as themselves list to
create in their several Conventicles, which are, in respect of the true Church
and Clergy of England, no more to be esteemed than the concubines of jealousy
and harlots of adultery are to be compared to lawful wives, that are Matrons
of unspotted honor.

The essentials of a true Ministry.
1. The Essentials of a true Christian Ministry consist, First, in the person or
subject fitly qualified for that callings; Secondly, in the commission or power
by which the proper Form and Authority Ministerial is duly applied to any
person so qualified.

1. The Subject matter of the Ministry must be able and apt men.
1. The person, subject matter or recipient of Holy Orders, ought to be such
persons as are furnished with those Ministerial gifts and abilities, both
internal and external, for knowledge and utterance, for unblamable life and
good report, as may make them not only competent for that holy work in
general, but likewise fit for that particular place whereto God by man does
call them. Of these real and discernable competencies, (besides those sincere
and gracious propensities in charity to be hoped and presumed to glorify God
in that service, not out of ambition, covetousness, popularity, or mere
necessity, but out of an humble zeal and an holy choice) a judicious, serious,
strict, solemn, public and authoritative trial and approbation ought to be
made, as was appointed in the Church of England, by such Ecclesiastical
persons as are in all reason most able, and so most meet to be appointed by law
for the examining and judging of Ministers, both as to their personal
sufficiencies, and the public testimonies of their life and manners.

In this point I know some men are jealous that some Bishops in former times
were too private, remiss and superficial, approving and ordaining Ministers
only upon the Chaplains trial and testimony, which after proved but sorry
Clerks; for which easiness they had (many times) to plead the meannesse of
those Livings to which such Ministers were presented, as could not bear an
exacter trial. Poor people must have such preachers or none in such starving
entertainments as were in many places, which, like heathy grounds, neither can
breed nor feed any thing that is grand or goodly.

Were the maintenance of Ministers every where made competent, nothing shouid
be more severely looked to by the ordainers of Ministers than the competent
abilities and worth of those to whom they transmit and impart that sacred
power, charge and Ministration. For, not only the consciences of the ordained,
but of the ordainers, stand here highly responsible to God and the Church, that
God may be glorified, that the Church both in general and particular may be
satisfied, that both other Ministers may cheerfully join with them in the work
of the Lord, and that their peculiar charge may receive them with that due
respect, love and submission, which becomes those that minister to them the
holy things of God in the stead of Jesus Christ, as his Stewards, Lieutenants
and Ambassadors. No men will conscienciously, no nor civilly, regard any
Minister (when once the plebeian heat of faction is allayed) of whose
sufficiency, and authority too, they have no just confidence, because no
public trial, credible testimony, or authoritative mission: How much less,
when men shall have pregnant evidences of a Ministers weakness, ignorance,
folly, schism and scandal many ways? It Is true, 2 Cor. 2.16.
in the highest and exactest sense (as the Apostle says) none are sufficient
for those things; but yet in a lower and qualified sense, none ought to be
ordained who are not in some sort sufficient for them. Because none are by way
of Divine equivalency worthy, we must not therefore admit such as are in humane
and moral, or intellectual proportions utterly unworthy; since the Lord of
his Church is pleased in all ages to give such gifts and blessings to men's
tenuity, 2 Cor. 4.7.
as may in some sense fit those earthen vessels to be workers together with
God, by the help of the excellency of his Divine power, whose operations in
this kind are not miraculous, as without any fit means, but moral, and
proportionate to the aptitude of such means as God has appointed and required
in his Church for humane ability and industry.

When the Material qualifications of one that is a Candidate or Expectant of
the Ministry are thus examined by the ordainers, Secondly, The essential Form
of a true Minister, right Ordination*
and discovered to all those who are concerned, the next care for the
Essentials of a Minister consists in applying that true Character, stamp and
Authority, wherein the Essential Form and Soul as it were of a Minister of the
Gospel does consist; which (as I have in another work largely declared) does
not arise from any thing that is common in Nature or Grace, from any moral,
civil or religious respects, for then all men, and women too, that have
natural or acquired abilities, religious or gracious endowments, might
presently either challenge to themselves the place, power, office and authority
of a Minister of Christ and his Church, or communicate it to others as they
please; which would be the original of all presumption and confusion in the
Church of Christ, as much as parallel practices would be in civil States, if
every man should put himself into what place and employment public he lists,
either magistratick or military, without any Commission or express authority
derived to him from the fountain of civil or magistratick power.

No, the true, valid and authentic authority of an Evangelicall Minister of
any rank and degree, as Deacon, Presbyter or Bishop in the Church, consists in
that Divine mission and Ecclesiastical Commission, which is duly derived and
orderly conferred to meet persons, by those who are the lawful and Catholic
conduits of that power, to whom it bath been in all ages and places committed,
and who are in a capacity to transmit or communicate and impart it to others by
way of holy ordination, such as Jesus Christ received from his Father, such as
he derived to his Apostles, such as they committed to their deputed successors,
the Bishops and Pastors of the Church in all Ages and places; of which we have
two express witnesses and great exemplifications in the commissions given by
Saint Paul to Timothy and Titus, both as to ordination and jurisdiction; Such
as has been preserved in the Church through all times and places as a sacred
depositum of Spiritual power, enabling Bishops and Presbyters to act as
Ministers of Christ, in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in those
holy Offices and Mysteries which are instituted by them for the calling,
collecting, constituting and governing of the Church in a regular society and
visible polity; which least of all affects or admits any novelty or variety in
its holy orders or authority.

Which great Trust, Power and Commission for duly ordaining and sending forth
Ministers into the Church of Christ, no man not wilfully blind but must
confess that it has been in all times, parts and states of the Church of
Christ executed, if not only, yet chiefly, by the Ecclesiastical presidents
or Bishops, in every grand distribution of the Churches polity: So as it was
never regularly, warrantably or completely done by any Christian people, or by
any Presbyters or Preachers, without the presence, consent or permission of
their respective Bishops, in the several limits or partitions.

Nor was this great, sacred and solemn work of Ordination ever either usurped
by Bishops, as arrogant and imperious, or executed by them as a thing arbitrary
and precarious; but it was always owned, esteemed and used by all true
Christians, both Ministers and People, as an Authority Sacred and Divine, fixed
and exercised by way of spiritual Jurisdiction and power Ecclesiastical,
specially inherent, and eminently resident in Bishops as such, that is, so
invested with the peculiar power of conferring holy orders to others, even from
the hands and times of the Blessed Apostles, who had undoubtedly this power
placed in them, and as undoubtedly ordered such a transmission of it, as to
Timothy and Titus, so to all those holy Bishops that were their Primitive
Successors; who did, as they ought, still continue that holy succession to all
ages, by laying on such Episcopal hands as were the unquestionable
Conservators and chief distributers of that Ministerial power, ever esteemed
Sacred, Apostolic, Catholic, and Divine, being from one fountain or source
Jesus Christ, and uniformly carried on by one orderly course, without any
perverting or interrupting from any good Christians, either Presbyters or
people. Nor were they ever judged other than factious, schismatic,
irregular, impudent and injurious, who either usurped to themselves a power of
Ordination, or despised and neglected it in their lawful and orthodox Bishops,
Ordinatos suisse Presbyteros a solis Presbyteris, nullo exemplo, nulla
authoritate probari potest. Sarav. Cont. Bez. de grad. Min. c. 22.
upon any pretense of parity or popularity; as Learned Saravia proves
unanswerably against Mr. Beza, when to make good the new Presbyterian
Consistory at Geneva, he sought in this point to weaken the ancient, Catholic
and constant prerogative of Episcopal Ordination; which never appears either
in Scripture to have been committed, or in any Church History to have been used
by any Presbyters or People, apart from, much less in despite and affront of,
the respective Bishops which were over them.

This great power of Ordination, which the Author to the Hebrews signifies by
the solemn ceremony or laying on of hands Heb. 6.2.
is esteemed by that Apostolic writer as a maine principle or chief pillar of
Christian Religion, in respect of Ecclesiastic Order, Polity, Peace, Authority
and Comfort; necessary for all Christians, both as Ministers and as people, in
sociall and single capacities. For there is ordinarily no true and orthodox
believing without powerful and authoritative preaching; and there can be no
such preaching without a just mission or sending from those in whom that Sacred
Commission has ever been deposited, exemplified and preserved; which were the
Bishops of the Church beyond all dispute, who did not ordain Presbyters in
private and clandestine fashions, but in a most public and solemn manner,
after fasting, preaching and praying, so as might best satisfy the Presbyters
assistant and the people present at that grand transaction: both of them being
highly concerned, the first what Ministers or fellow- laborers were joined
with them in the work of the Lord, the other what Pastors and Teachers were set
over them as from the Lord, and not merely from man, in any natural, moral, or
civil capacity; whence the authority of the Christian Ministry cannot be,
since it is not of man or from man, but from that Lord and God, Ephesians. 4.
who is the great Teacher and Savior of his Church, who only could give power
as gifts meet for the Pastors, Bishops, and Teachers of it.

These serious, weighty and undoubted persuasions, touching one uniforme, holy,
and divine ordination, being fixed in the consciences of all wise and sober
Christians; it will follow without all peradventure, that true Religion, as
Christian and Reformed, will never be able to recover in this or any Christian
Nation its pristine luster and Primitive Majesty, its ancient life and vigor,
its due credit and comfort, much less its just Power and Authority over men's
hearts and consciences, until this point of Ordination, or solemn investiture
of fit men into Ministerial Office and Power, be effectually vindicated and
happily redeemed from those modern intrusions, usurpations, variations and
dissentions, which are now so rife among Preachers themselves, whence flow
those licentious and insolent humors so predominant in common people, who by
dividing, the other by usurping, both by innovating in this point of
Ordination, have brought those infinite distractions, contempts and
indifferences upon Religion and its Ministry, as Christian and Reformed, which
are at this day to be seen in England beyond any Nation that I know under
Heaven.

It is most certain, that the major part of mankind, yea and of formal
Christians too, do not much care for the power of any Religion, nor for the
Authority of any Ministry, no nor for any serious profession or form of
Religion, further than these may suite with their fancies, lusts and interests.
If custom or education have dipped them in some tincture of Religion during
their minority, if the cords of counsel and example have bound them up to some
form of godliness in their tender years and tamer tempers; yet, as they grow
elder, they are prone to grow bolder to sin, and to affect such refractory
liberties, as may not only dispute and quarrel some parts, but despise and
trample under feet all the frame of Religion that is not indulgent to their
humors, or compliant to their inordinate desires and designs. Especially when
once they find public disorders, distractions and disgraces cast upon that
very Religion in which they were instituted; when they see contumelies and
affronts cast upon that whole Church in which they were baptized, and all
manner of contemptuous insolences offered to those chief Churchmen, by whom
they had received the derivations and dispensations of all Holy Orders, Truths
and Mysteries. When men see new Religions, new Churches, new Ministers and new
modes of Ordination set up, to the reproach and defiance of all that went
before, who, I beseech you, of most ordinary Christians (who are yet agitated
by their youthful lusts and unbridled passions) will be so constant as to hold
fast that profession which formerly they had taken up? Who will continue to
venerate that Church and Clergy whose heads they see crowned with thorns, and
their faces besmeared with blood and dirt, whose comeliness is deformed with
the spittings, buffetings and scorns of those that seek to expose them to open
shame, and to fasten them to the Cross of death and infamy? Alas, they will
not at all regard in a short time any orders of the Church, or any ordination
of Ministers, or any sacred ordinances and mysteries dispensed by them; since
no pleas, never so pregnant and unanswerable, for the Antiquity, Uniformity and
Constancy of that way and method which was used in all ages and places of the
Church of Christ, since no gracious and glorious successes attending such
ordaining Bishops and such ordained Presbyters, since nothing prevails against
vulgar prejudices and extravagancies, provoked by that impatient itch they
always have after novelties.

Many we see will have no Ordination, no Ministers, no Sacraments, rather than
Bishops should have any hand in ordaining. The honor of that Ordination which
was in all ancient Churches must be cruelly sacrificed with all ancient and
Catholic Episcopacy, rather then some men's passions for a parity, or
popularity, or an Anarchy in the Church be not gratified. All Bishops as such,
and all Presbyters, and all Christians, and all Churches, and all holy duties
performed by them in that station and communion, must be cried down, yea thrown
down, as the adulteratings and prostitutions of the Churches Liberty, and of
the purity of Christ's Ordinances. The hands of Bishops and Presbyters too,
though joined and imposed in Ordination, must be declared as impure, vile and
invalid; yea a flat, novel and impertinent distinction must be found out to
vacate the Bishops eminency, and yet to assert the Presbyters parity and sole
power, as resting in any three, two, or one of them, though never so petty,
poor and pitiful men in all respects* natural and civil, sacred and moral.
Yet these (forsooth) some fancy as Presbyters may still ordain, because a
Bishop (say they) did so, merely as a Presbyter of the same degree and order,
not as having any eminency of office, degree, authority or jurisdiction above
the meanest Minister; which St. Jerome and all antiquity acknowledged as a
branch of Apostolical dignity and eminency peculiar to a Bishop above any one
or more Presbyters.

Which reproaches against the persons, power and practice of Bishops in England,
as usurpers and monopolizers in this point of ordination (which they ever
challenged and exercised as their peculiar honor, office and dignity in this as
all Churches) if they could by any Reason or Scripture, by Law of God or Man,
by any judgment or practice of any one Church, or of any one godly and
renowned Christian in any age or History of the Church, be verified, so as to
make their power of ordination to be but a subtle or forcible usurpation in
Bishops, it would have been not only an act of high Justice to have abrogated
all the pretensions of Bishops to that or any power in the Church; but it will
be a work of admiration, yea of astonishment, to the worlds end in all
after-ages and successions of Christian Religion, (which will hardly last
another 1500 years) to consider the long and strong delusion which possessed
the Christian world in this point of Ordination, as only regular and complete
by Bishops, where their presence and power might be enjoyed. Nor will it be
more matter of everlasting wonder to ponder, not only Gods long permission of
such a strong delusion, but his prospering it so much and so long as a
principal means to preserve and propagate the Ministry, Order, Government,
Peace and Power of true Religion, and the true Churches of Christ, which were
never without Bishops, as Spiritual Fathers begetting (as Epiphanius speaks)
both Presbyters and people to the Church.

Nor will it be the work of an ordinary wit, whether Presbyterian or
Independent, to salve all those aspersions and diminutions of either ignorance
and blindness, or fatuity and credulity, or weakness and impotency, which must
necessarily fall from this account not only upon the wisest and best
Churchmen, but upon the most Christian and wise Princes, the most zealous and
reformed Parlaments of England, who in the grand Reformation of this Church,
and ever since for near an 100. years, have after grave counsel and mature
debate, approved and appointed, countenanced by a law, and encouraged by their
actual submission, the ordination of Ministers chiefly by the authority of
Bishops, never without them. And this they did certainly not out of policy but
piety, not in prudence only but in conscience, convinced not only of the
lawfulness of Bishops, but of the necessity of them (where Providence does not
absolutely hinder or deny them, as it never did in England, or elsewhere) by
the example of the Apostles, by the ancient, constant and uniform practice of
this and all Churches, by the suffrages of all Learned and Godly men of any
account in all ages. To all which were added as great preponderatings in
behalf of Episcopacy, the many and most incomparable Bishops that have been in
all successions of the Church; the many Martyrs, Confessors, excellent
Preachers, Writers and Governors of that order; lastly the unspeakable
blessings which by their Ordination, Consultation and Jurisdiction have been
derived to the Church of Christ. If all Estates in the Reformed Church of
England have been hitherto deceived, as to this point of Episcopal Ordination
by Bishops; sure they are the more excusable, because they have erred with all
the Christian world. Nor could they be justly blamed, if when they reformed
superfluous Superstition, they yet abhorred in this point so great and
dangerous an innovation, which must needs shake and overthrow the faith of
many, if the peculiar office and power of Bishops to ordain Ministers and
govern the Church were either only usurped, or wholly invalid, as some of
late have pretended, not with more clamor than falsity.

But if all these jealousies and reproaches cast upon Bishops and their
Authoritative Ordination (as a peculiar office and exercise of power eminently
residing in them) be most false, and by some men's calumnies heightened to such
impudent lies, that no eructations of Hell or belchings of Beelzebub had ever
more blackness of darkness in them, or more affrontive to the glory God and
the Honor of the Catholic Church, whence, I beseech you (O my Noble and worthy
Countrymen) is that dullness, stupor and indifferency come upon us in England,
so far, as not only connives at the arrogance of some Presbyters, who without
Scripture-precept or Catholick-patterne challenge this ordaining and Governing
power as only and wholly due to themselves, discarding all Episcopal Eminency
and Authority above them; but the very beasts of the people are so far
flattered, as to be suffered with their foul feet daily to trouble and
confound that clear fountain, and constant stream of Ministerial Authority
and Ecclesiastical succession by way of Episcopal Ordination? which was ever
of so solemn and conspicuous use in all Churches, of so venerable a succession,
of so ancient and uninterrupted a derivation, from the very Apostles days and
hands, that it never failed to keep its course (as some rivers do through salt
waters) amidst all the confusions which either heathenish, heretical, or
schismatic persecutions raised in the Church.

Yea, no Heretics, no Schismatics, (except Aerius and his few accomplices, who,
discontent for not obtaining a Bishopric which ^e sought, and turning Arrian,
was the first, the only and the fit^^st engine to oppose Episcopacy, as
Epiphanius observes) were ever so wild, so fanatic, so desperate, as to cast
off all Episcopal succession and Authority over them, both in Ordination and
jurisdiction; yea they knew no means to keep their confederacies and factions
better together, than that which they saw had always been serviceable to
preserve the true Churches communion. Though the Manicheans, Arrians,
Macedonians, Nestorians, Pelagians and others, together with the Novatians,
Donatists, withdrew from, or were justly excluded by the Bishops of the sound
and orthodox profession; yet still these Heterodox Opiniasters had not only
Deacons and Presbyters, but Bishops of their own: Some of which Bishops
afterward returning to the Catholic Communion, were not degraded from their
Episcopal power, but only suspended from the exercise of it in another
Bishops jurisdiction or Diocese without his leave; which being granted to some
of them, gave occasion to those Chorepiscopi, which were Bishops without
particular title and local jurisdiction, but yet enjoying and using this power
of Ordination in some Country-Townes and Villages, by the permission of the
Bishop or Metropolitan of the Diocese or Province, residing in the chief City:
which indulgence was after (as the Church-Histories tell us) taken away from
the Chorepiscopi, when it was found to occasion great inconveniences, by
admitting two Bishops in one Precinct or Diocese.

Certainly, what is so pregnantly Catholic and useful, that not only all
good men, but even such as were evil could not but approve and use it, it were
not only folly, but frenzy, to cast quite away: (if it were the full vote and
free act of the Nation.) What Apology could be sufficient to excuse this
Nation, either among Churches abroad, or to posterity at home, when they should
see that by a rash, partial and popular precipitancy we have been hurried,
against all Reason, Honor and Religion, to forsake or to stop up the ancient
fountains of living waters, which have always flowed from Episcopal
Ordination, (supplying this, as all Churches, in all places and offices with
orderly Presbyters and useful Deacons) only to try what those pits will
afford which novellers have dug to themselves, and which they eagerly
obtrude upon this Church, notwithstanding they are already found by sad
experience to hold no such clear and pure waters, either for Doctrine or
Discipline, for Authority or Unity, for Order or Peace, as those were which the
Apostles dug, and the Catholic Church ever used and esteemed for sacred?

In this great point then of Right Ordination, and true Ministerial Authority
(of which the Learned Mr. Mason professes, Mr. Mason Preface to his Defense,
etc.
next his salvation, he desires to be assured) it is (as I humbly conceive) not
only piously, but prudently necessary for our Reformed Church, Religion and
Ministry to be effectually vindicated, and by all possible means fairly
united. If there were ever any other way of Ordination used or allowed in the
Church of Christ, let the Authors, Histories and instances be produced, either
as to their grounds or their practice. If there were never any other either
used, or approved, or thought of, besides that which was in the Church of
England, managed by Bishops, as necessary and chief agents in it; truly it is
but Justice, Reason, Conscience and Honor to own this Truth, to follow this
Catholic precedent, to return to an holy conformity with pious Antiquity,
which neither invented nor induced Bishops or Episcopal Ordination and
jurisdiction as an affected novelty, or a studied variety, but they followed
(doubtless) herein what was received from the very first Bishops, who
succeeded to the Apostles, as authorized and placed by them.

Tertul. l. de Praes. adv. Haer. l. 32, and 34. Cont. Marci. l. 4. c. 5. Eusebius.
hist. l. 5, 6, 7. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 6. lib. 5. c. 20. Cyp. ep. 52. and passim.
Which authorities are afterward at large cited in this Book.
So that as the succession of Bishops was lineally reducible to the Apostles,
(which Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Eusebius, Nicephorus, and others
evidently prove, not only by their public Registers, but by their private
memories, when the names of Bishops were fresh in Christians minds, and not
very numerous, as in the second and third Centuries) No less may be affirmed
of Ordination by Bishops, it had its precept and pattern from the Apostles,
expressly committed and enjoined to some persons as chief Bishops, never trusted
to mere Presbyters alone, much less to people in common, so far as any Record
of the Church, Sacred or Ecclesiastic, does inform us; whose constant silence
in this case is a better Testimony against all innovation of Ecclesiastical
Ordination, than all the Sorites, the Rhapsodies, heaps and scamblings of I
know not what broken scraps and wrested allegations out of any Scriptures or
Fathers can be: by which I see some men have sought, with much dust, sweat and
blood, to bring in their new, uncertain, unaccustomed and unauthentick forms
of Ordination, exclusive of any President or Bishop, who ever was as the
principal Verb in a sentence, which cannot be wanting, without making the
sense of all other words very lame, defective, incoherent and insignificant.

These grand persuasions joined to the sad experiences made in Englands late
variations, do thus far command me to be more intent and earnest that in this
point of valid, complete, undoubted and most authoritative Ordination we might
be made uniform; that all Ministers, like current money, might have the same
image and superscription upon them.

It is most certain that the Christian and Reformed Religion will never be
able to shine either clearly, or constantly, or comfortably upon the
consciences of Christians, either as Ministers or people, while it is in this
great point of Ordination so darkened, clouded and eclipsed, that it looks like
the Sun wrapped in sackcloth, or the Moon turned into blood. What Ministry,
what Ministers, what Ordination, what Ordained, what Ordainers, what Ordinances
of Christ will (in time) be much esteemed in England by the Nobility, Gentry or
Yeomanry, when they shall see various ways of Ordination daily invented and
obtruded, pitiful Novelties induced, uniform Antiquity discarded, Primitive
Episcopacy exautorated, a subordinate Presbytery scorned, Veritatis
praedicatorem unius diei spatio velut e luto statuam fingunt. Nazian.
a popular parity and petulancy indulged every where to make what extemporary
Priests and Preachers they list of the dregs and meanest of the people, as
little (God knows) to their own souls benefit as to the Churches peace, or to
the honor of this Nation, though they do it with as much facility as children
make little babies of clouts, or statues of clay, as Nazianzen alludes?

For what I pray you will these new propagators, with all their progeny of
new-ordained, new-fashioned, new-coyned and new-commissioned Preachers,
signify to the more sober sort of mankind, or indeed to the very plebs and
vulgar, especially among people so curious, so querulous, so proud, so
pragmatick, so petulant, so insolent, as are in England? Will sober Christians
ever much care for any Ministers unless they be commended to them as meet to
be such, not only by the highest wisdom and civil orderings of this Nation,
but also as set over them in the Lords Name, and Christ's Authority, by an holy
and solemn Ordination? such, of which they have the least and indeed no cause
to have any doubting or slighting thoughts; which is the case only of
Episcopal Ordination. English Christians of any estate, worth, weight, or
wisdom, will never be contented to be taught and reproved, to have their
children baptized at the Font, or themselves communicated at the Lords Table,
by such Ministers as shall have only the petty tickets of an humane act or
State- ordinance. No, they will, and justly ought to require the grand Charter
of Divine Authority, conferred in the way of Catholic and true Ordination:
That so Ministers may be able to justify their function and actions, not only
in Law, but in conscience; not as Emissaries from men, but as Ambassadors from
God, Commissionated by Christ and his Deputies, employed in his work, and armed
with his power. There goes much more to make a Minister of Jesus Christ, than
to make a Constable in an Hundred or a Parish, or to make a Captain in a
Troop, or a Justice on a Bench; who yet cannot expect to be owned as such,
unless they can evidence their Commission and Authority to be rightly derived
from the sovereign original of civil power: no more may Ministers, unless
they can show the right source and course of their sacred Authority.

While Ministers preach and practice, Baptize and Consecrate with divided
tongues, distracted hands and distorted heads, as to this point of their
Ordination, they are likely to produce no better successes, either to this
Church or Nation, than those morter-men did, whose work deserved the nickname
of Babel or Confusion. The essential form and difference, the whole life and
operation, the proper virtue and efficacy of a Christian Ministry and Minister,
depending (as I have showed) upon the truth, sanctity and validity of that
Authority with which he is invested, and by that enabled to do the work and
office of a Minister; without which no man has any more to do, than his
meanest groom or footman, with the acts properly Ministerial, Military or
Magisteriall, whatever abilities or call he fancy himself to have.

So that if once your Wisdom and Piety (O worthy Gentlemen) could find a way
to put the Clergy or Ministry of this Church (as formerly we were) into an
uniform way of sacred, complete and undoubted Authority as to their Ordination,
then (and not before) will they appear like the Angels of God ascending and
descending in their orderly courses; then will they be enabled and esteemed
powerfully to pray to God for you, powerfully to preach from God to you,
powerfully to consecrate and exhibit holy mysteries to you: Then will they be
like the Lamps of the Temple, or the shafts of the Golden Candlestick, (which
were all of the same make and fashion, and supplied with holy oil from the
same source) shining with a luster more than humane in your several
congregations: how much more will they appear like Angelick and Celestial
Quires in their Ecclestastick Convocations and Synodall Conventions?

Whereas now Ministers are in all Places, Cities and Countries wretchedly
divided, monstrously deformed, and miserably disabled, mutually accusing and
clamoring against each other, always barking, or biting, or howling, either
tormenting or tormented, as the Devils in Hell. One superciliously abhorrs what
another devoutly adores. One vilifies what another venerates. One Minister with
his party pulls down what another builds up. One execrates what another
consecrates. One nullifies what another magnifies. One formally officiates who
is counted no Minister, and really is none; another is thought to be but half
a Minister, or a kind of mungrell; a third is reputed for more than an ordinary
Minister, as having his Commission by inspiration or conspiration. One is
thought superfluous, yea superstitious, in his Ordination, because he had a
Bishop with Presbyters to ordain him; another is judged defective and dwarfish
for want of a Bishop; a third has neither Bishop nor true Presbyters to
ordain him, but either begets a body to himself as an head, or is chosen by a
popular body to be their head. This makes both Preachers and people at such
distances and defiances in Religion, that one counts that sacrilege which
another boasts of as sacred. One is called a mocker of God, an usurper in holy
offices, and a contemner of the Churches Primitive and Catholic Custom;
another is derided as a doting Antiquary, a superstitious Priest, or proud
Prelate, who can relish no bread but what is old and moldy, nor any drink but
what is out of a Gibeonitish bottle.

Thus are all holy mysteries and duties, which any Ministers perform, made
either very disputable or despicable to the people, while all their authority
on all sides, as dispensers of them, is so much questioned, doubted, divided
and denied in the great point of their mission and Ordination; which is most
essential to a Minister, and most fundamental to any Churches Peace and
Polity, requiring (next the maine Articles of Faith) to be settled in the
clearest and most unquestionable way, with most uniform Authority, most
conform to all pious Antiquity; whose ancient and Catholic pattern as to
Episcopal (that is Apostolical) Ordination, is no more with prudence to be
changed either into Presbyterian or Independent new forms, than the Church
has cause to exchange David's* Psalms for any such godly Balads or modern
Hymns, as we see some Ministers, with more piety (I hope) than good poetry,
have sometime commended to the harsh and unharmonious voices of ill-tuned and
ill-stringed Congregations.

Add to all these, not only the inconveniences, but mischiefs, which are
not more uncomfortable than pernicious to the interest of the true and Reformed
Religion. For from the divisions of Ministers, as to their rise and descent or
Ordination, follow not only strangeness, but strifes and emulations, evil eyes
and secret feudes against one another, each being either jealous of, or
contemptuous toward another. But furthermore, from this difference in their
Ordination, they are tempted to affect, to broach and to preach different
Doctrines. For those peeled rods which always lie before their eyes, as to
their Orders or Characters, their Ministerial Admissions and Stations, do
occasion their conceiving and bringing forth a ring- straked and spotted kind
of Religion, even as to Doctrine; that by the discriminations of their opinions
either in faith or manners, they may more testify their distances from, and
animosities against each other as Ministers.

Men of very good parts, yea and of piety many times (as Saint Jerome and
Ruffinus) from lesser disputes and differences, are transported to wide and
sharp defiances; not only as to their persons, but as to their persuasions.
Hence we see Ministers of different descents commonly affect to be known by
some different points and Doctrines. Presbyterians and Independents are thought
generally to follow Mr. Calvin in all points, as sworn to his dictates or
determinations; who was a man, though of excellent parts, yet not of Divine and
infallible perfections, but mixed with humane infirmities, passions and
imperfections. Episcopal Divines are suspected most-what to have at least a
tang and relish of Lutheran, Arminian, and Pelagian opinions; some are said to
run out to a rankness of Socinianisme: though the most and best of them I know
do confine themselves to the Doctrine of their Mother the Church of England,
which was neither inconstant, curious nor superfluous, but clear, necessary
and constant, owning no Dictator but Christ, and no Canon of Faith but the
Scriptures; doing and determining all things of Religion with great gravity,
counsel, moderation, charity and circumspection, besides a just and sovereign
Authority, which swayes much with the Episcopal Clergy. As the Church of
England did not despise Luthers, Melanchthons, or Calvin's judgment, so it
justly preferred its own before theirs, or any one man's, being always guided
by the concurrent Wisdom and Piety of many Learned and Godly Clergymen, both
Bishops and Presbyters, no way inferior to those or any foreign Divines, and
in some things far their superiors, not only as to the eminent places they
held in this Church, but as to the great discretion and temper of their
Spirits; which made many of them fitter for the glorious Crown of Martyrdom
which they enjoyed, than either of those two hotter-spirited, yet renowned men,
who died in their beds, who had not only to contend with the Papal errors and
superstitions, which then extremely pestered them and all Christendom, but
with their own passions and transports, yea and with those many popular
extravagancies which they rather occasioned, I hope, than designed among the
vulgar, who presently fancyed that they had the precepts and patterns of those
great men, Luther and Calvin, to animate them to popular, seditious, rude,
injurious and rebellious methods of Reformation; in which the very plebs or
populacy imagined themselves better able to judge of Religion, than any of
their Governors in Church or State, and because they had more hands, therefore
they must needs have better hearts and heads to do that work, when and how they
listed. Which mad methods as the Church of England never used in its practice,
so it perfectly abhorred in its Doctrine, to which few Ministers do heartily,
ingenuously and fully conform, who have forsaken its Discipline and
Ordination; from which who so flies furthest, commonly wanders and wilders most
in Enthusiastic, Familistick and Anabaptistick opinions.

In order to this design of restoring an uniforme and Authoritative
Ordination, O how ingenuous, how religious, how prudent, how just, how
charitable, how noble a work would it be on all sides, for wise and worthy men,
to have some regard to those few clusters of Episcopacy which are yet remaining
in England, as a seed in which may be a blessing; if the learned and venerable
Bishops yet living among us were fairly treated and invited to such a
concurrence and common union in this point of Ordination as might transmit both
it and their Authority, without any flaw or scruple of schism, interruption,
or fraction, as most valid, complete and authentic, to posterity, according to
the Catholic and Primitive pattern! O how great a security and satisfaction
would this conjuncture and derivation and completion of holy orders by Bishops
with Presbyters give to many learned men's scruples, and to many good Christians
consciences, without any injury or offense (that I know) to such of any party
as are truly pious and peaceable, who (no doubt) would be glad to see that no
disorder or discord might be in holy orders, from which (as from a good and
well-tempered spring in a Watch,) all the regular motions of the wheels, and
the true indications of the hand are derived, directed and depending! There can
be nothing but clashings, enterferings and confusions in any Church, or society
of Christians, where there are crosse-grained, contradictive, or counterfeited
Ministers, as to their Ordination. Here must be laid the principal and corner
binding-stone of our happy Constitution and Communion as a Christian Church, or
Ecclesiastical polity. The affecting of novelty and variety in this (as to the
maine of the Ministerial Order, Power and Authority,) had been the way to have
made at first a very crasie and weak Reformation in England, and is now the way
to deforme, yea to destroy all again, giving infinite advantages to the
projects and policies of Rome, also to the licentious distempers of men's own
hearts and manners: which considerations have made me the more large and
importune, as in a point of no less consequence and importance as to the
visible constitution and managery of any Church, than the unity and uniformity
of civil power or Magistratick Authority is necessary for any Commonwealth or
Kingdom, where divided magistracy does certainly tend to distraction, and so to
destruction, as our own late miseries do abundantly convince us, as to our
civil peace and secular interest: And truly no less will a divided Ministry
infallibly tend to the distraction first, and then the destruction of this
Church and the Reformed Religion: a new Ministry portends either no Ministry,
or no true one. And where most Reverend Episcopacy, (which has so many
glorious marks of Primitive Antiquity, Rare Piety, Signal Prosperity,
Undisputable Universality, Apostolic Order, Scripturall Authority and Divine
benediction upon it; where this) comes after 1600. years of Christianity, and
one hundred years of an happy Reformation, to be questioned, baffled,
exautorated, there is no great likelihood that the novices and punyes,
Presbytery, or Independency, or Anabaptisme, or Enthusiasme, should take any
great root in the love and esteem of any Christians, who if Learned, Wise and
Upright, must needs have greater confidence of and reverence for an Episcopal
Ministry, than for any new-modes, which never yet had, at their best, any thing
either very desirable or very commendable in them, as to Wise and Grave men's
affections and judgments. And take them in their passions, pragmaticalnesse,
popularities, partialities, novelties, varieties, inconstancies, confusions,
and injuriousness and insolences, by which they have either begun or increased
their parties, ways and designs in many places, many times against the will
and Authority of lawful Magistrates and Sovereign Princes, no less than
against the dignity and authority of the Bishops and Fathers of the Church;
look upon the best of them (I say) under these marks, which are almost
inseparable from them, (especially in the height of their lusts and hopes,
which are as their rutting time, which secular ambitions and popular
acclamations raise them to) I believe, as they will never obtain the
conscientious respect of the wisest and best men, so, nor will they in
conclusion constantly enjoy the vulgar flatteries and applaudings of weak or
wicked men; who having not cast any anchor of fixation to their judgments and
affections, either in clear Reason or sound Religion, in Equity or Charity, in
Faith or Love, in holy Antiquity or Primitive conformity, but preferring
factious and fancifull novelties before Catholic and Uniforme Antiquity, they
must needs be everlastingly fluctuating in their endless inventions,
ambitions, inconstancies and vertiginous Reformations of Ministry and Religion,
which are commonly biassed by some private advantages, over-swaying them to
invent or embrace some gainful novelty, contrary to that due veneration and
humble submission which all sober Christians owe to Primitive simplicity, and
that Catholic Authority which is indelebly stamped upon the Universal
Churches custom, consent and practice, agreeable to the Scripture-Canon or
rule, which it ever was. All which are in no one thing more evident than in
this of the Original constitution, derivation and transmission of the
Ministerial Order, Office and Authority, by the way of Episcopal eminency;
where Bishops with their Presbyters did ever rightly ordain Evangelicall
Ministers, but Presbyters without any Bishops above them never did, by any
allowed example or usual practice in any Church, from the Apostles days, till
the last Century.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the well-being of the Clergy or Ministry.

1. In point of maintenance and support.


THe Essentials or Being of true Ministers thus restored and preserved both in
their Ability and Authority, the first to be searched by due Examination, the
second conferred by lawful and Catholic Ordination; the next thing which
craves your counsel, care and charity (most worthy Christians) is the (been
esse) well-being of your Clergy, both for their maintenance and their respect,
for their single support and their sociall consorting. For poor and alone, or
rich, yet scattered, like disjoined figures and ciphers, they will signify not
much as to public reputation or gubernative influence: But together their
Competency and Communion will make up that double Honor, 1 Timothy 5.17.
which the Apostle by the Spirit of God requires as due to such Evangelicall
Bishops and Ministers as rule well, laboring in the Word and Doctrine,
according to the place and proportion wherein God and the Church have set them.

The personal maintenance of Ministers, by which they may comfortably subsist,
diligently attend, and cheerfully dispense the things of God to their several
charges, I put in the first place, not as the more noble in respect of the
common good and joint honor of the Clergy, but as natural and most necessary:
for as Ministers will have no great spirit or ability for private employment,
so much less joy or confidence in any public Church Government, if they have
not such convenient support as may countenance and embolden them to appear in
public. Without doubt, nothing is more unbecoming the Honor and Grandeur, the
Plenty and Piety of any Christian Nation, than to keep their Clergy poor,
indigent and dejected: so beyond measure is it vile for any Christian people to
rob their able Ministers of that honorable maintenance which once they have
been lawfully possessed of, and long enjoyed, as devout donations given to Gods
Church and his more immediate Servants, the Ministers of the Gospel, by
pristine piety, for the public good of men's souls: but above all things to be
abominated, is that Atheistical Hypocrisy, whose fraud pretends to Reform
Religion, (as Herod promised to worship the babe Christ, when he intended to
kill him,) by reducing the dispensers of it to sordid poverty and sharking
necessity; by compelling Preachers to use Mechanic Trades and extemporary
preachings; yea, and after all this, by laying the weight even of
Church Government upon such weak and low shoulders, either of such poor Bishops
or Pygmy-Presbyters, who must (forsooth) live upon popular contributions and
arbitrary Alms, after the Primitive and Apostolic pattern (as some men urge)
even of St. Paul, and of other prime Preachers at first, who they say preached
gratis, having no set salary, and exacting nothing as due from the people.

Which Primitive and Apostolic pattern is not more impertinently and
injuriously, than falsely and impudently, urged by illiberall men in
sacrilegious times: For they may easily find that the justice and power of
demanding hire or wages as due for their work, 1 Cor. 9.6.
was urged and owned by St. Paul, as due by the Law of God under the Gospel as
well as before it; though sometime remitted in tenderness to the temper of
men's hearts and Estates in those hard, yet charitable, times, when there was so
much of gratitude and charity in zealous Christians, that there needed nothing
as of compulsion and necessity; and in which very cheap, though extraordinary,
gifts did most-what enable the Apostles and others, beyond what Ministers may
now expect under the rate of much Time, Charge, Study and Pains. Alas, those
Primitive Preachers needed not to be very solicitous for their support or
salary among true Christians; Act. 4.34, 35.
when it is evident that Christian people had generally such largeness of
hearts, as offered not only the Tithe but the Total of their Estates, Goods,
and Lands too, to the support of their Preachers and their poor. However it is
not to be doubted, but that as the Apostles, so all Bishops and Ministers of
the Gospel may with as much equity as modesty demand, receive and enjoy
whatever was then or afterward, either occasionally or constantly, conferred
upon them by any Christian people or Princes: the distribution of which was in
Primitive times chiefly entrusted to the care of the Bishops, who appointed
both rewards to Presbyters, and relief to the poor.

So that it must needs be barbarously covetous and Judasly sacrilegious, for
any Christian people violently and unjustly to take away from their Learned and
deserving Clergy, either such other Lands and Revenues, or those very Tithes
which people have once put out of their power, by giving them to God by an act
of solemn and public consent, testified in their national Laws, Genesis 14.18.
Number. 18.20, 21. Deuteronomy. 10:9. 1 Cor. 9.14. Gal. 6.6. Heb. 7.9.
every way agreeable to the Will and Word of God, to the Light and Law of
Nature, to the Patriarchicall Tradition and Practice before the Law of Moses,
to Gods own proportion and appointment among the Jews, to the Apostolical
comprobation and the parallel ordaining of the Lord under the Gospel, or to the
right and merits of Jesus Christ, (beyond the type of Melchisedech,) whose
Evangelicall Priesthood being to continue in the Church, surely deserves no
less honor and maintenance than the Aaronicall and Leviticall, and much more
sure than any Priestly office among the heathens. Yet who has not either heard
or read in all Histories, that the very heathens, out of an instinct of
gratitude and Religion, did every where offer the Tenth of their Fruits, Corn,
Spices, Gumms, Minerals, Metals, and spoils in war, to the Temples and Priests
of those Gods (as Ceres, Apollo or the Sun, to Diana or the Moon, to Mars,
Jupiter, Bacchus, etc.) by whose Divine influence and bounty they believed
themselves to enjoy those good things?

And can any true Christian people have so base and penurious hearts, as to
fancy that they then honor Christ most, when they part with least of their
substance to his service? that of all Priesthoods which have ever been in the
world (among civil or barbarous Nations) Christ's shall appear the most
beggarly and necessitous? Can any true believer thus requite the Lord that
bought them, and gave himself a ransom for them? will they compel the blessed
Jesus, who while he was on earth became poor to make them rich, now he is
risen and ascended to Glory in Heaven, to suffer poverty, hunger, thirst,
nakedness, shame and contempt in his Ministers, to whom Christ professes,
Mat. 10.42.
who so gives ought in his name, as to his servant and Minister, gives to
himself? And no doubt, who so takes any thing from them, takes from Christ,
and is a robber of his Savior.

So that nothing is or can be more impudent and abhorred in the sight of our
God, our Savior, and all good Christians, than for a Nation that is fat and
full, ample and opulent in all plenty, foreign and domestic, to debase and
impoverish their Bishops, Pastors and Ministers; to force them to live on
popular pittances and vile dependances; to make them as mercenary and arbitrary
hirelings; to expose them to all those sordid flatteries which attend sharking
necessities. How must this abase that sacred Honor and Divine Authority, which
is and ought to be highly regarded and reverenced in true Bishops and
Ministers? Which of them thus haltred and tamely led by the vulgar, shall dare
to speak the word of God with all comely boldness and Christian freedom? How
can such poor and petty preachers have the confidence and courage, without
being ridiculous, to reprove the faults of any men, great or small? Experience
has taught us, how miserably even poor Ministers must crouch and comply for
morsels of bread, not only to good Lords and Ladies, but to very sorry Masters
and Dames in Country as well as City; who all affect this glory, to be thought
((...)) patrones and benefactors to their preachers as to their servants, not
of right and duty, but of alms and charity: so supercilious are these
gratitudes of almost all sorts of Christians, when they count them not debts
but gifts; not a legal or a Religious Tribute to God and their Savior, but a
contribution to their poor Minister, the stream of whose tongue must set the
mill of his teeth on work; he shall feed little to his own pleasure in this, if
in the other he please not his gracious and inconstant contributors.

This station and posture of Ministers, as to popular dependence and arbitrary
Alms, is the most intolerable turpitude and vilest dehonestation that can
befall any ingenuous man in the world, and most of all incongruous to those who
pretend to any public place of Government or employment, with conspicuity, and
under any notion of authority, either Civil or Ecclesiastic.

Do but make, for trial sake ( O my noble Countrymen) your criminal Judges,
your civil Magistrates, your country-Justices, your Committee Men, your
Military officers, your Bailiffs, Majors, and chief Burgers in the meanest
Corporation; make these of pitiful, poor, hungry, threadbare wretches, let
them be always shifting and sharking, digging or thatching, spinning or
weaving, scraping and begging for their subsistence, and living upon precarious
salaries, such as people list to give them, for which they shall have no more
legal right or claim than Mountebanks and Juglers have for those rewards* from
their gentle spectators and benevolous auditors; would any thing (I beseech
you) be more putid, abject, vile and despicable in the eyes of the people of
England or any Country^^an such mushroome Magistrates, such Go-by-ground
Governors, no^tanding they may possibly have the formalities of a Broad Seal,
a ^te Staff, a Paper or Parchment Commission? will they not in time be as
noisome to a Country, and noxious to Justice, as the dead frogs were in Egypt?

To avoid which deformed and ridiculous spectacles in Civill-Government, does
not the wisdom of this as of every Nation, either find those men invested with
Honorable estates, whom it chooses to or places in Magistratick place and
power? or else, if their merits be beyond their Estates, are they not presently
endowed with such salaries and pensions, either out of the Princes Exchequer
and public Treasury, or out of the emoluments and perquisites of their places,
as may bear out their Authority with some form of Majesty and respect? At
least, they may redeem both their place and persons from that popular scorn,
scurrility and insolency, which is never more malapert, than when it finds want
and poverty, like vermin, pinching the backs, and oppressing the bellies of
those men who undertake to rule or restrain, to curb or control common people.

Which is no very welcome office to the vulgar; among whom true Religion finds
so much to oppose, so little to please or correspond, as to the humors, lusts,
fancies and passions of men, that its Ministers must naturally and necessarily
be subject and exposed to all manner of opposition, despite and despiciency;
unless those so obvious and innate mischiefs be, as in all piety and policy
they ought to be, avoided, not only by the conspicuity of Ministers, approved
learning, good abilities, prudent demeanor and due Authority, conferred in
their regular and uniform Ordination, but further, by that comely entertainment
and competent maintenance, of which common people have a more lively sense and
real taste (as the dunghill-cock had of the barly-corn) than of all their other
internal jewels and ornaments intellectual: which will not signify much (as
is evident in many hundred instances of worthy Ministers, both Bishops and
Presbyters, in these times) if people find them clothed in threadbare coats,
and almost starved by the straightness and tenuity of their worldly condition;
which aspect makes even parents themselves, who are our natural Princes and
Gods, very prone to be despised by their children. Nor can it but ill become
any ordinary Minister that is worthy of that name and office, but worst of all
will it suite with those who affect to be, or indeed are, or ought to be chief
Governors and Bishops in the Church; whose public entertainment ought to be
such as might extend beyond their private and domestic necessities, to
something of public Hospitality, Charity and Magnificence: which were the
proportions heretofore allowed by the noble and generous temper of the English
Nation to its Clergy, both Bishops and Presbyters, the better to bear up their
dignity and authority among the people. The words of a poor man, though wise,
Eccl. 9.15.
are forgotten or unregarded, as Solomon observes: boldness and freedom of
speech in poor men seems impudence; an authoritative carriage in (...) counted
arrogance; their very zeal seems either impatient o^ ^^^^olent. All nations
ever abhorred a beggarly Priesthood, as a blasphemous disparaging of the honor
of their God.

Nor is indeed (in my judgment) any thing at this day more worthy of the
Wisdom, Piety and Honor of this Nation, after all its long war and vast
expenses military, than to begin to think of doing their duty to God, by
finding out, and effectually using some fit means to put on Christ's clothes
again, to make every Church-living in England and Wales so competent as may
maintain one, and in some great populous places two competent Ministers, that
both Preaching, Catechizing and Visiting, with other offices, may be more fully
performed. Alas, what can twenty, or thirty, or fifty pound, or less than an
hundred pound a year do, to supply the studies and families of any able and
ingenuous Minister? to keep up his Spirits from rusticity and sordidnesse? to
preserve his person and calling from contempt? to make him in some measure
Charitable and Hospitable, cheerful and considerable?

Much we know was once pretended for the settling and enlarging the maintenance
even of the inferior Clergy, even then when much was intended to be taken away
from the chiefest of the Clergy, both of Lands, Houses and Honors. This last I
am sure has been sorely executed; the former is yet for the most part to
begin: nay most Livings in England are abated twenty, yea thirty, in the
hundred since those specious proposals, just as the burdens of the Israelites
were sorer after the news of their deliverance. O when will that blessed day
come, in which the just pity and generous piety of this Nation will by some
most prudent and equable ways make either a just restitution or some moderate
compensation to Churchmen; not only to maintain something of public Order,
Polity, Honor and Government among them, but so as may support private and
painful Ministers in their little Parishes, where unless they be able to live
in some decent sort in their own Houses and Tables, they can never serve well
at the Temple and Altar? They ought at least to be redeemed from biting and
debasing poverty, though they be not tempted to grow rich; a blessing now
denied to most Ministers beyond any that are public agents or officers, yea
and the meanest Farmers mechanic Artisans.

Much envy, spleen and bitterness have by some popular and envious orators
been heretofore vented against pluralities of benefices, when two or three
would scarce make one competent living: A like censorious sharpness has been
used by some against Bishops ordaining, and admitting to poor and pitiful
Livings some poor and pitiful Ministers. Alas, better Ministers cannot in
reason be expected without better maintenance: Mend this, and then in Gods name
mend the other; good workmen will not be had, nor can they live upon small
wages. This deep and old core of this Nations sin and shame, its sore and
suffering in Religion, ought first to be pulled out and cured* then will
strength, health and beauty follow in all parts. It is poverty, tenuity and
despair that commonly tempts Ministers, that are conscious to their neglected
and unrewarded abilities, to be either factious and popular, or debauched and
discontent. This Church had fared much better if some Ministers bellies had
been fuller. Some were ready to flatter any factious spirit that kept but a
good Table, and would feed them without an affront: others having an envy at
some of their brethrens and Fathers preferments were ready to turn all to
confusion; just as Joseph's brethren resolved to make him away, because of his
gay coat and his dreams of honor. Men are then most willing to be quiet when
they are at their ease. There was scarce one Minister that had any dignity or
Church-preferment, yea or a good Living in England, that was either forward or
fomenting of our late troubles upon a Religious account. Men that have most
wool on their backs will be most wary of the briars, and most obedient to
Laws, both Civil and Ecclesiastical.

As to the relief of Church Livings, much might in a few years be done, if the
work were once well begun by public advise and consent; partly by buying in of
Impropriations, which are usually little improvements to any Gentlemen's
Estates, and I believe no great cordial to their consciences, especially while
they see the necessities to which poor Vicars and Stipendiary Incumbents are
driven, besides the sorry provision that is made for poor peoples souls in
those Livings, where there is scarce bran enough left to make aloafe of bread
for the Priest, or a cake for the Prophet. Some advantage might be further made
by uniting two or three little Livings that are contiguous or nearly adjacent;
it being no sacrilege for two sixpences or three groates to give a good
shilling to the Temple. Much help also might be by abolishing all injurious and
defrauding customs, which ought not to prejudice Gods right, or the Churches
Dues. Nor would it be a small comfort to Ministers moderate Livings, if their
rights and dues by Law or Custom were once so valued and stated by an equable
rate in every parish, that there might be a power in some officer, as in other
parish-rates, to levy them as they were settled and due, without any further
vexatious and chargeable suites at Law.

For if the Labourer be worthy of his hire, it is but just he should have it,
without spending one half of it and much time to get the other; yea in most
cases the charge of a suite at Law comes to more than that is worth which is
detained. I know some petty Lawyers and progging Atturnies will not favor this
motion, thinking it will take grist from their Mills; but such of them as are
pious, just, and generous Christians, will as readily vote for and advance such
an Act for settling Ministers rights, as they did that for treble damages. Last
of all, it would be an act of great ease and favor, if Ministers might be
ex^mpted in part from public taxes and Town Charges, or at least be rated as
for Goods, and not for Lands.

Certainly these and such like as just as pious projects were not hard to be
executed, as well as invented, if men had as quick a sense of their souls
interests as of those which concern their Estates: Greater matters by far have
been done of late years, with far greater expense and far less benefit to the
Nation. The value of one years tax laid in for a stock or foundation, together
with the additions of private bounty (which I am confident would be cheerfully
cast into this Treasury or Exchequer of the Church) would in a few years do
this great work; I mean purchase in Impropriations, which the Learned and
pious Bishop Bedel calls Badges of Babylons captivity, and plain
Church-Robberies, in his Sermon on Rev. 17.18. lately set out by Dr Barnard.
This Redemption should begin there where is most need. We know that small
stock, which was entrusted in the late Kings days to some Feoffees for this
use, had so attractive a spirit and diffusive an influence in England, that I
believe by this time the work had been much advanced, if not well-nigh
finished, in all probability, if it had been begun, carried on and nourished by
as much public favor as it deserved in the design, if it was without any
leven of faction, sincerely to Gods glory, to this Churches good, and the
Nations both honor and happiness; which will never so much thrive by the vast
charges of any domestic or foreign war, as it would by one such noble
benevolence and contribution, which would very much set the Reformed Religion
on floate again, which every where (now) touches ground, by reason of the low
estate either of many Ministers, who have small and killing Livings with great
Charges, or of the poor people, who must needs have lean and starving
preaching: yea some people have no Ministers at all, others as good or worse
then none; men whose sordid lives confute all that little they do or can
preach, which God knows is very little, and little worth, full of froth and
vapor, if they aim to make up their abilities with popularity, or very flat
and dead, while they are at best very small, and run very low in their
preaching, praying and living. And all this misery for want of such ingenuous
means as should invite, entertain, encourage and oblige a Minister to be
able, careful and painful among them; which is now more necessary than
heretofore, because the fashion we see is to have all duties exposed to and
performed by Ministers private abilities and personal sufficiencies, which are
not to be obtained, nor maintained, nor increased at cheap rates.

But this great and good work, so much to the honor, stability and advantage of
the Reformed Religion, as it would be infinitely to the regret of the Roman
party, who are glad with exceeding great joy to see the Reformed, Learned and
Renowned Clergy of England thus foiled and cast down to the ground, licking the
dust of men's feet, and trampled under foot; so it is a mercy which Satan has
hitherto envyed and hindered to this Church and Nation by Gods permission, who
has hitherto thought fit to deny such a blessing both to Ministers and people,
from whom he has suffered the policies and passions of men, in order to save
their purses, of late to take away almost all that ancient Ecclesiastical
patrimony or dowry of Estate and honor, which was long ago given to maintain
the dignity and authority of this Churches Ministry and Government in the
persons of its Ecclesiastical Governors, Bishops and others of the dignified
Clergy; who, I think, might very well deserve as good salaries as any Major
Generals, Colonels and Captains, being no less both useful and necessary
for the eutaxy or good ordering of the spiritual Militia in the Church, than
those are for the secular Militia in the state, if they were as duly empowered,
paid and encouraged as the others are.

Nor do I doubt but if ever this Nation be so happy as to know its greatest
defects and miseries in this point, and heartily to resolve the speedy applying
of meet remedies to them, it will be so wise and worthy, so just and generous,
as to find out ways not only to provide a settled competency for all competent
Preachers, but also to annex some comely and honorary reward to the eminency of
those who shall be fit to be used and owned as chief Presidents, Moderators and
Governors, that is, Bishops in the Church; without which all Religious polity
will be as a body without sinews: For Rulers without some remarques of estate
and respect upon them, will be like veins without blood or spirits. I have
heard there are yet some such fragments remaining of the Bishops and Cathedral
Lands unsold, which might serve in this case to good use. Theod. hist. l. 4. c.
4.
Theodoret tells us that Constantine the Great gave provision of Corn out of
the Imperial Granaries to Christian Bishops, the better to sustain their
dignity; which allowance Julian the Apostate took away from them, but following
Christian Emperors restored to them. That great and witty engine of
Antichristian policy (Julian) well knew that neither the Polity, Order and
Government of the Church, nor yet Christian Religion it self in peaceful and
plentiful times, can thrive, increase or prevail among the generality of
mankind, if it be not either loved or reverenced; neither of which it can be,
if it be not publicly valued; valued it cannot appear to them, when they see
the chief dispensers of it despised; despised of necessity they must be, if
either their spiritual and sacred Authority be doubted and denied, or their
civil condition be either necessitous or no way conspicuous: which posture
will soon give great advantages to any contrary party and faction, never so
deformed with error and superstition, against all pretentions that may be
brought of such reformation as shall end in the beggerie and desolations, in
the disorders and distresses of its chief Preachers and Professors. Under which
burdens of poverty and disgrace Reformed Religion and its able Ministry will
soon decay and moulder away to nothing, while poverty and contempt shall be on
this side, but plenty with honor shall attend the deformities of its enemies.

I know there have been of late some petty projects offered by men of wary and
thrifty piety, to level greater Livings, and to make such augmentations to one
Minister as shall gripe and grieve another; so robbing Peter to enrich Paul:
But (alas) so grand and heroic a work is not to be done any way except by
public munificence, either of restitution and donation, or redemption and
purchase; which may redeem the long captive Livings from Papal Appropriations,
Regal Confiscations and Lay^ Impropriations, which have a long time detained
them from those Religious uses and ends for which they were at first by God
designed, and by man devoted, which was the comfortable subsistence of
preaching Ministers, that they might help both to save the souls and to
relieve the bodily necessities of poor Christians; who will never learn or
value true Religion very much, when they see the preacher one of the poorest
men in the parish, jealous that when he dies, the parish must be charged with
his poor wife and children. Alas, Ministers are sad Pastors of souls when they
want food for their own bodies; they are pitiful Rulers of Christ's flock, who
are in worse case than ordinary poor shepherds, who have their scrip as well
their crook, and something in their bag to relieve, as well as in their hand to
discipline their sheep, and defend themselves.

But I leave this (to many men unwelcome) consideration of Ministers
maintenance, either as governing or governed, to the wisdom of those who have
largest hearts, purest consciences, and liberallest hands: None but such will
lay to heart so great a concern as this is for Gods glory, Christ's honor, and
the good of souls. For other wretches, I know how their penurious, covetous and
sacrilegious pulse does beat; they are in nothing more envious and jealous: it is
equally harsh and odious to them to hear of any thing to be given or restored
to the Church, being much more sensible of any damage and injury done to their
private purses and Estates, than of such public detriments and depressions as
cloud the glory of their God and Savior, eclipse the honor of this Church and
State, vilify and, upon the point, nullify the dignity of the Ministry, and
prostitute the souls of poor people for which Christ has died to ignorance
and Atheism, to licenciousnesse and hypocrisy; it being more with many men to
save a penny than to save a soul, more willing to spare a sound tooth out of
their heads, than one pound or shilling to advance Religion: they are for a
cheap heaven or none; so willing they are to perish with their money, rather
than live by lightning the ship a little.

CHAP. XVIII.
AFter the foundations of a true Christian Ministry are thus laid both for its
Being, Of meet order, Government and subordination among the Clergy.
which consists in real abilities discovered, and in valid Authority conferred
after the most venerable, Catholic and authentic custom of the Church, 1
Cor. 11.16.
which being conform to the word of God, ought in such cases to be as a Law
sacred and inviolable; after I have further set forth the wel-being of the
Clergy, and in that of the whole Church, by sustaining able Ministers, in their
several degrees and stations, with such ingenuous maintenance as may become
not only the honor of the work and workmen, but the Glory of the Christians
God, the love and value of their Savior, and the beauty or majesty of the
Church, in which they are employed in so sacred, solemn, public and constant
services, which ought in all reason and Religion to be kept up by all good
Christians to some outward conspicuity and decency, as far as Gods indulgence
affords men peace and plenty;

The next thing I humbly commend to the Nobleness, Wisdom and Piety of my
Country, for the further strengthening and preservation of the being and
wel-being of this Church and its Christian Reformed Religion, both in Ministers
and people, able Preachers and honest Professors, is so to combine, cement and
unite all worthy Ministers and other Christians in an uniforme and holy harmony
of due subordination, holy discipline and decent Government, as may best keep
them (by Gods blessing) from such fractures and factions, such schisms and
swellings, such dashings and dividings against and from each other, as have of
latter years not only battered themselves and each other to great diminutions,
weaknings and deformities, but they have crushed this whole Church, and
crumbled its former entireness and amplenesse to so many broken bits and
pieces, Episcopatus aemulatio s^h^smatum matter. Tert. de Bap. c. 17.
through the impotent ambition of those Ministers or people, who being least
apt or able, are most greedy to govern of themselves, and loath to be governed
by others: which refracto^inesse has not only defaced the beauty, and broken
the unity of this Church, but further threatens to shake the civil peace,
stability and consistence of this Nation, whose honor and happiness is not
only now at the stake, but much abated, and in hazard to be quite lost, if
that public wisdom and courage be not applied which is necessary to recover
the blessing of the Reformed Religion, and the unity of this Church, to such a
posture of setledness, order and unity, as shall not need to fear either
fanatic Confusion or Romish usurpations, which are the great plots and
designs laid against this Church and Nation of England.

I easily foresee, that nothing will be a more hard, knotty and flinty work,
than the recomposing of this Church to any Ecclesiastical Uniformity,
Charitable Harmony and Orderly Government, if either the late sharp passions,
private interests, or mutual prejudices of any one of the parties so divided
from each other in England be made the partial and scanty measures of
Church Order and Polity: For the animosities and Antipathies among them are
such, that they will on all sides disdain to be forcibly cast into any one of
the pretended models which are on foot. The only probable and feisable way to
reduce all sober Ministers and honest people to a conscientious and charitable
Communion is, for the wisdom and piety of this Nation to do as Constantine the
Great did, when he burnt all the querulous demands and uncharitable petitions
of the Ecclesiastics against one another, so reconciling them all, while he
utterly silenced all their quarrels, and buried their complaints. In like
manner the best and speediest method of our union will be, to lay aside all the
earnest pleas and violent pretentions of all sides, either Episcopal,
Presbyterian or Independent, which have occasioned or increased our late
differences; and only to examine calmely, seriously and impartially, what was
the Idea of Church Order and Government for the first three or four hundred
years, that is, twelve hundred years at least before these late contests and
debates were raised, or indeed thought on in this or any Church.

Reperiemus veteres episcopos non aliam regendae ecclesiae formam voluisse
fingere ab e^ quam verbo suo Deus praescripsit. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 4. Sect. 4.
Certainly the Primitive, Catholic and Apostolic posture of the Churches
Polity, Order and Government, must needs be the true pattern in the Mount, as
Mr. Calvin confesses: in which times there was less leisure for ambitious or
factious variations, the Church being either persecuted most-what for 300.
years, or miraculously refreshed, at its freedom in the fourth Century
through Gods indulgence, and the munificence of Constantine the Great and other
Christian Emperors, who, as Princely nursing Fathers, studied the Peace, Unity
and prosperity of the Church, as much as that of the Empire.

In both which conditions, both calm and storm, it is most remarkable, that
as no one Author, Father, Historian, Synod, or Council did any way doubt,
dispute or divide about Church Government, before the Great Council of Nice; so
when that great and Oecumenick Council did come together to take a survey as
of the Churches unity in sound Doctrine and Manners, so of its Discipline and
Government, that it might gather together and recompose what ever the
tempestuous times of persecution had shaken or shattered; yet this grand, most
venerable and holy Assembly did neither begin any new Hierarchy or Government
of the Church, nor did they in the least sort tax former times of any
Innovation, Alteration or desertion from the Primitive, Apostolic and
Universal pattern, which was still fresh in men's memories: but they began
their Session and Sanctions with that solemn approbation and confirmation of
the ((...)) former ancient Customs or Orders of the Church-Catholick, as holy
and Authentic, which all men knew had prevailed from the beginning. Nor was
there then any doubt or debate in the general as to the point of Episcopal
presidency or jurisdiction; however, as to their respective Dioceses and
particular distributions some disputes had risen: But as to the succession of
chief Bishops from the very Apostles days and Seats, they had most evidently
continued in all Churches without any interruption, or variation of the form
or power, however the persons had been often changed by mortality.

Certainly it is most easy for all learned, honest and unbiassed men to see
what the uniform and Catholic form then was of all Churches orderly
combinations. I dare appeal to Independents and Presbyterians as well as
Episcopal men, to declare bona fide what they find it was in the first and
best times, after Churches were once fully formed and settled in their several
partitions. No man not more bold than bayard, or more blind than a beetle, but
must see and confess, Act. 6. 1 Timothy 3.8. Deacons.
that according to the first platform which we read of in the Acts and Epistles
of the Apostles, the Order, Polity and Government of the Church was completed,
settled and continued, first in Deacons, who had the lowest degree of
Church-office, order and Ministry, consisting in reading the Scriptures, in
making collections for the poor, in distributing of charity, in visiting the
sick, in providing things necessary, safe, convenient and decent for Christian
Ministers and people, when they met to serve the Lord in one place; which place
or house from hence was called Dominicum, or (...), a Church, or House of the
Lord.

Next these in order, degree and office were Presbyters, that is, Presbyters.
ordained preachers, to whom was committed, by the Apostles first, and after by
Bishops their successors, the Charge and Office of Catechizing the younger, of
Preaching to the elder, of Baptizing believers and their children, of
consecrating the holy Elements of the Lords Supper, and of admitting worthy
Communicants to receive them: besides, the grave and venerable Presbyters had,
as brethren, the privilege of electing their Bishops also of counsel,
confessions and assistance with their respective Bishop's in public
concernment and grand transactions of the Church.

Above both these, in eminency of place, Bishops. Act 1.20.
degree and power as to gubernative Authority, were those prime Bishops or
overseers of the Church, first called by the name of Apostles, as immediately
set by Christ in that Episcopacy; next were those that were personally
appointed by the Apostles to supply their absence, or to succeed them in that
ordinary presidency and constant jurisdiction which was necessary for the
Churches peace, union and good Government: of which we have two pregnant
instances in Timothy and Titus, who to be sure had Episcopal power given them,
not as Evangelists or Preachers, but as Ordainers and Rulers of many
Presbyters. After these Bishops of a lesser size constantly succeeded, being
first chosen by the Presbyters of each grand Church or Diocese to that power
and office, and then consecrated to it or confirmed in it by Neighbor-bishops,
who solemnly imparted to them, and invested them in that Eminency of Ordaining
and Ruling power which is properly Episcopal, not only for the dispensing of
holy mysteries, for the preaching of the word, and absolving penitents, as
Presbyters (who were a minor sort of Bishops) but for confirming those who had
in infancy been baptized, 1 Ep. to Tim. cap. 3. and 5. and Ep. to T^tus cap. 1.
for solemn excommunication and absolution, for examining and ordaining
Presbyters and Deacons, for transmitting that Episcopal and Ministerial power
in a constant and holy succession, according as they had received it; so for
judging of and inflicting public censures and reproves, likewise for all
Synodal Conventions and representations of the Churches; lastly for the
authoritative enacting and executing of all Ecclesiastical decrees and
Church-disciplines: all which things Bishops did as a Major sort of Presbyters,
though a Minor sort of Apostles, Episcopi, quos and Apostoli* successores
relinquebant, ipsis suum magisterii loc^m tradentes. Irenae. l. 3. c. 9.
Habemus enumerare eos qui ab Apostolis constituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis,
and successores little usque ad nos. Irenae. l. 4. c. 6. and lib. 5. c. ^0. Ordo
Episcoporum ad originem recensus in Johannem stabit Authorem. Tertul. adv.
Marc. l. 4. c. 5. Sicut Smy^naeorum ecclesia Polycarpum a Johanne collo^atum
refert, sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit, perinde utique and
caeterae exhibent (ecclesiae) quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitut^s
Apostolici seminis traduces hubent. Tertul. lib. de praesc. adv. Haer. c. 32.
and 34. De Johanne Apost. Cl^m^ns Alexandrinus narrat, post mortem Domi^^an^
and reditum suum a Patmo in Ephesum in vicinas gentes abiit, (...), Episcopos
constituens, and Ecclesias in ordinem digerens. Lib. de Div. Sal. Origeni falso
ascripto, ex judicio cl. Usserii Armachani. Jampridem per omnes provincias and
urbes ordinati sunt Episcopi, etc. Cyp. ep. 52.
if we may believe the judgment, practice and testimony of all Antiquity in the
purest times, which are diligently collected, evidently set down, and
unanswerably urged by many late writers, who have brought forth such a cloud of
witnesses as to this point of Ecclesiastical Order and Government by Deacons,
Presbyters and Bishops (a threefold cord, not to be broken,) that men may as
well deny the Evangelicall History, as the Original, Institution and Succession
of the Evangelicall Ministry, and the orderly constant Government of the Church
by the service of Deacons, the assistance of Presbyters, and the
superintendency of the Apostles, whom no sober man denies to have been, while
they lived, the eminent Rulers, authoritative Overseers, and chief Governors
and Bishops of all the Churches where they were fixed, or which they had under
their particular care and charge. Nor may it with any more shadow of reason or
truth be denied, that Bishops in a distinct place and eminent power were a
successive and secondary sort of Apostles, inferior to them in their immediate
call, in their extraordinary gifts, and the latitude of their power; but equal
to them in that ordinary, constant and regular jurisdiction, which was and is
ever necessary for the Churches good Order and Government.

If all sorts and sides would look beyond their own later prejudices and
presumptions to this holy pattern, this so clear, constant and Catholic
prescription, they would be ashamed of such gross ignorance or impudence, such
peevishness or partiality, as should beyond all forehead or modesty affect any
novelty or variety from an Ecclesiastic custom and an Apostolic precedent,
so undeniably Primitive, so famous, Successiones Episcoporum qui Apostolos
sequu^i sunt 7. libris descripsimus. Eusebius. l. 4. hist. cap. 1. So. Theod.
hist. l. 5. c. 27.
so glorious, so prosperous, so never altered or innovated (as to the maine)
that all true believers, all humble Deacons, all orderly Presbyters, all
Confessors, all Martyrs, all Synods, all Councils, submitted and subscribed to
the same form and kind of Government in its several stations and degrees,
according as the wisdom of the Church saw cause to use its prudence, power and
liberty (as Calvin, Zanchy, and Bucer tell us) in having not only Bishops, but
Metropolitanes or Archbishops, Primates and Patriarchs ( ad conservandam
disciplinam, as Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 4. Sect. 4.
Calvin ownes,) for the better Order, Unity and Correspondency of the Church in
all its parts, which were never quarrelled at, till pride begat oppression, and
envy schism in the Church; till foolish and factious spirits chose to walk
contrary to the true principles and proportions of all right Reason and
Religion, of all prudence and polity, which are to be observed in all
Societies, sacred or civil, which the Divine wisdom (as Apud nos. Apostolorum
locit tenent Episcopi. Hier. ep. 54. Ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas
de veteri Testamento, quod Aaron and filii ejus and Levitae in Templo erant,
hoc sibi in ecclesiis vindicent Episcopi, Presbyteri and Diaconi. Hieron. ad
Euag.
St. Jerome observes) had exemplified in the ancient Church of the Jews, and
directed us to (as Episcopus ecclesiis regendis unicus praepositus est, qui
plu^ibus unius ecclesiae presbyteris praeesser: Bono fine hoc institutum esse
nemo negat, quum optima ratio fuerit ita instituendi. Salmas. Walo Messal. page
413.
Salmasius confesses) in all successions of Churches, by the Spirit of wisdom
which Christ gave to his Apostles, and all their immediate successors the
Bishops, who were conform to them, and empowered by them to be a kind of
Tutelary Angels, of presidentiall Intelligences, in the larger circles and
higher orbs of the Church, where (as in Ephesus, and the other grand
Metropolitan Churches, which are denominated by the Spirit of Christ and the
pen of the Apostle from the chief Cities in those Provinces) there were no
doubt many Christian people, Presbyters and Deacons, yet all these subject (as
Neque enim Hieronymus quum diceret, ecclesias initio fuisse communi
presbyterorum consilio gubernatas, ita desipuisse existimandus est, ut
somniaret neminem ex presbyteris illi caetui praefuisse. Beza de Minist. grad.
c. 18.
Beza glossing on St. Jerome confesses) to that one ((...)) Provost or
President, as their Bishop in that Precinct or Economy, which either the
Apostles had constituted, or the Church had digested it self into as it
increased.

Contrary to which meridian pattern and most manifest exemplar of
Church Government, if (as learned De Episcopis and Minist. ordin. quid certius
ex historiis, ex Conciliis, ex omnium Patrum scriptis? quis ego sum qui quod
tota ecclesia approbat improb^m? Zanchi. Consess. p. 7.
Zanchy acknowledges) any one instance in any age or place of any Father,
Council, or Historian could be found, of any one Church in its grand Polity,
or larger Communion, I confess I should then make some scruple whether
Episcopal Government, however it might seem the best, were the only one to be
used in all times and places; whether Church Government were not a matter of
Ecclesiastic prudence, rather than of Apostolic prescription, or Divine
appointment. To which opinion St Jerome, that he might qualify and moderate the
incrochings of some Bishops upon Presbyters, or gratify perhaps his own
passion and discontent, sometimes seems to have inclined, contrary to his
cooler and more constant judgment, set forth at other times in many passages
of his potent and vehement writings, as well as in his practice. Which allay as
to the Divine institution and absolute necessity of Episcopal Government as
established by the Apostles, seems also to have swayed with Mr. Calvin and his
followers, when they found themselves put upon such a necessity as they thought
might justify their altering of it for a time, though not their rejecting or
reprobating of it for ever, which he never did* however his reputation,
interest and engagement carried him off from the more pompous and usual way of
Episcopacy, as it was abused in the Church of Rome; but he well knew, ever
judged and confessed that Primitive Episcopacy, which consists in a
presidentiall eminency of power and jurisdiction in one Minister over many,
appears to have been laid out by the wisdom and Spirit of Christ in the
Apostolical pattern and prescription, as is evident in the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, not as a matter of arbitrary freedom, which might be
lightly changed, as people, or Ministers, or Magistrates listed, for their
conveniences, but as an holy method and wise proportion of Government, best in
it self, fittest for the Churches Order, Peace and Communion, sacred by the
Characters of Gods direction, Christ's designation, constitution of his Church
in the Apostles, execution and derivation of it, also in the Churches Catholic
imitation: upon all which grounds it has ever been esteemed by all godly and
learned Christians, not only venerable, but (as to the main model and fabric
of it) inviolable; so that they who first factiously, presumptuously and rashly
change it, must needs highly sin against God, his Church, and their own souls,
however others that are forced to follow such changes may be excusable.

The superstructures of Episcopacy, as to civil Honor and Estate, may indeed
be variable, by public consent, with times and manners of men; but the
foundations I believe are not to be removed, which are laid upon the natural,
civil and religious grounds of diversity, disparity and excellency of one man
above many; proportionable to which Polity, Order and Authority are best settled
and managed, and not upon the loose or slippery bottomes of parity or
popularity, neither of which have either those principles, proportions or
perfections of Government, which the Spirit and wisdom of God has laid out by
the Apostles practice, in Primitive Episcopacy, and transmitted by a constant
succession for the Churches good, which cannot be preserved or advanced, where
there wants comely gravity, due authority, and a diviner beam of Majesty in
Government and Governors than can be found in any way of levelling and abasing
them, which are the highways (as all wise men ever observed) to all faction,
sedition and confusion both in Churches and States: of which truth no Age has
seen and suffered greater or sadder experiments than ours, since some
pragmatick or ambitious Spirits have made miserable essays to alter and
abolish the ancient authority and order of Episcopacy, only to bring in their
various novelties; which are so far from the true Grandeur and solid Majesty of
Government, that they are already found to be pitiful and petty projects
rather than pious or profound inventions, confuting themselves as much as
confounding others.

Could we then on all sides in England be so ingenuous and candid, as to lay
aside all modern designs, disputes and differences, which have made men's eyes
so squinted, bleared or blood-shotten in the point of Church Government; could
we remove the fancy of secular pride, pomp and ambition in one sort of
Ministers, the vulgar passions, prejudices and envies of a second sort, also
the pragmatick and plebeian humors of a third sort, with the private designs
and worldly interests of all; clear all our hearts of these prepossessions and
distempers; no doubt the face of holy order and wise Government in the Church
will easily appear, to the satisfaction of all wise and good men, who are
either worthy to govern, or willing to be governed in a true Christian and
charitable way.

For certainly Church Government or Ecclesiastical Polity, (about which we
have had of late in England so great contests, even to much bitterness and
blood) is no Scholasticall subtilty, no intricate nicety, no speculative
sublimity, no metaphysicall profundity, which require either accurate Critics,
or long-winded Diverse, or Logical Disputers, or Scepticall Sophisters, to find
out the Primitive form, Suadente natura, and necessitate flagitante, seasim
coierunt ecclesiae. Bez de grad. min. c. 24. Sect. 4. Hoc consentiebat legi
Christi, and fiebat ex jure corporis Christi. Bucer. de vi and usu min. p. 565.
the true proportions, or ancient pattern of it. It is plain (as Beza and
Bucer observe) in right Reason, pregnant in the proportions of all order,
natural, civil, military, religious. It is palpable in Scripture-patternes,
as Mr. Calv. on Tit. 1.5. For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou
might ordain, etc. Discimus ex hoc loco non eam tu^c fuisse aequalitatem
inter ecclesiae ministros, quin u^us aliquis authoritate and co^silio p^aeesset.
Calvin confesses: it is most apparent in the practice of all Churches. It
must be weakness or wilfulness, passion or peevishness, that hinders any
man from seeing the true Idea of it. It is made up of wisdom and power, not
only humane, but divine; of due authority cemented with true charity: a modest
and moderate superiority with meek subordination, faithful counsel with
equanimous commands, meeting together, these make up the holy Economy or
Polity of Church Government.

In which, first many humble Christians of one congregation do submit to one
duly- ordained Minister, as set over them in the Lord, so far as concerns
their private duties and relations: secondly, many grave and discreet
Presbyters, with their people, submit to one venerable Bishop, as a Father or
chief Pastor, chosen to be over them in things that concern more public
relations and common duties, in which their joint counsel, assistance or
obedience is required. The Bishops office and work is, not only Ministerial,
in common with their brethren the other Ministers, but Juridicall or Judicial,
declaring and exercising the necessary power and eminent acts of
Ecclestasticall Discipline and authority with them, among them and over them:
not in the way of secular dominion, gotten and kept by civil force or factious
ambition, which our blessed Lord forbids to those that are chiefest or greatest
of his Disciples and flock; but in a way of paternall authority, which chides
with love, chastens with pity, being tenderly severe, and most compassionately
cruel, when it is compelled to exert the sharpest authority, doing all things
according to the word, example and Spirit of Christ Jesus, in Meekness of
Wisdom, not to the destruction, but edification of the Church in truth and
faith, in charity and unity. To these Presbyters, Bishops and Christian people,
are Deacons subordinate and servient in all things necessary for decency,
convenience, charity, and carrying on of the Churches Authority, both in private
congregations and more ample conventions; part of whole office we see time and
custom had devolved upon our Churchwardens and Overseers for the poor.

These ends and means, this order and proportion, this constitution and
execution of Church^Government by Episcopacy, as far as it is conform to
Catholic Antiquity, and settled by the consent of any Christian Church and
Nation by its Synods and Parlaments, I do in no sort conceive to be arbitrary,
precarious or mutable as to the maine; (however it may be reduced and reformed
in its deviations) (except in cases of invincible necessity, which may dispense
with Sabbaths, Sacraments, and all public external duties of Polity, yea of
Piety) so far am I from judging it any part of prudent Piety or true
Reformation, for men rudely to baffle and despise, wholly to abrogate and
extirpate it; because I cannot but look upon it as Scriptuall and Apostolic,
sacred, and binding Christians consciences to due approbation, obedience and
subjection to it for the Lords sake, who undoubtedly intended the right
constitution and constant regulation of his Church, with Order and Honor, no
less than that of States and Commonweals, for whose peaceable Polity the
Gospel has set so many bounds and bonds of subjection. Sure neither Church nor
State can be honestly or handsomely governed in any way of parity or
popularity, where every one thinks himself fit to command, and so disdains to
obey; according to those innate passions which are in all men, and often in good
men, and in good Ministers too, Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis (i. e.
Episcopi) dignitate consistit. Hieron. adv. Lucif. c. 4.
who being many, are as prone to run into many distempers and dangerous
exorbitances, if they be left to themselves. As Mariners are without a Pilot,
or sheep without a shepherd, or soldiers without a Commander, or people
without a Prince; even so are Christians without ordained Ministers, and
Ministers without Authoritative Bishops, exposed to all manner of Schisms,
Disorders, Factions and Insolences;

Which must necessarily follow, where the Clergy is either not at all governed
by any Grave and Worthy Ecclesiastical persons, or by such Ministers as have
none but a popular and precarious Authority, or where Ministers are only
curbed and crushed by the imperiousness and impertinency of mere Laymen, yea
and of such as are not fit to be Judges or Rulers in the least civil affairs,
much less over Learned men, whose Place, Office and Concerns are properly
religious as they stand related to God and his Church. Nor can the Clergy be in
much better case, when they are by a Democratick or Levelling spirit cast into
such spontaneous Associations and Confederacies as give to no Minister that
orderly and eminent power, respect and due authority, which is fitting for the
Government of the Churches; nor yet teach common people that modesty and
submission, which are necessary for such as desire to be well and worthily
governed.

When all is said and tried that can be in point of Church Government, I doubt
not but it will be found true, as Beza expresses it (in the happy State of
England, Bez. de grad. m^n. c. 18. Sect. 3.
) that Episcopacy is ( singularis Dei beneficientia) Gods singular bounty and
blessing to this and any Church, which he prays it might always enjoy, where
it may be rightly enjoyed and religiously used; Conf. August. de eccl. potest.
De ord. eccles. Apolog. Aug. Conf. ad art. 14. Melanch. epist. ad Camerariu^.
Calv. epist. ad Sadolet. sub finem de neces* R^f. eccles.
which the Augustane Confession and all Reformed Churches with their most
eminent Professors did desire to submit unto, as a most special means to
preserve the Honor, Unity and Authority of the Church and its Discipline,
which, as a great River, grows weak and shallow, when it is drawn into many
small channels and rivulets. How suitable and almost necessary a right and
Primitive Episcopacy is for the temper of England, I shall afterward more fully
express: at present it may suffice to show how easy the restoration of it
would be, if all sides would sincerely look to the Primitive pattern of
Church Government. First, if the Diocese committed to the presidential
inspection of one worthy Bishop were of so moderate an extent, as might fall
under one man's care and visitation, and be most convenient both for the private
addresses and dispatches, and also for the general meetings of the Clergy in
some principal place of it; it would much remedy the great grievance of long
journies, tedious expectation, and many tims frustraneous attendance at
Westminister, to which all Ministers are now compelled to their great charge
and trouble, many times for a small Living, and sometime for a mere repulse.
Such Counties as Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Kent, Middlesex with London, may seem
proportionable to make each of them one Episcopal distribution: greater
Counties may be divided, and lesser united. Secondly, if the generality of the
Clergy or the whole Ministry of each Diocese might choose some few prime men of
their Company to be the constant Electors, chief Counselors, Correspondents
and Assistants with the Bishop; to avoid multitudinous, tedious and confused
managings of elections, Ordinations and other public affairs. Thirdly, if in
case of Episcopal vacancy, the generality of the Clergy meeting together,
might present the names of three or four or more prime men, out of which number
the Electors should choose one, whose election should stand if approved by the
Prince or chief Magistrate; if not, they should choose some other of the
nominated. Fourthly, the person thus chosen and approved on all sides should be
solemnly and publicly consecrated by other Bishops, in the presence of the
Ministers and people of the Diocese. By these means as there will be no crowd
or enterfering among the Clergy, so there will be great satisfaction to Prince
and people, without any clashing between the Civil and Spiritual power, which
must be avoided, considering that not only the exercise of all Church Power
must depend on the leave of the Prince in his dominions; but also the honorary
settled maintenance of the Bishops, as of all the Clergy, is but Eleemosynary in
the original, from the pious concession and munificence of the Prince or
State, who as they will not in conscience or honor deny competent allowances to
all worthy Ministers of the Gospel, so no doubt they will not grudge to add
such Honorary supports to every Bishop or President, as may decently maintain
that Authority, Charity and Hospitality, which becomes his Place, Worth and
Merit: for certainly no men can do more good, or deserve better of their Nation
and Country, than excellent Bishops may do, as by their Doctrine and example,
so by their wise and holy way of governing the Church with such Honor and
Authority as became them; which could not but be an excellent means to advance
the Majesty, Purity, Power and Profession of Christian and Reformed Religion,
as otherwhere, so chiefly in England, whose happiness and honor (in this
point) might, as I humbly conceive, be easily recovered by some such expediency
in Church Government, whose excellent temper should answer all the honest
desires and real interests of all Godly people, of modest Presbyters, of wise
Bishops, and of just Princes; whose wisdom and authority might easily, by the advice of all Estates, both Civil and Ecclesiastic, so restore Unity,
Tranquillity and Authority to the Church of England, that no worthy Christians
of any persuasion, Episcopal, Presbyterian or Independent, should have any
cause to complain of either neglect or oppression, which cannot befall any
party in respect of their just pretensions and equable desires, if regard be
had to the Primitive pattern of Episcopacy, which included the privileges and
satisfactions of all degrees, both of Ministers and people. The complaints of
oppression arise from the later innovations or invasions made by one party
against the real or pretended rights and immunities of the other; which my
design is on all hands to unite and mutually preserve by a regular, prudent,
complete, moderate, and yet authoritative, way of Church Government, which is
no where to be found but in a well-constituted Episcopacy.

In a design wholly for reconciliation and atonement between moderate and
pious men of all sides, I know the way is not partially to overvalue, or
passionately to undervalue any thing that is alleged by sober men on any side
conducing to the common good: Therefore I do not, I cannot in prudence or
conscience so prefer the eminency of Episcopacy, as to neglect or oppress the
just rights of worthy Presbyters, or the ingenuous satisfactions of Christian
people; neither of which are to be despised or rejected, but cherished and
preserved, no less than the Authority of Bishops, which at the highest must be
as of one that serves the Lord Christ and the Church, Luke 22.25, 26, 27.
not insulteth against either; the Grave and Elder sort of Ministers ought to
be treated by the Bishop as brethren, the younger sort as Sons. The real
interests of all are, in my judgment, best preserved, when they are least
scattered or divided, but bound up in the same peaceable Polity or holy
Harmony; which I call the Primitive and complete Episcopacy, ever esteemed by
the Catholic Church for its excellent wisdom, order and usefulness, to have
been (at least) of Apostolical Edition (both preceptive and exemplary) in its
Primitive impression: the errata's which, by long decurrence of time, through
many men's hands have befaln it, are easily corrected and amended by men of
Apostolic Spirits and Primitive tempers.

For my part, I heartily desire, humby endeavor and unfeinedly advise for such
a blessed accommodation as may satisfy the just designs and honest interests
of all good men; I am infinitely grieved to see them threaten one another with
eternal distances, and this Church with everlasting differences and
distractions: of which I am the more jealous and sensible, by what I observe
either of rigor or reservednesse in some men of Episcopal, Presbyterian and
Independent principles, who had rather lose the whole game of the Reformed
Religion and this Churches Recovery, than abate one ace of their high fancies
and demands. Where Episcopal Divines do remit much of modern advantages, and
condescend to the most innocent models of Primitive Episcopacy, yet still they
find many Presbyterians and Independents so died in grain as to their
particular parties, principles and adherencies, that they will not yet endure
any thing that has the least color or tincture, name or title of Episcopacy.
Some viler sort of men study nothing more than to render the venerable Names of
Bishops and Episcopacy odious, and the more there is pleaded for their
innocence or excellency, Luke 23.22.
(as Pilate did for Jesus, when he found no fault in him,) the more they clamor
with the Jews, Crucify, crucify. And all this, lest (forsooth) some Godly
Ministers of the new stamps and models should lose any thing of that popular
gloss and luster, whereby they fancy themselves to shine and glister like
money new-minted among some people in their private spheres: hence some of
them grow so cruelly cunning, that neither in Charity nor Policy they will
endure any closure or treaty with Episcopacy under any notion, notwithstanding
that they pretend to twist their Associations with the threefold cords of all
moderate men, differing still in some principles, yet concurring in one grand
end for the public peace, as they tell us; when yet nothing can entreat them
to wish, to speak or think well of Episcopacy in any state or constitution.

Some fervent or fierce men profess such a jealousy of Antichrist in
Episcopasy, that they cast away all that is of Christ in it: They fear an
Apostasy if they should return to the Apostolic Polity, which is Episcopacy.
There are that urge it best for the Piety, Peace and Honor of this Nation to
have no united Church, no Ecclesiastical Unity which should be National, no
uniforme or settled Religion, but to let every one invent, adhere to, and
advance that party and opinion which they like best; so immovable are they by
any experiences of our mischiefs, or any remonstrances of Piety, Prudence and
Charity, for a public composure in Religion.

From the restive temper of these men I can expect nothing more than that
equanimity which will bear at least with Episcopacy in such as can bear with
Presbytery or Independency in them. If they find it so blessed a Liberty to
serve the Lord as they list in those new Church-waies, whereof they so much
boast and glory, why should they envy, or how can they in conscience grudge to
allow the Godly and honest Episcopal Clergy and other Christians, (who are in
no virtue, grace or gift inferior to them) to partake of and use the like
freedom, as is either granted to, or used and presumed by Presbytery and
Independency? Why should they so spitefully obstruct and hinder that concession
to Episcopacy, which is indulged or challenged to all sorts of novelties and
varieties?

Possibly God in time would decide which is the best way, if Episcopacy, 1
Kings 18.
as Eliah, might bring its offering to the Altar, as well as others do. It may
be in a few years Providence would show which way pleases him most, by his
enclining the hearts of good Christians to embrace and follow what has most of
Gods Order and Wisdom, of Christ's Institution, of Apostolic imitation, of
Catholic Tradition or Custom, and of the Churches union; all which meet
(only) in Primitive Episcopacy.

But this way as it may be dilatory and tedious, so it may be dangerous and
pernicious as to the welfare of both Church and State; for there can be no
division in Religion without emulation, no emulation without opposition, no
opposition without ambition, no ambition without animosity, no animosity
without offense, no offense without anger and studies of revenge, whence arise
public seditions: therefore I rather choose a speedy and safe accommodation,
than any dilatory and dangerous Toleration, which will but increase disputes
and distances, animosities and asperities among good men.

And because I find it is not any thing really burdensome, noxious or offensive
in Primitive Episcopacy, which makes many so shy and jealous of it; but only
the ignorance, errors and prejudices of some men, who have sought to make It
(of later years especially) obnoxious to all manner of popular jealousies,
calumnies and reproaches; which have endeavored so to hide all the pristine
beauty and true excellency of it, that many look upon Prelacy, that is,
Episcopacy, as if it were in the same Form with Popery, and think (most
sillily) that they may no more in conscience comply with any regular
Episcopacy, than with the Popes irregular Primacy, in that arrogant and
imperious sense which he now challenges, beyond the modesty and humility of
his Primitive Predecessors, who were then greatest Bishops, when least in their
ambitions: It will be therefore, as I suppose, not an act of partiality as to
any one side, but of justice and charity to all sorts of Christians, for me a
little further to sweeten the name, and clear the cause of Primitive
Episcopacy, such as I have stated it, and as all Antiquity ever esteemed it to
be, the chiefest support of Religious safety, honor and order; the Center,
Crown and Consummation of the Churches peace, authority, unity and prosperity.

It is pity so Primitive, so Apostolic, so Venerable an Order, so universally
used in this as all Churches heretofore, should any further lie under the dirt
and disguises of vulgar prejudices, popular reproaches, or any men's personal
faults and infirmities, especially when all wise men know that the usual
distasts which have vitiated most men's palates do arise rather from their own
or other men's choleric and revengefull distempers, and the diffusions of their
redundant galls, than from any real defect or demerit of true Episcopacy, or
from any just blame imputable to worthy men either of that place and office, or
of that persuasion and Communion in the Church of England.

CHAP. XIX.
THere are several grand pleas in behalf of Primitive and Catholic
Episcopacy, Several Pleas in behalf of Episcopacy.
which I here crave leave to produce and urge in a way different from other
men's pens, before all Learned, Godly and Conscientious Christians, Ministers
and others; not only in order to relieve oppressed Episcopacy, but also to
reduce them to an happy reconciliation, and this Church to the state of a
settled and uniform Reformation or Religion, which will hardly ever be obtained
in England by the violent and partial exclusion of the ancient Rights,
pristine Power and evident privileges of Episcopacy, unless the
Antiepiscopall parties can take care to burn or smother all Monuments of true
Antiquity, or to banish all excellent books, ancient and modern, which have
asserted it, or at least forbid their new seminaries and all Scholars the
reading of them. If they cannot rid the world of these books, then they must
make some sharp Index expurgatorius, which shall blot out the words of (...),
Episcopus, Antistes, Praepositus, summus Sacerdos, Pastor, Pater, with those of
(...), ^aternitas, Eminentia, Dignitas, Sanctitas, Authoritas, and other like
expressions, setting forth the eminent dignity and ancient authority of
Episcopacy in all Churches; which expressions are so frequent and conspicuous
in all Ecclesiastic writers, Greek and Latin, that the stars in the
firmament are not more numerous or more illustrious in a clear night, or the
Sunbeams shining at bright noon.

The Native, Primitive, Apostolic, Catholic and Divine splendour of Episcopacy
cannot be eclipsed, without darkning the faces of all Churches and all
Christians. Nor in effect will it ever be done, unless its implacable enemies
can take care by their cunning activity, that none shall be Students, or
Preachers, or Professors of Christianity, or of true Divinity in England, but
such as will be content first to be blinded and hoodwinckt as to all knowledge
of Antiquity; next, that their Disciples shall take the measures of their
Religion, Ordination, Church Order, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Christian
Communion, not from Jerusalem, or Antioch, or Ephesus, or old Rome, or any
other famous, Catholic, Primitive Churches, (which were all under Episcopal
inspection, and in its Communion) but from Geneva, Francfort, Amsterdam,
Arnheim, or Edenbrough; and this since they have pretended (of later years) to
be wiser than their Teachers and first Founders in Christianity, grown more
Eagle-ey'd in Church-affaires than all Antiquity, and all Churches in the
world: whose constant consent and Catholic Testimony in the point of
Episcopacy, as an Apostolic institution, custom and succession, is (I
conceive) as much to be credited for the certainty and fidelity of it, as it is
for the Scripture-Canon received, preserved and delivered to us, or for the two
Sacraments to be used, or for the Lords day to be observed, or for Presbytery
it self, or for any ordained Ministry distinct and authoritative: for none of
these, as to the Historick and Catholic attestation of them, is more ancient
or more evident than Episcopacy. Sure, if the ancient Church were faithful in
all other things of universal use and reception, it is not to be suspected as
to this great depositum of Ecclesiastic Order for gubernative Power, Authority
and Jurisdiction, in what hands it was settled and deposited for the Churches
future peace and constant good Government to all posterity; it being equally
impertinent to affirm, first, that Church Government and Governors were
needless for the Church, or that it was not ordered by the Apostles, (that is,
by the Spirit and wisdom of Christ,) or that it is arbitrary and mutable every
year, as men have a mind to novelty and sedition, or lastly, that those holy
men who immediately succeeded the Apostles did vary from their rule and
prescription, changing Presbytery or Independency into a Presidentiall or
Episcopal primacy; which is a thing incredible, considering the purity,
exactness, and holy pertinacy of Primitive Churches, as to what was of
Apostolical Tradition, as Tertullian rarely expresses it in his book of
Prescription against Heresies.

1. Plea, from the Catholic Antiquity of Episcopacy.
So that my first pregnant consideration, persuading you ( O worthy Gentlemen,
with my brethren of the Ministry, and all my religious Countrymen) to look upon
right Episcopacy with a more propitious and favorable eye, is taken from the
great credit and just veneration which is due to Antiquity, there where we find
a Primitive practice and Catholic consent; and this not only no way contrary
to or diverse from, but most consonant and every way agreeable to the mind of
Christ and the wisdom of God, which the Church has delivered to us in the
holy Scriptures. It is not to be doubted but the stream of Christianity ran
clearest, the nearer it was to the Apostolic fountains, as in purity of
Doctrine, and simplicity of Devotion, so in the Discipline, Order and
Government of the Church, as to that power and authority which is meet in all
offices and Ministrations. Who can deny that the Primitive Churches and Pastors
best understood the appointments of Christ and his Apostles in this point of
Government, as in all things else, when they had such an anointing of the
Spirit and Truth to teach them how to constitute and govern all Churches, Omnes
enim illi valde sunt posteriores quam Episcop^, qu bus Apostoli tradiderunt
ecclesias. Irenae. l. 5. c. ^0.
as needed not any Presbyterian or Independent Tutors to teach them new modes?
who are, as Irenaeus speaks of some Innovators in his time, much younger than
those Bishops who were the successors of the Apostles; who as they could not
possibly be ignorant of the Apostolic appointment, so, nor probably could they
be so impertinent, as presently to alter it even in the first Century, while
some Apostles or Apostolic men were yet living, and not only preaching as
Presbyters, but so ruling as Presidents or Bishops among them and above them,
that they were far enough from the Incubus of popularity, or the Polypus of
parity, among Ministers: Both which methods must have left the enlarged and
numerous Churches of Christ either Acephalists, confused without any head, or
Polycephalists, burdened with many heads, and divided into infinite fragments,
far enough from any such influence and authority, God knows, as was capable to
preserve such large combinations of Churches as then and after were combined,
in any regular order, subordination and communion, wherein primitive Churches
(as in all other things) most excelled; being furthest from any such
distractions, defectivenesse or deformities, as are monstrous in Christianity,
because most contrary to those constant proportions of Modesty, Humility,
Order, Wisdom, Peace, Unity and Polity, which God has set before all sober
men, and specially wise Christians, both in reason and religion, in the systeme
of all bodies natural or social, in all communities civil and military,
oeconomick or politic, yea in all magistracies or eminencies, which are either
paternal, fraternal, or despotical. In the ordering of all which there ever is
and must be some Parent or Elder brother, or Master, or Chieftane, or
Superior, or Commander, who in a kind of Episcopacy over-see and overruled
those that are under their several charges, and within the several
combinations: which order strictly established by God in his ancient Church of
the Jews, can never be made to appear either as Paradox or Heterodox from the
wisdom and will of God in the several families, fraternities or polities of his
Christian Church; nor may it be thought that in this Christ suffered his Church
to err a Catholic error, which in all things else he ever preserved
(according to his promise) from all general defection. Can it then seem other
then Juvenility, Peevishness, Partiality, Pride, Petulancy, Love of novelty,
and factious inclination, or some other impotent passion, (which may, as
diseases, be sometime too popular, prevalent and Epidemick among Christians) so
grossly to blemish, suspect, despise and discredit (as some do) the veracity and
fidelity of the Church of Christ, in the point of Catholic Episcopacy, as most
ancient and venerable? which is indeed, and ever was, both used and esteemed as
he only crown and completion of all well- governed Churches, as in latter, so
in primitive times; before whose gray head and reverent age it well becomes
such Novices as we are to rise up and pay a due respect.

Since (then) presidential or paternal Episcopacy is (beyond all cavil or
dispute) the elder Brother by far to Presbytery or Independency; Britannoru^
inaccessa Romany loca Christo subdita. Tert. adv. Jud. c. 7.
since it had possession, as in all other, so in these British Churches (of
which Tertullian, who lived in the second Century after Christ, makes mention)
from the first Constitution of them in their just proportions (which St. Jerome
calls Adultas ecclesias, adult or full-grown Churches, Hieron. in vita Malch.
which had attained their due stature and dimensions;) since the quiet
possession and long prescription of fifteen or sixteen hundred years, is a
valid title in justice, and invincible prejudice against all novell pretenders,
and violent disseisors of Episcopacy; it were but modest and ingenuous,
reasonable and religious, equal and charitable, for all Ministers and others
of any Learning, Worth and Honesty (as many I hope are of all sides) to make
some handsome, if not retractations, yet retrogradations and returns toward
this Apostolic and Catholic, Ancient and Primitive Episcopacy.

O How well would it become Presbyterians and Independents, that have a due
sense of things comely, honest, praiseworthy and honorable, in stead of making
up their new Associations, which is but a marriage or medly of Presbytery and
Independency, to offer, or receive some fair offers and fraternall proposalls,
in order to an happy accommodation with those Learned and worthy men, who are
still firm to the Episcopal interests and just Authority, as Ancient,
Primitive and Catholic; which are not to be slighted by any men of Learning
and Worth, however the Cause may be more afflicted, and the men less favored
at present?

It ill becomes any Grave, Godly and ingenuous men, still to take those poor
advantages against Episcopacy which arise from popular ignorance, vulgar
prejudices or covetous jealousies; much less from the plebeian petulancies
used against all Bishops, and the undeserved depressions fallen on many
Episcopal Divines, over whom disdainfully to triumph, and with a kind of
scorn to crow and insult, is both base and barbarous: nor is it much more
ingenuous, to pass them by with a supercilious silence and neglect; which I see
some new masters affect to do, counting them all as unsavory salt, not fit to
be gathered from those Dung-hills on which they have been cast, (God knows, not
for want of savor in themselves, but of favor from others.) A third sort
there are of Associaters, who that they might seem more civil and candid to
Episcopacy, and to Episcopal Ministers, of whose worth they are convinced as
much as of their sustained injuries, have sometime (yet not without the
strictures of some brow and glorying) invited them to join with them, that is,
to subscribe and submit to their new Associations. For in these (as the design
and Opera is laid) those men whose judgment and conscience has most confined
and confirmed them to Episcopacy, must either as Ciphers signify nothing, and
when they convene, but sit still and say nothing, (being only tame Spectators
of other men's rare activities, who would fain Christen their Presbytery and
Independency with some drops and sprincklings of Episcopacy, and so have some
Episcopal Divines as Gossips to their new Births;) or else they must first as
good as openly renounce Episcopacy, and desert their former both opinion,
Ordination and station in the Church as Christians and as Ministers; next, they
must admit the rare and new invention of a particular Church Covenant, as they
call it, or an incorporating engagement, by word or subscription, contrary to
what they formerly had explicitly passed to this Church and its Government in
their ordination and subscription, yea and beyond that Baptismall Covenant,
which every Christian professor ownes as the badg or bond of his admission into
Communion with Christ and his Church, both Catholic and congregationall,
general and particular. This (it seems) must now not at all be owned, or
slighted, nulled and forgotten by the superfetation of a new form of Christian
confederation more solemn, sacred and obliging (as they fancy) to Christian
duties, than that was, which was solemnly made in the presence of the
congregation, ratified in the blood of Jesus Christ, and testified in the Name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: yea and after this the poor Episcopal
Divines, if they will gently comply, and for fear Associate, must quietly
permit either the community of the people, or the parity of the Presbyters (in
their several lesser bodies and congregations, or in their greater classes and
conventions) to challenge to themselves the plenary, sole, absolute, perfect
and unappealable power of not only ordination, which of old they never had, as
St. Jerome confesses, but of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Discipline,
and this under the conduct and auspicious management of only some Diurnall
Dictator, some temporary prolocutor, or extemporary moderator, who is
(forsooth) to have the Image of a superficial Bishop, and the shadow of a
short-lived superintendent; a thing merely occasional and unauthoritative as to
any office or power inherent in him, or of right to be challenged or exercised
by him, enjoying only an horary, arbitrary and humane presidency, for fashion
and civility sake, without any Ecclesiastical, eminent or constant Authority
residing in him as derived from Christ, the Apostles or their successors, or
any Churches custom, designation and consent in former times.

Such as was ever committed to, owned in, and used by the Bishops of the
Church, as regularly succeeding to the Apostles in that ordinary eminency of
power, which was necessary to keep both Presbyters and all Christian people and
Churches good Order, Peace and Unity; which blessings they never more enjoyed,
or more happily, than under a right Episcopacy.

Whose cause, however of later years it has been run down and trampled in a
hurry under foot by some men in England, Scotland and Ireland; yet has it
suffered no real diminution as to the true Honor of its Apostolic Authority,
its Primitive Antiquity, its Catholic succession, its high descent, and its
holy Original: which was never denied or much disputed by any men of any
considerable Learning and Piety, till these later Dog-dayes, in which not only
some single Stars of nebulous and dubious light, but whole Constellations of
them, like Sirius or the Canicular Juncto (erected under the new name and
figuration of Smectymnuus, to calculate the Nativity of a new Reformation)
became Lords of the Ascendent; being filled, contrary to their former
Conformity and declared submission, with a very unbenigne, that I say not
malignant, influence, not only against Episcopacy, but in effect against the
whole visible Constitution of this Church, in which (as Goods in a sunk ship)
all things are much wasted and abased by the ruin of Episcopacy. Their
destructive fires (kindled from the colder parts of this Island) first flamed
into strange Logomachies, thredbare cavillings, and trivial strifes about
Words and Names; as if after sixteen hundred years, all the Christians and
Ministers of England, its Princes and Parliaments, its Synods and Councels, yea
all the Christian world elsewhere, were to be Catechized by a few petty
Presbyters (in comparison) and their Scot-English Assembly, what the names of
Bishop and Presbyter, of Pastor and Teacher, of Elder and Ruler, of Helps and
Governments, of Apostle and Evangelist, of Ecclesiastical Stars and Angels did
mean: which not only all Writers, but all times and practices of all Churches
had sufficiently interpreted, and cleared from the first promiscuous use of
some general names (which called the chief Apostles Prophets, Evangelists,
Bishops, Presbyters, Elders, Ministers and Deacons too; in whose offices,
authorities and duties, there were real and great differences) to more proper
and peculiar distinctions, according to the several ranks, degrees, orders,
offices and powers then established in the Church.

After the Squibbs and Crackers of paper had been lighted, and cast in the face
of venerable Episcopacy, at last (as the manner is) things came to dreadful
Chiromachies, such scufflings and fightings with hands and arms of flesh
against that Government, (which is as the Ancient of days) that they looked
more like that Gigantomachy, the Giants assaulting Heaven and the Gods, than
that Good fight of faith, which ought to contend earnestly only for that which
was once uniformly delivered to all true Saints, and received by all true
Churches of Christ, in doctrine, order and government: among whom all lesser
disputations and differences circumstantial (rising among good Christians) were
wont to be fairly debated and determined in lawful Assemblies, in
Ecclesiastical Synods, and National or general Councils; from which Christian
and Orthodox Bishops were never either terrified or excluded, but principally
called and admitted as the chief Fathers of those holy Oeconomies or Christian
Polities: Nor was Episcopacy ever condemned by any of those Councils, Synods or
Assemblies in any Age of the Church; much less was it ejected and extirpated as
useless, unlawful and abominable, no not by any Synods and confessions of any
Protestant and reformed Churches of note; notwithstanding they could not
conveniently enjoy the blessing of it, (for so they accounted it) either by
reason of the petulancy of people, or the impatience of civil Magistrates, or
the Sacrilegious humors and designs of all against the Clergy.

After all these prepossessions and just presumptions thus challenged to the
cause and state of Episcopacy, in point of its venerable and undeniable
Antiquity, I cannot but offer to its still scrupulous or implacable Adversaries
these following Quaeres.

1. How sad (I beseech you) and wretched, how confounded and astonished must
the awakened Consciences of those men be, who have been the chief Authors and
Fautors of our late troubles, variations and miseries, chiefly upon the account
of their Antiepiscopal Antipathies, if after all these combustions,
perturbations and plunderings of Religion, which have rather pleased men's
private passions and opinions, than any way profited the public welfare of
this Church or State; if (I say) these great sticklers against Episcopacy
should be either grossly mistaken, or maliciously perverted from the right path,
that good old way, of which former Ages can better inform us, then those that
are but of yesterday, and can know nothing but by their light?

2. What if it should be as true, as it is most probable (because generally so
believed in all Ages, parts and places of the Church) that the cause of
Primitive Episcopacy is indeed the cause of God, of Christ, and of the whole
Church; the cause of all the Apostles, of all Primitive Bishops their immediate
successors, yea the cause of all true Presbyters and all true Christians; a
cause in which the glory of God, the wisdom of Christ, the honor of the
Apostles, the fidelity of their successors, the credit of the Church Catholic,
the comfort and authority of all true Ministers, the surest test and Character
of due Ordination, the peace and unity of all good Christians, are bound up and
mainly concerned?

3. What if these new masters, these sharp censors and imperious dictators,
(whom perhaps not Piety so much as Policy, not Religion but Reason of State,
not reforming severities, but needless jealousies and imaginary necessities,
have put upon such violent sticklings against Episcopacy, and reprobating all
worthy Bishops) what if they have been deceived themselves and deceivers of
others in that point? which is much more venial to think and say of the very
best of them, than to pass any such censure or suspicion of error or ignorance
upon all Churches, even in their purest and Primitive Antiquity, when one spark
of Martyrly zeal, which was as holy fire from Gods Altar, had more divine light
and heat in it, than all the blazes and flashes of Modern Zelotry.

4. I do in all Christian candor demand of the severest Presbyterian and
sharpest Independent, whether, when they ask of the generations of old, and
enquire of all Ages from the beginning of Christian Churches, whether ever they
find any Christians or congregations at any time either Christening or
Churching themselves, either by their own vote, choice and authority, or by
separating from their ordained Presbyters and Bishops, which were sound in the
faith, and regular in their administrations, who had duly taught, baptized,
confirmed and ruled them in the Lord. When did any Presbyters or Ministers ever
pretend to ordain themselves or one another without some Apostle or Bishop?
When, where, and by whom was the first Schism, Rupture or Chasme of
Ecclesiastical parity, as to Mission and Commission, begun? When and where was
the first intrusion or encroachment upon the pretended authority of Presbytery
made by Episcopacy? Did not all Presbyters owe and ever own their legitimate
birth and breeding to their respective Bishops? whose Authority was ever as
much above mere Presbyters in degree and office, as it was before them in the
order of nature and causality, no less than in time and antiquity.

5. If (then) all the novel presumptions, pretentions and objections of either
Presbytery or Independency against Primitive, Catholic, and Apostolic
Episcopacy, should in earnest be nothing but passionate, false and frivolous
mistakes, arising from ignorance and error, carried on by envy and arrogance in
many men; O what needless troubles, what heedlesse angers, what inordinate
furies, what dreadful disorders must they all this while have been guilty of?
what causeless contentions, innovations, confusions, vastations, have they
brought into the Churches of Christ? what cruel and uncharitable contentions
have they raised, as elsewhere, so in this famous and flourishing Church of
England? without any just cause, God knows, and beyond the merits of
Episcopacy, even in its greatest defects, declinations and deformities; to
which as all holy Institutions may in time be subject, so they ought to be
humbly, wisely and moderately reformed by the prayers, tears, counsels, honest
and orderly endeavors of all sober Christians, of all sorts and sizes, in
their places and stations, with due regard to the first pattern and original.

But certainly, as the whole order and office of Presbytery, (which may have
had its personal depravations also) so the ancient and venerable Authority of
Episcopacy, as to its Primitive Institution and Catholic succession, ought not
on any hand to be utterly ruined, rased and extirpated root and branch, by any
tumultuary rashness or popular precipitancy; which can never become any Church
of Christ, or any wise and godly Christians: nor can such methods of sharp and
sour Reformations ever end in the peace or comfort of good men; who, (if they
find themselves guilty of excesses, so dangerous and destructive to the true
Church, true Religion and true Reformation) have nothing less to do than to
persevere in their extravagancies, or pertinaciously to assert their former
transports: yea they have nothing more to do speedily and conscienciously, than
humbly to recant, seriously to repent, and effectually to amend, as much as
lies in their power, the affronts and assaults, the breaches and wastes they
have made of the Churches Peace and Unity, Power and Authority, by returning to
that duty which they owe to God, and that obedience they owe to their
spiritual Governors, and that reverence which they owe to uniform antiquity;
which so fully commends the presidentiall authority of Apostolical and
Primitive Episcopacy. Their first errors may be weakness, but their obstinacy
must needs be wickedness; who still sin when they are convinced, silenced and
afflicted.

6. What if after all this dust and noise, which has so blinded and deafned
the eyes and ears of many Presbyters and people, that they cannot and will not
see the Truth and Testimony of Antiquity, (which is no less clear for the
presidentiall authority and eminency of Episcopacy, than for the subordination,
counsel and assistance of Presbytery) what if it should be the mind of God, the
order and Institution of Jesus Christ, the designation and direction of his
blessed Spirit, evidently signified and settled in and by the blessed Apostles,
in all Primitive Churches, and so continued to this day, according to the
measures of Divine Wisdom and Order, (though not without mixtures of humane
infirmities and disorders, incident to all holy Institutions?)

7. What if after all these seditious and schismatic distempers in Ministers
and people, the Lord should say to these refractory and irreconcilable spirits
against Episcopacy, as he did to the Jews when they revolted from Samuels
Government, 1 Samuel 8.17.
They have not rejected you (O my faithful servants the Bishops, whom I have
constituted and used in all ages as vigilant Overseers, and wise Rulers of my
flock,) but they have rejected me? who in this point of Episcopacy, have so
sufficiently declared my will and pleasure to all the world, that no Church was
ever ignorant of it, or varied from it, being manifested from heaven, First, in
the evident instances of divine wisdom, among the Jewish Church and Priests;
yea as it is an orderly and gubernative method in all societies, where right
reason, and so true Religion, necessarily command and commend superiority and
subjection: Secondly, in the pattern and Rules of Ecclesiastical Polity, set
down by my Son Jesus Christ, and followed by his Apostles, who settled all
Churches in such an orderly subordination: Thirdly, in the constant custom and
Catholic testimony of all succeeding Churches, whose joint suffrages and
uniform practices in cases of any darkness, dispute or difficulty (where
Scripture-precepts may seem less clear and explicit) ought by all sober
Christians to be esteemed as the safest measures of conscience, and surest rule
of religious observance, especially as to things of outward Polity, Order and
Government; nor may any novel inventions or pretentions never so specious be
put into the balance against the Authority of the Catholic Church, which is
the pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.
the great Directory of Ecclesiastical prudence and practice.

8. What if the Great God of order, peace and truth, (as well as so many
learned and godly men, so many famous and flourishing Churches in all Ages)
should by beating or scaring men from their popular prejudices, pitiful
subterfuges, and sinister designs, thus mightily plead the cause of true
Episcopacy, against all those who have spoken and done so many perverse things
against that excellent government? What if he should by some powerful means
rebuke their confidences, as he did Job's? justly demanding of these
Destroyers, Where is that Wisdom, that Modesty, that Gentleness, that Charity,
that Moderation, that Humility, that Gravity and Christian Caution which became
godly men to their betters, to such a Church and to such worthy Bishops as were
the Governors of it under God and the King? Could you be ignorant of the
learning, graces, virtues, merits and worth which were in Bishops, suitable to
their lawful Authority? Did you not know, and with some repining see, how justly
they were preferred before Presbyters and People, as every way fittest to be
over and above them? Are these immoderations and injuries the ways of true
Religion and Reformation? Can there be true piety without charity, yea without
equity or pity? If evil men are not to be injured, much less good men, good
Ministers, and least of all good Bishops, which were not wanting among you.

May not thus the lightnings of Gods rebukes be clearly seen, and the terrors
of his thunders be justly heard, and the blastings of his displeasure be felt,
by all the unjust, tumultuary, malicious and implacable enemies of venerable
Episcopacy? Methinks I hear the Divine Majesty thus uttering his glorious voice
against them:

Deuteronomy. 32.6.
O foolish People! O unthankful Nation! O degenerous Christians or deformed
Church, not worthy to be beloved of God, or happily governed by wise men! Do
you thus requite the Lord, and thus despise all the ancient Churches of Christ,
by forsaking, yea rejecting your own mercies and happiness? Is it a small thing
that you have broken through all Laws, and the arm of man's civil authority, but
will you also contend against the power of God, and the wisdom of Christ? whose
outstretched arm in the way of Episcopacy has been in all Ages a defense and
refuge to his Church. Should you, beyond the boldness of Balaam, dare to curse
what God has not cursed, or to defy what God has not defied, but signally
owned with his blessing in all Ages and Churches?

In seeing do you not see, and in reading do you not understand, the constant
methods of Gods guiding and governing both this and all other Christian
Churches? How has a novel zeal, but not according to knowledge, blinded your
minds? Who called the first Apostles to be chief Bishops over all Churches?
Acts 1.
Who supplied the Apostasy of Judas by the Election of Matthias to his
Episcopacy? Upon whom did the power of the Holy Ghost first come? Who placed
Bishops immediately after them in all completed Churches through the world?
What planted, preserved, united and reformed them, but that Apostolical, that
is, the Episcopal authority, assisted by such Presbyters, whom they ordained to
part of the Office, Labor, Honor and Ministry? Who were the chief Champions
of the Gospel, but the venerable Bishops in all Ages? Who were the most
resolute Confessors? holy Bishops: Who the most glorious Martyrs? excellent
Bishops: Who were the most Learned and Valiant Asserters of the Orthodox faith,
Primitive purity, sanctity, order and harmony, becoming Christian Churches, but
admirable Bishops? Who were counted the prime Stars in the hand of Christ?
Rev. 1. ult.
Who were called by way of eminency Angels by him, but the chief Presidents and
Bishops of the seven Churches?

To whom was Divine Power first given and after derived, not only to teach and
feed, but to ordain Presbyters and Deacons, also to rebuke, rule and govern
both Presbyters, Deacons and People, (as St. Paul enjoynes) but to holy
Bishops, in the persons and patterns of Timothy and Titus, Archippus and
others, whose Authority as such, no man ought to despise? 1 Timothy 4.12. Tit.
2.15.
Who were they that wounded and destroyed the Great Behemoth and Leviathans of
prodigious errors and spreading heresies in the four first Centuries, but
incomparable Bishops, such as were Irenaeus, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Augustine,
Ambrose, Hilary, Prosper, both the Cyrils, the Basils, the Gregory's and
others? Who quenched the wild-fires of Schism and faction among Christian
people and Ministers, but excellent Bishops, such as Clemens, Ignatius,
Cyprian, both the Dionysiu's, Austin, Optatus, Fulgentius and others? By whose
sweat and blood, next after the Apostles, were the plantations and necessary
Reformations of Churches watered and weeded, but by the vigilance and industry
of worthy Bishops, both in their single capacity and in their joint Synods or
Councills? wherein Bishops, as the Representatives or chief Fathers of all
Churches as the families of Christ, might orderly meet, duly deliberate, and
autoritatively determine, what seemed good to the Spirit of God and to them,
for the Churches Purity and Peace, according to the Scriptures precept and
Catholic practice. Who were those renowned Pastors and Preachers of old that
mitigated the Spirits of great Princes, that converted many Nations, that
baptized mighty Kings and Emperors, that advanced the Gospel beyond their
Empires, and set up the Cross of Christ above their Crowns, not in
sovereignty or civil power, but in the Divine Empire of Verity, Sanctity and
Charity? Who moderated the Spirits and passions of persecutors? Who convinced
them of their errors, resolved their scruples? who condemned their sins? who
terrified their consciences? and who either raised or restored them (through
repentance) to the peace of Christ and his Church, but heroic, wise and
invincible Bishops? Who have been the chief Luminaries in all Churches, in all
Ages the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, the prime Pillars of Piety and Peace,
of Hospitality and Honor, of Order and good Government, but wise and renowned
Bishops? Who furnished all Churches with fervent Prayers, devout Liturgies,
convenient Catechises, learned Homilies, practical Sermons, accurate
Commentaries and excellent Epistles; with sound Decisions of Controversies and
Cases arising in the Church or any private Conscience? Who made up with
charitable Composures all uncomfortable breaches and unkind differences among
Christians, but pious and prudent Bishops? whose authority was ever esteemed as
sacred, being experienced in all Ages to be sanative and sovereign to Religion
and the Church, where they had freedom and encouragements to act as became the
chief Pastors, Counselors and Governors of the Church in all Ecclesiastic
concernments.

Sure if God would have them utterly destroyed, he would not so long have
accepted such sacrifices from the hands of Bishops, both ancient and modern;
nor thus mightily have pleaded the cause of Episcopacy in all Ages, and in
this, both as to Gods wisdom in, and his blessing upon, that way of
Church Government and Governors.

Obj.
But possibly our later Bishops (especially in England, whose cause is here
chiefly pleaded) were such degenerous persons, as deserved not to bear the
name, or knew not how to use the Office of a Bishop.

Answ.
Doubtless ( their Enemies being Judges) no place, no Age, no one Nation or
Church in the world since the Apostles, ever exceeded the Bishops of England
for piety and learning, for useful and exemplary virtues, of which I shall
afterward give more exact account; no Church ever more happy, flourishing or
prosperous, then the reformed Church of England was under such worthy Bishops,
as some men so despitefully used. Could Bishops in this and all Churches be so
blessed of God, and yet Episcopacy deserve to be so abhorred of men? Were the
Evangelical labors of godly Bishops so plentifully watered with the Dew of
Heaven, and yet does their function deserve to be rooted out of the Earth? If
Episcopacy in its secular riches and honors must needs be destroyed, in order
to confiscate the Churches Lands; yet at least primitive, though poor,
Episcopacy might have been preserved: whose ancient eminency would have been
both authoritative and conspicuous among good Christians, through the Clouds of
such undeserved poverty. Though some men might presume to deprive Bishops of
their deserved and lawful Estates, yet sure they were too bold to rob the
Church of all excellent and deserving Bishops, such as England ever afforded,
both before and since the Reformation; which the Romish and Jesuitick policies
never hoped more effectually to deforme and destroy, than by helping to carry
on the routing of Episcopacy. Certainly the excellent Bishops of England were
the greatest Eyesore of the Pope and his Conclave; nor did they care to fight
by their secret and open Engines against small or great Presbyters, so much as
against these Prelates, who had so long stood in their way. They knew, when
these chief Shepherds were smitten, the Sheep would soon be scattered: nor were
Papists ever more gratified than when Episcopacy was extirpated out of England.
What if the God, the Lord of his Church, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has laid the Government of it on the Shoulders of Christ Jesus, and he
derived the external administration or dispensation of it to the Apostles, and
they to succeeding Bishops, as spiritual Pastors and venerable Fathers of his
Church; what if he should thus plead the cause of Episcopacy, in the eminency
of its Apostolical order and primitive authority, against all those that have
spoken, acted and written so many peevish, spiteful, popular, partial and
perverse things against it? What if he should lay to their Consciences what is
visible to their and all men's eyes, the sad divisions, miserable confusions,
and horrid vastations of this Church and the Reformed Religion, which have
followed the destroying of harmless, honorable, ancient, venerable, useful
and necessary Episcopacy? Would they not be infinitely ashamed, and mightily
confounded for the new Modes which they have taken up, for the Oaks which they
have chosen to over-shadow themselves, Isa* 1.29.
yea for the Briars and Brambles which they fancy as fittest to rule themselves
and the Church of Christ in this Land, either by way of parity or popularity,
which are not fit methods to rule their own families withal?

Will a few arbitrary precarious Presbyters, and unautoritative Preachers, or
their new Associations serve their turn? Or will a few petty Congregations or
Schismatizing Conventicles, here and there, scattered and scrambled together in
Cities and Countries, be able to countervail the damage, or to recompense the
unspeakable defects and detriments, which this Church and Nation, which all
estates and degrees of Christian people have sustained, by the total loss and
overthrow of primitive Episcopacy, which was as it were smothered to death in a
crowd and huddle, never legally examined or fairly condemned by the free and
full suffrages of all estates, so as its Antiquity, worth and honor did
deserve. What learned, prudent and conscientious Ministers, or other
Christians, can be fully satisfied with those new-fashioned ordinations and
ministrations of holy things, which neither they nor their Forefathers, nor
any ancient Churches ever knew, and wherein that Divine Authority which they
challenge, is so justly doubted or disputed, as by no Catholic hand or regular
course committed to them?

If that Ministerial power, which is challenged and exercised upon such new
accounts of humane policies and later inventions, if it should really be none
at all, or as weak and defective as it is dubious, for Ordination as it is for
Jurisdiction; (which is very much feared and suspected by very wise and good
men; especially where not want and necessity deny, but wantonness and
wilfulness seek to deprive Christians of their true Bishop:) O how vain, how
invalid, how arrogant, how insignificant must those Ministers and all their
holy Ministrations appear to many Christians, who have of later years set
themselves up, by a Presbyterian Commission or Popular Election, not only
without, but against their lawful Superiors; who were every way so able, so
worthy, and so lawfully authorized for that office and eminency, not only as
they were ordained Presbyters, but as they were further consecrated Bishops,
that is, placed by Christ, and appointed by the Church in an higher degree,
capacity, use and exercise of Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction, then ever
was in any Presbyters? Of which eminency Episcopal as that famous Council of
Nice took such care to have it continued, after the cient mode and pattern of
public Election and solemn Consecration, or the Churches Benediction; so all
this formality must have been very superstitious and ridiculous, if it added
nothing of authority and power peculiar to them as Bishops, but only what they
formerly had received in common as Presbyters.

Doubtless reordination, as rebaptization, to the same office and degree in the
Church, was ever condemned in the Church of Christ as impious, because
superfluous, a mere mockery of Religion, a taking the name of God in vain;
forbidden by the African Canons and many Councils, never practiced by any but
such as St. Basil the Great reports one Eustathius of Sebastia to have been,
whom he calls an infamous Heretic, a notorious deserter of the Churches
Catholic Communion.

If St. Chrysostom in the fourth Century had judged it enough to complete him
in his Episcopal power and Authority, to have been once ordained a Presbyter,
In vita B. Chrysostom.
as he was in Antioch, where he so lived twelve years, sure he would not have
troubled himself to have been after ordained or consecrated a Bishop by
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria and others of that order, when he was chosen to
be Bishop of Constantinople.

In vita Aug.
Nor would St. Austin, (a person no less pious and learned, who had been
ordained Presbyter by Valerius Bishop of Hippo) been ordained anew by Megalius
Patriarch of Numidia, when he was chosen to be Bishop of Hippo. In like sort
was one Alexander a Presbyter ordained by St. Synes. ep. 66.
Chrysostom to be Bishop of Bassinopolis, according to the uniforme method of
Antiquity, which judged that the Presbyters choosing, the peoples approving, and
the next Bishops consecrating or blessing of the Elect Bishop, made up that
complete power and eminent Authority, in which he that was formerly but a
Presbyter, was now invested as a Bishop or President of any Church: which made
Epiphanius brand Aerius for a mad man, and subverted by the Devil (upon his
discontent for being repulsed from a Bishopric, of which he was ambitious)
because he made Episcopacy and Presbytery ((...)) of equal dignity, efficacy
and authority; Hieronym. ad Pammach. in Epitaph. Paulae. In epist. ad Johan.
Hieros. ep.
yet is Epiphanius often and highly commended by St. Jerome (who was but a
Presbyter and lived in his Diocese sometime) as a person ( sanctae and
venerabilis memoriae) of holy and happy memory.

This then appearing so pregnantly to have been the judgment and practice of
all Antiquity, which preferred Episcopal dignity and Authority above simple
Presbytery, I do not see how learned, modest and ingenuous men can lightly
esteem or actually oppose so Ancient and Catholic an order in the Church; so
useful, so necessary for any Churches well-being, which is unseparable from
its good Government.

Lay aside (then) passions, prejudices, partiality, love of novelty, and
childish pertinacy; I cannot but hope sober men will cheerfully return in
their judgments, desires and endeavors, to correspond with Primitive and
paternall Episcopacy, acknowledging the ancient Rights of it as well as the use
of it to be Catholic and Apostolic, so delivered to us in all Ages and
successions, not only by Bishops, but by Presbyters and Deacons too; such as
Clemens of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origin and others were: from all which
wholly to vary and recede, cannot be other than shaking, and in great part
subverting, the very foundations of Unity, Charity and Stability in the
Catholic Church, as to its visible Order, Communion and Government; wherein
all good Christians should not so much study the temporary satisfaction of
particular parties and interests, as the constant and common good of the whole
Polity and Society, wherein all honest men's private concernments are best
preserved by such a public Authority as is most venerable and least disputable.

What some have alleged to weaken and baffle the Catholic Antiquity of
Episcopacy, Of Ignatius his Epistles.
as to its Primitive and Apostolic plantation, by bastardizing all the
Epistles of Ignatius, as wholly supposititious, and so interpolated at best
with the oft-repeated Crambes of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, to a kind of
nauseous affectation, savouring (they say) more of later subtilty than
Primitive simplicity: All this has no weight in it, considering the high
esteem was had of Ignatius in the Churches of the second and third Centuries,
besides what the learned Usserius and Vossius do own in their late Examens, not
only for his Martyrly constancy, but for his so holy and generous Epistles, so
full of devout flames and sacred fervors of love to Christ, of Charity to his
Church, and zeal for Martyrdom, that it were a thousand pitties this lukewarm
Age should want the warmth of Ignatius his spirit glowing in his Epistles, such
as were often owned and cited by the first Ecclesiastic Writers, St. Jerome,
Eusebius and others, as genuine. Nor does it seem so probable that any in those
or aftertimes, which had no dispute either for or against Episcopacy, should
studiously add those frequent testimonies for it which are seen in the most
unsuspected parts of Ignatius; but rather, that Holy man was directed by Gods
good Spirit in his Martyrly zeal and ecstasies of love to Christ and the Church,
to reinforce and reiterate, as he does, the validity of his testimony for Order
and Unity in the Church, as foreseeing the quarrels which might be about
Episcopacy, and that the Communion of the Church would be much dissolved, when
the reverence and submission to Episcopal order and eminency should be so
remitted, disputed or denied, that either Presbyters or people should run to
parity and popularity, the certain highways to Anarchy.

Truly Ignatius is not more frequent for the honor and eminency of Episcopacy,
than for a venerable Presbytery in its due place and rank; which might make him
seem less fulsome to some Presbyters, if they were not their own enemies, out
of excessive transports against all Bishops. Vedelius of Geneva, who had as
good a nose and quick a sent as most men, would not have so studied Ignatius
his Epistles, and sifted them as he does, if he thought them all dross or
refuse: yea he is so evicted by them, that he cannot forbear to subscribe to
many of them in many places, Libenter tales amplectimur Episcopos. Vedel.
yea and to such an Episcopacy as that holy Martyr joins with the (...) of a
venerable Presbytery; which he hardly doubts, much less denies, to have been
in that first Century after Christ when Ignatius wrote those Epistles, Phil.
4.3.
being Bishop of Antioch after E^odias, constituted there by Saint Peter, when
he left that Church to go to others.

Obj. Of St. Clemens his Epistle.
Nor is there any more force in the fancies that some men draw from St. Clemens
contemporary with St. Paul, who in his Epistles ownes no Bishops as distinct
among or above Presbyters in the Church of Corinth, to whom he wrote that
divine letter, upon occasion of Schism or Sedition risen among the Presbyters
of that Church.

Answ.
Sure the enemies of Episcopacy are hardly driven to find testimonies in
Antiquity against it, when they are forced to wrest them out of such Writers,
who were undoubtedly themselves Bishops, as Clemens was in the Church of Rome,
in whose person he writes that Epistle to the Corinthians, as Eusebius, St.
Jerome, and all Antiquity before them do witness. Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 12.
Hierom. Catal. Scrip. Eccl.


It is true, St. Clemens then wrote, when the Name of Bishop and Presbyter were
not so distinct as afterward; Episcopal eminency being either in the
Apostolical persons and power yet surviving, or conveyed under the Names of
Bishops and Presbyters to lesser Apostles and Apostolic successors, Clem ep.
p. 54. (...).
whom St. Clemens calls the first fruits of the Apostles, placed by them (as he
says) to be Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in all Churches, to serve and
oversee or Rule the Church according to Christian order and Ecclesiastical
comeliness, as the State of the Churches required. Which Clem. epist. p 53.
he represents by those three orders among the Jews, which God had appointed,
namely the ((...)) the chief Priests, the Priests and Levites: which Orders, as
p. 57.
he says God confirmed by the miracle of Aarons Rod, against the factious and
seditious spirits among the Jews; so the Apostles, foreseeing the contention
that would arise about the name of Episcopacy, did place those worthy persons
to be their successors, whom others in like order might follow, to execute (as
he expresses) the proper ministrations and offices which are to be performed
in the Church, not confusedly, but by such persons and in such times and places
as the Lord had appointed.

So that either the Corinthian Presbyters were then as so many particular
Bishops attended only with their Deacons in their several Charges (which
might be many and large enough in that ample City and Territory, after the
Apostle St. Paul's death;) or they were still under some surviving Apostles
general care and inspection, as St. John, who yet lived in Domitians time,
when Clemens wrote this Epistle to those Corinthian Presbyters, who possibly
for want of some chief Bishop or President chosen and placed among them, thus
fell into emulations and factions: which afterward were remedied by Episcopal
eminency in that Church, as St. Jerome tells us. This is certain, as no
Primitive Church had more early factions and more carnal divisions, or more
needed Episcopal Presidency, that is, Apostolical Authority, to repress the
turbulent and contentious humors among both people and Presbyters; so none had
more eminent Bishops, among whom one was that famous Dionysius, Eusebius. hist. l.
4. c. ^2.
whom Eusebius and all Antiquity so commend for a Bishop of most Primitive and
Apostolic temper, full of Majesty and Humility, of Authority and Charity.

To conclude, I find no disadvantage brought against Primitive Episcopacy (but
much for it) by either of these most Ancient Writers, to which all others after
them do so unanimously and clearly agree for asserting the Venerable Authority
and Catholic Antiquity of Bishops above Presbyters, that for any man of parts
to listen to the partial, novel and pitiful allegations, which some
Presbyters have made against Episcopacy and all Presidentiall Bishops, contrary
to those ancient Authors, (who were most of them, yea almost all of them, of
that Episcopal order in the Church) is certainly as senseless a superstition,
and as vain a divination, as that was for which Hannibal reproched Prusias
King of Bithynia, when being advised by Hannibal to fight with the
Pergamenians, he refused, because the entrails of the calfe then sacrificed
seemed not propitious: Sure (Sir) says he to the King, you cannot be well
advised in your wars, An tu carunculae vitulinae mavis credere quam
Imperatori veteri* Cic. de Div. l. 2. Valor. Max. l. 3. c. 7.
who rather regard the entrails of a young calf, than the Counsels of an old
soldier and veterane Commander. Nor is it less impertinent for any sober
Christian to credit the pitiful Rhapsodies or scraps forced out of the
Scriptures or Fathers, and corraded by a few Neotericks, to wrest them against
Episcopacy, and themselves too who were actually Bishops, rather than to
believe that uniform concurrence, which makes wholly for it out of all
Antiquity, as in persuasion, so in practice, so far, that not one person or
Author, Father or Historian, Synod or Council of any Name or Note, Worth or
Eminency, can be excepted: No not St. Jerome himself, whose judgment and
practice is clear in many places for Episcopal Eminency and Authority;
however as a Presbyter he challenged an interest, as in the Election, so in the
Counsel and assistance of Presbyters to be joined with Bishops, which is as
prudent as ancient, and not denied by any sober man who adheres to Primitive
Episcopacy. For which St. Hier. epist. ad Euag. and in Catal* Scrip. Eccl.
Jerome himself gives so pregnant and ancient a Testimony, as none clearer can
be desired, in the person of St. Mark the Evangelist, who first planted and
settled a Christian Church at Alexandria, where he died and was buried. After
whom (by his advise and direction no doubt) the Presbyters of Alexandria chose
Anianus as their Bishop (a man endeared to God and man, Virum tum Deo propter
pietatem charu^, tum in omnibus rebus admirabilem. Hieron.
of admirable Piety and Charity) who ( in celsiori gradu collocatus) placed and
owned in a higher degree than any Presbyters, did govern that Church twenty two
years as Bishop; whose succession continued, as St. Jerome says, to his days,
in Dionysius and Heraclas Bishops of Alexandria. One such testimony for a
ruling and unepiscopall, that is, an unruly Presbytery or Independency,
(without any Bishop) would be worth considering; but is not to be found in all
Antiquity.

CHAP. XX.
A second plea for Episcopacy, from its Evangelicall temper as to civil
subjection.
MY second argument or plea, by which to reconcile sober men to Apostolic,
Primitive and Catholic Episcopacy, is from that Evangelicall temper and true
Christian spirit which is in it, and was ever both owned and used by it, as to
the peaceable principles and obedientiall practices of all worthy Bishops and
all Mininisters of that subordination, in all Ages and places, toward Civil
Powers and Magistrates; who both in first planting and after in reforming of
any Church (wherein they had a chief influence,) never applied any popular,
rude and violent means, to set up their opinions or parties any Church Way or
power, any Order, Discipline or Authority: nothing pragmatick, mutinous or
seditious was prayed, preached or practiced by them; contenting themselves with
sober sermons and devout prayers, with doing well cheerfully, and suffering
evil patiently. They never used any sinister policy or power, no fraud or
force, nor any methods or engines to introduce Episcopacy, other than such as
were necessary to bring in Christianity in the true faith and holy mysteries of
it, which have ever been embarked with, steered by, and either persecuted, or
prospered, together with Episcopacy; whose diligence and devotion,
peaceablenesse and patience, both in their Dioceses and in their Synods or
Councils, assisted by Presbyters of the same adherence and Communion, has
planted, preserved, propagated and best restored true Religion to all Nations,
by such demonstrations of meekness and wisdom, as were loyal, just, pure,
peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated. They never did any thing
menacingly and boysterously against their Superiors, with threatenings or
tumults, with sedition or hostility, with faction or partiality: They did not
presently let fly bitter arrows at the faces, hands, heads and hearts of all
that refused their offers and motions; but only shook off the dust of their
feet, and quietly departed, if need were, as Christ commanded his Apostles and
Disciples. This was and is the temper of Primitive and true Episcopacy, as to
civil peace and subjection.

It is an observation not so strange as too true, that all Spirits which are
Antiepiscopall are in some respects antimagistraticall, and most-what
antimonarchicall: enemies to Bishops are easily enemies to all Magistrates that
are not of their own strain and way. The first and great instance of which
truth was and is in the Papacy, since the Bishops of Rome forsook the first
humble, holy and martyrly principles of their predecessors, and challenged in
Christ's Name a Sovereignty, Monarchy and Tyranny above all Bishops; not content
with a primacy of order, civility and precedence, which was anciently allowed
as to other Metropolitanes, Primates and Patriarks, so principally to the
Bishops of Rome: not for the honor of their first founders, St. Peter and St.
Paul, nor for the renown and orthodoxy of the Roman Churches faith, (for
these might be and were as remarkable in other Cities, as Jerusalem, where
Christ in person had been, so in Antioch, etc.) but it was consented and
yielded to for the secular honor and glory of that mighty City, which was as it
were the confluence, summary and center of all worldly greatness, as the Queen
of all Nations, whence all Laws and sovereignty flowed to the civilized world,
and terror to the other parts that were barbarous or enemies. The Imperial
power and Majesty of that City induced all others to prefer it; and so the
Bishops of all other Cities made no scruple to yield the precedence of honor
and order to the Bishops of Rome, which was as lawful as it was orderly. But
when the Papal arrogance lifted up it self above its brethren, by a Luciferian
height, through the subtilty and importunity of Pope Boniface, as Platina in
his life tells us, he afterward sought to exalt himself above all that is called
God; the Papal ambition very cunningly invading not only the Rights of Kings
and civil powers, but of the Ecclesiastic Rulers also: for the Roman policy
saw that unless it got above all Bishops, it could not easily get above all
Christian Princes and Magistrates, which supported the honor and freedom of
each other. Then Monastic and Jesuitick flattery following pride, the Bishops
of Rome must be not only the chief Bishop, but the Father, the Fountain, the
Lord, the Prince of all Bishops and all Episcopacy, indeed the only Bishop of
Divine and Apostolic Authority: all other Bishops must be as his off-sets, his
Suffragans, or his Chaplains; nothing without him, and able to do nothing as
Bishops, but by a power derived from the Pope; forgetting the Primitive
equality of all Bishops, as to their Episcopal Rights, Power and Office, which
followed the parity of the Apostles as to their Apostleship, which all
Antiquity with St. Cyprian, St. Hieron. ep. ad Euag. Ubicunque fuerit
Episcopus, ejusdem est meriti and sacerdotii, sive Rom^, sive Eugubii, sive
Constantinopoli, sive R^egii, etc. Omnes Episcopi sunt Apostolorum successores,
etc.
Jerome, Gregory the Great and others owned as (Unicus in solidum Episcopatus)
but one Tree or source of Ecclesiastical Authority, first rooted in Christ,
afterward derived to the chief Apostles, and from each of them to their
successors in all the Christian world. This once laid aside, and buried in the
darkness and insolency of warlike and superstitious times, the degenerated
Bishops of Rome by degrees gained their process and design, which was to have
no civil or Ecclesistick power in the world, but such as might derive from and
depend upon them; all Princes and Prelates must be his vassalls, or they must
have no Principality, no Episcopacy. This axe was the first, and a very heavy
sharp one, that was laid to the root of Episcopacy by the Papal arrogance;
after whose copy all those may be suspected to write, who first blot out
Episcopacy, that they may blot and out-bolt, set up and pull down Magistracy,
upon such principles and pretentions of Religion as they list to set up and
fancy, for the advancing of Christ's cause, the Gospel, Religion and
Reformation: words never more used by any than the Popes of Rome, since they
used the style of Holiness and Servant of Servants, but intended Highness,
and exercised Sovereignty over all, according to that Mystery of Iniquity,
which was by some of them carried on, and is not to this day laid aside, though
more tenderly and warily managed, being on all hands either despised or
disliked by all Christian Princes, that are not forced by dependence or fear to
be parasites to the Pope.

I know in this point other novel Antiepiscopal parties on all hands, have
sought with all artifices to captate Magistratick favor, as well as plebeian
applauses, representing themselves so submissive and complyant to Princes and
Parlaments, to all States and civil Polities, that they fancy to favor their
side, as if they only studied to bear the cross of Christ, and not to wear
any Crown of sovereignty. But how modest some of them have been in seeking to
set up Jesus Christ and themselves, not only without, but against the express
will and consent of the lawful Princes and chief Magistrates, no less than
against the Laws in force, yea and against the far major part of the community
of all sorts, I leave it to others, yea to themselves, to judge, who have any
just, ingenuous or blushing principle in them. I am sure the Anabaptists at
Munster first pretended to abhor all wars and weapons of blood, while their
party was small, weak and frozen; but afterward they could find hands as well
as feet. As for Presbytery and Independency, truly they have given not only
terrible alarmes and assaults to both Monarchy and Episcopacy, which were both
of them their lawful superiors; but they have (even now) sharp rigours and
ambitious rivalries against each other, which of them shall have most power and
most hands, as well as most favor or indulgence. Neither of them are looked
upon as making any great scruple to bring in the prevalency of their parties by
force of arms, when once they presume of numbers sufficient: neither of them
seem to make any great conscience to set up their new Scepters by absolute
power, where petition and agitation will not serve their turn; because both of
them pretend to have Jesus Christ sure on their side, who is indeed King of
Kings and Lord of Lords; yet I do not find that he has any where made them his
Lieutenants to Rule for him, upon the score and Title of any Church Power;
notwithstanding that they entitle their designs with his cause, and inscribe
their banners with his name, as Pontius Pilate did that Cross whereon he
Crucified Jesus Christ. Many of them (I find) do hold all Men, all Christians,
all Ministers, all Magistrates, all Princes, Kings and Emperors, enemies to
Jesus Christ, that are not declaredly for them, and will not be subject to
their Discipline or Government. Many Grave and Learned men heretofore and of
later times have set them forth, not only in their occasional zelotries and
transports, but in their meditated principles and declared designs, to be such
strikers and sticklers, that they seem to be born with horns and hoofes, at
least with teeth and swords in their mouths; See Knox. hist. of the Church of
Scotl. etc. And Buchan. de jure Reg. ap. Sco^os.
preaching, as in Gods and Christ's Name, that if Christian Princes will not,
Peers and inferior Magistrates may, if these will not, the common people may
and ought to Reform any Church or Religion, after such a Form as their leaders
list to fancy and prescribe. Nor is this to be done with gloves and mittens,
with petitions and prayers, but with gantlets and spears, with clubs and
swords, if need be, and if they can get power into their hands; which (they
say) is to be counted Gods power, or a providentiall dispensation to his
people, thus to carry on his glory, his word and his cause, as to Religion,
though against his express Word, against all Rules of justice, against all
Laws and bounds of civil order and obedience, yea against common honesty,
even to the violating of just oaths, and superinducing of perjurious
superfetations, yea even to excommunication and deprivation of the chief
Magistrate or Prince of their place and power, in case they be refractory.

Thus do many men tell us they have found the Disciplinarian pulse of
Presbytery at least, if not of Independency, to beat almost ever since they
were born: so that they have, and ever will give no small terror, jealousy and
trouble to all sovereign and Magistratick powers, where ever they can by
popular arts get footing; both of them bearing themselves high upon the
confidence of Christ's Scepter, Call and Kingdom, which (they say) admits no
stop, delay or obstruction, whenever Providence opens a door, not to the Gospel
which is already professed, but to such a Form and way as they like to have it
in as to Discipline, Government and Church Order: and this if not to be had by
Princes favor and consent, yet by the suffrages and assistance of common
people, where they may be had; who in such cases are not to regard their
obedience to any worldly Princes or powers, who stand in opposition to, or
competition with Jesus Christ, or any thing that some godly men shall fancy to
be an ordinance of his, though never heretofore owned or used as such in his
Church. What is there so fond, so fanatic, so foolish, so mad, which such
presumptuous fury will not bring into Church or State that is not of their mind?

That these have been the principles, and in many places the endeavors or
practices of many (for I dare not impute them to all) is not to be doubted,
being evident by their writings, and the Histories of those who have truly told
the world what their sense, agencies and aims are. Nor is there any great
cause to expect that other petty parties or novel sects, (which are generally
the spawne of Presbytery) should deny themselves that Gospel-Power and Liberty,
(as they call it) since every one sees it has been affected and acted, though
with no very great or glorious success, by their grand-fire Presbytery; which,
both in Scotl. and in England, besides other places, has not been sparing to
proclaim to all the world what zeal they have for their and Christ's cause, for
his (that is, their) Discipline, even to the consuming of their foes, their
friends and themselves (as Penry, Udal, Hacket and others did in Queen
Elizabeth's days) of which Mr. Cambden and others give us sufficient account;
as Sleidan and others do of the like agitations in Germany, by such as were
first Schismatics from the Church, and then Rebels to their lawful
Magistrates.

But the true Episcopal principles are wholly Evangelical: they neither preach
nor practice other than what they have learned from Christ and his Apostles in
the Scripture: they know no voice of Providence ever calling them to act
contrary to those Rules of civil obedience and good conscience, which are
signal, express and emphatick in Gods word, Rom 13. 1 Pet. 2.13.
to be subject to every Ordinance or Law of man for the Lords sake; to obey
Kings as supreme, and all under them for conscience sake: if in any thing they
cannot freely and cheerfully act, there they must and will patiently suffer
what penalties or pressures are laid upon them. Thus did all Bishops and all
Presbyters of old both pray and preach, obey and suffer (as Tertullian tells us
at large in his Apology:) whose example and Doctrine all good Christians
followed in their constant subjection and submission to civil, though
persecuting, powers, even then when Christians wanted not power and numbers to
have invited them to have asserted themselves against both persecuting people
and Princes.

Yet still godly Bishops, with all Presbyters and people subordinate to them in
Religious respects, followed exactly the precepts of the two great Apostles St.
Peter and St. Paul, yea and of their great Master and Savior Jesus Christ;
rather suffering by many persecutions, than breaking out to any one act or
thought of sedition or rebellion. No injuries ever made good Bishops forget
their Duty and Loyalty to Sovereign powers: Mat. 26.53.
though they might have had Legions to have sided with them, yet, as Christ,
they chose the Cross as the best refuge of Christian subjects. Thus all holy
Bishops both held and did in Primitive times.

Yea, and since the later spring of Reformation in England, I am confident
there is not one instance of any one Bishop or Episcopal Divine that either
wrote or instigated any Christian Subjects to act, upon any religious
pretentions, contrary to the Rules of civil subjection to that Prince or State
under which they lived; no not to bring in or restore Episcopacy it self, which
has far more pleas for it from Catholic Antiquity and Universal
prescription, from actual possession in all times and places, from the pattern
of Christ and the practice of the Apostles, from the imitation and
uninterrupted succession of after-Ages, besides the proportions of Gods wisdom
and man's prudence in all settled polities and good Government, together with its
own Ancient, Catholic and National Rights, which aggravate its injuries, and
exasperate men's spirits: yet these are not enough to animate or heighten
Episcopacy so far as to make or restore its way into any Nation, Church, State
or Kingdom, by armed power or tumultuary violence, against the will of the
chief Magistrate, or the Laws in force: it humbly attends Gods time and the
Sovereigns pleasure, for its reception or restitution.

So false and foul are the odious aspersions of Fellonies, Treasons, Seditions
and Rebellions, which the looseness and choler of a Presbyterian Gentleman's
Pen (then more passionate and popular then now it seems) has cast upon all the
Bishops of England as such, in that rude, immodest and uncharitable pamphlet,
which he then set forth by a preposterous zeal, when having surfeited of an
immoderate revenge against one Bishop, he aimed so to disguise venerable
Episcopacy, and to degrade all the most excellent Bishops of Engl. with their
Clergy, as to expose them all to be the more cruelly baited and worried (even
to death) by the enraged beasts of the people; even then when they were to be
diverted from considering the actual combustions which then were raised by and
for his Presbytery. Such Declamatory and partial papers were certainly very
unbecoming a man of Learning, Religion or Ingenuity, especially toward such
Bishops in his own Country, which were men most-what his equals in all things,
and in many things much his betters and superiors, being Peers of the
Kingdom, and chief Fathers of that Church with which he held Communion, vested
in their Authority by our Laws, as well as conform to all Ecclesiastic
ancient Constitutions; being persons famous (most of them) for their worth,
every way answerable to the Piety and Learning of their best Predecessors, who
were great Preachers, wise Governors, learned Writers, and valiant Martyrs, as
well as venerable Bishops. I confess this one instance makes me see with
horror, what a dreadful tyrant and temptation passion and faction, revenge and
ambition, popularity and discontent are, when once they transport men of parts
beyond the true bounds of Reason and Religion, of Charity, Patience and
Civility; which is as apparent in that virulent charging of all Bishops for
seditious and Traitors, as if one should condemn all Lawyers for corrupt and
covetous, for bribery and oppression, as if all were Trissilians, Empsons and
Dudleys; which were a reproach most unjust and false, there having been (and
still are) many of them men of great justice and integrity.

I well know, it is not to be denied and dissembled what he liberally reports
to have been done by some Bishops, even in England, in the more pompous and
superstitious times, that were, like stormy nights, blind and boisterous; when
many of them, no less than other men of all sorts, Yeomen, Lawyers, Gentlemen,
Judges and Noblemen, were violently engaged in those different interests,
either Secular or Ecclesiastical, which set up two Supremes, (as two Suns in
one firmament) either in the Church against the State (whereto the Papal pride
and ambition then laid claim, seven hundred years after Christ, by an
usurpation and pretention upon Christ's score too, at least St. Peter's, not
known to the Primitive Popes, or other pious Bishops, either of Rome or any
other City) or else the distractions arose in the same civil State, by the
several claims and Titles which Princes made to the Crown and Sovereignty,
occasioning civil wars either in England or elsewhere.

But here the sidings and actings of some Bishops, which we read of in our own
and foreign Chronicles, were not as they were Bishops, upon any Apostolical
rule or example, nor by any Ecclesiastical Canons, much less upon any real
or pretended interests of Jesus Christ; but they acted either merely as persons
of civil place and politic power, or as men of common prudence and justice,
or of common passions and infirmities: sometime as they stood affected in the
justice of the cause which they were commanded to assist; sometime for their
own necessary preservation as well as their Sovereigns; sometime as they stood
related by blood and adherencies to great and potent families, which were
commonly the first movers in those civil broils and dissentions, which many
times were begun and carried on contrary to the desires of sober Bishops, no
less than the will of the lawful Prince, in order to gratify private men's
ambitions, yet under specious pretentions, of either asserting the Laws or
liberties of the people, more than the advancing the Papal power, and some
Church-immunities; that it was no wonder, especially in the twilight and
dimnesse of those times, to see some Bishops out of their way as well as other
gowned men, who had naturally those civil and carnal principles of
self-preservation, (common to even Judges and Lawyers, Nobility and Gentry,) as
to go along sometime with a potent stream, and to symbolize with the strongest
sword, not the justest side. But in dubious cases, as to the right of Rule,
Bishops, as all good Christians, meddled not with factions; being neither
Nigriani nor Albiniani, as Tertullian speaks.

More venial and excusable may those verbal reluctancies, reserves and
refractures (rather than any thing of open force and hostile rebellions) seem,
which some Bishops are reported sometime to have been guilty of here in Engl.
when they superstitiously asserted their disobedience and inconformities to
their Princes, upon the point of conscience, and those religious persuasions
which were then very plausible, and generally admitted both in England and all
Christendom, as to the privileges of the Popes of Rome, or of the Churches
interests and immunities distinct or exempt from the Authority of the Civil
State: which very challenges arose not from the seditions, treasons and
rebellions of Bishops and Churchmen, as such, but partly from the cunning
encrochments of the Popes of Rome, and partly from the former indulgences of
Princes, more superstitious and easy; also from the favorable Laws or
Customs of the Nation to the Clergy, as men most useful and venerable in
their Ecclesiastic Authority; which was esteemed sacred and Divine, as indeed
it is in the right constitution and execution of it.

But no Christian or Reformed Bishop (as such) did ever approve the stubborn
and indeed insolent spirit of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, who was
slain as he was officiating in the Church, by a paroxysme more blameable in
the King, than that was in the Archbishop, which made him so stiff and
refractory as to his and the Churches supposed privileges and immunities. What
true Christian and Reformed Bishop does not pity the distempers of Lanfranc
and Anselm (both Predecessors to Becket in the same See of Canterbury) who so
highly contended with their Sovereigns in behalf of the Popes power as to
investitures (contrary indeed to the just prerogatives and ancient customs of
this Kingdom and Crown in those cases (as has been sufficiently proved by Sir
Roger Twisden and others) that they lost much of the luster of their otherwise
real worth and useful virtues, in the point of Learning, Piety, Charity,
Devotion and Integrity; which were eminent, as then times went, in those two
Archbishops, of which Eadmerus gives a very honest and full account? Yet did
not these Bishops or their brethren proceed further than spiritual arms and
Ecclesiastical censures, rather receding than revolting, much less actually
rebelling: They never, that I find, did raise any armies against their
Sovereigns upon those Church-quarrels, nor did they ever engage Ministers and
People by Oaths, Leagues or Covenants, to a forcible asserting of any
Episcopal power or Ecclesiastical privileges or pretentions, contrary to the
declared will of their Sovereigns.

No; look upon Episcopacy in the whole series of Bishops that were of the true
Primitive temper, stamp and succession: as they followed the chief Apostles in
their ordinary Ecclesiastical Power and jurisdiction, so they walked in the
same steps and spirit of Humility, Meekness, Wisdom, Patience, Obedience and
Loyalty, as the Reforming and Reformed Bishops of elder and later Ages have
always done; coming into all Nations, Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, Empires
and Commonwealths, at their first access and entrance, as Christ did unto
Jerusalem, meekly riding upon an Ass, with resolutions rather to be crucified
there, than to give any cross or offense to civil powers further than they
humbly testified soberly and preached the Truth of God to them and their
subjects; not with any Factious, Seditious or Rebellious spirits, they never
preached any such principles, nor encouraged any such practices: They neither
at first, nor af^^^ward (when the word of God mightily grew and multiplied) did
make their way by any hostile invasions; they never called Horsemen and
Footmen, Troops and Regiments of Armed Soldiers to assist them in the work of
the Lord, or to set up Jesus Christ against Princes or people who did not
believe them, or not willingly receive them.

Yea, so Meek, Moderate, Just, Wise and Charitable was the zeal of Primitive
Bishops and Churchmen, that they did not by force turn the Idols of the
Heathens out of their Temples, till Sovereign and Imperial Authority either
commanded or permitted them so to do: Nor did they drive out the Flamens and
Arch-flamens here in England, (which were Idolatrous Priests) till Princes,
converted by Bishops and other Preachers of the Gospel, did forsake and abolish
those lying vanities. So far were Bishops from obtruding their opinion or
party, merely as to gubernative order and power, upon any City, Nation or
Kingdom, contrary to the will of the chief Magistrate: nor did they ever turn
any lawful Prince out of doors, to make way for themselves and their
Episcopal Authority or party.

Which method (as I touched) appears to have been used even by the first
Presbyterians in the world, even at Geneva, as some report, where popular fury
violently expelled not only the Bishop, but the lawful Prince of that City,
who had of right not only the spiritual jurisdiction, but also the civil
dominion of that Place and Territory, Bodin. de rep. p. 353. Call. ep. ad Card.
Sadolet.
as Bodin and Mr. Calvin confess. After this copy, in many places, turbulent
spirits did endeavor ( art vel Mart) by power or policy, by hook or by
crook, to bring in that new way into Cities and Countries; and no where I find
more remarkably than in Scotland, during the minority of King James, and the
reign of his mother. How little regard was had to the Laws or Religion then
established, to the Will or Authority of the supreme Magistrate: how insolent,
petulant, imperious, audacious were some Presbyterian spirits there against
Princes as well as Bishops, is no news to those that have read the histories
of that Church; among which none exceeds that of Dr. Spotswood Archbishop of
St. Andrews, set forth by the care of Dr. Duppa, the Learned and Reverend
Bishop of Salisbury, a person of such Piety, Patience and Prudence under his
undeserved sufferings, that not only his friends, but his and all Bishops
enemies admire the Christian gravity and heroic greatness of his mind, as
well as others of his Order.

How far the like spirit plotted, threatened, acted and attempted in England in
Queen Eliz. time, so afterward in K. James his reign, and now at last in K.
Charles his complete Tragedies, (full sore against his will and conscience, no
less than against the Laws not then by any power repealed) both Mr. Hooker,
Bishop Bilson, Bishop Bancroft, Archbishop Whitgift, Mr. Cambden, and many more
of old, together with our own late sad experience, sufficiently inform us.
They of old began with scandalous petitions, scurrilous libels, bold
admonitions, rude menacings, cunning contrivances; which were followed at last
with fire and sword, with blood and ruin, with sad division and great
devastation to Church and State, to Prince and People.

Which events are no wonder, when any new thing pretending to Religion and
Reformation may be carried on by principles and practices of violence and
force; and these, not because lawful, but because they are said to be
necessary for Gods interest, yea as instances of the highest zeal and most
conscientious courage: as if there never were, nor could ever be, any truth or
faith, any piety or sanctity, any Christ or Christianity, any Grace or Gospel,
in the Church or any Christians hearts, unless Anabaptisme, or Presbyterisme,
or Independentisme, had, not gently contested, but rudely justled Episcopacy
out of the Church of England as well as Scotland, though full sore against the
will of the Chief Magistrate.

Certainly military or mutinous methods of Religion and Reformation were never
preached or practiced, meditated or endeavored by any worthy Prelates,
Presbyters, or people of that persuasion. For they do not think that Secular
Arms are fit Engines to set up Jesus Christ or his Kingdom in this world,
which is not of this world, nor after the methods of worldly power and force:
yea they hold that Sovereign Princes, as Christians, ought not by brutish
force to compel, but by reason and due instruction to persuade their Subjects
at first to the true Religion; much less are weapons in the hands of Subjects
meet instruments to convince or convert Princes forcibly to yield to any
popular presumptions and mere innovations in Religion, especially when contrary
not only to the Catholic Customs of all Churches, but to the present
constitution of that Church of which the Prince is a chief part; yea against
that personal oath by which a Prince has sworn to preserve the settled and
just rights and privileges both of that Church and those Churchmen which are
in his Dominion.

What is more horrid than to have Reformation or Religion (never so good and
true) thus crammed down the consciences of Kings or States whether they will or
no? which is the way to make all secular powers jealous of all Christianity and
Reformation; to set their faces and their forces against them, as seditious,
injurious, mutinous and rebellious against the public peace, the civil Rights,
Honors and Authorities of all Governors in Kingdoms and States. The Episcopal
and Evangelicall methods have been quite other, (as I have said) by preaching
and praying, by patient sufferings and frequent Martyrdomes, by attending Gods
leisure and their Princes pleasures. Thus they obtained the protection and
favor of the Laws: other projects or policies, other arts or arms, were
never known to the true Gospel of Jesus Christ, or its unseparable attendant
Episcopacy. Thus did Evangelicall Bishops and their Clergy conquer, by a meek,
gentle and unbloody Conquest, the vast Roman world, and that part of it which
was here in Britany: no people were so barbarous, no Princes so tyrannous, whom
they did not soften and sweeten by that Evangelicall way and spirit, which is
called an anointing, because it is a sacred balm or oil, 1 John 2.27.
which breaks not heads, but hearts, wounds not the bodies, but the spirits of
Princes and others with an healing stroke, with a soft and merciful wound.

Thus did the Cross of Christ and the Crosiers of Bishops ever go together
into all places; not pulling down, but exalting, not shaking, but settling the
Crowns of Kings and Princes. Though they were Heathens, Unbelievers and
Persecutors, as all at first were, yet did holy Bishops and their Clergy so far
submit to their civil power, as to pray and preach not only faith in Christ,
but fidelity to Kings, teaching not only Religion, but Allegiance; yea they
made the Allegiance of Christian subjects and soldiers even to heathen
Emperors (as Tertullian says) a great part and note of true Religion, which
perfectly abhors all rebellion against God or man, as the sin of witchcraft; 1 Samuel 15.23.
it being as an apostasy from, and an abnegation of, the true God and true
Religion, when upon any godly and specious pretentions of Piety or Reformation,
as by so many charms and enchantments of the Devil, turning himself into an
Angel of light, Christian Preachers or Professors do begin and carry on
factious, tumultuous and rebellious motions against the civil Powers, Laws and
Polities of any Prince or State. It is upon the point a denying of the faith,
and setting up a new Gospel, a Judaick or Mohammedan, not a Christian Messiah,
whose true servants and soldiers were always armed with weapons that were
spiritual, 2 Cor. 10.4.
not carnal, ministerial, not military or martial; which in Churchmen rather
stab and wound all true Religion and Reformation to the heart, by infinite
scandals, injuries and deformities, than any way advance it, either to a
greater power, or approbation and acceptance among men of any sober reason or
moral sense of things. No violence and injustice can be proper to usher in
true Christian Religion and Reformation: these methods have made them so
stunted and ricketly, that they are come to a stop-game; so that in these last
and worst Ages of the world, there has been little or no progress made to the
true propagating of the Gospel among any heathen Nations, or of any Reformation
among the decayed Christians, because Religion is every where, even among many
Christians and Reformers, too much managed (as the Spaniards did among the
West Indies) with force and fraud, with covetousness and cruelty, with faction
and ambition, with regard to worldly interests of men more than to the true
precepts and holy concernments of Christ and his Church. Who is there that will
entertain Christianity, or any Reformation, when it comes in, like Turcisme
and Barbarism, with fire and brimstone, with swords and canons? pretending to
convert and save souls, but to be sure it will first pervert the Laws, ravine
men's Estates, and destroy at last men's lives, if they do not submit, even
against their consciences as well as the Laws, to strange Innovations.

Truly these are engines only fit to be used by such spirits as are
Antichristian, Luke 9.55.
who know not of what Spirit Christ and his Apostles, with their successors the
Primitive Bishops and Presbyters, were. Nor did the Popes of Rome ever more
stain the honor of that Apostolic See, and the glorious name of Catholic
Episcopacy, than when they forgot to follow their pious predecessors, (holy and
humble Bishops of that famous Church for 600. years, who were Martyrs, or
Confessors, or true Professors of the Gospel) and betook themselves to such
arts of secular policy and power, of sedition and ambition, as made some
after-Bishops of Rome seem rather Monsters of men, as their own writers
confess, than Ministers of Jesus Christ; imitators of Sylla, Marius and
Caesar, more than of St. Peter, or St. Paul, or St. Clemens, 2 These. ^.4.
when they sought by Hildebrandine arts to exalt themselves above all that is
called God in civil Magistracy, which justly claims under God, and from him,
(as did the Kings of Judah) that supreme visible power, which within their
respective dominions does orderly and duly manage all ministrations
Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, for the public peace and welfare. Certainly,
since Christianity it self, in its grand Articles Ministry and Mysteries, must
not thus be brought in by head and shoulders, by force and affronts upon any
Prince or State whatsoever; much less may any Reformation never so desirable
and just. As for some little defects or venial deformities, they ought not in
any sort to be so urged as should carry Religion beyond good manners, or
Reformation to rudeness. Not persecuting, but persecuted Bishops and
Presbyters, are the ablest preachers and aptest propagators of the Gospel, such
as while they lift up their voice like a trumpet, Isa. 58.1.
(not to give the alarmes of war, but to tell Judah of their sins, and Israel
of their transgressions) do also lift up holy hands and pure hearts to God in
prayer for all men, but chiefly for Kings and all in Authority.

In the greatest depressions of Christianity and Episcopacy, (for they ever
went together, as Truth and Order, Ministry and Authority, both of them being
necessary for the being or well-being of any Church) never any godly Bishop or
orderly Presbyter, (who were still the foremost and stoutest Champions for
Religion,) did make any seditious appeals, scurrilous libels, or declamatory
invectives against the powers that were, by whatever means they either
obtained, or held, or exercised their sovereignty: They never thought it their
duty, as Christians or Ministers, to stir up the spirits of any men, great or
small, many or few, to any unlawful commotions: (and so they esteemed all to
be, which had not the consent and Commission of those in civil dominion, who
were supreme, and the present Powers ordained of God.)

When any of those holy Bishops and Presbyters were necessitated, not out of
revenge or anger, but out of charity and pity to their persecutors, to bring
forth their strong reasons, by way of Learned, Grave and unanswerable Apologies
for their Religion, (as many of them did, hoping thereby to buoy up the cause
of Christianity, not only from unjust persecutions, but from false
prejudices,) they did write them (indeed) with an heroic kind of freedom, yet
with all due respect, dedicating their writings by way of humble supplications,
or clear yet comely Remonstrances, to the Emperors or Senates, to the Princes
and supreme Magistrates themselves: so did Justine Martyr his first Apology to
the Senate of Rome, his second to the Emperor Antoninus Pius; so Tertullian
his to the Emperor Severus and his Son; so Quadratus Bishop of Athens to
Adrian the Emperor; and in like manner did others.

But never any Primitive Bishop or Presbyter did use any Satanick Stratagems,
or such seditious practices as were to advance Religion by any thing that
tended to, or intended popular tumults and rebellion; no impudent libellings
and scurrilous pamphletings, to make either the persons of Princes odious, or
their Government infamous. Episcopacy never used any such conjurations as would
either bring down fire from heaven, or stir up Earthquakes; Luke 9.54:
neither exciting the Optimacy and Nobility, nor the Populacy and Communalty
against any, either supreme or subordinate powers: they never made the waters
above the firmament and those under it so to meet, by breaking up the great
deeps of subjection, or by opening the fountains of plebeian Liberties, as to
bring in terrible inundations upon Kingdoms or Commonwealths. No, they
always by the word and Spirit of Christ (which were their only swords, and
these two, as Christ said to St. Peter, were enough for that work) set bounds
to the proud waves of that raging Sea, the tumultuating people, and rather
repaired the banks and breaches that others rashness (as the Circumcellions
and Euchites) sometime made, than either assisted or countenanced those horrid
deluges of sedition. They never wrested the Revelation, or any other places of
Scripture so, as to animate the earth, that is, the common and meanest people,
Rev. 12.
to help the Woman, that is, whatever some list to call their Church and
Religion, in its agonies; that by their unlawful motions they might bring
forth something that faction lists to call Reformation; a word that is never
out of the mouths of John of Leiden and his accomplices, though far from their
hearts. Godly Bishops and Presbyters never either taught or thought those
practices to be any helping of the Lord against the mighty. No, they ever
judged and preached after St. Paul's, St. Peter's, and our Blessed Saviors
Doctrine and example, that such inordinate motions upon pretexts of Religion,
are cursed and damnable resistings of those powers which God has ordained by
the civil Laws and customs of any Church or State. Romans 13.2.
The Lord and true Religion are only to be helped by laudable and lawful
actions, the measures of which are not to be sought in every man's private
breast and fancy, but in the public counsels and constitutions of every
Kingdom, State and Polity.

Nor was this more true piety and charity, than prudence and policy, in the
Bishops and other Ministers of the Church, to whom, as to gowned and bookish
men, and not as to armed soldiers, does all the Christian world owe (under
God) the planting, propagating and preserving, yea and the due reforming of
true Christian Religion. For the arms of flesh, or any carnal weapons, going
along with the Gospel, which is a spiritual warfare, as so many Pioneers with
pick-axes and spades, to demolish and overthrow civil powers, must needs have
alarmed and armed all States and Princes, all honest and just, all wise and
moral men against it, when they looked upon Christianity as coming not to
preach and save, but to plunder and spoil: for all wise Magistrates know that
there was no trusting to the moderation and justice, no nor to the mercy of any
men who came with force against them. Though they profess (as Andronicus did,
and Absalom before him) never so much to mend and reform things; yet they will
at last rob, kill and destroy: and as the Sons of Jacob dealt with the
Sichemites, they at first only pretend to circumcise men, yet at last they
will not only geld, but kill them.

Armed Religion, like Eagles and Hawks, is always terrible. Which
considerations do justly harden all men's hearts (that have any thing to lose or
to keep in this world) against all forcible and riotous entries of any Religion
or Reformation whatsoever, which seldom fails to be sacrilegious as well as
rebellious.

Hence the present fears, jealousies and abhorrencies, which many Princes and
States, as well as Bishops and Churchmen, that are of the Romish Communion,
have taken up against any Reformation of Religion by such popular methods and
principles, which they see are seldom begun, and never ended, without infinite
trouble, confusion and ruin of all things, both sacred and civil; every wise
man rightly judging, that when God is pleased to bring in the beauty and
blessing of true Religion or due Reformation to any Church or Nation, he will
(as he did in England most eminently) so stir up the spirits of Sovereign
powers, (the method he anciently used in purging and reforming the Temple and
Church of the Jews, by Hezekiah, Josiah, and others,) that the work shall go
on, as without noise, like the building of the Temple, so with Order and Honor,
to the glory of God, the safety of Princes, the honor of the Clergy, and the
peace of the people, as well as the purity of the Church and true Religion.

Till this may be done, a thousand civil burdens and oppressions, yea
persecutions, are easier than any sinful presumptions; yea, true Religion will
be beautiful when it is black with persecution, if then it be comely with
patience. Scorching Reformations so burn the face of Religion, that they leave
not only sad scarres, but shameful Stigmas or brands upon it, which look very
like rebellion and barbarity, engaging men and Christians into mutual hatred,
bloodshedding, deaths and destruction. Let men pretend never so much to be
Saints, godly, yea and inspired too, yet, as the purest water and the
wholsomest flesh, when once they come to feel the heat of factions, and begin
to boil up to civil perturbations, they will soon discover a very black foam
and foul scum to rise in their hearts and actions, which (as Hazael) they
hardly thought could have been in them, carrying them to injustice,
immoderation, uncharitableness, presumption, rebellion, sacrilege and
cruelty, and all unwarrantable actions, before they are aware of the folly,
falsity or foulness of their own, as indeed all men's hearts; at whose bottom
lies all manner of filth and villainy, which is then easily and constantly
discovered, when they are passionately and inordinately stirred. Nor is it at
all to be considered how pure men appear, as to that which is upward or
outward in their Religious protestations and professions, when once they come
to that Romantic and Errant spirit, which thinks it as much gallantry to fight
for their Religion, as some do for their Mistresses beauties, which exceeds
quarrelling and killing each other by civil and heroic murders, for no other
offense but the glory of their opinion, and the preferring of their fancy.

What did ever seem more holy than the Euchites and Circumcellions of old? what
more precise and godly than John of Leiden and his crew? what more inspired
than our Hacket and Coppinger? what less covetous and impartial than
Massaniello? All of them were not very warm, but very scalding Reformers, yet
came to naught. Add to all these, what was or is more titularly holy than some
later Popes of Rome? who ever seemed more solicitous to advance Religion? Yet
by their usurping both St. Peter's swords, by interpreting Arise Peter, kill and
eat, in a sanguinary sense, by making the Bishop of Rome the greater light to
rule the day, and Emperors or Kings in their dominions to be as the Moon and
lesser lights; by challenging a power unchristian and inordinate, to depose
lawful Princes, to absolve Subjects from ^^eir oaths, to expose their lives
to their Subjects or any other men's swords, to dispose of their Thrones and
Kingdoms as they please, in order to the Romish Churches or Courts interests;
they have made all the world now very wary of them. Even those Princes that are
of the Papal Communion are grown very reserved and vigilant as to their civil
power, now their eyes are so opened, that many moderate men have highly
suspected (as Padre Paulo, the Author of the History of the Council of Trent,
and others,) this Papal arrogance to be one of the shrewdest marks of the
Papal Antichristianism; a Bishop thus enormously exalting himself by fraud and
force, by blood and violence, in the Church or Temple of God, above all that is
called God in civil Magistracy, directly contrary both to Christ's pattern, and
the two great Apostles precepts, as well as practices: who though they laid
(with the other eleven Apostles) the foundations of an Episcopal Hierarchy, by
the parity or Aristocracy, as of the chief Apostles, so of Bishops, yet they
never either exercised, or enjoyed, or dreamed of a Monarchy, in which one
Apostle or Bishop should have dominion over all others, and over the whole
Church.

Episcopacy, as it is Primitive and Apostolical, exactly and conscientiously
preserves to all Princes and Sovereign Magistrates whatsoever, their civil
peace and safety of their persons, their laws and powers, with their just
prerogatives, as well as it does the Evangelicall and ingenuous Liberties of
all Christian Subjects, which are always and only to do well, either in
active or passive obedience. But, as the Papll claims and flatteries of former
Ages did with full mouth and open forehead invade, yea and by force insult
over, the just powers of Sovereign Princes, (however of late they have been
more cunning, modest and tender;) so other spirits (which from Pygmies have
fancied themselves to be swollen to Giants) are charged of old by many grave,
learned and honest men, as very much treading in the Popes steps, that is,
either upon the toes, or heels, or hands, or necks, or heads of Kings and
Sovereign Magistrates. The experience of which gave (it seems) to King James
such dreadful apprehensions of that way, that he equally feared Presbytery and
Popery, when they thundered with Excommunication and great guns too; which had
so filled Scotland many years with great inquietudes, in his Mothers reign,
and in his Minority, that he thought them no better than godly rebellions in
order to promote private and partial, factious and deformed Reformations. Nor
was Queen Elizabeth without her fears on this side, when she not only heard
the Tragedies of Scotland, but saw and felt the menacings and agitations in
England, even upon this account: which the event has taught us and all the
world were no childish terriculaments, nor brutish thunderbolts. So that both
high Presbytery and low Independency are by many wise men judged inconsistent
with a just and complete Monarchy, no less than with a right Episcopacy, See
Sir -- Ashtons discourse to this purpose.
standing in the same posture of enmity against these, as they pretend to do
against the Papacy or Popery. It will be very well if Reformed Presbytery can
wipe off those stains and suspicious as easily and truly as Primitive
Episcopacy did avoid them, and our late Reformed and Reforming Bishops in
England, who always joined together, fear God and honor the King, without any
Ifs or Ands, without any reserves or salvo's; save only those which betray men
to serve sin and Satan, rather than to suffer with and for a good conscience in
the service of God.

And however some Christian Bishops, as St. Ambrose, St. Vid. Theod. hist. l.
5. c. 34.
Chrysostom, St. Athanasius, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Basil and others, did
sometime in weighty and exemplary cases vindicate the honor of Christian
Religion, and the Authority of Ecclesiastical Discipline, before and against
some Christian Princes, whose errors or passions had either swerved them from,
or transported them beyond that Orthodoxy, Charity, Justice and Moderation,
which became Christians; as in the revenge taken by Theodosius upon the
Citizens of Thessalonica, and in other passages of State which tended to the
public scandal of Religion, then countenanced by the Laws and professed by
the Princes: yet still those great and good Bishops both preached and practiced
all civil respect and loyal subjection to them as their Sovereigns; they
never divided what God had joined together; they followed Christ's Oracle, Mat.
22.21.
to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods; the first were set out by the Imperial Constitutions, the second by the
clear Canons of Gods word, interpreted not by every private man's new
imagination, but by the Catholic judgment and practice of the chief Fathers
of the Church.

All Orthodox Bishops, Presbyters and people ever held it to be a Vile,
Unchristian, Antichristian, Diabolick petulancy, to speak evil of dignities, 2
Pet. 1.50.
either Civil or Ecclesiastic, to curse the Gods or Rulers of Church and
Commonweal, to use railing accusations against their Superiors. Jude 8.
The rough garb of Satyrs was never thought comely for the Pens, Pulpits or
hands of Churchmen: it was a Solecisme in Christian Religion, to have
Ministers tongues sharp swords, their mouths open sepulchers, their sermons
sarcasmes, their prayers pasquils, their invocations of God invectives against
their Governors; whose Authority was still sacred, though their exorbitancies
might be blameable. What good Bishops and Presbyters ears would not have
tingled then to have heard those filthy and dirty ditties which were tuned in
England to the pipe of Martin Mar-prelate, and Penry's Supplication to the
Devil, to which some men danced, who were then thought zealous for Presbytery,
making sport at such lewd and infamous scurrilities against their Governors in
Church and State, as were fitter to have fetched tears from their eyes, when
they saw not only worthy and Reformed Bishops, but the whole Reformed Church
of England and the Majesty of the Prince so torn and bespattered by those
Borborites, those unclean Spirits?

The grave and modest sort of Bishops, Presbyters and People, who otherways
much desired a just and orderly Reformation of Religion, yea and valued the
notable parts and zealous industry of Luther, yet they extremely blushed at and
disliked that outrageous reply which his over-boyling heat made against our
King Henry the Eighth, when he wrote for the defense of that which he thought
true Religion; whose error (in Luthers judgment) did in no sort deserve so
rude, so scornful, so scurrilous and uncomely a reply: in which sober men
pitied Luthers native passion and rusticity, which were more like an unbred
and unbridled Monk, than a meek Disciple of Christ, or a zealous Preacher of
his Gospel, Acts 23.5.
or an exact follower of St. Paul, who publicly checked himself for the
reproach and disdainful speech he used ignorantly against the High Priest
Ananias, who probably had attained that dignity (as then the fashion was among
the Jews) by very sinister means; yea and had upon the place done St. Paul a
palpable injury, commanding him to be smitten on the mouth, when he should have
heard his defense. It Is true, Luther afterward used some soft recantations to
the King, but in vain; it being looked upon as his Policy, more than his Piety
or Humility; hoping thereby to advance his party, to which he saw the King in
some points was now driven, more than inclined, by the breach he had made with
the Pope. But it is hard to wash the hands of any person or party clean, whose
insolency has once cast* dirt in the face of Sovereign Princes or chief
Magistrates, who are the brightest visible image and glory of God among
mankind, being the Lords anointed, as David called Saul, now forsaken of God
for his forsaking God first. Although the actions or opinions of our Superiors
in some things be less commendable (as were those of Constantius and other
Arrian Emperors) yet are they not to be reviled in any case by those that will
not deserve the name and fate of Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.9.
whom Abisha's loyal zeal calls a dead dog, for his barking against his Lord
the King now in his Eclipse and distress; whose cursing insolency that valiant
Commander would presently have revenged with the less of his head: and however
David's humility and clemency did pardon him at present, yet afterward vengeance
pursued him, while he foolishly following his fugitive servants beyond his
bounds and teddar, forfeited his word and life to King Solomon's just and wise
severity; the royal pardon not availing to protect so petulant and insolent a
disloyalty, which God would have punished, though it were by man pardoned.

Yea some grave men have thought that those two learned and eloquent Bishops,
St. Chrysostom and St. Gregory of Nazianzum, the one in his resolute, but
rough, carriage to the Empress Eudoxia, the other in his sharp Steleticks
against Julian the Emperor, did ((...)) as men suffer their native passions to
carry them somewhat beyond tha discretion and temper which became grave and
godly Bishops, while they did too much proscind and prostitute (as it were) the
Imperial purple, vilifying that Majesty which ought to be sacred to Christian
Subjects, although the persons wearing them may be Tyrants, Persecutors and
Apostates; as the Censers were to be holy in which Incense had been once
offered, though with strange fire.

Bishops Miters and Crosiers ought in no case to clash with the Crowns and
Scepters of Sovereign Princes, however their discreet zeal may seasonably
represent to them, and in Gods name reprove, their misdemeanors as Christians:
much less may any Presbyters pert upon them, who are of a far lesser size, and
never had any ensigns of honor and authority as chief governors of any Church.
Be Bishops or Presbyters never so zealous and gracious, yet they are not beyond
the ancient and best Bishops of Rome, and of other chief Cities, who (with
Gregory the Great) owned the Emperors as their Sovereign Lords. So did St.
Ambrose respect both Theodosius and Valentinian; so did the venerable Council
of the Nicene Bishops reverence the Emperor Constantine the Great: Neither
their number, being three hundred and eighteen, nor their public
representation of the Catholic Church, did encourage them to do or meditate
any thing beyond prayers and petitions, recommending all their Counsels to God,
the Emperor, and all the Church. No Preachers or Christians warmth needs go
beyond the pitch of Christ and his Apostles, who are so absolutely for
obedience, respect and civil fear to Princes, whether heathen or Christian,
that no supreme power whatever need to fear the overthrow or shaking of their
Empire, Sovereignty and Dominion, by admitting true Christian Religion and true
Christian Bishops: nor need they fear it as any sin, persecution or injustice
in them, to curb, repress and punish by all means the inordinate, pragmatick
and seditious zeal, as of Bishops, so of any Presbyters or people, who shall
pretend to bring in any Religion or Reformation against their will and
permission: it being the work and mark of true Religion and undefiled, to
establish the Thrones of Princes, to preserve the public peace, to teach
subjection, not only of purses and persons, but of souls and consciences, so
far as Princes do not require them to disobey God; and in these cases they need
not rack their wits to find out rebellious remedies or disloyal evasions; the
only lawful and laudable refuge is near at hand, namely Christian patience,
which sets men furthest off from railing or resisting, both which are but the
scorchings and soote of black and over-burning zeal, which makes a kind of
Charcoale of Religion.

What wise, sober and humble Christian (then) can sufficiently love, honor and
admire the modesty, humility and loyalty of true Episcopacy, ever expressed by
the carriage of the best Christian and reformed Bishops toward all Princes?
And who can sufficiently abhor the petulancy and insolency of those Novellers
and Reformers, who shall dare to lift up either the Presbyterian virgula, or
the Independent ferula, or the Anabaptistick flail, not only to threaten, but
to chastise Sovereign Princes, that list not to admit their ways into their
dominions, before they can approve them in their Consciences and Judgments;
following the disciplining methods and penance used by some Monks of Canterbury
against our King Henry the second?

Surely Christianity and the Clergy are never so healthy and comely, as when
their complexion is rather pallid with the fastings and prayers, the studies
and pains of humble Bishops and Presbyters, than purpled or sanguine with blood
and fury.

The over-hot breathings of Ministers, like the chaud of Charcoale, stifle and
suffocate the vital spirits of true Religion. Godly Bishops and Presbyters ever
abhorred, as Hell and damnation, to teach Princes their Religion, their Canons,
Catechises and Directories, as Gideon did the men of Succoth, with Briars and
Thorns, or to discipline Sovereign Majesty with Swords and Pistols, in order
to persuade them to submit to the Gospel-Scepter and Discipline. No, they never
did attempt so to do, either in the Primitive and persecuting times, when
Magistrates were most froward and injurious, or in those times which were
afterward more propitious and prosperous, when the Clergy fed highest, and was
most indulged by the munificence of Christian Emperors and Empresses, devout
Kings and Queens; who as good nurses never repined at the fullness of their own
breasts, or the hearty sucking of their dear nurslings, joining the Prince to
the Prelate, and adding Lordly Honors with Estates to Christian Bishops: never
fearing hereby to make them too wanton or insolent, while they saw them keep to
the sober principles of Christianity, conformable to that Apostolic and
Primitive Episcopacy, which was always pure and peaceable, faithful to God,
humble and loyal to man, so Ruling the Church of Christ, as not to be Masters
of mis-rule in any Nation, State or Kingdom.

Yea, in the amplest enjoyments of that pious munificence, and those generous
liberalities which Christian Princes, Noblemen, Gentlemen and inferior persons
devoutly afforded to Bishops and the rest of the Clergy, (as tokens of their
gratitude to God, their honor to their Savior, their love to their spiritual
Fathers, and their value of their own and other men's souls,) however some few
Clergymen among many might (possibly) surfeit sometime, and, as Jesurun, grow
petulant, sensual and sottish, through fullness of bread, idleness and luxury;
yet still the general face of the best Bishops and Clergy was comely and
venerable: there wanted not in all Ages such Bishops and Presbyters, both in
England and all Churches, for Gravity, Learning, Sanctity, Charity, Fidelity
and Loyalty, as kept up the Office, Name and Honor of the Clergy and of
Episcopacy, to an high degree of honor and veneration both with Princes and
people that were good Christians. No men were more useful or more employed for
the good ordering both of Church and Commonweal than Bishops were: none were
better Counselors to Princes, and greater Benefactors to their
fellow subjects; none further from faction, sedition, popularity, sacrilege
and rebellion; none did greater service or better offices for their King, their
Church, and their Country.

How loyal, resolute and religious a Remonstrance did the Bishop of Carlisle
make in Parliament, against the deposing of King Richard the Second, when the
whole stream ran against him? Was not Morton (first Bishop of Ely, and after of
Canterbury) the first designer and a principal effecter of the union of the
White and Red Roses, the two great houses of York and Lancaster, to the blessed
extinguishing of those long flames of civil war, which drank up the blood and
consumed the flesh of this Nation, whose greatest miseries rise from its own
bowels? Was not Richard Fox, Bishop of Durham, the chief Counselor, Promoter
and Actor of that other union between the two Crowns of England and Scotland,
by treating and concluding a match with our King Henry the Sevenths daughter,
and James the Fourth King of Scotland? a foundation certainly of very great
honor and happiness to both Nations, if wise and religious superstructures had
been built upon it. Now by a strange revolution of Divine Justice, that holy
Thistle which lately vied for an Equality with, if not a Superiority above, the
Roses, is become not so much united in a Parity, as subdued to an Inferiority.

Nor were the English Bishops less loyal to true Religion as Christian, yea and
to the true Reformation of it, then to their King and Country. How notably did
that renowned Lincolniensis (Grostest Bishop of Lincoln) assert the freedom of
his Conscience against the Popes unworthy commands? How many other Bishops, in
the contests between the Popes and our Princes about Investitures, asserted the
rights of their Sovereigns? After the Roman darkness and Tyranny vanished, and
the light of an orderly and loyal Reformation appeared, how many godly Bishops
then did abide the fiery Trial of Martyrdom? How many of them and their Clergy
were banished and imprisoned as Confessors? How many of them, as Jewel, Abbot,
Andrews, Davenant, White, Morton, and others, have wrote with incomparable
study and unanswerable strength against the Papal Usurpations, Errors and
Superstitions? and none beyond the last Archbishop of Canterbury, for clearness
and exactness of the Controversies stated.

With how great a resolution and loyal freedom did George Abbot, his immediate
Predecessor, write a notable letter to King James against all toleration of
Popery, when the Spanish match was hot in treaty? At which time with what
thunder and lightning did Dr. Senhowes, afterward B. of Carlisle, preach the two
famous Sermons against the great Diana of Rome as well as of Ephesus, to such a
degree of eloquent zeal and becoming courage, that he pleased even those whom
he offended? In the very last Convocation in England, anno 1640. (which gave
occasion to so great flames in this Church, meeting with times and minds which
had both wood and fire ready, and only wanted a Sacrifice) even this so
decryed Synod (which had in it as learned, honest and venerable Churchmen,
Bishops and others, as ever were in England) had among other things concluded a
full and firm defiance against Popery for ever, as well as an establishment
for Episcopacy, which they then found tottering and shaken, but had not the
happiness to use the right means of establishing it; which was not by building
it a story higher, but by taking it rather a story lower, at least abating its
Pinnacles, Turrets and Battlements; what it wanted in ornament and height, it
might have enjoyed in strength and setledness. Yet their design and endeavor
was very prudent, foreseeing, as was easy, that the overthrow of Episcopacy in
the Reformed Church of England, would be the greatest gratification to Rome
that could be at present expected by the Papists. And certainly the Romish
party were never more pleased then with those Convulsion-fits, which so
tortured first, and afterward destroyed, not only that Convocation, but all
the former Stability, Honor, Peace, Plenty, Order and Government of this
Church and its Clergy; which always feared and foretold no less danger from
Scylla then Charybdis. I might add further the humble, yet resolute,
Remonstrance made by the Bishops of Ireland to the Governors and Council of
that Kingdom, in the Lord of Straffords time, fully and freely declaring the
inconsistency of any open and avowed toleration of Popery with the honor of
God, with the power and purity of the Reformed Religion, and with the peace of
the Kingdoms.

Thus when the Bishops of England were Capital or Dominical letters both in the
Church and State, their Piety, Loyalty, Courage, Zeal and Constancy made (I
think) as fair and as goodly ashew as any of their enemies have done; they were
legible afar off, at home and abroad, and will be so to present and after-Ages:
many an one of them signified more, as to exemplary Piety and useful Virtues,
then one hundred of petty Presbyters or puny Preachers either then did, or now
do, or ever will be able to do; who were indeed never so considerable or
commendable, so useful to the Church, or serviceable to the State, as when they
kept to an humble subordination and wise communion with their Bishops, whose
honor and peace was the Presbyters honor, as the honor of the head is the
honor of every member of that Body. Doubtless their temporal happiness was
bound up together; neither could Bishops be happy without the assistance of
venerable Presbyters, nor Presbyters without the governance of reverend
Bishops; neither should be without other in the Lords Church.

I might here further add to the consideration of the obedientiall and
peaceable principles and practices of true Episcopacy, its Charitable,
Hospitable and Generous disposition, which are best expressed in times of peace
and a state of plenty. As Bishops had a firm loyalty to their Princes, and
obedience for conscience sake to their superiors, not examining their moral
virtues, but their civil Rights, which are the only measures of duty; in like
manner Bishops had generally great charity to their equals, and benignity to
there inferiors: which is a great fruit of a subjects loyalty to his Prince,
and love to his Country, relieving many poor people in their pressures, and
thereby keeping them from those discontents which usually attend the distresses
of men's conditions; the afflictions of Princes often rising from the dust, the
meaner sort of people, when necessities animate them to animosities, and such
insolences as turn dust into lice, as Moses did to the plaguing of Pharaoh
and all Egypt.

None but evil eyes, and worse hearts, could with unthankfullnesse and
uncharitableness grudge the excellent Bishops of England those Honors and
Revenues which they highly deserved, while they worthily employed them rather
for others good than their own private enjoyments, in any way of luxury, or
gallantry, or debauchery; the frequent gulfs of many other men's great Estates
and Honors, when they are enjoyed and abused by very small and sensual minds.
Generally Bishops neglected their own private interests and gain to advance
the public. How few of them, in many years of peace and plenty, raised any
considerable fortunes to their particular families or posterities? I am sure
not comparable to what Judges and Lawyers in all Ages, yea and Military men
have done in a few years, whose thrifty swords have gathered better Estates in
one seven year, than any Bishops or other Church-mens liberal words and works
ever did or aimed at in twenty years, though their yearly Revenues were as
good, or better, I think, than most Commanders pay, and I conceive as much
deserved by them, in order to the public good and service, which they might do
and really did in all Ages, both as to Church and State, to Superiors, Equals
and Inferiors.

For Bishops, beyond all men in their times, were guilty of building repairing
and endowing many Churches, which other men pull down and rob, buy and sell,
squander and embezell. Bishops, besides their temporary, daily and occasional
bounty, founded and erected many costly works of durable and Monumentall
Charity, in Colleges, Libraries, Free-Schooles, Hospitals, Almes-Houses, and
the like: many noble endowments they began, many they increased, many they
perfected, to Gods glory, the Nations Honor, the encouragement of Learning and
Religion, as well as the relief of many poor people. They took as much pleasure
in their works of Charity, as others can do in their sacrilege or robbery;
taking away those things from the Church, and all religious uses, to which
neither they nor any of their progenitors ever gave one farthing: for they are
commonly persons of the meanest blood and ignoblest descents, as well as minds
and manners, who are most repiners at the Churches patrimony, which all persons
of generous piety both fear and abhor to do, knowing that those penurious
practices and sacrilegious principles which some men follow, are as much
Antievangelicall as they are Antiepiscopall, against Christ and his Gospel, as
much as against the Clergy and true Christian Charity: It being impossible than
Christian or Reformed Religion should ever flourish, except by miracle (as
Aarons dry Rod did, when it was nourished by no earth or dew) when the
Ministers of it are such diminutives, kept always in a mendicant Minority, and
in a plebeian parity, as well as poverty; when Pastors of the Church are so
pitifully penurious and inconspicuous, that they are always driven like
vermin to be creeping and biting, crying and whining, craving and coveting,
crouching and complaining, rather than giving or distributing any thing with
charity and cheerfulness to men, or consecrating any free will offering to
God, the Church, and their Country.

O how perfect a Blessing, how complete a Reformation, how Triumphant a Church,
how glorious a Ministry, how precious Predicants must there needs be then in
England, when the visible order, sociall beauty, politic harmony and ancient
Government of Religion being first deprived of all honors and amplenesses,
Ministers are reduced to meannesse and tenuity, either wholly scattered into
fragments of Independency, or molded up in the Mass and Chaos of Presbytery;
where every Ministers principle and practice must necessarily tend either to
rule in Common, or else to rend from the Community; where there shall be no
further motive to any Loyalty, Subjection and Peaceablenesse, than what either
the terror and necessity of others power, or the tenuity and paucity of their
own party and sides, imposes upon such Ministers and their various Sectators,
who thus levelled, or ravelled, or hudled up without any due Subordination to
Ecclesiastical Governors of any Eminency or Authority, must needs sow all
seeds of Faction, Sedition, civil Troubles and Disloyalty toward civil
Magistrates, whatever Title or Majesty they affect to be clothed withal! They
cannot avoid to be always exposed to and exercised with their peoples mutual
emulations, contrarieties, contradictions and contempts, which are raised and
exercised upon the score of different Teachers and Religious disputes; for the
determining of which there are no men of venerable worth and conspicuity
appointed, such as Bishops and Synods of old were in all Ages.

Men cannot long have a conscientious regard to Civil Governors, when either
they have not or they will not endure any Ecclesiastical. They that see
nothing deserving honor, love and submission to a Worthy, Learned, Grave and
Godly Bishop, will hardly see much in any Justice, Judge or Prince; especially
when Duty, Obedience and Fidelity shall be measured by men's parties and
opinions in Religion, by their civil and secular interests: which is always
expectable from any people that affect irregular liberties and formidable
freedoms in any Church or State.

As Princes that ever have been Episcopal do hardly suite with the novelties
and intrusions of either Presbytery or Independency; so it is certain,
Presbyterian Preachers will as hardly comply with an Episcopal or an
Independent Prince as with a Bishop, and the like may be imagined of
Independents; when neither of them enduring any order or subjection as to
Religious polity, beyond their own fancy, must needs be less pliable to that
obedience which is legal and civil, especially when it is exacted by those
Princes that are not of their persuasion and way. Nor can there be indeed any
aptitude in such men's spirits or tempers to any stability of loyalty, when
their very conjunctions are like the first confused concretion of all things,
rather an heap of contraries or novelties daily emerging, than a composure of
any noble, orderly and constant harmony in Religion: which is never to be
expected where there must ever be either a combination of folly and faction, of
juvenility and simplicity only; (none being admitted to some confederacies
that do not first renounce much of their Learning and Reading, if they have
any, or of their credit and esteem as to all Ancient Churches) or else, like
lumps of ice, they must be compacted and governed as it hits, by Gravity and
Levity, by Age and Youth, by Weakness and Ability, by Steadiness and
Giddiness, by Rashness and Wariness, by Passion and Judgment, by Prudence and
Confidence, by Modesty and Impudence, Hemp and Silk, Course and Fine, Linen
and Woollen, being twisted and jumbled together; these at the best must make up
the associating and fluctuating methods of any levelled Ministry: or else they
must be like sand and stones without lime, rather cast into several little
heaps, than built up in a joint and grand fabric, by just Rules, Orders and
proportions truly edifying; when there shall be nothing of Authority among
Ministers proportionate to the different Ages, Capacities, Gifts, or Offices
and Merits of any of them, (which make up the true harmony of Government and
internal Majesty of all Authority,) but all things of Religious and
Church Order must be left in such a popular and plebeian posture, as shall most
encourage whatever is most Turbulent, Factious, Seditious and Rebellious in any
men's spirits, who will be prone either to affect more Rule than is their due,
or else be impatient that any should govern them in Church or State further
than they list, or think is agreeable to those principles and persuasions of
Religion or Reformation which they strongly fancy to themselves, and aim as
strongly to set up and impose on others when they shall be able, not by the
approbation and permission of the chief Magistrate only, where it may be
fairly had, but in case he be so blind, wilful, obstinate and unconvertible,
(as some have been for Episcopacy against Presbytery) they will find a call
from God, and some special impulsives to obtrude their opinions and designs,
without, yea against the express will of the Sovereign Governor; whose
obstinacy against any such supposed ways of God, and pretended Discipline of
Jesus Christ, is thought by many a sufficient Absolution and Dispensation from
their civil Loyalty, Oaths and Subjection. Thus looking for God in fires and
Earthquakes of civil combustions, they lose him, who is best to be found in
the Evangelicall and still voice, to which the Priests and Prophets of the
Jewish, also the Apostles, with their successors the Godly Bishops, of the
Christian Churches, have always listened, and generally obeyed; judging nothing
more diametrally distant from and opposite to true Religion than Rebellion
(that is, the usurping of that power which is by Right and Law another) upon
any religious pretense whatsoever. Certainly the Jewel of Loyalty neither was,
nor ever will be, safer kept than in the Cabinet of Primitive Episcopacy; as
Aarons R^d and the Tables of the Law were best preserved in the Ark of the
Testimony, and in the most holy place, which were laid up with the pot of
Manna; Emblems most lively setting forth the happy State of any Christian
Church and Nation, while it maintains the Laws of God and man, while it
subjects all men to the Rod or Scepter of just Government both in Church and
State, supporting, as the Princes, so the chief Pastors, Bishops and Guides of
the Church with an honorable plenty, and all other Ministers both in Church and
State with competent and ingenuous alimony. As Christian Kings and Queens have
ever been, according to Gods promise, the most indulgent, liberal and tender
nurses of the Church of Christ in all Countries, every where retaining and
reverencing Episcopacy as most agreeable with their Sovereignty and Monarchy;
so have all true Christian Bishops, in all Ages and places, ever been the most
Learned Assertors of, and the humble submitters to, Sovereign and Monarchical
Authority of Princes, and no less to that of Aristocracy in Commonweals or
Republiques, such as Florence was, and Venice still is; who never yet saw any
reason of State to move them to change the ancient and honorable Government of
Catholic Episcopacy for any other, which has, as more of parity, popularity
and poverty, so less of honest policy, firm peace and religious loyalty.
Certainly a Christian Prince or State that designs stability to their power
and peace, will need these two swords, of Sovereignty and Episcopacy to keep
himself, his people, and his Church safe. A wise Governor cannot but see and
say of Episcopacy, compared to all other forms, as David said of Goliahs
sword, there is none like that, in respect of its principles, operations and
influences, as to religious loyalty and public tranquillity. The loyalty and
civil subjection of all novellers seems to be with so many salvo's and
reserves of godliness and grace, of Religion, Christ's Discipline or true
Church-waies, of Princes not being tyrants or persecutors in their subjects
sense, that there is little certainty, much lubricity, and as many dangers as
evasions. But the Loyalty of Episcopacy is positive and plenary, resolute and
absolute, according to those clear Evangelical precepts and patterns, either
to act or suffer with good conscience, owning no pensations as from God or Man,
Pope, or Presbyter, or People, which some Antiepiscopall Preachers and
Professors seem to have found out, as the Gnostics of old did, being loath to
be Carbonated or Crucified Christians if they can help it; pleading that Right
follows Might, especially in Cases and Engagements of Religion; excusing the
Primitive Martyrs softness and easiness to suffer, as Bellarmine and others do
the Popes pristine submission to the Emperors, by reason of their Minority,
being then in their bibs and hanging-sleeves.

CHAP. XXI.
MY third Plea to recommend Primitive and Catholic Episcopacy to my wise and
honored Countrymen, Episcopacy most suitable to the genius and temper of the
English.
is taken from the consideration of the Genius or temper of the English Nation;
in which the Spirits of people are (generally) so heady and giddy, so high and
stout, that they cannot long bear any way of Government, or any Governors
which seem levelling, popular plebeian and prostrate: however they may for a
fit of novelty or discontent be pleased with such Pageants, yet these are not
the Mansion-houses that English people will dwell in. They are too stiff-necked
and stubborn a people ever to reverence or submit to such Magistrates in State,
or such Discipliners in Church, as are but their Peers and Equals at best, and
many times their Inferiors, as in estate and learning, so in all those things,
Divine, Civil and Humane, which are proper to conciliate respect, and command
submission upon the account of some eminency of merit or worth, set off with
some conspicuity of riches, honor or power.

The late Presbyterian design and defeat in England, as to inducing their
Checker-work of Lay Elders to be Joynt-rulers and Partners with Preachers in
Ecclesiastical authority, placing (as they must needs) even silly Mechanics in
many places in a parallel jurisdiction with the ablest Scholars and Ministers,
as to Church Government and Discipline, yea and above them in their numbers and
suffrages; the speedy baffling (I say) and discountenancing of this pitiful
project, with all its long train, baggage and ammunition, by a general dislike,
difuse and neglect of it, sufficiently shows, that either Common people in
England have more modesty yet left in them than to think themselves fit judges
and rulers in the State or Church with their Magistrates and Ministers; or else
that they utterly disdain to be Catechized and controlled by such as are their
plain country-neighbours and trivial Comrades, of the same form for rusticity
and simplicity, and many times as much below them in prudence as in estate, in
civility as in solid piety, to which a factious and pragmatick ambition in any
man adds very little.

The speedy confutation of this incongruous polity and stratagem, which, to
please the people, sought to besiege my self and all Ministers, both in City
and Country, with four or five or more Lay Elders, made up of Farmers,
Shopkeepers, Clothiers and Handicrafts-men, to be our Assessors and
Assistants, as Censors and Supervisors of all the Parish, and our selves too
not only with us, but in some things above us Ministers both in number and
popular influence; this has really wrought such an abhorrence and disdain in
most people of all such Lay-ruling-elders, and such a despiciency of all such
Disciplining-plots as are neither prudent nor pertinent for the English temper,
that even those Ministers who were at first most zealous to set up, in stead of
the fair Temples and Cathedrals, those small Synagogues and low Consistories of
Lay-partners in Church Government, even these Ministers find they have lost
much of that pristine respect and influence they had among their own and all
other people: so that upon the point neither great nor small will now be
(further than they list) governed by such methods of imprudent men, who have
reproched their own Mother Church, diminished themselves and their Order,
blasted their Ministerial Ordination, soiled that fountain whence they sprang,
disgraced those venerable Bishops who were lawfully and worthily their Fathers
and Rulers, despised (as much as in them lies) the very Catholic and
honorable name of Episcopacy, abolished its ancient honor and authority, which
were ever established and preserved till now by the Custom and Canons of this
as of all Churches, also by the ancient Laws of this Nation; thus splitting
even their dear Presbytery in pieces, (which was best embarked with
Episcopacy) while they ran this on ground, upon the Rocks and Quicksands, the
oppositions of power and the despiciencies of people, between which all
Church Government and public respect is now removed from both Bishops and
Presbyters.

Alas, how pitiful a part of any Government have any of these Ministers now to
act and please themselves with, who affected to play a new game at Chesse in
this Church, only with pawns and rooks, without Kings or Bishops? whose
unseparable fate, at least as to the Genius of England, King James very wisely
foresaw would stand and fall together, (if he had as wisely prevented the
danger and damage of both:) it being very hard for any Sovereign Prince to
govern such an headstrong people, unless he have power over their minds as
well as their bodies. This a Prince cannot have but by Preachers, who, as the
weekly Musterers, Orators and Commanders of the populacy, do exercise by the
Scepter of their tongues a secret and swasive, yet potent, Empire over most
peoples souls. These preachers he knew were not easily kept either in good
order, or in just honor (being men of quick fancies, of daring and active
confidences, great valuers of themselves, and ambitious to be many Masters, yea
popular and petty Monarchs, in the Thrones of their Pulpits and Territories of
their Parishes) unless there were some men over them, who are fittest to be
above them (as being too hard for them) in their own sphere and mystery, best
able to judge of Ministers Learning, Opinions, Preaching, Praying and Living;
men for years of Gravity and Prudence, rewarded with Estates and Honors.

Judges 1.7.
And such were Bishops, without whom Christian Monarchs are like those Kings who
had their thumbs and great toes cut off; it being not possible for a Prince
immediately to correspond with every petty Presbyter, nor is it comely to
contest with them, nor can he be quiet from their pragmatick janglings, unless
they be curbed by some such Learned, Authoritative and Venerable Superiors as
are properest for them; who were the fittest mediums between the King and his
other Clergy, both to persuade Princes to favor the Church, and to persuade
Churchmen to preach and practice loyalty toward their Princes, which tends to
the honor of both Magistracy and Ministry. So that it was no other then an
obvious conjecture to foretell, No Bishop, no King; since the same Scriptures
and Principles of both reason and religion, piety and policy, lead men to obey
both as rulers over them in the Lord, or to reject both, by affecting popular
parities and communities, as in Church so in State.

Which abatement of Kingly or Sovereign power in one person, as to its civil
Magistratick and Monarchical eminency, has by late experience been found so
inconsistent with the Genius of this English Nation, that the Representatives
of the People have not only importunely petitioned the restitution of
Monarchical, yea Kingly, government, but they have actually settled the main
authority in one person, under an other Name and Title; justly fearing, lest
the dividing and diminishing of Sovereignty, Majesty and Authority, as to the
chief Governor, should in time make a dissolution of the civil Government, by
frequent emulations and ambitions, incident to any such Nation as England is,
which has so many great and rival Spirits in it, prone to contemn or contest
with any thing that looks like their Equal.

Nor do I doubt but Time will further show us, (if it has not done it already
sufficiently) that no less inconveniences and mischiefs, both as to Church and
State, may follow the debasing and destroying of Ecclesiastical power and
authority in England, dividing and mincing it: so diverting the ample and fair,
the ancient and potent stream of Episcopacy, (which flowed from the Throne of
Christ, and of Christian Kings) into the new rivulets, small channels, and weak
currents either of Presbytery or Independency.

The Scepter of Government in Church or State, like the staff or rod of Moses,
when it is cast out of his hand on the Earth or populacy, turns to a serpent,
Democracy being a very terrible Daemogorgon: Exodus 7.9*
until it be resumed into Moses his hand, (as King in Iesurun) it does not
return to its former beauty, strength and use, which that did, after it had
justly devoured the rods and serpents of the Magicians; as in time Monarchical
Government will do all other kinds or essays in Engl. which are but the
effects of popular passions and encroachments, carried on more by some
Preachers Enchantments then by Laymens Ambitions.

Strabo and others tell us, that the people of Cappadocia, Cappadoces munus
libertatis a Romany oblatum obnuentes, missis ad Romam Legatis, negabant
vivere Gentem suam sine Rege posse. Quod mirati Romani, permiserunt illis quem
vellent Regem. Strabo l. 12. p. 540. Just^n. l. 38. c. 2.
when the Romans had conquered their Kings, and offered them their Liberty as
a Province or free State under them; they refused the favor, affirming the
temper of their Country was such, that the people in it could not live if they
were not governed by a King: So pertinacious were they, as indeed most people
in the world have been, and are at this day, to retain the sacred Tradition of
Kingly or Monarchical Government, which being parentall and Patriarchall, is
most natural and divine, derived to us by nature, and confirmed by good
experience ever since Noah and Adam, who had their just Sovereignty as Fathers
and Kings over all mankind derived to them from God the Great Father and
Eternal King over all, from whom Monarchy and so Episcopacy derive their
Majesty and Authority; Primogeniture carrying with it, as Princely, so Priestly
power; which made the same name (...) ( Genesis 41.45. Exodus 3.1.) to signify
both Prince and Priest: The want of either of which, and the swerving from
either of them, commonly occasioneth infinite distractions in any Nation and
Church; especially if they have been in all times wonted to be governed by
them. To avoid which miseries among Mankind, the Wisdom of God has guided, as
most Nations to Monarchy, so this and all primitive Churches to the royal
Priesthood of Episcopacy, from the very cradle or beginning of Christianity: At
which time S. Jerome to Euagrius confesses, it was ( toto orb decretum) a
Catholic Decree and Order through all the Christian world, which could be no
other then Apostolical at least.

And however other Reformed Churches may make a shift to live, and some of them
thrive, without the formal name and title of Bishops, (though most of them have
the efficacy of the power, and the reality of the authority in their
Superintendents) yet I am confident, till English Spirits are wholly cowed and
depressed with war, and such exhaustings as utterly dis-spirit and embase the
Nobility, Gentry and Communalty, nothing will be more inconsistent with them
than what savours of parity and popularity in Church Government. They will
rather affect to have every one what they list, which in effect will be no
Government properly Ecclesiastic, further then they may be commanded and
possibly over-awed by the civil sword, to submit to any such Triers, Ordainers,
Committee Men and Censors, yea Tithing-men and Constables, as it is pleased to
impose on them, while it exercises both a Civil and Ecclesiastical Episcopacy
over Church and State, as supposing it self safest when it has both swords in
its hands, that by so eminent power it may both preserve Majesty and exercise
Authority, which are inseparable.

It is extreme vanity and folly to imagine that even the lesser flies, the
rabble and vulgarity of the people in England, (naturally course, and now grown
both baser and ruder then ever, being insolent as to the presumptions of their
liberties, both religious and civil) that these (I say) should easily be held
by those fine new cobwebs of Church Government, which some men have lately spun
out of their own bowels and brains (for they are not of the ancient Web or
Loome.) How much less can any wise man expect that the greater sort of people
in the Nation, such as are either purse-proud (yet arrant Churles and Clowns)
will be either catched or held by those imaginary toils? What then shall we
think either Presbytery or Independency will do with the higher-spirited
Gentry, and (heretofore) Magnanimous Nobility of England? Will not these Lords
and Ladies think it ridiculously strange to find themselves cited and summoned,
tried and examined, reproved and censured, excommunicated, yea and reprobated
by a few petty-Presbyters, whom they look upon commonly as poor Scholars,
pragmatick and pedantick enough for the most part, if they have any power, and
be under none as to Church Discipline? Or will these Gentlemen submissly
venerate the Authority of Good-men Lay Elders, or a cold Vestry of a few honest
Gaffers with their Elect Pastor, who is as a poor soul set to inform and move
that poor Body of Parochial or congregated Christians, Isaiah 65.5.
who are ready to say with the Pharisee to all that are not of their
corporation and opinion, Stand by, we are holier than thou?

Good God! what stamps of eminency, in Reason or Religion, in Piety or Policy,
in Civility or Charity, will any persons of Noble Birth, Good Breeding and
Pregnant Parts, see in these Consistorian or Congregationall Conventions, to
keep up their own Authority, and to keep down other men's spirits from despising
them? Among whom there neither is nor can be (generally) any such conspicuity
or sufficiency for any parts and abilities, of mind and body, of estate and
quality, as may redeem them from the very contempt and laughter even of boys;
to which many times their pitiful clothes, (which give either a great gloss
or damp with vulgar eyes, as they are either rich or mean on the backs of men
in Authority) besides their simple carriage, their senseless speeches, and
very silly looks, are prone to expose them. Nor have they many times, as to
the Lay-part of them, any thing without or within them to redeem them from this
low and loose esteem, in all men's both judgments and consciences who are not
very silly, superstitious or servile.

Yet of this course bran and barrel (for the most part) are those men and
Ministers who have been most eager to exclude Venerable Episcopacy, and to
challenge to themselves, either as Ministers or Laics, the whole Height,
Depth, Length and Breadth of Ecclesiastical Government in England; not only
for ordaining Ministers, but for censuring, silencing, deposing,
excommunicating, and wholly Anathematizing or abdicating from Christ and his
Church, all sorts and sizes of men, whatever Majesty, Sovereignty and Authority
they have upon them. For these new Masters profess, (like God) to be no
respecters of persons: all must fall under their lash and stroke who are either
in the Parochial or Congregationall Communion and Jurisdiction. Possibly such
small Monitors or Triobolary Discipliners, (who are justly of least esteem in a
Nation and Church) might for a time, and in a humor, suite the spirits of some
little Colonies or Conventicles in Arnheim or Amsterdam, in new England or in
old and cold Scotland, where common people have much of the easiness or
tamenesse of peasants: But certainly they are no way suitable to the
Haughtiness and Grandeur of England. These manacles are so far from shackling
the chief of our Tribes, and heads of our Families, that they are not capable
to hamper the feet; so far from making good Pillories, that they will not serve
for good Stocks and whipping-posts, for the due repressing and punishing even
of vulgar petulancy and insolency; which we see prevails every where inspite
both of Presbytery and Independency, for want of an Honorable and Venerable
Episcopacy, justly constituted and honorably countenanced in the Church.

The temper of the English Nation is not like that of Scotland, (which with so
brotherly and unwelcome a zeal would needs obtrude upon us Presbytery whether
we would or no.) There every petty Lairde of a Village in his High house, has
either a bit and bridle in the mouths, or a Cane over the crags, of all the
poor Cotagers, and of the poor Clerick his Minister too; who are in a kind of
Villanage (as underlings) to his Seigniorie, servilely depending on him, the
one for his great Salary of an hundred Scotch punds or marks a year, (where
every mark is thirteen pence halfpenny, and every pund is two shillings
English) the other for their Cotages, Copy-Holds, Farms and Tenures. So that
the common people there being generally over- dropped and under-fed, low-pursed
and low-spirited, might easily be ruled, as to any religious Government and
Church-Concernments, by such a Discipline as their gudd Lairdes and Sr. John
pleased to put upon them; the ambition of Preacher and people being no higher
than to eat and drink, and to beget children in their own likeness to
poverty and servility, as the Peasants in France and Boores in Germany do.

But the ruggedness and fierceness of the people of England, even of the very
Commons and clowns, (who are higher fed, and bred to less slavery then in other
countries) is such, that, like our English horses, cocks, mastives and bores,
they are no where to be matched for the curstness and animosity of their spirit
and mettle. How have we seen even mean men bristle against, not only their
grave Ministers, but their great Benefactors and Masters? Tenants have risen
against their Landlords, and Peasants against the noblest Peers: so Presbyters
have contested with their Bishops, and subjects with their Sovereigns. Such
tragical rufflings and disdains of their betters are no news in Engl. And shall
we think that tradesmen, peasants and yeomen (not to mention gentlemen and
noblemen, or such as shall govern as supreme) will, all or any of them, now be
so tame, as to be curbed, checked, ruled and managed by those minime- Ministers
and members of Congregations, or those petty Presbyters in their Parishes or
Associations, whom they have no visible cause or motive in the world to look
upon or esteem as their equals or betters, no way likely to be their
benefactors, and so not worthy to be their Rulers in the least kind? This
submission cannot be expected, unless Englishmen are (now) to be subdued by
fine words, and made obedient by the formal and supercilious looks of some men,
who affect in their Churches and Parishes to govern all, and are not fit
(alone) to govern any, unless they had been more able and willing to govern
themselves, and to have kept within that compass of Ecclesiastical Order and
subjection to their Bishops and betters, which the example of all Churches, and
all worthy Presbyters, and true Christians in all Ages, commended to them,
besides the particular Laws and constitutions of this Church and State.

These considerations of the unproportionableness of any other
Church Government than a right Episcopacy to the temper of England, moved the
supercilious, yet very learned, Salmasius, in his advice to the Prince Elector
then in England, and to some other of the long Parliament, and of the Scotized
Assembly, (who desired his judgment upon the then hot and perboyling, Vide
Vit. Salm. page 50. Postquam comperisset Presbyterialem statum citra
Episcopalem in Anglicanis Ecclesiis consistere non posse, (prout nata istic
ingenia videret) in ea erat sententia, aliquam moderationem adhibendam, and
Episcopos non omnino tollendos: m^lius illud regimen, and haud dubie cum summa
util^tate, processurum in illis Ecclesiis existimabat; m^xime quum viderit,
sublatis Episcopis, omne genus Haeresium and Schismatum gliscere: voluit ergo
ut Episcopi essent moderatores perpetui Presbyterorum Collegii, etc.
yea passionate and over-boyling debates touching Episcopacy) to tell them,
That as the Episcopal Government, rightly constituted and executed, is very
agreeable to the Word of God, and most conform to all Antiquity; so it was of
all other most suitable to the English spirit and constitution: The want of
which he already foresaw was, and would ever be, the cause of much disorder and
distraction, of infinite Factions, Heresies, Schisms and Confusions.

Thus the great Dictator of Learning (as he esteemed himself) was pleased in
this passage and other-where, graciously to express his judgment and pleasure,
according to the humor he was in, Vindic. Car. and Walo Messal.
or to the Interest which he was pleased to adopt. Sometimes he is Walo
Messalinus, and ashamed to own his Name against Episcopacy: he was in that
disguise to gratify the pretentions of Presbytery, and the adherence or
dependence which he had to the French and Dutch Churches: otherwhile he puts
off the vizard, and with open face owns the eminency, authority, antiquity and
universality of Episcopacy; yea the incomparable utility of it, when joined
with a grave and orderly Presbytery, besides a particular aptitude in it to the
English Genius.

For he well saw that all Government, and Church Government as much as any, is
a beam of Divine Majesty, and requires not only something of a Diviner
sufficiency as to inward abilities and endowments, but also of a Diviner
conspicuity and luster for Authority, civil eminency and ornament. We read that
God, besides his choice of Aaron and his Sons to be complete persons, to make
them chief Priests according to his Command and Commission, gave also strict
order for their garments, Exodus ^8. v. 2, and 40.
to have them made with such comeliness, cost and curiosity, as should be for
glory and beauty, even before the eyes of the people over whom they were
placed. And we further read that God forbad to his people the Jews all birds
that did creep and yet fly, they were unclean and abominable to be eaten.
Deuteronomy. 14.19.
An Emblem that nothing is less comely in Gods Church, than to see those men
ambitiously affect to fly high in governing others, whose condition is low and
creeping on the ground.

Indeed no Government can be carried on in Church or State, (especially in
Engl.) but either by the absolute terror of the sword, and secular power
commanding, or by such legal injunctions and religious persuasions as bind good
men in conscience to submit, first, to God, and for his sake to those whom he,
as Lord of all, is pleased to set over us. Then is government in Church or
State most complete and constant, when it has first that rational Empire and
religious prevalency over men's hearts, which arises from the persuasion that
people have of the worth, abilities, right and authority which Governors have
(by their laws) as from God in the State, so from Christ in the Church. Which
persuasion as it brought all Christian people, Presbyters and Bishops, to be so
wholly subject to their civil Magistrates and Sovereigns; so it made all
Christian Presbyters and Professors to be filially submiss to their Bishops, as
to Fathers given them by Christ: even then when Bishops were rich in graces and
gifts of the Spirit, but low as to worldly greatness, and under much
persecution; yet then did the Majesty of Episcopal authority prevail, (on which
the lively Characters and pregnant Memorials of the Apostolical pattern,
designation and succession, were still fresh and most remarkable) then did it
draw all true Believers and good Christians to venerate their Bishops or chief
Pastors for Conscience sake; by so much the more, by how much Presbyters and
People had more of the power of Godliness in them: whereas now it is made a
new mark of Godliness and Saintship with many, to cast off, to hate, abhor,
despise and destroy all Bishops and all eminent Episcopacy. Sure either
primitive purity or modern dreggs must be very much out of the right way: and
which of them erres, I leave to all sober men to judge.

As for other Christians of looser Consciences and Conversation, which were
prone in all Ages to be as weeds in the garden of the Church, (especially in
times of Peace, Plenty and Prosperity) the piety and wisdom of Christian
Princes and other godly people ever took care to keep them in the more awe and
reverence toward their Bishops and Ecclesiastical Governors, by investing
these in such outward and visible enjoyments for estate and honor, which might
add some outward respect and authority to them, (and that no small one) before
those that had most need to be so restrained, overawed and dazzled. Hence the
piety and policy of Constantine the Great not only gave liberal supports to
the Bishops of the Church, but gave them places and honors equal to the
Patricii, the Senators in order and degree, which were the Roman chief Nobility.

It is not only an imprudent, but an impious presumption, and a tempting of
God to needless miracles, for any people to invest those men in any Government,
as in State so in Church, who are (as St. Paul says) little esteemed, because
deserving little; who have neither personal abilities for the Office, nor any
clear and undoubted commission to authorize them in it from God or Man, from
Christ and his Church: which, I conceive, can hardly, if ever, be found in any
ways of Church Government, which are suspected for Novelty, or tainted with
Parity and Popularity, contemners of Catholic Custom, Primitive Antiquity, and
Apostolical Succession in an holy Uniformity. From all which depravations as
venerable Episcopacy is sufficiently known to be farthest removed of any, so it
cannot but seem to all impartial Christians to be, as every way best in it
self, so fittest for the native temper of England; where men's spirits are more
accurate and acute, more inquisitive and searching into the rights, foundations
and grounds of all authority over them, then in other Countries, where
meannesse and easiness, servility and credulity of common people, makes them
venerate for their Gods any Calf or Idol which their Superiors please to set
up in the Church, to serve or secure the civil Interests.

But in England, where people have much light and dare to use it, such policies
and projects would (now) be not only preposterous, but vain and ridiculous.
There is no putting (among us) Eagles wings or Feathers upon the bodies of
Jack-dawes, Rookes or Crows, which rather incumber them, than enable them for
any orderly motion; much less do they make them Imperial birds, fit to rule
or over-aw the other winged inhabitants of the world, which will be ready to
scorn and despise them.

And what indeed (for instance) has more abased the condition, and abated the
common honor of Ministers in England, of later years, than some of their
unseasonable and unreasonable affectations to govern in common, as beyond their
due proportion for Age, Gifts, Parts, Ornaments, so before they had complete
Commission to empower them, either from God or any man in Sovereign power? Even
such Presbyters as most affected, like Icarus, to fly above their Fathers, my
self and the English world have seen to have so melted their own artificial
wings, that they have miserably fallen into a Sea, a black and a red Sea of
confusion, contempt and contention, both among their own people and all the
Nation.

Out of which Abyss they will never be able to wade or swim, in my judgment,
unless they can (with such Unity, Pertinaci enim and animosa perversitate
priores suas sententias defendendo, in sacrilegium schismatis (quod omnia
scelera supergraditur) ^aecitate impietatis irruunt. Aug. l. 1. cont. Parmen.
Humility and Charity, (as St. Austin advises some Donatists) revoke their
exotic errors, retract their Schisms and transports, returning from their
pertinacious novelties to the true proportions of Ancient Church Government;
which I think are in no degree to be found either in Presbytery, Independency,
or any way apart from Episcopacy: both which new: ways have so grievously
blasted and singed themselves by the exorbitancy of those terrible flames which
they kindled utterly to consume Episcopacy, that there is little likelihood
either of these novelties should ever appear to be entertained with any
public beauty, honor, esteem or approbation in England, where nothing is less
tolerable than Governors that are contemptible, for want of Ability, Authority
and Dignity, as to Estate and Honor.

Amidst all which immoderate and merciless fires (destinated to consume all
the pristine beauty and honor of Catholic Episcopacy, both root and branch, in
one day) yet (to show not more the wonder of Gods mercy, than the true temper
of the English people) behold not only Primitive Episcopacy, but Primitive
Bishops (that is, persons of Learning, Piety and Virtue, becoming that sacred
Office and Dignity) have retained all this while, and will do while they live,
(yea and when they are dead) so much of real honor and true respect due to
their worth, that no Assemblies, no Armies, no Votes, no Ordinances, no
Terrors, no Calumnies of inordinate Presbyters, no insolences of licentious
people, nothing can ever deprive them of, or degrade them from, an high respect
and esteem in the hearts and desires, in the loves and compassions of all
unbiassed, learned, sober and wise men throughout the Nation;

Who are not yet grown so dull and degenerous, as not to prefer the
Primitive, Catholic and Venerable Authority of Episcopacy, as to order and
Ordination, so to Government and jurisdiction, as much before the novel
inventions and ostentations of any Presbyterian and Independent models, as one
would value the English Roses before the Scotch Thistles; freely to handle or
feed upon which, is no such precious Christian Liberty as any wise men,
Ministers or others, have either cause to envy in others, or to congratulate in
themselves; since their former subjection to Episcopacy was far more to their
Safety, Order, Plenty and Honor, than what they now enjoy in their petty
Signiories. The lowest parts of that Mountain of God, Episcopacy, on which the
Church of Christ for many Ages stood and flourished, were higher than the top
of these new mole-hils; the skirts of Bishops clothing were more venerable than
the very Crowns of these Ministers heads, the unanointed corners of whose
hair and beards are now so deformedly shorn or shaven by a sharp and popular
rasor.

The renown and value of Episcopacy is much risen since Englishmen have seen
added to the other excellencies of our English Bishops, the miracle and
magnanimity of their Christian patience, who after their hard and long studies,
attended with many meritorious and useful virtues, after they had lawfully
obtained and many years peaceably enjoyed such Honors and Estates as adorned
Episcopacy in England, after they had no way, and by no law, forfeited these,
or misused them; yet, in the decline of their life's, in the colder and darker
winter of their Age, these grave and gallant men can bear with Christian
patience and heroic composedness of mind the loss of all, and that from
their own Countrymen, Professors of the same Christian, yea and Reformed,
Religion: and this without any respect had either to their present and future
support, or their pristine dignity. A fate so sad and Tragical, as is scarce
to be paralleled in any Age or History: yet have none of them been heard to
charge God foolishly. They say and write either nothing, or only the words of
Soberness, Truth and Charity: they still possess their souls in silence and
patience, when dispossessed of all things: wherever they live, their luster
shines through their greatest obscurity and tenuity, as the bright Sun through
small crevises, far beyond the most sparkling Presbyters, or glittering
Independents; whose new popular projects for Church Government, compared to
Primitive and old Episcopacy, are like Comets or blazing Stars compared to
the Sun and Moon.

The Gravity, the Constancy, the Contentedness, the Meekness, the Humility of
these Venerable, yet afflicted, Bishops, (now reduced (God knows) to a great
paucity as well as tenuity) yet still keeps up their price, and commands from
all wise and worthy men a veneration both of their persons, and of that comely
Authority which they heretofore enjoyed, and worthily exercised, in this
Church. Who almost of any considerable people in England, that are not either
ignorant, fanatic or sacrilegious, but either openly or secretly wish the
happy restoration of Venerable Episcopacy to this Church and Nation? who, that
has sense of honor, justice or ingenuity, does not deplore, and is not
discountenanced to consider, the Crowds and Loades of indignities cast upon
such excellent persons as for the most part the Bishops of England were; even
then when they were to be sacrificed, by I know not what strange fire, as a
peace offering to the discontented Presbyters of Scotland, and their ambitious
Symbolizers in England? I know some of those Lords and Commons who in the
huddle helped to destroy Bishops and their Order, now not only pity the
undeserved sufferings of such brave men, but repent of their own compliance;
and so do many Ministers.

The usefulness, worth and necessity of excellent Bishops and of true
Episcopacy were never so well understood in England, as since the sad effects
have showed us and all the world the want of them, if in any Nation, sure in
this, where some of the very enemies of all Episcopacy heretofore, and the
eager extirpators of it, do now express (which they have done to me) (as the
other Tribes did to that of Benjamin, Judge. 21.
when they had almost quite destroyed it) something of mercy and pity, of
moderation and retractation.

Alas, saving a few Ministers, most-what Lecturers, and some scrupulous people
here and there, which had been a little bitten by some Bishops, either for
their inconformity or extravagancy, and saving a few other men that had a mind
to Bishops Lands and Houses, (both which were not the hundredth part of the
people of this Nation) saving these, I say, (who had and have most implacable
picques and feuds and jealousies against all Episcopacy,) the rest, which are
the most and best of the Nation, I persuade my self, have been and are so just
and ingenuous, as not to take up vulgar and causeless, and yet eternal
hatreds, against such worthy men as our Bishops most-what were, and so
Venerable a Function as they were invested with. Yea at this day (as much as I
perceive) the Names of Episcopacy and of every worthy Bishop are like spices
bruised, and like sweet ointment, (whose box is broken) more fragrant and
diffused: just as an agreeable perfume would be after one has been much
afflicted with Assafetida. The very stench which has risen every where from
the heaps and dunghils of factious confusions in religion, both as to men's
minds and manners, since the routing of Episcopacy and Bishops, these have
rendered that primitive Order and Catholic Presidency more savoury and
acceptable then heretofore it was to some men, when their weaker brains were
cloyed with the constancy of so great a blessing; as some are brought to
fainting spirits by long smelling of the sweetest smells.

Episcopacy, like the body of holy Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, and (placed there
by St. John) when it was burned, has filled the English and all the world with
a sweet odor. It is like the bodies that have been well embalmed many hundred
years past, never capable to putrify, but will ever remain incorrupt, as a
sacred kind of Mummy, for a memorial to all generations.

Though the Lands and Lordships, the flesh and skin which adorned Episcopacy by
humane bounty, be either devoured by worms, or so wasted and dissipated (as the
ashes of some Martyrs were, by which their persecutors hoped to defeat them of
a blessed resurrection;) yet still the Divine donations and endowments, the
Spirit and Soul of pastoral power is remaining to Episcopacy: and its honor
will be both Immortal and Glorious, when all its enemies shall be ingloriously
either forgotten or remembered.

The Apostolic Antiquity, the Catholic Dignity of Episcopacy is not abated,
nor ever can be: The Divine Wisdom, Beauty, Order, Authority, Usefulness and
Blessing by it, in it and upon it, do still survive, and ever will, in all
Histories, in all Times, in all Churches, and in none more justly than in this
of England; where the experience of all sober Christians has brought them to
that sense which venerable Beda expresses was had in his days, (that is,
eight hundred years ago) of Episcopacy and good Bishops, That any Province or
Church destitute of its Bishops, Provincia Pontifice destituta, divino pariter
praesi^io ^estituta. Bed. hist. l. 3. c. 7.
was so far destitute of the Divine protection and benediction. As this Age
has brought forth such as dare to despise, decry and destroy what all former
Ages have happily used and highly magnified; so after-Ages, in the revolution
of not many years, may admire, adore and restore with great devotion the
primitive honor of Episcopacy, which some men have sought to lay in the dust,
and bury in oblivion.

Whose resurrection is not to be despaired of, even to its ancient glory, when
sober Christians of all sorts shall seriously consider, and compare with former
times in England, the present State of this Church and the Reformed Religion in
it, full of divisions, distractions, disaffections, of animosities, envyes and
jealousies, of offenses, murmurings and complainings, running to ignorance,
negligence, irreligion, and at best to Romish Superstition; where Ministers are
multi-form, people mutually scandalized and scattered, Christians not so much
united by any bond of uniform Religion or Worship, as overawed from doing
those insolences and affronts to which their parties and passions eagerly
tempt them. Nothing of Ecclesiastical Order, Discipline and Authority, further
then a sword or a gun, or a private fancy afford; nothing of the Clergies
authoritative convention, correspondency, or communion as brethren; no joint
counsel, no blessed harmony, no comely subordination among them; all proclaim a
Chaos and confusion. Compare (I say) all these deformed distempers into which
we are fallen since we abdicated or lost venerable Episcopacy, with that Piety,
Plenty, Harmony, Unity, Order, Decency, Proficiency, Respect, Honor and
Authority, which were heretofore so eminent and illustrious in the Church and
Churchmen of England, while it enjoyed the blessing of Episcopacy; in whose
preservation and honor the honor of true Religion, the Majesty of any
Christian Church, the dignity of the ordained Ministry, the validity of sacred
Mysteries, the completeness of Ecclesiastical power, the Authority of all holy
Ministrations, and the measure of all just Reformations in Religion, (besides
the civil peace) were heretofore thought to be very much bound up, as in all
Churches and Nations that are Christian, so in none more than in these of
England, if we consider the native greatness and generosity of some men's
spirits, the roughness and stubbornness of others, all of them disdaining to be
either abused by the simplicity, or curbed by the arrogance, of any men as
their Church Governors, of whose Religious ability and Ecclesiastic authority
they are in no sort satisfied. It is not good to tempt either the Sea or the
Populacy, by keeping too low banks, which are easily overrun, and occasion
much ruin to all sorts.

I may further add, to convince my Brethren the Ministers, and all my worthy
Countrymen, how agreeable and honorable Episcopacy, in its due place, posture
and authority, was to the genius of Engl. by putting them in mind of that vast
disproportion, for Love, Respect, Countenance, Maintenance, Encouragement and
Honor, which now are paid, as generally to the function of the Ministry, so
particularly to the person of any Minister, of whatever quality or preferment,
title or party he be, comparing things to what the deserving Clergy generally
enjoyed heretofore, while, under God and their Kings, their worthy Bishops
protected them according to Law in well-doing. Heretofore (even in my memory) a
grave, learned and godly Bishop was as the center of his Diocese, the tutelary
Angel of his Clergy, the good genius of every able and faithful Minister under
him: He was the grand Oracle of the honest Gentry, the honored Father and
ghostly Counselor of the true-hearted Nobility; he was the admiration and
veneration of the most plain-hearted and peaceful Common People.
Notwithstanding all the scurrilous obloquies and affronts which sometimes
either weak or wicked, foolish or factious men sought to cast upon all Bishops
and all the Clergy under them, yet still the kindness of Parlaments, the favor
of Princes, the worth of good Ministers, the discretion of wise Bishops, and
above all the goodness of a gracious God, kept the Clergy of England in such a
condition as was rather to be envied than pitied. No Minister of any worth was
then so cheap and despicable, so obvious to injuries, and obnoxious to all
indignities, as now he is, no not by an hundred degrees. Every grave and good
Minister in his place then moved as wheels in an Engine, by that concurrent
strength which then was in the whole Fabric and Juncture of the Church: the
beams of Episcopal honor shined on the meanest Clergyman, whose own fatuity or
factiousnesse, weakness or wickedness did not obscure him. The secular
interests and worldly enjoyments of the whole Clergy were then much more
considerable, both for profit and honor; their livings much better and more
secure to them (as their Free-holds,) if they kept within the bounds which our
Laws had set; their preferments more ample and more easy to be had; their
reliefs, in case of any loss, burden or charge, more easy; their reputation
more conspicuous, when they had something of authority and commission besides
their Desks and P^lpits, when some of them were not only in Ecclesiastic
Commissions, but assessors on Benches of civil Judicature; for which as they
might well have leisure enough, without neglecting their spiritual employment,
so I believe they might be as able to serve their Country and their neighbors
in that way, as a great many Justices of latter edition, especially so far as
to preserve the honor of the Church and true Religion from suffering any
detriment in any County. It is evident that in all times since England was
Christian, no Courts of Justice were ever had without some Divines at them and
in them; our Forefathers always judging it to be of no less concernment to
preserve Religion in authority, and Churchmen in conspicuity, than to preserve
their Estates, civil Peace and Life's.

Beyond this, how great a luster (I beseech you) was added by the piety and
generosity of the English-Nation to all the Clergy, when some of the Bishops
were taken into the Privy Counsel of the Princes, when all the Bishops had the
places and privileges of Peers in Parliament, having temporal Baronies; yea
when the whole Clergy in their Representees had place and power in Convocation,
both to consult of all things Ecclesiastical, and to give of their own
Spiritual Estates a free-will-offering to the public Treasury? These and such
like marks of public conspicuity looked indeed like the beams of honor upon
the Clergy, making their faces to shine before the common people. This posture
of the Clergy was manly, generous, heroic, becoming the Honor and Piety of the
Nation, worthy of the munificence of Christian Princes, of the Devotion of
Christian Parlaments, of the Learning and Merit of so excellent a Clergy and
Christian Ministry as England enjoyed; which (of all professions) in any Nation
should be least Eclipsed, and most illustrated with the tokens of public
respect, because no men have to encounter with so many Devils of disdain and
Spirits of opposition in private breasts, as good Ministers have, if they will
be friends to men's souls, and foes to their sins.

Now ( poor wretches) wherein are any of us, as Ministers of the Gospel,
considerable, for any public remarques of respect and honor either to our
persons or callings? Are we not even ashamed of our selves and one another,
when we see the nakedness to which the justice of God, by our own sin and
folly, has exposed us and our profession? Not only all Bishops, under whose
wings Presbyters were wont to be best sheltred, but even Presbyters, yea
Presbytery it self, and all sorts of Preachers or Ministers whatsoever, are
miserably disputed and despised by those many- faced parties in Religion which
have been gendred of late in England, while people have looked upon that
ring-streaked, py-bald and party-colored Ministry which has been set before
them, vastly different from that Candor, Beauty and Uniformity, which
heretofore was both in Shepherds and their several flocks, agreeable to that
Primitive pattern, which never had a Christian Congregation without an
appointed Minister, nor a Minister without due Ordination, nor Ordination
without a Bishop, nor a Bishop without great honor and respect among all good
Christians: The Bishops of the Church being, as St. Jerome expounds that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 45.16^
those children of the Church which are prophesied to be made Princes in all
Lands under the Gospel, and in the Government of Jesus Christ.

All these united together in an holy and happy correspondency kept up
Christian Religion, its Doctrine, Ministry and Discipline, to some height and
eminency; which is now fallen here in England to a very poor and pitiful, a
plebeian and precarious, yea in many to a Parasiticall posture, not daring to
discommend what they dislike, nor to own what they desire, nor to desire what
they approve, nor to complain of what they feel pressing and pinching them:
yea some are such Cossets and Tantanies, that they congratulate their
Oppressors, and flatter their Destroyers, calling that a State of precious
Liberty, which is indeed no better than a tamer slavery; boasting in their
shame, and triumphing in the ruins and disparagings, as of their profession,
so of the true Christian and Reformed Religion, which cannot but be darkened
when the Clergy is Eclipsed, as now it is in England, where not any one
Minister, great or small, can keep himself in any tolerable esteem with all
parties, no nor avoid the contempts and reproaches cast from some hand or other
on him: let his worth be what it will, for Learning and Integrity, for Piety
and Pains, yet he wants not those friends to Reformation that seek to depresse
him, and would heartily joy in his utter ruin.

Some poor Ministers may (possibly) now shroud themselves here and there under
some particular shelter of some civil and less supercilious patron, or some
more sober and good-natured people: but, to speak the truth, none of them have
any proper Sanctuary, or any meet refuge among themselves, where they may
equally expect protection for their Rights, Persons and Profession, as
Ministers of the Church, or as men in holy orders. How many with scorn
disallow and disavow any such Church or Orders as the best Ministers pretend?
nor do they that are first Antiepiscopal, and then Antiministerial, think that
there is any thing of right due to any of them besides poverty and contempt.
Yet to such ports (many times) most Ministers put in, when tossed to and fro in
the tempest of popular contests, forced thus to run themselves a- ground
sometimes, to avoid utter Shipwreck: many have given over their Livings, to
enjoy their Liberties, and to preserve a capacity either to get another, or by
occasional preaching to get their bread. Ecclesiastical Courts we have none,
nor any considerable or competent Judges of our own Cloth and Calling. To
Convocations or Synods* we are never called, which I conceive might be as
useful and necessary for the religious interests of the Nation, as Parlaments
are for the secular and civil; out of which the Clergy are wholly excluded,
Bishops being ejected out of the House of Peers, where they sat so many
hundreds of years, yea, ever since there was such a great Council in the
Nation, and long before there was any House of Commons. Neither Presbyterian
nor Independent Ministers are admittable, (however they have either renounced
their Clericall Order, or Metamorphosed themselves both in apparel and in
principles to a Laick form.) Other men, though they ordinarily preach, yet may
be chosen as Members of the House of Commons, and sit there; only professed
Preachers, though not in Orders, may not. So that in neither House the Clergy
or Ministry (now) have any other Proxyes, Deputies, Representees or Patrons,
than such as the meanest Mechanics or Tradesmen have, no nor so much; for
these may have of their own Art and Calling there, to assert their Rights,
which Ministers have not, as any spiritual Corporation or Fraternity, not so
much as the meanest Burgess Town or civil Corporation. Nothing is left the
Clergy but a Lay-Committee for Religion; which may in time be as great an
injury and a grievance to the true Religion, as any they sit to inquire of;
while all the Concernments of the Church, all matters Ecclesiastic, all the
Doctrine and manners of the Clergy, all that concerns the Preservation or
Reformation of Religion, all disputes and determination of controversies, yea
and of cases of Conscience, all settling and asserting of true Doctrine, all
confutation of dangerous errors, all Antidotes against the poisons and
infections of Religion, all direction for the decency of Gods public worship,
for administration of holy Mysteries, for Ordination of Ministers, for
execution of Church Order and Discipline, all the Liberties and Livelihoods of
Ministers, must be wholly left either to the Learning, Religion and Discretion
of some plain Country Gentlemen, who (God knows) are most-what but very
superficially studied in these cases, being better skilled in hawks and hounds,
in their oves and boves, than in the deep studies or points of Divinity; nay
it is well with many of them if they have not forgot their first Catechize and
principles of Religion: or else the Clergies concernments must fall under the
judgment of Lawyers, who finding no worldly profit to come by their Pleadings
for Religion, do not much mind them, or enable themselves for them: or they
must be exposed to the piety of Physicians, which was never thought very
intense, nor much in the Rode of their practice: or the cases of Ministers must
fall under the tender-heartednesse of Soldiers, who are more skilled in Swords
than Books, in Military than Ecclesiastical Discipline; men of blood, as
David himself, are not fit to build Temples or Churches, as God tells him: or at
last the affairs of Ministers must be referred either to the formal gravity
of some solemn Citizens, whose Shops and Counting-houses have been their most
constant and profitable studies; or to the pragmatick activity of some
confident Mechanics, who whetting each other by their disputes and janglings,
are every where ambitious to be as thorns in the flesh and goades in the sides
of poor Ministers, left they should be lifted up above measure. To the mercy of
some of which sharp censors had the Ministers of England been (sometime) left,
they had not left one Minister in his Living, nor one Church- Living in England
for a Minister. But God then hampered them in their strange Vagaries,
preserving still some Remains of this Church and its Clergy from being wholly
left like Sodom and Gomorrah.

And indeed, who almost is there of any profession never so sober, that
ingenuously now or at any time sympathizeth with either Scholars or Ministers?
who is there that by a native (as St. Phil. 2.20.
Paul says) and genuine affection cares for their affairs? All seek their
own Profit, Honor, Pleasure. Any of them may invade the place and office of a
Minister, if they list. Few are scrupulous to pinch or deprive Ministers of
their profits: none expects any great good from them, but rather unwelcome
reproves and censures, according as every Minister is either severe, or
supercilious and choleric, setting up his small Tribunal, and exercising his
Discipline as he fancies best, scaring silly men and women sometime with the
thunderbolts of his Excommunications, Examinations and Suspensions; that
generally all people are jealous of Ministers peartnesse and ambition, which
aim to rule them with a Rod of Iron, when they have but the Scepter of a Reed
in their hand.

Hence is it that most Gentlemen, Noblemen, Yeomen and Artizans, not only do
not much care for Ministers that are weighty and steady, but they generally
look asquint on them, and are afraid of them, as their Tetricall Reprovers and
Moroser Monitors. In all respects all men are now tempted to despise them, as
made every way inferior to all sorts of men, of small gains and uncertain
Estates, of no publik power, honor or influence; not worthy to be adopted to
any friendship, nor to be feared for any distance and enmity; persons most
safely to be injured of any men, having nothing to revenge or right themselves
with but their sad looks and sharp tongues a generation of men rather filled
as with wind, and swollen with their own airy speculations, than any way
considerable for solid sufficiency and useful worth: yea, by very many and
most illiterate persons, all Ministers are esteemed no other than their
Leeches, Hangby's and Dependants, whom grudgingly they entertain rather out of
formality than conscience, out of policy more than piety. Persons of some
literature and ingenuous breeding have (many times) secret emulations and
rivalries against their Ministers, judging themselves not only the better men
in all other respects, but the better Scholars too, as it often falls out now; so
that they think it time lost to hear their Ministers preach, because they find
them do it with little study or dexterity, and with less Authority.

The meanest, poorest and plainest sort of people expect neither much good nor
hurt by any Minister, whom they see every where reduced to such a tenuity and
minority, that there is no spark of Majesty, or beam of Magistracy among them,
since the ancient and honorable Chairs of the Bishops of England have been
turned into Joint-stools, and their Jurisdictions or Courts, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, resolved into Lay-Committees. This blessing has the
Clergy of England gained, since Ministers affected to ride on Scotch saddles
and Galloway-Naggs; which was once made an Article of accusation against Bishop
Farrar, in Queen Elizabeth's third year, as a diminishing of his Episcopal
dignity.

Thus desolate, dejected and despised is the condition of the Clergy now in
England, both in storms and in calms, ever since they have been beaten from,
and denied Anchorage in, the fair Haven of Episcopacy, which ever was and ever
will be the safest and best harbor, both for Religion, this Church and its
Clergy. For no men will regard those Ministers who help to make themselves
undervalued: Who will care to provide for or protect them, that cast off so
fair a portion of Estate, and noble a proportion of honor, as the Laws of this
Land had given them under the Episcopal covering? Whither now shall poor
Ministers fly, unless they fly from their despised and distressed calling to
some more easy, quiet and beneficial Mechanic profession; unless they
renounce their former Orders, and take up a new standing, either upon their own
tip-toes, or some Molehill which the Ants of the people have cast up? neither
of which stations is either firm or comely.

The vulgar favor is too flat, dull and shallow, for any man of Learning,
Worth and Wisdom to lanch into; he will presently be a-ground: for popular
respect rises to no higher a pitch than they see men have some public
influence of favor, estate or power. Go to the Palaces of such as are Princes,
and think themselves great persons, their Courts and Families are commonly full
of deep and rough, rapid and dangerous motions: the courtesy of
country-Justices and true Committee Men is very various, much as the Wind and
Tide are either with or against the poor Clergy.

Where are there then any proper Advocates and Judges, or any competent Censors
and Supports of the Clergy, becoming men of Learning and Worth, beyond the
ordinary rate of most men? Whom have they of their cloth and calling that is in
any eminency of Place, Power or Honor, who might by their favor defend a poor
Minister as with a shield, so as worthy Bishops did? without whom the Ministry
in England may (I think) despair of ever recovering themselves to any great
value or regard, while they are looked upon (even one and all) under a mere
plebeian notion and proletary proportion; permitted indeed to marry, and beget
children, but to servility, poverty and beggary. Few persons of any Worth or
Estate will now either make their sons Ministers, or match their daughters to
them, or contract any alliance or friendship with them: since no Clergymen can
be great, they will not be much valued for being good. Thus has the fall of
Episcopacy, like a great and goodly Oak, crushed all the Under-wood of the
Clergy; which was safe while those defensatives stood in our Druina: nor have
those escaped the brush and crush who were most industrious to fell it. On all
hands the honor of the Clergy is never like to revive in this Nation, till
something like primitive and authoritative Episcopacy be either replanted or
restored; the spirit of the Nation being such, that it cannot be governed but
by those that have some public eminency and real luster upon them, either as
to military power, or civil honor, or religious presidency, set off with the
ampleness of some estate, and the authority of some fitting jurisdiction. As
Augustus said to the Egyptians when they desired him to visit their God Apis, I
worship Gods, not Oxen; Deos, non Boves, veneror.
so do the most people of Engl. in their hearts reply to all Presbyterian and
Independent Ministers, who seek to win them to worship their ways, We were
wonted to venerate grave and honorable Bishops, not every petty Presbyter or
Preacher, as our chief Church Governors, according to the custom and manner of
all good Christians in all ancient Churches, and in this of England, ever since
Joseph of Arimathaea or Simon Zelotes converted us, ever since K. Lucius was
baptized, Britannica primogenita Ecclesia.
and the British Church had the honor of Primogeniture to any National Church
in the World; ever since either Palladius in Scotland, or Patricius in Ireland,
or the latter Austin in England, by the mission and commission of the devout
Gregory the Great, either restored or planted Christian Religion and Bishops in
England; the shortest of which Terms or Epoches is now above a thousand years:
In all which time England has been famous for nothing so much as for the great
regard this Nation had (til of late years) both to Christian Religion and to
the Clergy, which never til now were made to live without the crowns and
coronets of their worthy Bishops in every Diocese, which were the coverings of
power and honor upon the heads of all the Clergy; to whom the access of a poor
Minister was short and easy, his hearing speedy, his trial legal and rational,
his dispatch without delays, his dismission fatherly, and his submission
filial and comely: insomuch that peaceable and good Ministers were never more
blessed, than when they had the sight of their worthy Bishop or Diocesan, who did
not only as a good Shepherd oversee and rule them, but took care to feed and
defend them, with Order, Plenty, Peace and public Honor; blessings of so
great price in our mortal pilgrimage, that they had need be very precious
Liberties indeed that are to be purchased by parting with them, or exchanging
them for the dry Martyrdoms of Poverty, Contempt and daily Confusion.

CHAP. XXII.
A fourth plea for Episcopacy, from their true Piety and orderly Policy.
IN the last place, I do with the more courage and confidence recommend the
cause of Venerable Episcopacy to my honored Countrymen, because no Nation or
Church under heaven ever had more ample and constant experiences of that
excellent worth which has been in their Bishops, or of that excellent use
which has ever been made of a regular Episcopacy, both in respect of true
Piety and Orderly Policy.

I know it will at first dash with full mouth be here replied, how many Bishops
have been superstitious, sottish, luxurious, tyrannous persecutors, and what
not? especially before the Reformation, till their wings were so clipped that
they could not be so bad as they would; yet some of them were bad enough.

My answer is, I do not undertake to justify every thing that every Bishop
has done in any Age, late or long since: though I am charitably modest to
palliate the shame or uncomliness of my Fathers, yet I am no Mercenary Orator
or veneall Advocate to plead for their enormities, which are in no men less
tolerable or expiable. There were (no doubt) among Bishops, as well as other
men of all sorts, some weak, some wicked; as Ezekiels figs, some very good,
some very bad: yet take them in the general view and aspect, even in the
darkest times, I am sure they were in England ever esteemed and employed both
in Church and State, as Primores Regni, men of the greatest abilities and best
repute for Learning, Wisdom, Counsel, Piety, Charity and Hospitality in all
the Nation; nor were many of them in those times inferior by birth and
breeding to the greatest Noblemen in the Land. I do not censoriously rifle men's
personal or private actions, but I consider their public influence and
aspect: It suffices to my design, if I demonstrate by induction of many
particulars, that Episcopacy is no enemy to Piety, no way prejudicial to
Church or State, yea a maine pillar to support the welfare of both. Many
Bishops may have been bad, yet is Episcopacy good; as many Priests of old were,
like Elies Sons, vile men, yet was the Priesthood Honorable and Sacred: many
Judges and Justices may be base and corrupt, yet is Judicature good; many
Magistrates unworthy, yet is Magistracy an excellent and necessary Ordinance of
God. He that should sift all the Presbyters or Ministers of any sort that have
been, or now are, even the greatest zealots against Bishops and Episcopacy, I
believe he would find among them dross enough; yet must not the Office of
Presbytery, or the Function of the Ministry, be cast off or abhorred. He that
shall examine by right Reason, Religion, Conscience and Honor, what some
Princes, yea some Parlaments, have been, and done, as to the persons of men,
will find they have been neither Gods, nor Angels, nor Saints, nor Saviors
always, but poor sinful men, of common passions and infirmities; yet, is the
honor and use of Sovereign power in Princes, and supreme Counsel in full and
free Parlaments, of admirable concern to the public good.

So is it in point of Episcopacy; notwithstanding that many Bishops were but
men, yet some, yea many, nay I hope the most of them (especially since the
Reformation) were as Mortal Angels, Faithful Pastors and Venerable Fathers.
There are upon account reckoned up by Bishop Godwin and others 1479. Bishops in
England and Wales, for above 1100. years; of which time some Histories
remain, though Bishops were long before; but of these there are some Records
both before and since the Reformation. Who will wonder that in so great an
harvest, in so large a field, there be found some light, some empty, some
blasted ears?

This is certain, that till these last tempestuous times, Bishops in England
had given so ample and constant experiments of their Prudence, Piety, Worth and
Usefulness in all Ages and States, for Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, that
they did abundantly conciliate and conserve those great measures of Love,
Respect, Honor and Estate, both public and private, which their Persons and
Function by Law enjoyed: Insomuch that as there were no where to be found
better Bishops, so no where had they better entertainment, before and since the
Reformation, while they enjoyed the favor of Princes and the love of
Parlaments; who never heretofore listened to the plebeian envy or petulancy of
those who sometime petitioned and prated against Bishops and Episcopacy, as
Diotrephes did against St. John. The Wisdom, Gravity, Piety and Honor of this
Nation never thought it worthy of them to overthrow so Venerable, so Useful,
so Ancient, so Catholic, so Honorable an Order, merely to gratify the
peevishness, or passion, or revenge, or discontent, or ambition, or envy of
inferior people or inferior Presbyters; who were at their best every way,
when kept in compass by wise Bishops.

No men heretofore, never so much fly-blown with faction, could so far prevail
by their insinuations and agitations, as to have any Vote passed in England
against Episcopacy: all men of Learning, Gravity and Prudence, for these
thousand years and more, in England, (as in all Christian States) owned and
highly reverenced, as Episcopacy in general, so good Bishops, as the chief
Conduits that had conveyed to them, their Fore-father and their Children, all
Christian Ministry and Ministrations, all Christian Mysteries and Comforts, yea
Christianity and Christ himself. Which Spiritual, Divine, Eternal and
Inestimable blessings, this, as other Nations and Churches, ever owed, as
chiefly to Gods mercy, so instrumentally to the hands of Bishops, by whose
Ministry they were taught, by whose Authority they had many other Ministers
duly ordained and sent into the harvest, when it was great, and required many
Laborers. These in their order assisted, as Presbyters, their respective
Bishops in Teaching and Governing the Church; but without or against their
Bishops they never acted, upon any account of Parochial or Congregationall
pretentions of Ministers Equality, or peoples Immunity and Liberty. Alas, what
ground was there for either of these pretenders in England, Vid. Godwin. Epis.
Ang in Honorio.
when there were no Parishes divided (as now they are) till the year of Christ
634. when Honorius an Archbishop of Canterbury began that way, for the more
easy and orderly carrying on of Religion among the Country People, who had now
generally received the Christian faith and Baptism? Till then the Pagani or
Country People either repaired to their Bishops and his Clergy in the Cities
and chief Towns where they resided, or they occasionally attended their
Bishops in their visitations of them, or such Presbyters as were sent out by
the Bishops to officiate among them. There was then no fancy, nor many hundred
years after, of any petty Churches, either of Associated Presbyters or
Independent people, without, yea against, the Episcopal Ordination, Inspection
and Jurisdiction: still Bishops and Episcopacy were preserved and honored in
England.

And this not only by private persons of all ranks and qualities who were
considerable for their honesty or Devotion, but by our most admired Princes,
our noblest Peers, our wisest Parlaments, who did ever keep up the use and
honor of Episcopacy in England: nor did they ever disdain to have Bishops
their Assessors and Assistants in Parlaments, esteeming it a rustic and
plebeian temper, to admit men to public Counsel and Honors for their Valor
and Estates, and not for their Learning and Religion; by which all worthy
Bishops did as much ennoble themselves in all wise men's esteem (if they wanted
that of blood and descent, which many of them had) as those who most swelled in
the conceit of their great Ancestors, who left them great noble Estates, but
many times ignoble minds, little wits, and less honesty or virtue: which has
been the fate of some who have most puffed against Episcopacy, and despised
those Bishops who were in all Moral, Rational, Religious and real
Excellencies not their equals, but far their betters.

What Prince was ever more sage in her Counsel, or more solemn in her
Government, more advised in her favors and frowns, than our Augusta, Queen
Elizabeth? what Sovereign ever more reconciled Empire and Liberty, or held the
balances of Justice more impartially and more prosperously between all
interests and degrees of men, both in Church and State, between Clergy and
Laity, Nobility and Communalty, for near half an hundred years? In all which
time she had no greater blemish, than her yielding sometime too much to the
sacrilegious importunities of begging Courtiers, who terribly fleeced, and
sometimes flayed, the Estates of some Bishoprics in England and Wales; not so
much out of her malice or covetousness, as out of her mistaken munificence. For
never any Prince did more really, religiously and constantly honor her Bishops
as Fathers in God: one of whom She had for her Godfather, namely Archbishop
Cranmer; another (I think it was Archbishop Whitgift) she called her black
Husband; most-what preferring such men to be Bishops as were worthiest of her
favor, fittest for Gods, the Churches, and her Majesty's service. Did this
wise Princess ever listen to the insinuations, pretentions, petitions and
charms of those men in her days, who so much importuned and molested the
public peace and patience by their despite against Episcopacy, and their
scurrility against Bishops? Some of them (possibly) might be well-meaning men;
but I take the best of them to have been popular and superstitious in this
point, others very pragmatick and juvenile: none of them were any great
Politicians, while they would either have no Church Government with any
Eminency, or wholly reduce it to such a parity as they designed for their
ambitions, which would have made themselves and all the Clergy (as at this day)
more divided and despicable, than ever they could have been under Bishops,
though Bishops had had no more power than an High-Constable, or a
Country-Justice. Besides this, the simplicity of those zealous men in those
days who most maligned Episcopacy, and disparaged the Church of England,
(having been terribly scared by some Popish Bishops in Queen Mary's days,
whose sad pictures still frighted them in the Book of Martyrs,) did then by
their needless Divisions, Distractions, Oppositions and Separations, greatly
advance the Papal interests, Cambdens Elizabeth on Dr. Whitgift: Dum Praesidum
conniventia and Novatorum pertinacia Schismata oriebantur; plaudentibus interim
Pontificiis, multosque in suas parts pertrahentibus, quasi nulla esset
Ecclesiae Anglicanae unitas, nulla uniformitas.
as learned Mr. Cambden wisely observes, writing of the contests between
Archbishop Whitgift and Mr. Cartwright with his Associates; whose unhappy
Successors could (we see) never carry on their designs now at last, but with
the infinite troubles and miseries of this Church and State; by which they have
advanced their Presbytery in England so little, so not at all, that never any
men got so little, or lost so much, by so dear a bargain, which cost not only
much money, but much blood, many lives, many souls and many sins.

After this renowned Queen had left Episcopacy not only standing, but fixed
and flourishing in England, to the content and happiness of the most and best
of her Subjects, in Court and Country, in Parlaments and out of them, King
James succeeded as supreme Governor in Church and State.

What Christian King was ever crowned with more learning, and a larger heart in
all Knowledge, Divine and Humane, Ecclesiastical and Civil? This Prince had
been nursed with the milk of Presbytery, he had been long dipped and dyed in
Presbytery; if any, sure this King might have seen, at least fancied, the
beauty that Presbytery added either to the Reformed Religion, or the Imperial
purple: His education by Buchanan, and his castigations by Mr. Knox and others,
might in all probability have much devoted him to Presbytery, and prejudiced
him against Episcopacy; of which I believe he seldomer heard one good word,
than he did Faction, Treason and Rebellion, from those warmer Presbyters, who,
as his swadling-clouts, so straightly wrapped him up in his minority, that he
could hardly fetch his breath with freedom, yea, and in his majority too, when
they made themselves as his chains and fetters, to bind Princes, as all men, to
their good behavior. Yet notwithstanding these Presbyterian Prepossessions for
so many years, did not this great Monarch heartily rejoice, when he came to a
Church handsomely and honorably governed by learned, grave, orderly and
venerable Bishops? (the only Catholic Government of all Churches, of which he
had read so much, and so much good in the Ecclesiastical Histories, and nothing
of any other) Was it not an infinite content to him, to see himself freed from
the vexatious Thistles and provoking Thorns of some Presbyterians in Scotland,
(for others were grave and modest men) that he might enjoy the fair and sweet
Roses of Sharon, such Bishops as had ever been the chiefest flowers in the
Garden of Christ's Church? Was he ever satisfied, until he had reduced the Kirk
of Scotland from some Presbyterian extravagancies, to such Episcopal Order and
Constancy as was indeed very excellent, and nearest to the primitive pattern of
paternall Presidency, fraternal Assistance and filial Submission? (But few
people are ever so happy as to know and value their own happiness.)

When this great work was done, of restoring Episcopacy to so ancient a Church
as Scotland was, and confirming it in England, contrary to the vain hopes,
childish presumptions, and self- flatteries of some popular men, who could
never with reason expect that so learned and wise a Prince as K. James would
exchange the Ark of God for Dagon, Episcopacy for Presbytery; did he not as
seriously triumph in the blessed alteration of his Ecclesiastical Station, as
he did to remove his habitation from, and extend his dominion beyond, that
Hyperborean horror of Scotland, to this Southern sweetness and amaenity of
England?

These things thus well settled as to the Order and Honor of the Church of
Christ in his Dominions, although this King were a Prince of most profuse,
Orat. pro D^iot. Rege.
and indeed prodigious, munificence, (thinking no Epithet became a King less
(as Tully says of Deiotarus) than that of homo frugi, thrifty or illiberall)
yet did he never incline to devour the Churches patrimony, to keep the
Episcopal Seats vacant, that he might enjoy the Revenues. He once refused the
offer of Cathedral Lands, Bishop Andrews.
which some had projected as very feisable, because (as a grave Bishop then
suggested to him) God was twice every day publicly and solemnly worshipped in
every Cathedral, and his Majesty there publicly prayed for in his greatest
necessities: whatever hunger seized his royal appetite in the ((...)) sharpest
famine of his Exchequer, yet he never, waking or sleeping, thought of
Confiscating Church Lands, or making Bishops to be superstitious, or
superfluous in the Church, because his condition was necessitious. No, whatever
failings as a man that Prince had, yet, as a King and a Christian, he had this
justice and generosity, to preserve the honor of Bishops, and the Rights of the
Clergy. Indeed, as he was the greatest Scholar of a King in all the world, so
he was as great a patron of good Scholars as the world had. Nor will those that
have most quarrelled the Memory and Reign of King James, easily mend the
condition of Church or State; which he left in Peace, Plenty and Safety. Nor
was it so much policy or reason of State, as strength of true Reason, and the
prevalencies of true Religion, which so counterbiassed that Kings judgment
against Presbytery, as a partial popular novelty, or confirmed him in
Episcopacy, as an Apostolic and Catholic Antiquity; between which he thought
there was no more compare as to Church Government, than there is between the
Majesty of goodly Lions and the subtilty of little Foxes.

After this great pattern of King James, (whose learned arguments were more
prevalent than his arms in Religion) followed his unfortunate Son, the last
King, who amidst all his reproaches and improsperities cannot be denied this
Honor, than he seemed not inferior to any King that ever lived in his regard
to the Churches ancient Order, Estate and Honor: although few Princes ever
sustained greater difficulties and necessities as to his Estate, yet never any
had greater Antipathies against what he thought Sacrilege, nor a less longing
to taste of the Priests portion; which he esteemed sacred, because it was Gods,
dedicated to him, and so vested in him both by Law and Conscience, by true
Divinity and just Humanity, that he judged no power on earth could, without
manifest sin and robbery, alienate it from God and his Church. This made him so
zealous not only to preserve Bishops, upon his Fathers principles, but their
Rights and Estates also, because he thought them to be Gods and his Churches;
to maintain whose right he remembered himself to have sworn in the first place
at his Coronation, and so was no less bound to them than to the rest of the
people, as to their civil Properties, Laws and Privileges. Certainly, however
some have denied this King the Title of Pater Patriae, yet he seems to have
deserved that of Filius Ecclesiae, both Alumnus and Patronus, of which he
appeared more ambitious than of any earthly glory, or Kingdom, or Life.

For whence, I beseech you before God, Angels and Men, do you think arose that
his Princely and Christian pertinacy, even to the death, in the point of
Episcopacy and Church Lands? Henry the Fourth of France could change the whole
scene of his Religion from the Reformed to the Roman, merely upon reasons of
State, dispensing with conscience to preserve his Kingdom and his short-lived
greatness; yet is he cried up for Henry le Grand: how much greater is that
King to be esteemed, whose conscientious constancy (which some counted
obstinacy) lessened him to nothing, when to the very last he maintained those
sharp Agonies, Contests and Disputes he had as to the interests of the Church
and Episcopacy, which he counted his greatest concerns as to Religion, Justice
and Honor? How did he encounter Mr. Henderson, Mr. Marshall, and others, upon
this point chiefly? how indeed did he confound them by Scripturall grounds, by
Ecclesiastical precedents, by Catholic consent, by the sacred, venerable and
unanswerable custom of all Churches till his days? What answers, what offers
of moderation and conciliation did he make as to this point of
Church Government, to the admiration, yea astonishment of his Antagonists?
Although as to Military successes and Civil concessions, he yielded much to an
over- powering power; yet as to this rock of Ecclesiastical affairs, like the
Ark upon mountains of Ararat, where he rested there he fixed, there he
continued rooted, unmovable, invincible, choosing rather to be dashed in pieces
than to renounce his principles, or to move contrary to those conscientious
persuasions, for which he thought he had such clear and valid grounds, such
ancient prescriptions, such constant presumptions, that he thought nothing in
Religion could be safe or certain, if in this point of Church Government the
Catholic Church were not to be believed or imitated in Episcopacy.

Good God! whence should it be that a Prince so knowing, so sensible of his
dangers, when he saw the Presbyterian proposalls, power and interests so
pressing upon him, (for Independency, that little stone, was not then cut out
of the Mountains) whence had so great a restivenesse and obstinacy seized upon
so great a Prince, in a posture of so great storms and danger? which would in
all likelihood at first have been appeased, if he would have cast this Jonas,
Episcopacy, overboard, and swallowed the Church Lands into the Sea of the
Exchequer. He that could, as to civil and Regal concernments, much deny
himself, why should he choose, upon the Churches account, to suffer so long a
war, so many wounds, so tedious prisons, so sad Tragedies living and dying? For
however differences at last were inflamed upon other accounts in the procedure
of the war (which necessarily multiplies offenses on the conquered party) yet
certainly the maine propose and motion, first of the Scots, and then of the
English Presbyterians, was this, Destroy the Temples of Episcopacy, and set up
the Synagogues of Presbytery. Which any politic Prince would speedily have
done, at least when he saw so terrible a tempest in present pressing upon him,
yea and prevailing against him. What Prince was ever so in love with any
Bishops or any Churchmen, as to love them better then himself? which in Reason
he could not, and in Religion he ought not to do, nor would certainly have done
so far as he did, if he had not had such persuasions deeply rooted in his
conscience, of a justice, gratitude and duty he owed to God, to his Savior,
and to the Church, more than to the persons of a few Clergymen; which he
solemnly avowed, as in Gods presence, to Mr. Marshall of Finchfield in Essex,
after a long conference at Newcastle, as I take it, had with him touching
Episcopacy, (as Mr. Marshall himself soon after told me) assuring him, and
conjuring him to assure others, of his Majesty's uprightness and resolvednesse
in this point of Episcopacy, as to matter of Conscience, and not of State or
Policy: else, in point of secular advantages, his own peace and preservation,
the public tranquillity, the increase of his revenue by the Confiscation of
Bishops and Cathedral-Lands, would have amounted to much more benefit than ever
he or his could expect from a few Bishops, Deans and Prebends.

Thus riveted was the Kings Conscience to Episcopacy, unable, upon any terms,
till convinced not by Arms but Arguments, to consent to the utter extirpation
of it; although he offered and condescended to many moderations, which were
from him as much in vain, (for nothing but root and branch would serve) as all
the Extirpators Allegations to his Majesty against Episcopacy, to prove it not
to have been the Primitive, Catholic and Apostolic Government of the Church,
were in vain: for indeed nothing was produced new; all were trivial and
threadbare arguments, which had been answered ten times by learned men in this
Church, and had for ever silenced all sober and modest men, if they had had so
great regard to the Churches Catholic and constant Testimony, or to the
Scripture-rule and Apostolic pattern, as indeed they should have had.

Besides this insuperable difficulty, fortifying Episcopacy in his Conscience,
his Majesty no doubt had prejudices enough against Presbytery, as to its
novelty, its first violent intrusion, his Fathers vexation, its now armed
obtrusion upon himself, a Sovereign Prince and chief Governor of Church as
well as State: to these were added all the former Troubles and Tragedies in
Scotland, by the scufflings of Presbytery against Episcopacy; besides, he saw
the destroyers of Episcopacy already divided among themselves, neither
Presbytery nor Independency could agree whose the child should be; yea, he
lived to see Presbytery, when it had been set up in the House of God, fallen,
like Dagon, with its hands and head broken off, before the captive Ark of
Episcopacy. Mean while His Majesty, and all the World at home and abroad, saw
the miserable Distractions, Confusions, Luxations and Licentiousness which
brake in daily upon this Church for want of that vigor and authority of
Episcopacy, which had been the great defense, under God, the King and the Laws,
against those foul and filthy inundations.

A state of Church-religion and Reformation which his Majesty saw was at
present, and was ever likely to be, far distant from that which was enjoyed in
England under his Princely Predecessors, and in some part of his own reign,
when England was filled and overflowed with good Christians, good Scholars,
good Presbyters and good Bishops; of which order England ever afforded, and
specially since the Reformation, so many learned and commendable, yea some rare
and admirable instances: Insomuch that this Church had cause to envy none in
the World, ancient or modern, as for other things, so for this, the blessing of
excellent Bishops, as well as orderly Presbyters and sincere Christians.

Indeed no Nation for many Ages (if we may feel the temper of any people by the
pulse of their Parlaments) either had more cause, or seemed to have more
disposition to value, and actually did venerate, its excellent Bishops, than
England did: yea, I have known those Noblemen, Gentlemen, Ministers and other
people, who were, as to some Ceremonies, less satisfied or more scrupulous than
the Church and State was, yet these men how have they commended, how courted,
how almost adored such Bishops as they thought godly and grave, good Preachers
and good Livers, as well as good Governors? But as to the general sense and
vote of the Nation, which was audible and legible in its Laws and Constitutions
for above a thousand years, it ever did it self this honor, and its Clergy
this justice, that no where in any Christian or Reformed Church Bishops were
more ample, more remarkable, more reverenced, more honored, even to the
highest honor of Peerage; yea the Archbishop of Canterbury had place next the
Royal Blood, never diminished or degraded by any Prince, or by any Parliament in
any Age.

Nor is it the least of the Riddles of Providence, how Bishops and Episcopacy,
having so resolute a Prince, and so great a King to be their patron and
protector, should now in England fall under so great diminution, dejection, yea
utter destruction; considering that there never had been worthier Bishops in
any time of the Church, than have been in England this last Century; nor in any
part of that Century were there more excellent Bishops, than were to be found
among them at that very time when all their Palaces, with Episcopacy, were
pulled down about their ears, and the best of them buried in the dust and
rubbidge: by which some men hope that the Names, Merits and Memories of all
Bishops, and the ancient honor of Episcopacy, shall be for ever smothered in
obscurity or obloquie, in scorn or oblivion; whose Resurrection, Reputation and
Eternity, as to their deserved honor* and to the public honor of this Church
and Nation ever since it was Christian, and ceased to be either barbarous or
unbelieving, I do here endeavor; which if I cannot recover to life, ^et I have
brought these pounds of Spice and sweet Odours for the Enterrement, and leave a
fair Inscription or Epitaph upon the Gravestone or Monument of Episcopacy, if
it must be ever buried in England: an Office of Piety in a Son to his Fathers,
being my self a Person every way as free from suspicion of flattery or
partiality, as can well be found, never either injured or obliged by any
Bishop, as to any public advantages, further than my Ordination as a Minister;
which I count a great and holy Obligation, because by no other hands, I
conceive, I could have lawfully received Holy Orders in the Church of England.

Free therefore from all biassings either for against the Episcopal Order,
which has now no sinister temptations attending it, I do affirm that
Episcopacy could never have fallen into its terrible Fits and Convulsions, into
such excessive and mortal Agonies in a worse time, as to the undeserved ruin
of so many worthy men; nor yet in a better time, as to the eminent worth of
those Bishops, and other Churchmen of their subordination, who might well have
born up the Cause and Honor, as well as the weight of the Contest and Ruin of
Episcopacy. A wise man would wonder how in a full, free and fair hearing,
before competent, complete and impartial Judges, it was possible for Episcopacy
(which was founded and supported by so strong foundations and supports; to
which all Churches, all People, all Presbyters, all Princes, all right Reason,
all due Order, all politic Honor, all Scriptural Patterns and Divine
Precedents gave concurrent ayds, besides the Laws and ancient Customs of this
Church and State) how it should suffer such a rout and reprobation, (instead of
due Reformation where ought was amiss,) when it was able to bring forth such
Armies at that time in England of learned, grave, godly, venerable and
incomparable Clergymen, Bishops and others of their persuasion, which like so
many Heroes and Atlasses were capable to have born up the falling Sky, if it
had not been overcharged with the Sins of the Nation. Doubtless the whole
world did not afford in any National Church more excellent Bishops, or more
able Divines for any Ecclesiastical Convocation, Synod or Council: singly they
were mighty men both of Stature, Virtue and Valor, higher by head and
shoulders than most of the Presbyterian Champions; but socially they had been
invincible, if they had not been encountered with the sword, which regarded not
the greatness of their Learning, or the soundness of their Judgments, or the
gravity of their Ages, or the sanctity of their Lives, but jealous of their
firmness to Episcopacy, presently set up a new Assembly, no way representing,
because not chosen by, the Clergy of England, according to the wonted custom,
in which the Clergy of England had their privileges as well as the Commons of
England, to choose their Deputies, according to Law and the Kings Commission:
yet these were to do the Journey-work of Presbytery as well as they could in
broken times, undertaking to Directorize, to Unliturgize, to Catechize, and to
Disciplinize their Brethren, their Fathers, their Countrymen and their
Sovereign without any contradiction; there being none among them that either
would, or could, or dared to plead the cause of primitive Episcopacy, which had
so resolute a patron, and so many able defenders at that time in England, as
among the inferior Clergy, so among those of the Episcopal Degree.

Among whom we have only to excuse the indiscretions, frailties, defects or
excesses of two or three later Bishops, (who possibly forgot the Counsel of
Phoebus, to use less stimulations, and more restrictions.) Do but consider
with compassion the great temptations of these Bishops, by that favor, place
and power they had, besides their native tempers, which might be too quick and
passionate, also the Scholastic privacy and bluntness of their education, not
having taught them so well to dissemble, at least not to moderate their
passions; take all together, it may be their greatest enemies in their place,
posture and provocations, would not have been much more moderate and calm than
they were.

But let these Bishops pass, who, as the highest trees, have suffered first
and most the battery of the storms raised against Bishops. These few were
abundantly counterpoised by those many other Bishops, both in former and later
days, whose worth and abilities every way were such, that it is hard to find
any of their adversaries in all things equal to them, nor could they have
stood before them in the combat, if no weapons but books and arguments had
been used: certainly some one Bishop had been able to have chased an hundred
Presbyters, these last being seconded by none of the ancients, the first having
all antiquity on his side.

It Is true, I well know, that many of the Presbyterian party were men of very
fleet pace, of voluble tongues, pregnant parts and plausible appearances, which
did very well while they kept their ranks and stations, but yet (under favor)
they did not any of them attain to the first three. There were many pounds,
yea talents difference, between a spruce Lecturer, or a popular Preacher, and a
wel-studied Bishop, whose great Learning and Experience had made him every way
grave and complete: there was as great a distance between some Bishops
sufficiencies, and the ablest Antiepiscopall Presbyterian that ever I knew, as
there was between their honors and revenues. Take them in all latitudes, for
writing, speaking and doing; that I say nothing of their prudentials in
governing, wherein Bishops drove the Chariot tolerably well at all times,
sometimes very well, during a thousand years and more in England and Wales.
But the Presbyterian wisdom and Policy has not only overthrown others, but
themselves too in a few years, together with the unity, order and honor of
this National Church.

Yea, as to that part of a Clergyman, which is not more popular and plausible
than profitable and commendable, when well performed, I mean preaching, no
Presbyterians exceeded the Episcopal Clergy, or some Bishops, in this
particular; if they preached oftener, yet not better; no nor oftener, considering
the Age and infirmities of body which might attend some Bishops. Nothing was
beyond the thunders and lightnings sometime, or the gentle raines and softer
dewes otherwhile, which distilled from the Tongues of Learned, Godly and
Eloquent Bishops. How often have I heard them with equal profit and pleasure?
Such apples of Gold in pictures of silver, such wholesome fruit in fair
dishes, were their sermons, many of which have been printed, and many hundred
more never published. Doubtless none of the Primitive Bishops and Fathers went
beyond ours in England, if we may judge of their Preaching by those short and
most-what plain Homilies or Sermons which we read: Few of which were preached
before great Princes and their Courts, as ours oft^were, whose Court-sermons,
since Queen Elizabeth began to Reign, if they could be collected together, I
doubt not but they would be one of the richest Mines or Magazines of Learning,
Piety, Prudence and Eloquence in the world. For those Sermons, both for the
present Majesty of the Prince, for the curiosity of the Auditory, and for the
abilities of the Orator, were the Quintessence or Spirits of many sermons and
much study, commonly as much beyond ordinary preachments, as oriental pearls
are beyond the Scotch Pallors of those Jewels. Not but that it is the
commendation of ordinary Ministers to preach plainly, yet powerfully, to
ordinary hearers, so as may most profit them. For he is the best Archer, not
who shootes highest or furthest, but nearest and surest as to that mark at
which he is to aim, which in preaching must be the saving of souls, not
pleasing men's ears. Nor did the others preach less honestly or usefully,
because more elaborately, at Court, considering the ((...)) nauseous
wantonness, of most Courtiers, and their curious expectation, who needed as
much as they expected, sermons that savoured, not only of the Lips and Lungs,
but of the heart and head too. For Court-hearers will never get profit unless
the Preacher take pains. And Queen Elizabeth very smartly once said, when she
heard a warm and earnest, but a very plain and easy Country-preacher, who
was brought to preach before her in her progress by some of those Courtiers
who then seemed to favor the Nonconformists, She that had been wonted to drink
strong water rarely distilled and compounded of many excellent spirits, which
were very cordial in lesser quantities, did not well relish any drink that was
very small, though it seemed scalding hot: which is rather a culinary than a
celestial heat in preaching, whose true warmth lies in the weight of the
matter, not in the noise or heat of the speaker.

I am not ignorant that some of our later Bishops fell under great obloquy and
odium among many people, specially the last Archbishop of Canterbury, who being
a man naturally active, quick, rough and choleric enough, less benign and
obliging than was expected from him, had brought upon himself so great a weight
of envy, jealousy and disdain, that there was no standing before it: when once
he was left to stand by himself, he was easily overrun by a multitude, being
but low of stature, of no promising, winning or over-awing presence. As for his
politic or civil Demeanours, upon which account he suffered death, I have
nothing to do with them in this place, both he and his Judges are to be judged
by the Lord.

As to his Religion, I shall afterward express my sense whether he were Popish
or not.

But first I would a little consider that sudden cloud which covered the face
of many of our brightest Bishops at once, confining them to prisons, who were
esteemed persons of great Candor, Prudence and Moderation; yet was their
discretion much called into question, when twelve of them were snared and twice
committed, most of them to the Tower, for a Remonstrance or Protestation which
they made in order to assert their ancient and undoubted privilege, to sit as
Peers in the House of Lords, to which they had by writs been summoned.

Some State-Criticks thought they forgot what became their years, their
wisdom, their dependence, and the distempers of the times. My answer is,
possibly those goodmen might, through discontent and indignation at the vile
and vulgar indignities they suffered, (even a Parliament now sitting, of which
they were Members) pen the form of their intended plea less conveniently;
passion being an ill Counselor or dictator to the wisest men: yet, I believe,
few of their severest censurers would have been more cautious in their
expressions, if they had been under the like tumultuary terrors and
insolences, which, repeated and unremedied, were capable to provoke men of
very meek spirits and mortified passions to speak or write unadvisedly, as
Moses himself did in a case of less personal provocation than at other times
he had given him from the petulancy of people. Nothing scares sober men more
than to be destroyed by vermin, About the year 1375.
as that brave man Simon of Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury, was, whom the
rabble at seven or eight blows hacked in pieces. A valiant man will not cry
out for assistance when he is to encounter with his match; but if many beasts
of the people unprovoked run upon him, he may without cowardice call for
succor where he thinks it may be had. Such was the case of those Bishops at
that time, when they not only fancied, but actually found, promiscuous and
rude heaps of people, not only threatening, but offering indignities to their
persons as well as to their place and function; through whose sides they saw
the malice and insolency of such Riotous Reformers sought to strike at the
whole frame and constitution of the Church of England, which they, as all good
men, had great cause to value more than their lives, if they might lay them
down in an orderly and deliberate way, not in a tumultuary and confused
fashion. Whatever miscarriage those Bishops were guilty of in that particular,
yet I am sure it was somewhat excusable by the greater Misdemeanor of those who
gave them occasion so to complain: Nor does it any way blemish that excellency
which in their more calm and composed actions they did discover, worthy of
themselves and their Predecessors; to whom Erasmus long ago, Sola Anglia
doctos habet Episcopos. Erasm.
in Archbishop Warhams days, gave this commendation, that England of all
Churches had learned Bishops.

I will not go beyond the Reformation of Religion to find worthy Bishops in
England; it may suffice (here) to register some of the well-known names of
them, which possibly the vulgar never heard of, though men of reading and
breeding cannot be ignorant of them. What was more gentle, ingenuous and
honest-hearted than Archbishop Cranmer, whose native facility made him in rough
times less fixed, till he came to be tied to the stake of Martyrdom? where he
took a severe revenge on his inconstancy, by burning his right hand first, but
his sincere, though frail, heart was unburned amidst his ashes. What was more
downright good than Bishop Latimer, who joyed to sacrifice his now decrepit
body upon so holy an account as the Truth of Christ? What was more holy than
Bishop Hooper, or more resolute than Bishop Ridley? What more severely, yea
morosely good than Bishop Farrar? All of them Martyrs for true Religion, by
whose fires it was fully refined from the Roman Idolatry, dross and
superstition. This foundation laid by such gracious and glorious Martyr-
Bishops in England, God was pleased to build a superstructure worthy of it in
other most worthy Bishops, even to our days.

Time would fail me to give every one of them their just Character. It may
suffice to place an Asterisk of honor to some of their names. What man had more
Christian gravity than Archbishop Parker? who had more humble piety than
Archbishop Grindall? who more Christian Candor, Courage and Charity than
Archbishop Whitgift? who overcame his enemies by well-doing and patience,
deservedly using that triumphant Christian Motto, Vincit qui patitur. Who had
more of pious prudence and commendable policy than Archbishop Bancroft, who did
many Ministers good that never thanked him for it? Who had more of an honorable
gravity and all virtues than Archbishop Abbot? to whom I may join his brother
Bishop of Salisbury. All these were as chief of the Fathers, Metropolitanes of
Canterbury, Primates of all England, as to Ecclesiastical Order and
Jurisdiction, according to the ancient pattern of the Church of Christ in all
Ages and places. Nor were the Archbishops of York inferior to them, such as
Sands, Hutton, Matthewes and others; men of great and good spirits, Learned,
Industrious, Hospitable, Charitable; good Preachers, good Livers, and good
Governors.

After these came those other Bishops, who were equal to them in Gifts, Graces
and Episcopal Power, but so far inferior to them in Precedence and some
Jurisdiction, as the good Order and Polity of the Church required. No Age or
History of the Church can show in any one Century a more goodly company of
Bishops, than here I could reckon up. To omit many that were worthy of
honorable remembrance, who had been some of them Confessors and Sufferers,
others constant professors of the true reformed Religion; these I may not
smother in silence without sacrilege, robbing God of his glory, this Church of
its honor, and these Bishops of their deserved praises; most of whose works do
yet speak for them, and loudly upbraid the ingratitude of those that cast dead
flies of indignities upon such Bishops, whose names are as a precious Ointment
poured out.

What was ever more precious, more resplendent in any Church, than Bishop
Jewel, for Learning, for Judgment, for Modesty, for Humility, for all
Christian Gifts and Graces? What one or many Presbyters ever deserved so well
of this Church and the Reformed Religion, as this one Bishop did, whom God used
as a chosen arrow against the face of the enemies of this Church and the
Reformed Religion? What man had more of the Majesty of goodness and Beauty of
holiness than Bishop King? Who was more venerable than Bishop Cooper, though
much molested by factious and unquiet spirits? Who had more ampleness and
compleateness for a good Man, a good Christian, a good Scholar, a good
Preacher, a good Bishop, than Bishop Andrews, a man of an astonishing
excellency both at home and abroad? How shall I sufficiently express the
learned and holy Elegancie of Bishop Lake, whose Sermons are so many rare Gems?
or the holy Industry and modest Piety of Bishop Babington? Or the Nobleness, by
Grace, by Gifts, by Birth and by Life, of Bishop Montacute? How acutely
profound are the Disputes and Decisions of Bishop White? How full of equanimity
and moderation was Bishop Overall? How clear, compendious and exact was Bishop
Davenant? How fragrant and florid are the Writings, as ^^s the Life, of Bishop
Field, whose Labors God did bless with the Dew of Heaven, he long ago
asserting the honor of this Church by an unanswerable Vindication? What can be
more beautiful for Learning, Judgment and Integrity than Bishop Bilson, whose
excellent works if some in England had more studied, they had not so easily
opposed the perpetual Government of the Church, which he proves to be
Episcopacy? Was there any man more Saintly than Bishop Felton, who had been a
good Patron to some Ministers that since have helped to destroy his Order? What
could be more devout and thankful to God than Bishop Carleton, who has erected
a fair pillar of Gratitude for the remembrance of Gods mercies to this Church
and State? How commendable for ever will the learned Industry of Bishop Godwin
appear to impartial Posterity, who has with equal fidelity, diligence and
eloquence preserved the History of our English Bishops for above a thousand
years from oblivion? Nothing was beyond the courageous and conscientious
freedom of Bishop Sinhouse, whose eloquent tongue and honest heart were capable
to overawe a Court, and to make Courtiers modest. Add to all these the famous
Bishop Hall, who had in him all that was desirable in an excellent Bishop, for
Learning, Meekness, Patience, Peaceableness: his eloquence both in speaking and
writing was transcendent, yet the least of his excellencies. Lest any rust or
soil should grow upon so great graces and abilities, he was (among other
Bishops) polished by the Grindstones and roughness of these times; yea, there
wanted not to his dying day some men, who gave him a greater luster by their
insolences. Who had ever more of the Dove and less of the Serpent then Bishop
Potter, a man severely good, and conscienciously, not factiously, scrupulous in
some things, but not as to Episcopacy? What shall I speak of the Meekness and
Tender-heartedness of Bishop West field, who frequently softened his auditors
hearts, not only with his excellent Sermons, but his unaffected tears? yet was
he forced among other Bishops to lie down in sorrow, though no doubt he now
reaps in joy. Nothing was more mild, modest and humble, yet learned, eloquent
and honest, than Bishop Winniffe. I conclude this goodly Regiment of
Church-colonels, of Ecclesiastical Rulers, of venerable Bishops, with Bishop
Prideaux, who was a Miscellany or Encyclopaedy of all Learning: after he had by
many years diligence honored the Divinity-professors Chair, and the University
of Oxford, together with the Nation, by his vast pains, and was deservedly made
a Bishop, (though somewhat too late) he was at last so squeezed to nothing by
the iron hand of our times, that he had nothing left to maintain himself and
his children, See Bishop Prideaux his last Legacy.
but dying bequeathed them Piety and Poverty as their Legacy.

May we not cry out, as he did of old, Bone Deus, etc. Blessed God, to what
times have thou reserved us? what terrors have thou showed us? If it be thus
done in the fruitful, sound and green trees, what will be done with those that
are hollow, barren and rotten, dry, twice dead, and pulled up by the roots?

All these Heroes of Learning and Religion, these renowned Bishops, the honor
of Episcopacy, the glory of this Church, the just boasting of this Nation,
(together with many others) have, some long since, some of late, dyed in the
Lord, and are at rest from the sore Labor and travells they in the evening of
their lives met with under the Sun. Many of them were exhausted, distressed,
despised, destroyed, as to all worldly enjoyments; yet not miserable, not so
afflicted as to be forsaken of God, or despairing of Gods mercies, though they
found little from man.

Nor is the English world, heretofore so full, so famous, so flourishing with
rare Bishops, as yet so drained, but there are some such left as are worthy to
bring on the Rear, and close up this gallant Troop of gowned Generals and
mitred Commanders. If I might without offense to the Modesty and Gravity of
such Bishops as are yet living and best known to me, I would tell the erring
and ungrateful Age, that, as it was said of Gonsalvo, whom Guicciardine calls
the great Captain, an Age is scarce able to breed or match such a Scholar,
such a Writer, such a Bishop as Bishop Morton is. A most illustrious and
invaluable Jewel, yet shut up now in a little box; a great and rich Vessel
driven in his old Age to a small harbor, where his safety is tenuity and
obscurity. Nor may I give a less tender touch of Dr. Juxon, whose modesty,
fidelity and exactness was such, that when he bare the great envy of being at
once a Lord Bishop of London and Lord Treasurer of England, yet he never had
blame for either of them: his Government as a Bishop was gentle, benign,
paternal; his managing of the Treasury was such, that he served his Prince
faithfully, satisfied all his friends, and silenced all his enemies, of which
he had enough as a Bishop, though as a man he was so meek and inoffensive, that
I think he could contract no enmities with any. Some men wished they might have
oftener heard him preach, and truly I was one of those; not only because
preaching was so much in fashion at London, but because that City needed good
preaching, and was to be much taken by it. Nor could any preacher in my
judgment exceed the Bishop of London. I confess I never heard any man with
more pleasure and profit, so much he had of Paul and Apollos, of a Learned
plainness and a useful elaboratenesse: when he preached of Mortification, of
Repentance, and other Christian practicks, he did it with such a stroke of
unaffected eloquence, of potent demonstration and irresistible conviction, that
few Agrippa's, or Festus's, or Felixe's that heard, but must needs for the time
and fit be almost persuaded to be penitent and mortified Christians.

I will yet be so modestly and honestly impudent, as to mention two or three
Bishops yet living, not because I know them, but because they are worthy to be
known, loved and honored by all good men. Such as Dr. Duppa the Bishop of
Salisbury, a person of singular Prudence and Piety, equally Grave and Good,
Learned and Religious, so eminent in many things, that he is worthy to be not
only a Tutor to a Prince, but a Counselor to a King, and no less to be a
Bishop in the Church of Christ. Next I crave leave to mention Bishop King, of
whom I need say no more, but that I think him a Son worthy of such a Father. I
cannot forbear to conclude all with a mighty man, Dr. Brownrig Bishop of
Excester, whose name and presence was once very Venerable to many Ministers,
while they were orderly Presbyters; now he is a dread and terror to them, since
they are become Presbyterians or Independents, such Grassehoppers they seem in
their own eyes in comparison of his puissance, who so filled the Doctors Chair
in Cambridge, and the Pulpit in place where he lived, and had filled his
Diocese, had he been permitted to do the office of a Bishop, that it would have
been hard to have routed Episcopacy, if he had sooner stood in the gap, being
justly esteemed among the Giantly or Chiefest Worthies of this Age for a
Scholar, an Orator, a Preacher, a Divine, and a prudent Governor; so much
mildness there is mixed with Majesty, and so much generosity with gentleness.
But I earnestly beg his Lordships and the others pardon, since the iniquity of
the times have compelled me thus far to transgress, as to commend such persons
yet living, who though most commendable, yet are in nothing more than this,
that they are more pleased to deserve, than to hear their just commendation;
the best consciences being always attended with the most tender, modest and
blushing foreheads. But I will trespass no further.

CHAP. XXIII.
A Review of our late English Bishops.
BUt thus far I have set forth the worth of some (I am sure) of our English
Bishops, even in those days which damned them all, that the world may see upon
what men's heads the total ruin of Episcopacy and all Cathedral Churches have
fallen; how there wanted not many good Bishops then, when worse and harder
measure befell them and their Order than since England was Christian. Indeed
many, yea most of our Bishops were as Noah's, Sems and Japhets; yet have all
these been drowned in the Presbyterian Deluge. Even these made up the so
odious, so unpopular, so decryed Bishops in England. The pest and contagion of
whose fate as it came first from Scotland, (where (no doubt) there were many
Bishops of equal virtues, though inferior revenues to the worthy and
well-known Dr. Spotswood Archbishop of St. Andrews, and Lord Chancellor of
Scotland) so it reached to Ireland, where there wanted not Bishops worthy of
the fraternity of Bishop Usher, Bishop Bedel and Bishop Bramhal, all cruelly
persecuted first by Papists, and after by Antipapists though persons of the
highest form for all excellencies, yet must all these be destroyed and their
whole Order, with the destruction of Sodom. Although more than ten righteous
Bishops, I am sure, were to be found in each of these British Churches, yet all
must be routed, all rooted up, as guilty of the unpardonable sin of Prelacy; a
new sin, and unheard of in the Church of Christ, but now to be put into the
black Catalogue of scandalous sins, when Heresy, Schism, Sacrilege and
Sedition must be left out.

These, these and such like Bishops are the men whose fate I passionately
pity; men famous in their generation, either for solid Preaching, or weighty
writing, or grave counselling, or holy living, or prudent governing, or
charitable giving (all of them for some, and some of them for all these
excellencies.) These are made the most unsound, the most infamous and
superfluous parts of this body politic and Ecclesiastic; these must be, one
and all, represented to vulgar simplicity and scurrility as the Popes, the
Antichrists, the Bite-sheeps, the Oppressors, the Tyrants, the Greedy and dumb
dogs, the Cretians, the Slow-bellies, the Devourers, the Destroyers of all
godliness and true Religion. These foul glosses, first made by Martin
Mar-prelate of old against Episcopacy and the Bishops of England, are now set
forth in a new and second edition, with larger notes and exquisite Commentaries
upon them, intimating that these are the men who have by their Learned, Grave
and Godly Misdemeanors, as Bishops, forfeited (not by any Law, but by absolute
will and pleasure, merely as Bishops) all their Houses and Revenues, all their
Honors and Preferments, yea their good Name and Reputation, which by Law and
desert they had obtained and enjoyed, yea all the Ancient Dignity, Apostolic
Authority and Constant Succession of their Place and Function in the Church;
which had not more of eminency than of necessity, nor more of necessity than of
Primitive and Catholic Antiquity. For the real faults of some, and the
imaginary of other Bishops (whose name was their only crime) must all Ages
after them be for ever punished with the want of such Grave, Learned, Godly and
Venerable Bishops, as have been destroyed, (for better cannot be had or
desired:) and posterity must be ever exposed in these British Churches to all
those Factions, Fedities, Divisions, Disorders and Confusions, which follow the
want of due Episcopal order and Government in the Church.

But Bishops (qua tales) were enemies to the power of Godliness: Obj.
the worst of them and the best of them were men too much devoted to empty
forms of Religion; they urged Ceremonies so far as to neglect substances,
straining at gnats and swallowing Camels; they justled out preaching by
Catechizing, and over-layed Ministers private prayers by their long Liturgies;
they did not kindle, but quench, damp and resist that spirit of Zeal and
Reformation which for many years has burned in the breasts of many godly
Christians, by whose flamings and refinings at last all Bishops, as dross,
with all their ornaments and adherents, have been justly consumed.

I confess I cannot tell how to answer for all the actions and expressions of
every Bishop; they were of age, Answ.
and able to have answered for themselves, if any of them as offenders of our
Laws had been brought to plead for themselves, which not one of them was, as
to Ecclesiastical matters, that I ever heard of; for the weight of the
Archbishops charge was chiefly upon civil or secular affairs.

Who knows not that Bishops were but men? that if left to their private
spirits and single Counsels, they might as easily over or under-do, as their
Adversaries have done, beyond or short of what becomes wise and good men? The
greatest blame that I perceive among any of them, was, that they would injoyne,
or exact, or remit any thing as to public Order, Discipline and Government of
the Church, without a joint agreement and uniformity among themselves,
according to what the Law allowed or commanded. This fraternall concurrence and
mutual correspondence had been worthy of Grave, Wise and Learned men: for all
private fancies obtruded by any one or two Bishops in so tender a case as
Religion is, and upon so touchy a people as the English now are, do but breed
variety, this differences, these disputes, these dissentions, these despites,
these oppositions, these breed confusions. All the actions and injunctions, all
the Articles and disquisitions of Bishops as such, should have been as exactly
consonant and uniforme as possibly could be.

But as to the crimination, That Bishops, like Hernshaws, abounded in the wing
and feather of Ceremony, but had little substance or body as to the power of
Godliness: First, Scripture and Christ's example teach us, that decent and apt
Ceremonies, public or private, are not in their nature enemies, but helps, to
the power of Godliness; as putting off all Ornaments, eating the bread of
Sorrow, putting on Sackcloth and Ashes, Fasting, Weeping, Smiting the breast,
Bowing, Kneeling, Prostrating to the ground, being all night in Solitude and
Darkness, lying in the Dust, etc. all these were and are helps to an humble,
broken, contrite, penitent and devout temper of Soul. Contrary, Company, Wine
and Oil, Singing and Music, Dancing, Discourse and Laughter, were and are
helps to holy joy and thankful jubilations; so are lifting up the eyes and
hands to Heaven, Sighing and Groaning, to fervency of Prayer and Praises. It is
but a rude, affected and fanatic imagination of clownish Christians, that
decent Ceremonies of Religion, wisely appointed in any Church, or fitly applied
by any private Christian in his private devotions, these cannot stand, but the
substance and sincerity of Godliness must fall; that there can be no forms of
Godliness, but the power of it must vanish or be banished. They may as well
imagine, that they cannot put on their clothes, or dress themselves handsomely,
but they must presently cease to be wise men, or honest men and good women, but
must turn either specter or dishonest. Do we not find that many such
Christians, who have of later years cast off all the former decent and
wholesome forms of Godliness, (either by Profaneness, or Preciseness, or
Peevishness, or Faction, or Atheism, or Superstition) are most apparently now
removed from the real power of Godliness, which mortifies all inordinate
lusts, moderates all passions, brings the thoughts, words and deeds of
Christians to the exact conformity of true Holiness, Justice and Charity? Who
are more vain bablers and endless janglers, who more unholy, unjust,
uncharitable, unmerciful, implacable, immoderate in their passions,
presumptions and revenges, than many of those who have most stripped themselves,
as to their Religion, of their clothes and coverings, that they may prophecy
with Saul quaking and naked, enjoying what immodest and insolent freedoms they
list to use and call Christian Liberties and Simplicities?

Certainly, the power of Godliness is most seen, when men having most power in
their hand to do good or evil, do choose the good and refuse the evil. No men
were more gracious and spiritual, none did more good, than many of the Bishops
of England in their prosperity, both publicly and privately; yea no men have
suffered more evil in their adversity with more silence and patience. They
only once cried out, when they durst not go to the Parliament by Land, and
going by water, they were, with St. Stephen, assaulted on the shore with a
shower of stones, and could not land with safety of their life's: Since that
time, though fleeced and flayed, yet they have held their peace under the
shearers hands, both singly and socially, as far as ever I have heard or read.
It is no great sign of the power of Godliness, that men can endure no power,
civil or Ecclesiastic, but in their own hands, and think no power is of God
which other men lawfully enjoy.

Since Bishops, and Episcopacy, and Liturgy, and Ceremonies, and constant
Catechizings, and all uniform celebration of Sacraments are discarded; since
nothing but Ministers private breasts and brains must serve the Church, with
their formed or informed, constant or extemporary conceptions, Praying, and
Preaching, and Celebrating; is the power of Godliness, as to true grace, or
the fruits of the Spirit, much advanced? Is there more constant hearing of
sound Doctrine? Is there more of sober and settled Knowledge? Is there more
Modesty, Humility, Equity, Charity, Obedience, Unity, Proficiency, Patience,
Love and Fear of God, or Reverence of Man, or Conscience of Duty to both, than
was formerly? If these Antiepiscopal men (who so much pretend to the bare sword
of the Spirit, that they scorn to wear any scabbard of Form or Ceremony) have
with Saul utterly destroyed the Amalekites of Immorality and Hypocrisy, what
means the bleating, crying, complaining, biting and devouring of one another
which are among us? what mean the factions, divisions, envies, animosities
among both Ministers and People? what means the contempt of the Word of God, of
all public Duties, and of the best Ministers, who are most able, most humble,
and most constant? what means the Uncatechisedness, the Sottishness,
Profaneness, Impudence and Irreligion which are so much spreading and
prevailing? How many rich and poor people neither have, nor care for, any
Preachers at all? No Sermons, no Prayers, no Catechises, no Sacraments, no
Morals, no Civilities almost are left among them. All the Religion of many is
resolved into disputing and denying Tithes, into paying their Taxes, into the
fear of Soldiers, the Sword and Laws, the Prisons and Gallowses or Men;
lastly, into enjoying what liberties or looseness in Religion they fancy best,
as far and as long as they list. But are there, in earnest, generally more or
better Scholars, or Ministers, or Christians, now than there were under
Bishops? I trow not; scarce the half part for number, and scarce the half part
so able for Learning as they were heretofore: as our Timber for great Oaks, so
our Ministry in England for grave Divines, is much wasted. Whatever the matter
was and is, I am sure, if it was not the Wisdom and Piety of Bishops, it was
the undeserved Blessing of God, that made the power of Godliness, in sound
Knowledge, Humility, Faith, Repentance, Love of God, Justice and Charity to
men, in unity amongst Christians, in good Lives and good Works, appear much
more to me and others under Episcopacy, than ever it has done since its
dissolution. Undoubtedly, true Religion, both as to its profession and power,
as Christian and as Reformed, as opposite to Profaneness and to Popish
Superstition, did, among the generality of the Nation, both Nobility, Gentry
and Commons, thrive better when it fed on the pults and water (as some esteemed
of the Liturgy, good Catechizing, sound Preaching, frequent Communicating, and
orderly Governing under Bishops) than since it has fed of other men's dainties,
who left a lean Church and Clergy, while they have been filled with Kings and
Bishops portions. The garden of Christ's Church was much safer and better among
those Ceremonious Briars and Thorns (as some count them, yet good senses of
religious Order and Honor) under Episcopacy, than since it has been laid so
open and wild, without ancient boundaries or defenses. Alas, poor Ministers
(even all upon the point) have no authority among the Common People, but what
is precarious and despicable, which people contemn, cast and kick off as they
list, unless so far as a Soldier may perchance smile upon a Preacher.

Object.
But to avoid these just Ironies and retorted Sarcasmes, the more grave and
modest Antiepiscopall Spirits do now profess, That their fierce wrath was
intended only against such Prelates as were indeed Persecutors, Proud, Idle,
Superstitious, Imperious, Luxurious, Court-Complyers and Flatterers, Answ.
etc. I reply, first as to persecution, First, Many Bishops were blamed as too
remiss and indulgent by some of their own Order who drove more furiously.
Secondly, all were not equally such persecutors in their enemies sense; yet all
of them equally complain of being no less persecuted. For their
Court-Complying, they had been very ungrateful men, if they had not owned with
all loyal respect and service the fountain of their Honor and Estates; yet
good men could not love their King without loving their Country, nor their
Country without their King; which all godly and honest Bishops did: if any
others did not, why did not Justice separate between the good and the bad, the
precious and the vile? Why should good Bishops, yea and good Episcopacy it
self, suffer? As Abraham said to God, Genesis 18.25. so does God say to every good
man's conscience, Far be it from thee to destroy the righteous with the wicked.
Why should not all Presbyters, yea and Presbytery it self, as well suffer a
final and total extirpation, (which some men have designed and desired) since
(no doubt) there were and now are many, yea as many, nay more for the number,
of insufficient preachers and unworthy Presbyters, as there were of Bishops;
and few, if any of them, so able, so worthy, so well-deserving of the public,
both Church and State, as some Bishops were? Why should Presbytery be preserved
alive, and Episcopacy, which is the elder, be slain? Since Episcopacy in all
Ages has preserved Presbytery, why should Presbytery ingratefully extirpate
Episcopacy? Was it not because Episcopacy was fatter than Presbytery, or had a
better fleece, and therefore was fitter for a sacrifice? O no; but Presbytery
(they say) is a plant of Jesus Christ's, which Episcopacy is not; and therefore
to be weeded out. Truly, it may as well be said by the partial Presbyterian,
that the seventy Disciples were of Jesus Christ's appointment, but the twelve
Apostles were not; that God created the lesser Stars and Planets, but not the
Sun and Moon; that God made people, but not Princes; that he formed the feet
and hands, but not the eyes and heads of natural bodies. This is the great
question, which is not to be thus begged or supposed, but should have been
solidly proved, before judgment had been so severely passed against
Episcopacy: we should have seen the time and place, when and where Episcopacy
usurped, when and where Presbyters ruled, in this or any Church, by way of
parity, without any Bishop, President or Apostle above them. The constant
stream of this Jordan, which has flowed from the first springs and fountains
of Christianity, ever flowing and overflowing in the Catholic Church, this
should have been miraculously divided, before that Presbytery should have
boasted of its passing over dry-shod, and of its drowning all Bishops and all
Episcopacy (as the Egyptians) in a Red Sea, between the returnings and closings
of the waters of Independency and Presbytery.

Whenas it is well known, even by their own confessions that have any grains
of Learning in them, that Presbyters were ever as Ciphers in all Churches,
insignificant as to Church Government, without Bishops being set over them and
before them, as Capital Figures. Bishops were ever esteemed as the chief
Captains of the Lords host in this Militant State, principal Stewards of
Christ's Household, head-shepherds of his flock, the ((...)) first-ordained and
first-ordainers of the Evangelicall Ministry, the first consecrators and
distributers of all sacred mysteries, the prime Conservators and Actors of all
Ecclesiastical Authority: These were in all Ages, next the Scriptures, the
Churches chiefest-Oracles and Interpreters; these were the grand Divines in all
Times and Places, not superficially armed with light armor, only for the
preaching or Homilisticall flourishes of a Pulpit, but with the weighty and
complete armor of veterane and valiant soldiers, who were to stand in the
forefront of the Lords Battles, to receive the first charge and impressions
from the Churches enemies of their force, cunning and malice; these were the
fairest transcripts or Copies of Apostolical Mission and Evangelicall
Commission; these were the great Magazins of sound and vast Learning; these the
Centers, Refuges, Sanctuaries and Succor of both Ministers and people in all
Churches; these gave, as holy Orders to Presbyters and Deacons, so decent
Ceremonies to all the Church, also fatherly Counsels and friendly
encouragements to all worthy Ministers, when young and novices, weak and
defective, when fearful and dejected; these gave Vigor and Authority to that
Discipline which was necessary to punish and repress scandalous livers; these,
these worthy Bishops (such as we had good store in England, even now at the
last cast) were the Chariots and horsemen of Israel; these always (by the
help of God) recovered the Ark of God, after the Philistines had taken it;
these recollected the flocks of Christ, after they had been worried and
scattered by grievous wolves and foxes; being persons of more public
influence, of more eminent example, of larger hearts and greater spirits
(commonly) than most or any private Ministers; most men's spirits shrinking with
the tenuity of their place and condition, and enlarging with the ampleness of
them: God usually giving of that spirit of Government and Authority to those
that are placed justly in it, as he did to Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Saul, David,
Samuel and others, both Princes and Prelates, Judges and Magistrates, who but
equal (it may be) to inferior persons in sanctifying Gifts and Graces, (as the
Bishops of England might be to the many godly Presbyters) yet in this they
exceeded them, not because placed above them in worldly Place and secular
Honor, but because they, from the Apostles pattern, were particularly
appointed and commissioned by the Church of Christ, and so fitted to execute
those eminent Offices of Church Government in Ordination and Jurisdiction,
beyond what was ever given to any Presbyters without their Bishops.

Having then such a cloud of Witnesses both at home and abroad, of former and
latter times, by which to justify the deserved eminency of Episcopacy, and to
condemn the insolency of Presbytery, I cannot forbear with St. Paul to demand
in the behalf of our worthy English Bishops, who have been so distrusted, so
discountenanced, so dejected, so despised, so desolated, so depressed. Wherein
did they come short of the very best of those Presbyters, (who were known
sufficiently to my self) who h^^e so studiously sought their ruin, and so
ambitiously usurped against them? Were Presbyters good Preachers? so were
Bishops. Were Presbyters able Writers? Bishops were more. Were Presbyters
zealous Opposers of Popery? so were Bishops. Were Presbyters devout Men? so
were Bishops. Were Presbyters unblameable Livers? so were Bishops. Were
Presbyters Martyrs and Confessors? so were Bishops. Were Presbyters Instruments
for a just and orderly Reformation of Religion? Bishops were more. Were
Presbyters useful to Church and State, by word and example, in their petty
Parishes? Bishops were more in their primitive Parishes or larger Dioceses,
which were long known and of force in the Church of Christ, before lesser
Parishes were in use or in being. Were Presbyters hospitable and charitable,
(without which all Religion, Faith and Fervency is nothing?) Bishops were more;
equal in their Affections, beyond them in their Liberalities as much as their
Revenues. Are Presbyters that were able, faithful, humble and orderly, gone to
Heaven? so (no doubt, through Gods mercy) are those holy Bishops who have been
cast upon Dunghills, as Lazarus and Job, by the cacozelotry of some men in our
times, who have so much houted and outed, despised and destroyed them. Many
Presbyters have done well and learnedly, but many Bishops have exceeded them
all; who were so far from losing or abating the Gifts and Graces they had when
but Presbyters, that they increased them and improved them when made Bishops,
above other Presbyters, who were then at their best, when they most kept within
that place and station in which God, and the Church, and the Laws, and their
own proportions had set them, in an holy and humble, a rational and religious,
a pious and prudent subordination to their respective Bishops, as their lawful
Superiors and reverend Fathers, whose names are, and ever will be, precious to
all those that understand what belongs to excellent Learning, to eminent
Virtue, to Christian Courage, to admirable Patience, to what is Primitive,
Catholic and complete in the Order, Honor, Polity, Government and Happiness
of the Church of Christ.

No Learned or Worthy Writer, Foreign or Domestic, who can fly above the
Parasitisme of popular Pamphlets, (which will soon be condemned to Chandlers
shops, to Ovens and to Privies) no pen (I say) that has any genius of
Learning, Life and Honor in it, will blot its paper, or blunt it self, with the
names of those that have been or are the unjust, malicious and implacable
enemies, the insolent despisers and injurious destroyers of such Primitive
Bishops, and such Primitive Episcopacy, as these British Churches plentifully
afforded. But every worthy Author will be ambitious to adorn his works, and
enamel his History, with the illustrious names of such meritorious Bishops,
who have not only been worthy doers, but unworthily, yet worthy, sufferers,
very patiently though very undeservedly; knowing, with Paulinus Bishop of Nola,
how to lose all things but God and a good Conscience, which are the true Honor
and Eternal Treasures of good Christians. If the most of, or all our Bishops
had been vile men, and fit to be destroyed, why was not their wickedness and
unworthiness publicly and personally charged? Why were they not legally
Summoned, Accused, Tried, Witnessed against, Convinced, Condemned? Might not
many, yea most of our Bishops have said in their proportion as our Blessed
Savior, Who is it that can accuse me of sin? what evil have I done? for which
of my good works, John 10.32.
in Preaching, Praying, Writing, Giving, Living, do you stone me, or seek to
destroy me and my function? They were neither evil men, nor evil Christians,
nor evil Preachers, nor evil Bishops; 1 Pet. 4.15.
yet nothing must be left them, but the grace and opportunity to suffer (not as
evil doers, but) as became Learned, Grave and Good men.

Which Episcopal glory and Christian grace they have in an high degree
attained, many of them saying with more truth than the Stoics were wont
((...)) I have lost nothing that was mine, yet I have all that is worth having;
notwithstanding that they were deprived of all their Ecclesiastical Estates,
not allowed, according to the mercy of Henry the eighth to Monks and Friars, to
Nuns and Votaries, (which were grown the superfluous Leeches and Wens of the
Nation) any pension during their lives. Some Bishops could never get the
Arreares due to them before the dreadful Act of dissolution: many of them were
spoiled, as of other goods, so of their good Libraries; where their best
company, faithfullest friends, and surest comforters were to be found amidst
those afflictions, desertions and solitudes, which they were sure to meet with
both from foes and friends; most men being friends to men's fortunes, not to
their persons or virtues.

With these dark foiles and deep shadows has the brightness of our best
Bishops been set off to after-Ages. O what admiration, what astonishment, what
horror will there be, when impartial Posterity shall read, together with their
excellent writings, the plentiful poverties, the illustrious obscurities, the
honorable contempts, with which the excellent Bishops of these British Churches
have been at last rewarded; even then when indefatigable studies, incomparable
endowments and holy improvements, had both fitted them for and preferred them
to those honorable employments, rewards and encouragements, which they lawfully
obtained and worthily enjoyed! being persons for their Graces and Gifts, for
their Learning and Judgment, for their Gravity and Prudence, much more worthy
(if God had seen fit) to have been continued in their Golden Candlesticks, and
to have shined to their last in this Church, than to have been so shut up in
dark lanternes, or to be put under such bushels as not only hide, but quite
extinguish their personal and public luster; so burying, as much as may be,
while they are yet alive, their excellent abilities, which did not consist
only in good preaching, but also wise Governing their Churches, in keeping
both Ministers and people in good Order and Unity, in being not only Monitors
and Fatherly Correctors, but Refuges and Defenses to their Clergy and others,
as Fathers to Sons, in ordaining and encouraging able Ministers, in continuing
a Catholic succession of a complete and Apostolic Ministry to this as all
other Ancient and Renowned Churches, in preventing that great Scandal and
Schism (to the Papists (now) most desired and welcome) which is and will ever
hereafter be imputed to us with unanswerable reproaches, while, by Apostatizing
from Primitive Episcopacy, we do not so much forsake the Roman party, (which
in this point, as in many others, is Orthodox and sound) as the Catholic
Church, and that Authoritative order which began with Christianity, and ought
as much as may be in providence for ever to continue with it. An ordained
Ministry, a right Government, and good Order in the Church, being (as I have
demonstrated) no less necessary for the Churches well-being, than the Word and
Sacraments are for the being or beginning of it. Religion and Christian
Churches soon moulder to nothing, where there is not an indisputable,
Authoritative and complete Ministry. Nor is this to be (ordinarily) had without
Episcopacy; least of all with the violent and undeserved extirpation of
Episcopacy, if we will follow the judgment, custom and practice of all
Christian Churches from the beginning, rather than modern novellers, who will
never be able to make up the breaches, or to patch up the Rents, which they
have either rashly or unnecessarily made in this particular, not from the Roman
only, but indeed from the Christian and Catholic pattern, to which the
Reformation of the Church of England studied exactly to conform, as in other
things, so in the point of Episcopacy, until the fatal fury of these later
times: which is the more unexcusable, because no Church in the world had less
cause either to complain of, or to reject, its Bishops or Episcopacy; for
certainly no Church since the Apostles days was ever more flourishing under
Episcopacy (for other Government was not known till of late) nor had any
Reformed Church either more worthy Bishops, for the most part of them, or more
able Ministers, even at that time when all Bishops, with their Order and
Succession, were devoted to utter destruction.

Not that I here forget how some Bishops in England were under very great
Jealousies, as if they were Popishly affected and inclined, as if they were
underhand Factors for Rome, and secret Traitors to the Reformed Religion: Thus
most (if not all) of them were censured by some men of very sharp noses and
severe tongues, yea and condemned before they were tried, for superstitious and
Super-ceremonious Prelates. Hence that popular Odium and Indignity of joining
Prelacy and Popery together: which Sarcasm and reproach, I confess, ought by all
wise Bishops and other Ministers to have been seriously avoided, so as no way
justly to deserve any such suspicion, taunt or proverb; there being nothing
less advancing, or more diminishing, the true respect and honor of Christian
Ministers and Reformed Bishops, than unworthily to comply with or conform to
the Bishop and Church of Rome, in those things where the distance is as just
and necessary as it is great, and grounded on Gods Word, being founded upon
that eternal distance which is and ever will be between Light and Darkness,
Truth and Falsehood, Error and sound Doctrine, between the Institutions of
Christ and the sacrilegious Inventions of Men, between the infallible Rule and
Oracles of Gods Word in the Scripture, and the variable Canons of poor men,
between the Catholic Custom of pure and Primitive Churches, and the particular
practices of later Usurpations, brought in in the twilight of dark and depraved
times. These diametral distances ought ever to be preserved by all godly
Bishops, who may not come nearer to Popery than Popery is near to Christianity,
or then Antichristian policies may correspond in some things with Christian
piety.

Which just bounds, as far as ever I could understand, our pious Bishops in
England, from the first Reformation till now, have religiously observed; not
one of them (much less all) deliberately or openly owning any communion with
the Church of Rome, where they saw the Church of England had made a just, clear
and necessary separation: yea, the learned Bishops of England have, generally,
so fully confuted the Falsity, Injury and Indignity of that calumny, both by
their Preaching, Writing, Living and Dying, that men must be blind with
despite, mad with malice, or drunk with passion, when they vomit out so foul
calumnies against all Bishops and Episcopacy in England, as if they were
Pandars for Popery, and Pimps to the Whore of Babylon; for this is the language
of some men's oratorious Zeal against our Bishops and all Episcopacy, which will
in time much more agree with Presbytery and Independency, I fear, than ever it
did with Episcopacy.

But it will be demanded of me, whence then arose this smoke of Jealousy, which
was so popular and spread abroad, that it made so many pure Eyes to ache and
smart, yea to grow watery and blood-shotten, not only among the vulgar, but
even among our greatest Seers and Overseers? Was there no fire where there was
so great a smoke? My Answer is, these jealousies of some Bishops (and other
Ministers who most imitated them) being Popishly inclined, never had, so far as
ever I could discern, any farther ground than this: Some Bishops pleased
themselves, beyond what was generally practiced in England, with a more
ceremonious conformity than others observed; first, to the Canons and
Injunctions, which (they thought) were yet in force in the Church of England,
being not repealed, but only antiquated through a general disuse; next, being
aged and learned men, and more conversant in the Antiquities of the Church than
younger Ministers, they found that such ceremonious Solemnities in Religion
were then very much used, without any sin or scandal; no godly Bishop,
Presbyter, or other good Christian, ever making scruple of using the sign of
the Cross in Baptism, and at other times of Bowing, Kneeling, Prostrating
himself, or of putting his mouth to the ground and kissing the Pavement when he
came to worship God, or to celebrate holy Mysteries, expressing thereby that
Humility, Faith, Fervency, sense of his own sinful Unworthiness, and that
unfeigned Reverence which he bare in his heart toward God and his Service.
This, I suppose, made some of our Bishops hope that they might with the like
inoffensivenesse add such Solemnity to Sanctity, and such outward Veneration to
inward Devotion, and yet be as far from Popery or Superstition as the ancient
Christians were; yea, as those Ministers and others now pretend to be, who make
so much of lifting up their eyes and hands in Prayer, or who are pleased to be
uncovered in Praying, Preaching, Singing, or Celebrating the Sacraments.

Besides this, many Bishops found a secret genius of Rusticity and Rudeness,
of Familiarity and Irreverence, strangely prevailing among Country-Preachers
and People so far, that they saw many of them placed much of their Religion in
affecting a slovenly rudeness and irreverence in all public and holy Duties;
loath to kneel, not only at the Sacrament, but at any Prayers, or to be
uncovered at any Duty, enemies to any man, and prejudiced against all he did,
if he showed any ceremonious respect in his serving God: They saw some were
grown so spiritual, that they forgot they had bodies; and pretending to approve
themselves to God only as to the inward man, they cared not for any thing that
was regular, exemplary, orderly, comely or reverent, as to the outward
celebration, in the judgment and appointment of the Church of England. Hence
some men grew to such great applaudings of themselves, (as if this were the
only simplicity of the Gospel) that they thought every man went about to cut
the throat of Reformed Religion, who applied any Scissers or Razor to pare off
rudeness and rusticity, or to trim it to any decency in the outward
Ministrations, according to what seemed best to the Church of England. Many
Bishops thought that Religion would grow strangely wild, hirsute, horrid and
incult, like Nebuchadnezzars hair and nails, if it were left to the boisterous
Clowneries and unmannerly Liberties which every one would affect, contrary to
the public appointment of the Church.

If some Bishops pleased themselves in using such outward and enjoined
Ceremonies, beyond what was ordinary to some men, yet certainly a thousand
decent and innocent Ceremonies, such as those enjoined by the Church of England
were declared to be, do not amount to one Popish Opinion; nor are they so heavy
as one popular and erroneous Principle, which tends to Faction, Licentiousness
and Profaneness. Ceremonies may possibly be thought superfluous, because not
of the substance of the Duty; but they are not to be charged as superstitious
where the Devotion of the heart is holy, and the Duty is sincerely performed
for the Essentials of it, as it is instituted by Christ, and enjoined by the
Word of God, who has left the ceremonious part of Religion, more or less, very
much to the prudence of his Church, according to the several forms and customs
of civil respect and decency used in the world; which St. Austin and St.
Ambrose with all the Ancients declare, placing no further Religion in any
Ceremony of humane invention and use, than it served aptly to excite or express
inward sincerity of Devotion, and an outward conformity to the decent customs
of any Church: Which keeping to the Truth, Faith and holy Institutions of
Christ, for the main, were not blameable for that variety of Ceremony, which
was and might be observed without any damage to Truth, or breach of Charity.

As to the maine charge then, that Bishops in England were Popish, that is
warping from the Reformed Doctrine of the Church of England, as it was and is
stated opposite to the Romish errors and corruptions, I do believe that the
Bishops of England were in all Ages since the Reformation, and in this last, as
much removed, and as free from Popery, as the most rigid censors of them, who
dare accuse every man for Popish, who is not boiled up to the same
superstitious height and Ceremonious Antipathy with themselves, or who do not
presently adopt every man's new fancy, opinion and form of Religion, (though
private, foreign and impertinent to us) rather than the public Authority and
wisdom of the Church of England in its religious determinations and
injunctions; which were not more Moderate than Orthodox, Orderly and Comely,
not partaking of the Romish contagion, though it did not abhor the Roman or
any Christians Communion, so far as Rome kept any Communion with Jerusalem, I
mean with the Primitive, Catholic and true Church of Christ.

I do not pretend to search the hearts of any Bishops, nor (it may be) should I
have approved some things which some of them said or did, as to the
unseasonablenesse, rigor and excess: yet this I affirm, that those men must
have foreheads of flint, hearts of brass, and pens of Iron, who dare to charge
with Popery any one of those excellent Bishops whom I have mentioned with
honor; besides many more whom I have omitted, who better knew the true Medium
of Religion and Measures of Reformation, between Superstition and Profaneness,
Affectation and Irreverence, Indevoutnesse and Rudeness, than any of their
fiercest opposers and unjust destroyers.

And since I have thus far undertaken, not the Patrociny (which is a work far
above me) but such a parentation at the Funeral of my Fathers as may (I hope)
not misbecome me, I shall further adventure to do so much right to some
Bishops, to whom I was most a stranger, as to this foul suspicion of Popery,
which being first fixed upon them, was easily diffused to all the Bishops of
England, by the wonted spreading of all envious and evil reports, which easier
find entertainment in men's hearts and tongues, than any that are good: For
these seem to men to lessen themselves by commending others; the others help
either to cover or excuse men's own faults, or to set off their seeming zeal and
virtues.

The first and greatest was the last Archbishop of Canterbury, who was by many
suspected and charged not only as Popishly affected himself, but as a poysoner
of the whole stream and current of the Reformed Religion in England; at last
he was treated either as a Heretic or a Traitor, or both, to Church and State.

It becomes not me to sentence either the sentenced, or sentencers that
adjudged him to death, his and their judgment is with the Lord; only as to
the aspersion of his being Popish in his judgment (which reflected, in the
repute and event, upon all the Bishops of England,) truly his own Book may best
of any and sufficiently, vindicate him to be a very great Antipapist: great, I
say, because it seems by that Learned dispute, that he dissented from Popery
not upon popular surmises and easy prejudices, but very learned and solid
grounds, which true Reason and Religion make good, agreeable to the judgment
of the Catholic Church in the purest and best times. And in this the
Archbishop does, to my judgment, so very impartially weigh the state and
weight of all the considerable differences between the Papists and the English
Protestants, (not such as are simple, futile and fanatic, but learned, serious
and sober) that he neither gratifies the Romanist, nor exasperates him, beyond
what is just; neither warping to a novel and needless super-reformation, which
is a deformity on the right hand, nor to a sub-reformation, which is a
deformity on the left, but keeping that golden Mean which was held by the
Church of England, and the greatest defenders of it.

As to his secret design of working up this Church by little and little to a
Romish conformity and captivity, I do not believe he had any such purpose or
approved thought; because, besides his declared judgment and conscience, I
find no secular policy or interest which he could thereby gain, either private
or public, but rather lose much of the greatness and freedom which he and
other Bishops with the whole Church had: without which temptation no man in
charity may be suspected to act contrary to so clear convictions, so
deliberate and declared determinations of his conscience and judgment in
Religion, as the Archbishop expresses in that very excellent Book.

I am indeed prone to think, that possibly He wished there could have been any
fair close or accommodation between all Christian Churches, (the same which
many grave and learned men have much desired:) And it may be his Lordship
thought himself no unfit instrument to make way for so great and good a work,
considering the eminencies of parts, power and favor which he had. Happily he
judged (as many learned and moderate men have) that in some things between
Papists and Protestants, differences are made wider, and kept more open, raw
and sore than need be, by the private pens and passions of some men, and the
interests of some little parties, whose partial policies really neglect the
public and true interest of the Catholic Church and Christian Religion, which
consists much in peace as well as in purity, in charity as in verity: he found
that where Papists were silenced and convinced in the more grand and pregnant
disputes, (that they are novel, partial, and unconforme to the Catholic Church
in ancient times; as in the Cup withdrawing, in the peremptory defining of
Transubstantiation, in public Latin prayers, such as common people understand
not what is prayed or said, in praying to Angels and Saints, in worshipping
Relics and Images with divine worship, in challenging of a Primacy of Divine
Power and Jurisdiction to the Bishop of Rome over all, in their adding
Apocryphal Books to the proper and ancient Canon of the Scripture, in their
forbidding marriage to the Clergy, and the like) when in these points the
Romanists were tired, discountenanced and convinced, then he found they
recovered spirits, and contested afresh against the unreasonable transports,
violences and immoderations of some professing to be Protestants, who, to avoid
Idolatry and Superstition, run to sacrilege and rudeness in Religion, denying
many things that are just, honest, safe, true and reasonable, merely out of an
((...)) excessive Antipathy to Papists. Hence some are run so far that they
will have as no material Churches built, or used, or consecrated, so no
Liturgy, never so sound, solemn, and easy to be understood; so as no Bishops,
never so holy and Orthodox, so no Ministers rightly ordained by them, no
orderly Ceremonies or decent Rites whatsoever used by the Papists, though they
first had these from those Churches which were yet beautiful and pure in their
Primitive health and integrity.

The truth is, it would make a wise man mad to fall under the sinister censures
and oppressions of all vulgar opinions, who still urge in things indifferent
that unsociableness which is between light and darkness, truth and error,
Reformation and Superstition, never suspecting themselves for superstitious in
being so Anticeremonious, Antiliturgicall and Antiepiscopall: nor are they
jealous lest any thing that has the heat of their zeal might want the light of
true judgment, and be like a Tailors goose or pressing iron, hot and heavy
enough, but neither bright nor light, neither seeing nor shining. Truly I find
the calmeness and gravity of sober men's judgments is prone to improve much by
Age, Experience, and Reading of the Ancients, hereby working out that juvenile
leaven and lee, which is prone to puff up and work over younger spirits and
less decocted tempers in their first fervors and agitations. Possibly the
Archbishop and some other Bishops of his mind did rightly judge, that the
giving an enemy fair play by just, safe and honorable concessions, was not to
yield the cause or conquest to him, but the more to convince him of his
weakness; when no honest yieldings could help him any more, than they did
indamage the true cause or courage of his Antagonist.

For my part, I think the Archbishop of Canterbury was neither Calvinist, nor
Lutheran, nor Papist, as to any side and party, but all, so far as he saw they
agreed with the Reformed Church of England, either in fundamentalls, or
innocent and decent superstructures: yet I believe he was so far a Protestant
and of the Reformed Religion, as he saw the Church of England did protest
against the Errors, Corruptions, Usurpations and Superstitions of the Church of
Rome; or against the novel opinions and practices of any party whatsoever. And
certainly he did with as much Honor as Justice so far own the Authentic
Authority, Liberty and Majesty of the Church of England, (in its Reforming and
Settling of its Religion,) that he did not think fit any private new Masters
whatever should obtrude any Foreign or Domestic Dictates to her, or force her
to take her Copy of Religion from so petty a place as Geneva was, or Francfort,
or Amsterdam, or Wittenberg, or Edenborough, no nor from Augsburg or Arnheim,
nor any Foreign City or Town, any more than from Trent or Rome, none of which
had any Dictatorian Authority over this great and famous Nation or Church of
England, further than they offered sober Counsels, or suggested good Reasons,
or cleared true Religion by Scripture, and confirmed it by good Antiquity, as
the best interpreter and decider of obscure places and dubious cases. Nor did
his Lordship esteem any thing as the voice of the Church of England, which was
not publicly agreed to and declared by King and Parliament, according to the
advice and determinate judgment of a National Synod and lawful Convocation
convened and approved by the chief Magistrate, which together made up the
complete Representative, the full sense and suffrage of the Church of England.
His Lordship (no doubt) thought it (as indeed it is) a most pedling, partial
and mechanic way of Religion, for any Church or Nation, once well settled, to
be swayed and tossed to and fro by the private opinions of any men whatsoever,
never so godly, contrary to Public, National and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions; which carried with them, as infinitely more Authority, so far
more maturity, prudence and impartiality of Counsel than was to be found or
expected by any wise men in any single person, or in any little juncto's of
Assemblies, or select Committees of Laymen whatsoever.

And truly in this I am so wholly of his Lordships opinion, that I think we
have in nothing weakened and disparaged more our Religion, as Reformed in
England, than by listening too much to, and crying up beyond measure, private
Preachers or Professors, be they what they will for their grace, gifts or zeal;
who by popular insinuations here and there aim to set up with great confidence
their own or other men's (pious it may be, I am sure) presumptuous novelties,
against the solemn and public Constitutions or determinations of such a Church
as England was. These, these agitations and adherencies have undermined our
Firmeness and Unity by insensible degrees. What was Luther, or Calvin, or
Zuinglius, or Knox, or Beza, or Cartwright, or Baines, or Sparks, or
Brightman, (not to disparage the worth which I believe was really in any of
them or their Disciples) to be put into the balance against the whole Church of
England, when it had once Reformed and settled it self to its content, by joint
Counsel, public consent and supreme Authority? Which has had in all Ages, and
eminently since the Reformation, both Bishops and other Ministers of its
Communion, no way ( singly) inferior to the best of those men, and jointly far
beyond them all; whose concurrent judgment and determination I would an hundred
times sooner follow, than all, much more any one of those men: yea possibly I
could name some one man, whom I might without injury prefer to any one of those
forenamed persons; such was Melanchthon abroad, and such was our Bishop Jewel
at home. And indeed the Church of England had (blessed be God) so many such
Jewels of her own, that she needed not to borrow any little gems from any
foreigners; nor might any of them, without very great Arrogance, Vanity and
Imodesty (as I conceive) seek to strip her of her own Ornaments, and impose
theirs upon her or her Clergy.

Which high value, it is probable, as to his Mother the Church of England and
her Constitutions, was so potent in the Archbishop of Canterbury, that, as he
thought it not fit to subject her to the insolency of the Church of Rome, so
nor to the impertinencies of any other Church or Doctor, of far less name and
repute in the Christian world. No doubt, his Lordship thought it not handsome
in Mr. Calvin to be so far ((...), rather than (...)) censorious of the Church
of England, as to brand its devotion or Liturgy with his tolerabiles ineptiae,
who knew not the temper of the Nation, requiring then not what was absolutely
best, but most conveniently good: and such not only the Liturgy was, but those
things which he calls tolerable toys.

This charitable sense I suppose I may justly have of this very active and very
unfortunate Prelate, as he stood at a great distance from me, and eminence
above me; against whom I confess I was prone in my greener years to receive
many popular prejudices, upon the common report and interpretation of his
public actions. In one of which I was never satisfied, as to the Piety or
Policy of it; that when his Lordship endeavored to commend the Liturgy of
England to the Church of Scotland, (which was a worthy design, as to the
uniformity of Devotion) yet he should affect some such alterations as, he might
be sure, like Coloquintida, would make all distastful. Such was that in the
Prayer of Consecration and Distribution at the Lords Supper, which was after
the old form of Sarum, and expunged by our Reformers as too much favoring
Transubstantiation; besides some other changes in that and other things, of
which possibly his Lordship could give a better reason than I can imagine, or
have yet heard.

Toward his decline I had occasion to come a little nearer to his Lordship;
where I well remember, that a few days after his first confinement, when he
seemed not at all to despair of his innocence or safety, having occasion to
wait on him, and being not only a stranger wholly to him, but under some
prejudice with him, as to some relation I then had, yet he was pleased, after
some accesses to him, to invite me to some freedom of speech, asking me (among
other things) what the sense of people generally was of him and his actions. I
freely told him, the vulgar jealousies and reports were, that his Lordship, by
secret approches, did seek to betray the Reformed Church of England to the
Roman Correspondency and Communion; which was so tender and just an
apprehension in all people, out of their zeal to their Religion, that I humbly
conceived it were great wisdom to avoid all suspicion of it. Nor did it seem
an hard matter so to do, in ways, as much to Gods glory and the Churches
Honor, so less exposed to peoples jealousy or obloquy; common people being
easily won or lost by persons of public place and eminent Authority, whose
actions as they could not be hid, so their wisdom or weakness would be exposed
to every censurer, according to that party and side which he most adopted or
opposed.

I added, that people were not taken generally so much with grand and severer
virtues, as with things more plausibly and seasonably, yet piously and
prudently, adapted to their capacity as well as their good; that as they were
not to be unworthily humored, so nor too roughly neglected or offended; that it
was much easier not to raise, than to allay the Spirit of jealousy in the
Populacy; that it was no hard matter for a good and great man honestly to make
himself gracious with the best and most people, by doing them as much good as
they could expect, without any wresting of his or their consciences, without
diminishing his lawful Authority, or their ingenuous Liberties; that in some
cases and posture of times, a wise man was not bound to do people more good
than they would or could bear, nor was he to surfeit and tire them by
over-driving them to better pasture; that it was possible to serve the times,
and yet to serve the Lord, as the Pilot, that in a rough Sea humors the winds
and waves, yet saves himself, his ship and goods; lastly, that it was no hard
matter for his Lordship, and other Bishops of great parts and preferments, to
outdo in Preaching, Praying and well-doing all those that most maligned
Episcopacy.

To this purpose I took the boldness sometimes to speak to his Lordship; which
as he heard at first with something a severer brow, so he at length very
gravely and calmly thus replied: Protesting with a serious attestation of his
integrity before Gods Omniscience, that however he might mistake in the mean
and method, yet he never had other design than the Glory of God, the Service of
his Majesty, and the good Order, Peace and Decency of the Church of England:
that he was so far from complying with Papists, in order to confirm them in
their errors, that he rather chose such methods to advance the honor of the
Reformed Religion in England, as he believed might soonest silence the cavils
of fiercer Papists, induce the more moderate Recusants to come in to us, as
having less visible occasion given them by needless distances and disputes to
separate from us; which he thought arose much from that popular Variety,
Inconstancy, Easiness, Irreverence and Uncomeliness, which might easily grow
among us in the outward profession of Religion, for want of exact observing
such uniformity and decency in Religion, as were required by the Laws and
Canons of this Church and State. He added, that he had (further) a desire, as
much as he could, to relieve the poor and depressed condition of many
Ministers, which he had to his grief observed in Wales and England, where their
discouragements were very great, by reason of the tenuity and incompetency of
their Livings; that in his Visitations he had sometimes seen it with grief,
among twenty Ministers not one man had so much as a decent garment to put on,
nor did he believe their other treatment of life was better; that he found the
sordid and shameful aspect of Religion and the Clergy gave great advantages to
those that were Popishly inclined, who would hardly ever think it best for them
to join with that Church which did not maintain either its own Honor or its
Clergy to some competency and comeliness.

Much more discourse his Lordship was pleased to use at several times to this
purpose, which commands my charity to clear him, as far as I can judge, of any
tincture of Popery, truly so called, or of any Superstition, which places a
Religion in the nature and use of that thing which God has not either
particularly commanded, or in general permitted. I suppose he thought that
where God has allowed to his Church and to every private Christian, (so far as
may consist with the Churches good Order and Peace) a liberty of ceremonious
and circumstantial decency as to Gods worship, there neither himself was to be
blamed, nor did he blame other men, if they kept within those discreet and
inoffensive bounds which either the Churches public Peace required, or its
Indulgence to private Christians permitted. And thus I leave this Archbishop to
stand or fall to his and our great Master, who will judge our confidences and
infirmities according to our sincerity. Doubtless this Prelate had more in him
of Charity, Liberality, Munificence and Magnificence (as appears by the works
he undertook to found, to build or to repair) than ever I saw in any of those
who are the having and getting, not the giving enemies to Episcopacy.

And what if I have the like Charity for Bishop Wren? to whom I am wholly a
stranger, further then I have sometime heard him preach, with great evidence of
pregnant Intellectuals, set off with notable Learning and Acute Oratory. I
never heard that he was actually charged, or judicially convinced of any one
Tenet or opinion that was formally Popish. I know his Lordship was terribly
decryed, as if he had stung his Diocese, both Ministers and people, with
serpents, (as Hannibal did the Romans in a Sea Fight with the Bithynians) when
some thought he only rubbed some tenderer skins with nettles; which might
sting them shrewdly, but they could not deadly ^^yson them: for, mustering up,
as it seems, all that his Lordship found in the old Injunctions or new Canons
of the Church of England, (rather abolished many of them by disuse, than
legally repealed) his Visitation-articles seemed as an Army of Ceremonious
punctillo's; which he urged and exacted beyond what had been wonted, judging
them to be as Bees, which might each of them bring a little wax or honey to the
hive of Devotion, when others took them to be either as Flies, that did only
buz and fly-blow Religion, or as Wasps and Hornets, which stung so grievously
some tender consciences, that many of them (as the Canaanites of old) were
driven by them out of this good land, to seek their liberty and ease in horrid
and desolate plantations.

I confess, things of this nature, which being obsolete are urged afresh upon
the public practice of Christians in Religion, ought (as I conceive) to have
their revived and renewed Authority from the joint Counsel, pblick prudence
and consent of the Nation, else rigorous remedies, even of disorders, may prove
worse than the supposed or real diseases. For many antiquated Ceremonies in
Religion, though they be not quite worn out, yet, as garments long ago made
and now out of fashion, are rather to be kept as Monuments in the Wardrobe and
Records of Religion, than to be on the sudden put upon men's backs, and urged
to be worn; especially when they seem antique to the most, and uncomely by
their unwontedness to be commonly worn, though the stuff be never so good,
and the state of them not unhandsome.

Although all these might not amount to any thing that is properly Popery, no
more than a thousand shadows can make one substance or body, yet many did
judge them as a cumulative kind of Popery, which cloyes Religion with such a
Mass of needless Ceremonies, that it is like a tree too much over-growne with
moss, even to a barrenness; or like a garment not adorned and set off, but
wholly hidden, encumbered and buried with a superfluity of lace: which is either
a great Prodigality, or as great a Vanity and Affectation (especially
considering the matronely gravity which best becomes Christian and Reformed
Religion,) as that sancy was of our Henry the Fifth, who when he was Prince of
Wales, came one day to the Court and his Fathers presence with a suite all cut
and embroidered with oilet-holes, having a needle hanging out of every hole,
that he looked more like a Porcupine than a Prince. But as that Prince
afterward proved a very brave King, very pious and valiant, besides
successful, (which adds much to any Princes piety in the opinion of common
people,) when he left his needless needles, and betook him to his Victorious
Sword; so it is probable this Bishop, if he had received so grave an admonition
as the wisdom and meekness of a Parliament could have given him and other
Bishops of his mind, would easily have amended any such luxuriancy of
Ceremonious observations; which if they would be a means to induce any
judicious Papists to change their opinion as to these points of Doctrine which
most divide us and them, truly it were a very great uncharitableness in us, not
to comply very far with them in whatever the Church commands as innocent and
decent ceremonies. But sure they must be very silly birds, and scarce worth the
catching, which will be taken only with the chafe of ceremonies or pictures
in a case of Religion, (which so highly concerns their consciences and
salvation) so as to change their side upon these formalities, until their
judgment in the maine matters of Doctrine be convinced and satisfied: nor do I
know how we can well lay such strong lime-twiggs among such chafe as would
hold any Papists firm to our party and persuasion. Not that I would have them
scared or scandalized the more against us, for want of that reverence and
decency which becomes us in the worship of God, and in holy mysteries, by the
dictates of Reason, as well as the Indulgences of Religion; but considering
that just and vast distance in some grand points between us and the Papists, as
to outward worship, grounded upon inward persuasion and devotion, I think it
becomes the wisdom and wariness of Protestants, (according to the admirable
temper and moderation of the Church of England in its Reformation) as not to
deny themselves the use of any things enjoined as decent, because Papists had
abused them, so not to affect by any particular modes to symbolize so far with
them, as may confirm them in any thing that we judge Superstitious or
Idolatrous. This made many sober men so much strangers to the Policy and Piety
of those who so much urged to set the Lords Table Altar-wise, to adorn it with
the Crucifix and other pictures, and to bow with adoration toward it. Though
these might be lawful in the abstract, yet sure not expedient in that state
wherein the Reformed Profession stands opposite to the Papists superstitious
veneration of a Creature transubstantiated to a God. Though I have no
conscience of duty toward an Idol, so as to worship it, but only to the true
God, who is every where; yet I think it best for me not to go into an Idols
Temple, there to worship the true God, when I may do it other-where, without
any such appearance of evil, or scandal to those that see me, and know my
principles against it.

But as to the true and real discriminations between the Religion of the Church
of England and Popery in Doctrine, I conceive the best dimensions of this
Bishop are to be taken, by those that are wholly strangers to him, as I am, by
that notable Book which was lately published and dedicated to his Lordship by
Dr. Cosins, his well-known friend and successor, than whom no man ever fell
under greater popular jealousies for Popish, yet no man it seems less
deservedly, as appeared when he came to the Test before the Committee of Lords,
who then cleared him as to Mr. Smarts accusations for Superstition; and since
that he has further cleared himself, no man more handsomely, before the best
Protestants in France, where his long exile and sufferings have not so
exasperated him as to make him yield any way to the Papists: yea no man has at
home or abroad been a more stout Defender of the Protestant Religion, as it was
established in the Church of Engl. which the testimony of Mr. Daille, one of
the Protestant Ministers at Charenton near Paris, Tuus Cosins, imo noster
(intercedit enim nobis cum illo suavis amicitia atque familiaritas) admodum
probatur. Bestiae sunt, and quidem fanatici, qui eum de Papismo suspectum
habent, a quo vix reperias qui sit magis alienus. Ex autographo test. Dr.
Bernardo Hosp. Grai.
fully and freely confirms, telling all the world, That they are either beasts
or fanatics who count Dr. Cosins a Papist, from whom no man is really more
removed; which his very excellent History touching the Canon of the Scripture
fully assures us, being a grand and fundamental point in difference between the
Papists and us; wherein he having so irreparably battered and shaken their
Apocryphal Babel, by solidly proving the Church of Rome to be erroneous and
pertinacious in that point, all sober men will soon suspect her honesty,
fidelity, and pretended infallibility in other things which do as little agree
with the pristine Practice and judgment of the Catholic Church. Truly it is
pity so great and able a vindicator of the Reformed Religion should longer
suffer a pilgrimage among Papists, being forced to dwell in Mesech, and to have
his habitation in the Tents of Kedar, and not have leave to return in peace to
his native Country, of which he has so well deserved in this learned
undertaking: which piece sure he would not have dedicated (being so
Antipapistical, that it peels the very bark of the Church of Rome round) to his
friend the Bishop of Ely, if he did not intend him a collateral security, or a
vindication from any such aspersion of being either a practical or dogmatical
Papist, wherewith many have more pleased themselves, than proved it against
that Bishop.

But no Net plays with wider wings or larger bosom than that popular Drag,
which sweeps as it lists into its bosom all men for Papists, Pelagians or
Arminians, who are not just of some men's private opinions in all things; taking
what freedoms and latitudes they please themselves in their opinions and
actions, but allowing none to other men, no not in points that admit of
dispute, without scratching the Conscience, violating the true Faith, or
breaking Christian Charity. It is a wonder of wise and just men, how this
Bishop, if he were so evil a doer as was voiced, has not been long ago
publicly heard, and sentenced according to his deeds, but is punished
beforehand by a long imprisonment; when as he was committed to prison, not as
his sentence (I think,) but as his security, to be forthcoming at his lawful
trial, to which in eighteen years he has not been brought.

If then neither of these two Prelates, whose eminency and activity drew so
many eyes of envy upon them, were really popish, which was not very probable,
when they knew the Prince, whose favor they enjoyed, to be so steadfast and
able in his judgment against Popery, as I have often heard the Earl of Holland
and others affirm; I presume the other late Bishops of Engl. upon whom the
Tower of Siloam fell, may find so much justice and charity as to be freed from
that suspicion, and not to be thought greater sinners, as to that particular,
than many Presbyterians who joyed most in their destruction.

Never any of them, that ever I heard, gave any occasion to be thought a
Papist, except only the last Bishop of Gloucester, Vide G. G* his Quaeres to
Dr. Hackwell about the Decay of the World.
Dr. Goodman, (Vir sui nominis) as some report; a man of good learning and good
life, who having suffered in his old age (almost to a distraction) by the
storm and distresses of times, (which wet many other men to the skin, but it
stripped off the clothes, and flayed off the very skins of many Clergymen, and
all Bishops especially) was driven, it seems, beyond his pace, and something
beyond his patience: for thus provoked beyond all measure and merit (as he
thought,) by those who much professed Reformation (and yet so much, in his
sense and experience, did deform and destroy the Church of England,) it is no
wonder, if, dying and dejected, he chose rather to depart in communion with the
Church of Rome, than to adhere to the Church of England, 1 Kings 19.10
which (as Eliah) he thought now decayed and dissolved, (at least as to its
visible Order and Polity) if not quite destroyed. Not that he owned (I hope) a
communion or Conciliation with the Roman Church as Popish, but as far as it
was Christian; not as erroneous in some things, Vide Bishop Bedels Sermon on
Come out of her my People.
but as Orthodox in many others; from which (as Bishop Bedel says) no good
Christian does, or ought to separate. And since we hold Baptism among the
Papists to be valid, which is the sign of a Christians new birth, and first
admittance to the Churches Catholic Communion, he might hope, that dying in
that Communion so far as it was Catholic, would be no hindrance to his
admission to the Church in Heaven. At worst, it seems his discontent and
despair drove him rather to think of returning to the Confines of Egypt, where
he believed there might be found some Bread of life in an orderly way of
Housekeeping, than to dye in the Wilderness of a Church which was now howling
and starving, and self-desolating in his apprehension; that, as Lots Daughters
were so far excusable for their incests with their Father, as they believed all
men were destroyed besides, so may this poor Bishop (now made poor, when he had
been very rich) have this to plead for his resting at last in the bosom of the
Church of Rome, that he knew not any other so visible and conspicuous a Church,
either fit, or worthy, or willing to receive one that had so long lived a
Protestant and a Bishop in the Church of Engl. and was now no longer permitted
either to live or dye, either a Protestant or a Bishop, according to the
constitution of the Church of England; from which at its best, many of those
have more separated themselves living and dying, who are the sharpest Censurers
of this Bishop for dying a Papist, which is but a greater kind of Separatist
from the Church of England and the Church Catholic in some Opinions and
Practices. But I have done with this Bishop, who was dying most declared, and
with the other two, who living were most dubious and ambiguous, in the censures
of the world, as to their Religion. What their Morals, Prudentials or
Devotionals were, (who had so long and so great an influence of power and
favor) I must leave to the Supreme Judicature of God above them, and that
subordinate or lower Bench of their Consciences within them. If we should take
their dimensions by the successes and events, truly they have been very
unhappy: after-Counsels are prone to think it had been easy to have prevented
such calamities; but the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong. Though true Piety is always the best Policy, yet it is not always
attended with Prosperity. No doubt the sins of all sorts were ripe for wrath,
and in common calamities the best may suffer as well as the worst; the
afflictions of the first being their trials, of the second their punishment.

My concern is only to examine the ground of that Charge cast upon them, and
for their sakes upon all our Reformed Bishops, as if ranckly popish, as if
Prelacy and Popery were no more separable then Gehezies Bribery and his
Leprosy; which I justify to be as false a calumny as it is foul, and no way
becoming the mouths or thoughts of those who aim to judge righteous judgment,
or consider the account they must give to God of what they say and do, in truth
or falsity, in justice or iniquity. This I am sure, if our Bishops, and many
other grave Divines, had no inclination to Popery in their Prosperity, their
Adversity might have been a great temptation to them, less to approve that
Reformed Religion, not for which, but from which, they have suffered so hard
measure, as untried and unconvicted to be condemned, punished, destroyed,
beyond any men that lived orderly and peaceably.

CHAP. XXIV.
THat I may for ever silence the harsh braying and tedious barkings of all
Antiepiscopal Pens and Tongues against our Godly Bishops and Venerable
Episcopacy, Bishop Usher, Primate of Armagh, an unanswerable vindication of
Prelacy, not Popish, but pious.
(which is as much, or more, an enemy to Popery, than either Presbytery or
Independency) I crave leave to insist a little more largely upon the name,
worth and memory of one of our Bishops, very well known, not only to the
British Churches, but to all the Christian world that has any correspondency
or commerce with Learned men. It is Dr. James Usher, late Archbishop of Armagh,
and Lord Primate of Ireland; whom I reckon as ours, because not only his ashes
and mortal remains are deposited with us, but he lived his last years of
exile, and ended his mortality amongst us in Engl. where besides his constant
pains in Preaching, even to his last, he has left us many of his Learned
works, which are enjoyed by, and highly esteemed of, all worthy men who were
blessed with the example of his great and unspotted worth, which no envy, no
malice can (I think) be so impudent as to blemish.

With this rare and Reverend Prelate, this great and gracious Bishop, I was
rather happy than worthy to be acquainted many years, so far as to be able
more nearly to discover his genius and temper, both before and after the storm
of blood and Massacre in Ireland had driven this holy man to fly from that
(Terra irae Dei) land of Gods wrath, and to take such Sanctuary or shelter as
then he hoped might be had in England for Protestant Bishops; where he little
thought (good man) he should have found some Protestants in England as fierce
to undo and destroy their Bishops (though of the same Reformed Faith, and of
unblameable Profession) as the most Jesuited Papists were in Ireland; who were
and are sworn enemies against them, not as Christian Bishops, but as of the
Reformed Religion, which had nothing in it more Primitive, Illustrious and
Honorable than this, that in England it shined with the glory of those
Apostolic Stars, Godly and Venerable Bishops, which did not depend on the Pope
of Rome.

The real excellencies of this Bishop every way were such, that they exceeded
all ordinary measures of humane commendation and capacity, extending to
something of admiration or ecstasie: (...). Admirationi quam laudi proximus.
None but those whose minds are enlarged to some proportions of his
accomplishments can be able to comprehend his worth and amplitude: so vast, so
transcendent, so astonishing was his Learning and Understanding in all kinds of
knowledge, Divine and Humane, that he was as the Cynosure by which all great
Divines steered, and as the Sun-Diall by which all great Scholars set their
watches. Much of this Treasure was discovered in his writings, printed, and not
yet printed, of all sorts, both of greener and riper studies, in all which he
was exact and complete. He wrote, as he studied, not in the beaten paths of
Plagiary Compilators, or Systematicall Collectors, (as Scriba doctus ad regnum
Caelorum;) but he brought forth out of his large heart and vast reading new as
well as old, things of rare, hidden and untroden observation, even out of
Manuscripts which scarce any but his Eagle-eye had seen, and but few could
read. All which he judiciously collected, methodically disposed, clearly
explained and aptly applied: yet it was with him as with copious and living
springs, the least part of his innate, acquired and unexhausted fullness was to
be discerned by any of his outward emanations.

So accurate was he in all useful and Learned Languages, Occidentall and
Oriental; so clear a prospect he had of all History and Chronology, of all
Controversies ancient and modern, that nothing escaped him: nor was he only as
a Reader and Spectator, but as a Judge and Censor, as an Arbitrator and
Dictator in Disputes, as one that sat in a Tribunal of Sovereign Learning
above all. Nothing was new or hidden to him in Philology, Philosophy,
Geography, Astronomy, Mathematics, and least of all in Theology or Divinity;
he had conquered all others, but in this he Triumphed, which was the Trophee,
Crown and Center of all his other studies.

There was scarce any Book, printed or Manuscript, worth reading, in private or
public Libraries throughout all Christendom, which he had not read, either in
the Copy or Original, and digested into the method or design of his studies;
yea, and to a miracle remembered, as to the maine contents of it. To the
Immensity of his Learning there was added excellent principles of Politic
prudence, as a Governor of the Church, and as a Counselor of State; wherein
he was conspicuous, not for the crafty projects and practices of policy, or for
those sinister ways of Artifice and Subtilty, which are the usual
unreasonable Reasons of State, the so admired depths of devilish Hypocrisy,
but (indeed) the flats and shallowes of all Truth and Honesty: no, the Measures
and Rules of his Politics and Prudentialls were taken from that great
experience he had gotten, and many excellent observations he had made, out of
all Histories, as well Humane as Divine; though he always laid the greatest
weight upon the grounds and instances of holy Scripture, which gives the truest
judgment of wisdom or folly.

These great abilities, managed with so much Piety, Prudence and Integrity,
could not but make this Bishop as fit to be a Counselor of State, (for so he
was in Ireland) or a Privy Counselor to his Prince (which other Bishops were
who lived in England) as any of those Misepiscopists were, who most envied and
denied that honor to this or any other Bishops; with whose sufficiencies few
of their enemies (the chiefest of whom I well knew) were to be compared, either
for Wisdom, Gravity, Goodness, Learning, Experience and Eloquence, or for that
Sanctity, Severity and Integrity, which make a complete Counselor. All which
are hardly learned by the juvenile Gallantry of a little traveling, or by
seeing many Men, or by courting many Mistresses, or by passing through many
Cities and Countries in a negligent way, or by wearing ample plumes on men's
heads, or by showing fair clothes on their backs, or by fanciful and affected
conformities to all the modes and fashions which may be observable in foreign
places: all which Leven do usually so puff up many young Gallants (who glory
most in their Nobility and Gentry) with Amorousnesse, Futility, Vapouring,
Vanity and Folly, that it is a long time before they can thoroughly decoct them,
or settle themselves to that clear and serious study of Piety and Policy, of
Wisdom, Divine and Humane, which only can furnish out fit and able
Counselors of State, who are to be not only as the Eyes, Guides and
overseers of the Public, but even of the Prince; whose hand of power (if he be
wise) will steer according to the Card and Compass set before him by his
Council; which cannot be good, if it be not godly, nor prudent, if it be not
pious

So that it is not only my wonder, but it will be so to all Posterity, what
should move any sober and religious wise men to exclude all Bishops and
Clergymen from all capacity of being either Members of the great and
Parlamentary Council, or of the Privy Council of any Prince or State:

When 1. Religion ought always to be as much under the care, counsel and
inspection of Christian Princes, Parlaments and Councils of State, as any
secular or civil affairs; which never prosper where Religion is put in the rear
and Crupper of business, or where the Clergy, beyond all men, must be excluded.
Do we not read in one Melchizedek (the Type of Christ) both Prince and Priest
joined together? Afterward, were not Aaron and Moses, the one as King, the
other as Chief-priest, appointed by God as the leaders of the Church of God?
From this example, Abiathar the Priest also Gad and Nathan the Prophets, were
Counselors as well as Confessors to King David; so was Azariah the son of
Zadok the Priest a chief Prince and Counselor to King Solomon; so Jehojadah
the Priest was a Father, a Protector, and a chief Director to King Joash, 1
Kings 4.2. 2 Kings 11.
who ceased to prosper when he wanted such a Counselor.

2. When no men may be presumed, or indeed generally are, and in all times have
been, so able in managing and advising of matters religious, as eminent Bishops
and well-chosen Church men, certainly none were so fit as they to give account
to the Prince and State of the true estate of the Church and Religion, which
are miserably misrepresented by other ignorant or envious Informers; none so
much lays to heart the true concerns of Religion, or the interests of men's
souls; none will so much take care that these suffer no prejudice and detriment
by any Laymens disorderly insolency or covetous encrochments.

3. As for the preaching part of a Bishop, or his residence and inspection to
his particular Diocese, it can be no hinderance (as some men have pitifully
pretended) sometime to attend the general good of their own and all others
Dioceses: they may not be thought to neglect their own Cabin, who are sometime
employed for the reparation or conservation of the whole Ship; as my Lord
Viscount Newark very honorably, learnedly and eloquently expressed himself in
the House of Peers, where it was briefly disputed touching Bishops sitting as
Peers in the House, which they had done ever since there was an House of
Christian Peers in England. So that the pretended damage, as to their
particular care of their Diocese, is abundantly compensated by the good they
may do to the public; which may easily be as much as that was of the English
and Scotch Presbyters, who were dispensed with for many months Non-residency,
as to their particular Livings and charges, when they were to attend the
Assemblies great service of making a Catechize, a Directory, and helping to
extirpate Bishops out of this Church and State.

4. The retortion upon these Ministers especially who were so much enemies to
Bishops being in any Council, Civil or Ecclesiastic, must needs be a most
smart and severe conviction of their Partiality, when we have daily seen so
many petty Presbyterian and Independent Preachers as busy as Bees, and every
where eager Sticklers in all secular Councils and Affairs. How did some of them
haunt some Lords and Commons in the long Parliament? How did they ply all
Committees, specially that for Religion, which had swallowed up the
Convocation? How prone are they still, uncalled, to crowd or insinuate into all
public, yea into Cabinet-Counsels, both military and civil? What of concern in
Church or State, for these last eighteen years, can move or pass without their
suggestions, whisperings and agitations? Many public Declarations savor much
of their strain and form, both for fancy and phrase; especially if they regard
any religious business of State, as Fastings, Humiliations, Thanksgivings, and
the like; which heretofore were managed by the counsel of great Bishops, as
able I believe as any of our new and little ones. But it is not strange that
some men should think themselves fit to be at both ends of all public
Counsels, either laying or hatching them, and yet be so eager against all
Bishops, who were full as honest, and in all respects as able and worthy, as
the best of these Sticklers: for nothing makes men more presumptuous of
themselves, or more envious against others, than want of true knowledge of
eithers dimensions.

5. And lastly, the very light of Nature makes it seem very preposterous and
impolitick to exclude all Churchmen, of which Bishops were ever the chief
Fathers, out of all public Counsels: for all Nations have taught us, that they
did so far venerate their Gods and honor their Religion, as never to carry on
their chief Counsels and public Affairs of War or Peace, for Religion or
Civility, without taking some of their Holy men and Priests into their
Councils: so King Balak calls for Balaam in his greatest exigencies; so were the
Pontifs or Flamens ever among the chief Roman Counselors and Senators; so were
the Druids ever among the British and Gallick Parlaments; so were the Magi
among the Persian Princes; so at this day are the Mufties among the Turks chief
Counsel: All Mankind knowing this, that the best counsels are those which rise
nearest to Jupiters Throne, and are drawn from the clearest fountains of Divine
Wisdom.

If the true God, and the Son of God, the Christians Savior, have justly the
Titles of the All and Only wise, yea the wonderful Counselors, how (I beseech
you) can it stand with any Christian sense, or reason of State and true
Religion, to exclude those men, beyond any, from all public Councils of Church
and State, who are most in Gods and Christ's stead, best studied and acquainted
with the Divine Will, Wisdom and Counsel in Gods Word? I am sure (so far as I
am versed in any Histories) neither this Church or State (nor any other) did
ever flourish without Bishops among the prime Counselors, both in Parliament
and other-where; nor did they ever more flourish in Piety, Peace and Plenty,
than when these had as great an influence as any other Men of Learning, Worth
and Wisdom.

How things may hereafter thrive, where the Clergy are so nipt and
frost-bitten, time and success will best inform the survivers: yet it is no
very promising omen, when neither Clergymen are encouraged to be fit and able,
nor, if fit and able, are at any hand to be admitted to such public use and
honor; when any others may, whatever extraction, rise and education they have
had: for they are not always noble Rivers and ancient Springs of Virtue,
Wisdom and Honor, but many times small Brooks and very inconsiderable
Rivolets, which aspire to this honor of contributing their small drops of
Counsel into the great and public Cistern of Government. And such were they
(as far as I understood) men, for the most part, who with least patience could
bear any Bishops to sit in counsel with them, lest they should be miserably
outshined and eclipsed by the others improved parts and well-known learning,
which vastly exceeded the small shreds and short ends which many other men were
so highly conceited of in themselves, whose Estates laid the greatest
foundation of their Honor.

But I here crave the Readers pardon for this digression, no way impertinent to
my design, which is, to demonstrate the merit, and so far to recover the
public esteem and honor, of good Bishops and all the Clergy, such as they ever
enjoyed in this and all other Christian States, till these darker days in
England; which pretend to seek a greater light, by putting out of Princes
Courts and Counsels the chiefest Lamps and Stars of Learning, Religion,
Counsel and Wisdom.

To return then to this excellent Bishop and able Counselor, the Primate of
Armagh: as to his personal policy, domestic subtilty, or private
cautiousness, truly he had little enough of the Serpent; but as to his
harmless innocence, he had very much of the Dove, ever esteeming Piety the
best Policy, and Sanctity the safest Sanctuary.

If any thing might seem to have been as a venial allay in him, it was a kind
of charitable easieness and credulity, which made him prone to hope good of
all, and loath to believe evil of any; especially if they made any Profession or
shows of Piety: he did not think, there could have been so much gall and
vinegar mixed with the shows, or realities, of some men's graces, until he
found by sad experience some Godly people, and Presbyters professing much
Godliness, who formerly were prone to adore him as a God, or an Oracle, were
(now) ready to stone and destroy him with all his brethren the British Bishops.

He was most prone to err on the right hand of charity, and to incline to
those opinions in things disputable which seemed to set men furthest off from
Pride, Licenciousness and Profaneness; of which he was better able to judge
than of Hypocrisy, being more jealous of Irreligion than Superstition, which
is the right hand, and more venial extreme of Religion. He had not, til of late
years, felt the scalding effects of some men's over-boyling zeal, or the
dreadful terrors of their righteousness who affected to be over-righteous, who
despised his Learned, Wise and Moderate Counsels, touching the settling of
Peace, Order and Government in the Church.

The rare endowments of this pattern of a perfect Bishop were both wrapped up
and set forth, as occasion required, with such Tender Piety, such Child-like
Humility, such a Saintly Simplicity, such an Harmeless Activity, such an
Indefatigable Industry, such Unfeigned Sanctity, such Unaffected Gravity, such
an Angelick Serenity, and such an Heavenly Sweetness, as made all his Writings
perspicuous, though profound; his Preaching plain, yet most prevalent. He had
an Eloquent kind of Thunder of Reason mixed with Scripture-Lightning, which
together had a pleasing potent terror: his praying was fervent and pathetick,
without affecting either too diffused a variety or too circumscribed an
Identity: his fervency, discretion and sincerity, always set his prayers far
from any thing either of a verbal and vain repetition, or a flat and barren
invention: he ever highly esteemed, and devoutly used, the Liturgy of the
Church.

Indeed he Prayed, or Preached, or Practiced, continually the Scholar, the
Christian and the Divine: his whole life, as to the conversable part of it, was
so Civil, so Sacred, so Affable, so Amiable, so Useful, so Exemplary to all
persons of any Worth, Ingenuity and Honesty that came to him, that (in earnest)
nothing Ancient or Modern that ever I knew or read of in these British
Churches, or any foreign Nation, was more August, Venerable, Imitable and
Admirable than this blessed Bishop; such Candor, yet Power, such Largeness,
yet singleness of heart, such Majesty with meekness, appeared in all that he
seriously said or did. I never saw him either morose or reserved, much less
sour or supercilious. If he were sad, it made him not silent, but only more
solemn, as night-pieces, which have admirable work of perspective in them,
though not so much light with them: if he were chereful, he abhorred not such
facetious and ingenious elegancies of discourse as showed that Risiblity was as
proper to Religion as Reason, that Holiness was no enemy to Cheerfulness, but
great graces might safely smile, and innocent virtues sometimes laugh without
offense.

He was indeed (as the Church of Smyrna testifies of holy Polycarp, their first
Bishop, there placed by St. John the Apostle, (...).
) a most Apostolic person, a true Divine, a most exemplary Christian, and a
most Venerable Bishop, equalizing (without doubt) if not exceeding, any one of
the ancient famous Bishops and chief Fathers of the Church, not only in his
Primitive Piety, but in his great literature; for he was jointly excelling in
all those things wherein they were severally most commendable: he was, as our
Savior says of John Baptist, a Prophet, yea, greater than an ordinary
Prophet; for among the children of men, or children of God and of the true
Church, Mat. 11.11*
there has not since the Apostles days been born a greater than He. If I, or
any man, were able to reach the Height, Length, Depth and Breadth of his Gifts
and Graces, his acquired and infused endowments, some taste or essay of which
his faithful friend and servant Dr. Bernard (as Timothy to this St. Paul) has
given, and is daily further imparting to the world, yet no Epitomes or little
Volumes are able to contain so ample a subject, nor give that satisfaction to
Learned men at home and abroad, as is justly exspectable from so copious and
complete a theme.

Whose humble and holy industry was such, that besides his vast designs for
Writing and Printing, he never failed, since he was Presbyter, Prelate or
Primate, to preach once every week, if health permitted him, besides many times
on the weekday upon occasion; which was so far from being his reproach, as if
he made himself too cheap (as some men of more pompous than pious spirits have
calumniated,) that, like David's dancing before the Lord, it turned not to his
diminution, but to his great honor among all People, Presbyters, Prelates,
Peers and Princes, that had any knowledge what was the true dignity of a
Divine, and the commendation of a Christian Bishop: nor was it any great pains
to a person of his fullness, who did not pump for, but pour out his Sermons
like a pregnant spring, with a strange Plenty, Clarity and Vivacity.

Certainly, if all our Bishops had so honored God according to their Places,
Parts and Strength, by imitating the best of their Predecessors, yea the
Apostles, and our Lord Jesus Christ, the greatest Bishop and greatest Preacher,
it is very probable, not only Bishops but Episcopacy had at this day suffered
less diminution and dishonor: if all Bishops hearts and mouths had been as
open as his, sure they had stopped the mouths and silenced the tongues of all
their adversaries. But by this and other, either real failings or supposed
defects, of some few Bishops (as in Sea-banks where low and weak) the horrid
inundation has broke in upon Episcopacy and all Bishops with such a torrent of
violence, that we see the best of them could not keep out nor stand before the
impetuosity of the times; which if any Bishops, in any Age or Church, might
have merited and hoped to have done, this excellent Primate, and other Bishops
then in England and Ireland might have done it, who were persons of so great
Learning, Piety, Moderation, Humility.

For besides the many other most accomplished Bishops then in England, Scotland
and Ireland, who is so blind as not to see this one illustrious Bishop, the
Primate of Armagh capble, as to the true cause of Episcopacy, to have
over-shined, both as to his Learning, Judgment and Life (as the Sun in the
firmament,) all those Comets and Meteors, those blazing and falling Stars,
which either then did or since have appeared eccentrick or opposite to
Primitive and Catholic Episcopacy?

Take them in their straggling novelties, or in their associating confederacies,
or in their congregational conventicles, however they may seem by false
glasses, or grosser mediums, to be magnified in some men's imaginations, and so
set off to vulgar admiration among weak and womanly apprehensions; yet neither
for Scripture-proportions, nor for Catholic practice, nor for right reason,
nor for true prudence and Christian polity, are they any way to be compared
either to the Antiquity or Majesty of true Episcopacy: For which the Judgment,
Humility, Moderation and Integrity of this excellent Bishop is so clearly set
forth, both by his constant practice and all his writings, (wherein, for peace
sake, he willingly joined an orderly Presbytery with a Venerable Episcopacy;
that neither grave Counsel, nor comely Order, nor just Authority, nor
Christian Unity should be wanting in the Churches Government) that it is an
error worse than the first, for men not yet to return from their Paroxysmes
and Transports against all Presidentiall Episcopacy, or not to close with so
great a judgment, so grave an Oracle, as this holy Bishop was. Who, however he
held a Fraternall Correspondency and Actual Communion (as occasion offered)
with those Reformed, Churches and those Ministers who approved, yea desired,
Episcopacy, though they could not enjoy any Bishops properly so called after
the custom of all ancient Churches; yet, with St. Cyprian, he flatly
condemned, and branded with the sin and Scandal of Schism, Sine spe sunt, and
perditionem maxim^m Dei indignatione acquirunt, qui Schism^ta serunt, and
relicto Episcopo suo, alium sibi for^s Pseudo^^iscopum consttuunt. Cypr. Epist.
61. lib. 1.
all those who wilfully cast off, and injustly separated from, their lawful
Bishops, who professed the same Orthodox Faith and Reformed Religion;
affirming, as I have been further most credibly informed, that he would not
(because with comfort and good conscience he could not) receive the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper from such Ministers hands, whose Odination he esteemed
irregular and incomplete, or for their consecration inauthoritative, because
partial, and schismatic against that Episcopal power which ever was, and
still might be had, in this Church.

Nor was this his censure heightened or sharpened by any anger or vindicative
passion, though he was unhandsomely used by some men who heretofore much
applauded him: from such distempers his Mosaic meekness was most remote,
especially in cases of Religion and the Churches public concernments; for the
advance of which he could have cheerfully sacrificed all his private interest
of honor or profit, and have been reduced to teach School in a belfry, as his
phrase was. But he ever held to his pristine and constant judgment in the most
prosperous times, which enjoyed him the same as did his adversities; no losses
and distresses, to which the Fatality, Fury, Folly or Ingratitude of this Age
reduced him, being able to cloud his judgment, or discompose his tranquillity,
in any other, or in this sharp controversy touching Episcopacy.

And indeed, to add to the further weight and crown of this excellent Bishop,
(who deserved to be esteemed one of the Primates of all Learning, Piety and
Virtue in the Christian world,) he was (by Gods wonderful dispensations) to be
made a Primate in sufferings, and to be more illustrious by those darknings
which on all hands were cast upon his person and profession, as a Preacher and
as a Prelate. He lived to see, yea to feel, his Venerable person by some men
shamefully slighted, (who saw more brightness in a sharp sword than in all
Learned virtues;) his function, as a Bishop, exautorated, decryed, depressed,
despised; his Revenues first stopped, then alienated and confiscated; his
moderate stock of movables (all, except his excellent Library) and at last a
reserve of some moneys, about 2000. pound, seized and swept away by the Irish.
The news of which last (as I was witness at the first coming of it,) he
received with so no trouble or emotion, that it made me see in this holy man,
that the patience of Job might well be a true history, and not a Tragic
parable.

After this the profits of the Bishopric of Carlisle (then vacant) being
conferred upon him by the late King, for the support of his age and exile, even
these were taken from him by those that took all Church-revenues from all
Bishops: yet, (for shame) a Pension of four hundred pounds a year, as his
Lordship has told me, was promised him when he was forced to yield up his
Interest in the Revenues of Carlisle; which Pension, after a year or two, was
never paid him. At last this great Personage, the Primate of Armagh (whom
Cardinal Richelieu, with many other great Princes and States, had invited with
very honorary propositions to make only his residence with them, as an honor
to their Country) was reduced to a small stipend or salary of about two hundred
pounds a year, which he was to earn by preaching, as long as his sight and
strength served him. These failing him, (and in him all the learned and better
world) he lived upon Gods Providence and the Contributions (for the most part)
of some noble Personages, (wherein I was happy to do him some service:) among
whom none has merited, and erected a more lasting Monument of Honor, than the
Countess of Peterborough, under whose grateful and hospitable roof this Mortal
Angel, this incomparable Bishop, left, as the English, so all the World, which
was not worthy of him, having of later years treated him with so little public
value, that while Merchants, Military men, and mean Mechanics, either get fair
Estates, or have good pay, pensions and gainful employments, while young
Presbyterian and Independent Preachers possess themselves (some by
dispossessing others) of the best Livings they can seize, this aged Bishop,
this inestimable Jewel of men, this brightest Star of the British Churches and
Christian World, this Paragon of Prelates, this Glory of Episcopacy was
suffered to be so eclipsed, that, with St. Paul, he knew what it was to want as
well as to abound. He had not, with our Blessed Savior, any house to rest his
head in, nor a foot of land which he might call his own: He seemed to live, as
St. Chrysostom says of St. Paul, (...), only with a naked soul, or a
sublimated Spirit, as much above the glory of the world, as he had been
stripped of it and by it; being careful in nothing save only to discharge a
good conscience to God and men, as he did both living and dying, esteeming this
the greatest Treasure and Honor to those that are daily dying to the world,
even while they live in it. He was equally remote from Lucifer and Mammon, from
Haughtiness as from Covetousness: as he complained not of Tenuity, so he
owned not that deserved Eminency which he had by any outward token, never
appearing of later years in any other than a plain Gown and Cassock, as an
ordinary Presbyter. A person so rich in all excellencies, and yet so poor, even
to an annihilation, in his own Spirit, Mat. 5.3.
partakes (no doubt) of that first great Beatitude, The Kingdom of Heaven.

But, as if all that burden, while this blessed Bishop lived, had no been
sufficient to depress this Atlas, this Job, this Elias, there wan-tted not some
men, (who go for Ministers) who, to show their despite and insolency against
all Bishops and Episcopacy, durst own and declare their scorn and disdain
against this excellent Lord Bishop and Primate while he lived, by not
vouchsafing to own or call him by any of these most deserved Titles, nor
enduring the style of Armachanus to be added to his name. O pitiful Parasites!
most obsequiously courting other men with the nauseous and repeated Crambes of
Your Honor, Your Lordship, My good Lord, etc. whose neither place nor personal
worth and merit in Church or State, is, or ever can be, (without a miracle)
comparable to this renowned Lord and Bishop, if pious Impartiality, and not
secular Flattery, might be judge. Ask all the Christian and learned World, what
man of any Learning, Honor and Ingenuity, from home or abroad, ever wrote to
him, or made mention of his name, without exquisite Prefaces and studied
Epithets of signal honor and respect; which attributes of Lordship and Grace
given to Bishops are no news, nor any way offensive, save only to Mechanic
Ignorance or Envy; there being nothing in all Antiquity more frequent on all
hands, than the honorable compellations and additions of ((...) and (...))
Domine, and Multum venerande, of Dominatio, Dignitas and Paternitas, of
Honorable Lord and Venerable Father ascribed to worthy Bishops: Among whom
none was more worthy of all Attributes fit to be given to a mortal man than
this Bishop; whose greatest diminutions (like the seeming Eclipses of the Sun)
did not lessen his light, but only hide him more from the World. He was as
truly worthy to be Honored, Emulated, Admired, Magnified and Imitated of all
good men in all Ages, as any one person that ever I knew in all my life; which
(as Plato said of Socrates) I think much the more blessed of God, because I
lived in those days which gave me the opportunity, honor and happiness both
to know and be known to this great Exemplar of all learned worth, this grand
pattern of Bishops, Preachers, Scholars and Christians.

Nor was it the least cordial I had in the difficulties and horrors of later
years, to remember that I was not far from such an open Sanctuary, that I might
have frequent recourse to such a full and free Magazin of all Christian Graces
and Gifts: nor did I think we could be completely miserable and utterly
desolated, as to the Church, while this great Genius was yet alive and in
England; in whom, by a rare and wonderful conjunction, such high abilities were
mixed with unparalleled humility, such Candor and Gentleness did temper his
Gravity, and such Serenity did sweeten the severer Sanctity of his life, that
he seemed to me not so much a man, as a kind of miracle or prodigy of humane
perfections: especially when I remember, not long before his death, those
unfeigned tears which I saw, and those humble complaints which I heard, not for
his losses, but for his sins and omissions, earnestly deprecating Gods
displeasure, and dreading his exact Tribunal. Who will not fear and tremble,
who will not wax wan and discolored, when he sees a Rubie of so great price
and orient luster contract pallor and amazement?

As for the many sufferings or indignities he had sustained, I never perceived
the least regret or sigh, much less any bitter and revengfull replies. A very
great sense indeed he expressed, and very often with sadness and compassion,
for the distractions of this Church, the deformities of our Religion, and the
feared future desolations, which he often and earnestly seemed to presage as near
at hand, always jealous that our Religious feuds and factions would at last
end in Papal Superstition and mutual oppressions: Against both which this
good Bishop, and so many, yea most, of his Brethren, were, I believe, as much
enemies, and as far removed, both in their judgments and endeavors, as the
most Antiepiscopall Presbyter or Independent in the world; being much better
able to give a reason of his distance from them, than they can for their
defiance of him and all Bishops.

Against the deluge of whose partiality and passion I have thus opposed the
Barricado or Peire, this one great instance of a most unblameable Bishop,
purposely to vindicate, against all men's impudence, ignorance or malice, the
consistence of Episcopacy with Piety, and the vast distance between Primitive
Prelacy and after-Popery. Tru^y, in my judgment, this one Bishop out-weighs
all that ever was or can be alleged against Episcopacy; who not only while he
lived mightily justified the function, but before he died his earnest desire
was, that such a due succession of Episcopal Authority might be regularly
preserved in England, as might keep up the completenesse and validity of
Ecclesiastical and Catholic Ordination, first against the Calumnies of
Papists, who infinitely joy in the advantages they have got of such a
Schismatic reproach upon us; next, against the rage and impertinencies of other
factions, who will in time bring all Reformed and Christian Religion to a
consumption, if they either quite obstruct, or utterly destroy Primitive and
Apostolic Episcopacy, which that great Bishop esteemed as ( vena porta,) the
great vein, which has from the Apostles conveyed, in all Ages, all
Ecclesiastical Order, Power, Authority and Jurisdiction. Which undoubtedly was
the judgment of all Antiquity; otherwise all Churches would not have been so
impatient of being without their Bishops at any time, nor would Bishops have
been so careful, in the times of persecution, to propagate an holy succession
of Bishops, without any remarkable or long interruption, never failing in any
Church till this last Age, nor in England till of late years: Primitive
Bishops not considering the pleasures or displeasures of men, great or small,
in so grand a concern as what they believed was pleasing to God, profitable for
the Church, and necessary for Ecclesiastical Authority; which they thought
could no more stand without Episcopacy, than a body can without its legs. Nor
did Antiquity either use, or know, or want the late Crutches of Presbytery, or
the stilts of Independency, which, to make themselves seem useful, have sought
to cut off the native pillars and proper supports of this Church to the very
stumps, not without infinite pain to some parts, and those principal ones too,
of the Body, besides constant diminution and deformity to the whole.

Which will in my judgment, which willingly follows so great a guide as the
Lord Primate, never in England be well at its ease, or in any posture of
Stability, Unity, Beauty and Honor, until Episcopacy be beheld and embraced in
its native luster and Primitive posture: First, as designed by the Orderly
Power and Wisdom of God; Secondly, as instituted and actuated by the Spirit of
Christ and his Apostles; Thirdly, as received and used without any scruple in
all Primitive Churches, when once they were fully planted and established in
Ecclesiastical Polities or Spiritual Corporations; not one Church, in all
Ages, either denying, or doubting, or disputing the Catholic Authority of
Bishops; Fourthly, which they saw every way most agreeable, as to the nature of
mankind, so to the different stations of Christians, and to that necessary
order which ought to be among Ministers as well as other people; Fifthly, and
to none more than to the English Nation, where the blessings by Episcopacy are
now the more remembered and remarkable, by the Miseries, Disorders, Divisions,
Insolences, Horrors and Confusions which have befaln us since we took away the
chief buttresses and pillars of the Church, as if they were burdensome and
superfluous, when indeed they were not less ornamentall, than useful and
necessary to the well-being of it at least, if not to the very being of it in
us integrality and completeness.

Hist. Theod. l. 5. c. 34.
I am sure, the ejection of Episcopacy, like the banishment of St. Chrysostom
out of Constantinople, has hitherto been attended and followed in England with
great Earthquakes and terrible shakings of other men's Palaces and Houses as
well as those of Bishops; whose turning out of the House of Lords by the Vote
of about twenty Lords, made so wide a door and breach to that House, that none
of those Peers (who were more impatient to sit with such Learned and grave men
under the same roof, than St. John was to be in the same bath with Cerinthus)
could long stay within those walls; the justice of Heaven (as some conjecture)
so far retaliating men's passions with speed upon their own heads: the Divine
wisdom (I doubt not) seeing and approving as much of Beauty, Order, Prudence,
Unity and Stability in true Episcopacy, as he sees, and abhors, much of
Novelty, Weakness, Fatuity, Partiality, Deformity and Confusion in any other
ways of Church Government, which cannot but be as defective and dubious, as
they are novel and partial, no way conform to the Catholic Custom of the
Churches of Christ, nor any way either invented, approved or authorized by the
sociall wisdom and joint consent of all those in this Church and State, who
were concerned as highly in all changings of Government, as any of those men
are who have been most forward to make strange alterations, and to remove the
ancient Landmarks.

CHAP. XXV.
BUt it is high time to take my last Farewell of this long and oft-debated Cause
of Primitive and Catholic Episcopacy; Commending this Church of England, with
the Reformed Religion, to the Piety and Wisdom of all Persons of Honor and
Honesty.
which truly I think in my Conscience to be the Cause, First, of God, as he is
the God of Order and Wisdom, and not of Folly or Confusion; Secondly, the Cause
of Jesus Christ our blessed Savior, whose Spirit constituted and guided the
Apostles, with all their holy Successors, in this Method of Ecclesiastical
Communion and Subordination; Thirdly, the Cause of Christ's Catholic Church,
which we ought not, in modesty or charity, so highly to reproach, as to impute
ignorance or perverseness to it, that either it knew not the way of Christ at
first, or it wilfully and presently forsook it by an universal Apostasy, to
gratify some few men's ambition. Fourthly, I esteem it the special Cause of
this Church and Nation: first, because it was never blessed with any
Church Government but that by Bishops; secondly, it has been, and is,
miserably shattered and abased by the casting off and want of Episcopacy; and
thirdly, for the native temper of the people, who are not apt to be governed by
any men not duly invested with the Majesty of some eminent Worth, adorned with
special Power, Honor and Estates, which together give Authority. Fifthly, I
think it the Cause of all good Ministers, that desire to keep themselves in a
true Church Order and Catholic Communion; who will find themselves, and leave
their Posterity, at a great loss, (as to the Honor, Setledness and Safety of
the Christian and Reformed Religion) unless they be restored to some such
uniform way of public Subordination and Unity, as has most safety,
consistency and authority in it self, also most satisfaction to all learned,
wise and honest men. All which things are no where (that I see) to be found but
in a regular and primitive Episcopacy; which ows its late total ruin and
shipwreck in England, not to its own age and leakinesse, (as if it sunk of it
self) nor to the general dislike and weariness of it, as if the wisdom and
power of the Nation, Prince and People, of all estates, had, upon serious, free
and impartial advice, concluded to sink it, having provided a better Vessel:
but its ruin is the effect of a terrible and fatal storm, which came first out
of the North upon us; this ran Episcopacy so, aground, that many despairing of
her ever coming off with any intireness, betook themselves to the Cock-bote of
Presbytery and the Skiff of Independency; when yet, I conceive, it were no hard
matter to recover Episcopacy, as to the primitive structure of it, although
much of its Ornaments and Gallantry be lost.

Certainly, the Restitution of primitive Episcopacy, for the Unity, Honor and
Happiness of the Nation as well as of all the Clergy, seems a Work, as of far
more prudence, justice and piety, so of much less charge and trouble than the
Ruin of it has cost us all: nor can it be strange to see some men change
their minds in religious concernments, who we see have soon done it in our
civil settlements.

This and other Blessings of Church Order and Unity will easily flow in upon
us, by a kind of Tide or Reciprocation of providence, beyond expectation, when
once the God and Savior, the King and Bishop, the great Protector and
President of his Church, shall please to breath a spirit truly Evangelical and
Christian upon this Nation; when all of us accepting of our punishment, and
repenting of our sinful follies and presumptions, the Lord will also repent of
the evil which he has brought upon us all, and think thoughts of Mercy toward
this languishing, afflicted, divided and deformed Church, whose Order, Peace,
Honor, Unity and Happiness, some of us weakly, others wantonly, and not a few
of us wickedly, have sinned away, to a state (in point of Ecclesiastical
Government) deplorable enough, and almost irreparable. For it is not new
Associations, or Confessions of Faith, or pretty Paraphrases on the Heads of
Religion, which do salve our sore; blessed be God, the Church of England needed
not these Crambes: It is only the God of Love and Father of Mercies who can
allay the spirits of Men, and bring them out of those contentious and c^uel
dispositions which are divisive, and so destructive to each other. True, we
have been three days dead and buried; yet no Corruption, no Dissolution, no
Dissipation can hinder the hand of omnipotent Goodness, when he shall please
to command a Resurrection, even to dry bones and scattered dust. Then may we
hope that this salvation of the most High draws near to us, when those that
are in highest place for power and Counsel, shall by impartial advise, both
of States men and Churchmen, in Synods as well as Parlaments, deliberate and
determine such things as shall gratify no one or more Factions or Parties, but
the community or public; with regard not so much to the present pregnant and
pugnant interests, (which are not without passion prosecuted and urged) as
chiefly to the future blessings of their Country and Posterity; which no
Government, as to the civil State, will make long happy or peaceful, unless
they be combined in religious regards as Christians, no less than as men: For
though Christians properly do not fight and contend, yet the men and beasts
will, if their hearts and hands be not bound with mutual Charity and Religious
Harmony; which are the surest bonds of Unity, Perfection and Peace.

To let the concernments of this Church and the state of the Reformed Religion
alone, to leave them as now they stand (or fall rather into daily Decaies,
Divisions, Distractions, mutual animosities and abhorrencies between Ministers
and other Christians,) to let them take their course, and work out themselves
by an irreligious tolerancy and imprudent indifferency, is (as St. (...).
Basil. Aturbio, ep. 181.
Basil the Great observes) like the leaving of a desperate Consumption, or a
spreading Cancer, or a venomous Gangrene, or a contagious Plague, to the cure
of good nature and providence, expecting what Time will do; (which is indeed a
Catholicon that either cures or consumes, mends or ends, all things.) A method
far short of that Prudence and Conscience which ought studiously and
industriously to apply all those seasonable and apt means, which both Reason
and Religion, Piety, Charity, Policy, and Humanity do dictate to us, and
require of us; which being in the power of our hands, not to use them, must
needs be such a supine negligence and sottish laziness, as neither becomes
wise men nor good Christians; savouring more of an earthy dullness and an
Atheistical indifferency, than of any quick sense of Honor or Conscience in
behalf of our God, our Savior, our Religion, our own or other men's souls. In
all which to be careless and stupid, is the less venial in us as men,
because in other things, like Spiders, we have a very quick sense and most
acute resentment of any thing that in the least kind touches or threatens our
civil, worldly, and momentany concernments, for Estate, Honor or safety: here
we are vigilant to prevent, speedy to consult, diligent to endeavor, desperate
to adventure. Which high activity in matters Momentany, renders our coldness
and lukewarmenesse in Religion most unexcusable before God and man; being more
afraid of an Enemy than an Heresy, of civil Sedition than of Ecclesiastic
Schisms, of a sharp Sword than a damnable error; more solicitous to save our
Carcases than our Souls, and to sleep in whole skins, than to keep good
Consciences; pretending (as some do) that nothing is more Religious, than to
urge, injoyne and require nothing in Religion, that the highest Christian
Liberty is an Indifferency or toleration left to all men toward all Religions,
especially if they do but pretend to any smack of Christianity.

I know that this indulging of an equal toleration to all parties and Sects in
Christian Religion, (by which, as Cocks in a pit, they may fight it out till
they have got the Mastery of each other) has a popular show of Equanimity and
tenderness; being much applauded by those that have had of late years the
real benefit of it, though they are the most supercilious and severe
suppressors of others, who do but crave an equal and inoffensive share of
freedom, as to their Judgments, Consciences and Religion: yet if we look to
the bottom of such indulgences as gratify men's endless Novelties, Varieties,
Vanities and Extravagancies in Religion, we shall find they have little of true
Charity, less of true Piety, and least of all of true Policy, either in
Magistrates or Ministers; whose duty (I humbly conceive) is not so much to
build their own several nests, and to feather them with their private fancies,
where to lay and hatch up their various opinions; but they should all agree to
build Gods house, to advance that common salvation, according to the Catholic
Order and Example of Christ's Church. They should speedily, faithfully and
impartially set themselves to settle and maintain, by all fit means, such a
way of true Religion, as to its public Profession, solemn Ministration, and
paternall Government, as shall be found, by the joint Wisdom and Piety of the
Nation, in Learned Synods impartially convened* and in free Parlaments
peaceably disposed, to be most consonant to Gods word as to the substance of
duties, and to Primitive Custom as to the manner or Circumstances of them.

A work certainly not more necessary than easy, if men's hearts were as upright
as they are able, with Gods blessing, to attain so good a design. Nor would
men fail to be warm and diligent in it, if they had a true perception either
of the great advantages which attend the Unity of any Nation in Religion, or of
the mischiefs, public and private, which follow their distractions, while
every one, out of a childish and inordinate delectation, is indulging their own
private humors and opinions, to the injury and neglect of the public.

I see that in Terrors of fire, shipwreck or inundation, even devout people
will fly from their Prayers, Sermons and Sacraments, to secure themselves or
their neighbors: with how much more zeal and earnestness should wise men
dispense a little with their private interests, secular Counsels and civil
agitations, and sometimes apply to the reliefes and securities of Religion, if
they did apprehend and lay to heart the pernicious consequences which are
inseparable from the Divisions and Distractions of Religion? whereof I have
given in the Second Book so many and so miserable instances.

If the work were but once well begun, it would be half done: lesser disputes
would fall of themselves, if once, as to the maine of Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Church Government, sober men were agreed: if the maine sores of
Pride, Passion, Prejudice and Presumption were well searched and cleansed,
Charity, like a precious balsame, would soon work out, close and heal all
uncomfortable jealousies and distances among good Christians.

However, some public standard owned and established for the settled Truth and
Order of the Reformed Religion on all sides, would (by casting Anchor as it
were) give some good stay at present, beyond what the particular Confessions of
several parties are like to do, such as I see both Presbyterian Associations
and Independent Congregations daily bring forth; and so will every new form do,
till we all agree in something uniform, as to the maine Rule, End and Order of
Religion. This once done, however there might still be some tossings and
dis-satisfactions as to private men's opinions; yet, as to the maine interests
of Religion as Christian and Reformed, also as to the grand concernments of
this Church, in its Unity, Honor, Purity and just Privileges, these would by
such Ligatures and limits of Truth and Love be much preserved from running into
endless factions and sacrilegious confusions, which cannot but tend to civil
combustions, and end at last in the Romish usurpation, which, as the Dam of
Romulus, never fails to make its prey of any Churches that are divided and any
Christians that are scattered, dis-satisfied or scandalized with their
Religion; by which means either our Thames will run to Tiber, or Tiber will
come to our Thames. This will be the last result these the dregs and bottom of
our Religious distractions and unsetlednesse, if they be not wisely remedied.

Mean time, for want of some such sober fixation and equal standard of
Religion in its public profession, to which both Prince and people of all
sorts might both wisely consent and conform, First, there cannot be that mutual
Christian Charity and neighbourly Communion among subjects; Next, there cannot
be that kindness or correspondence, that Love and Fidelity between Prince and
people, which would be if they did say Amen to the same prayers, and serve the
same God in the same manner. Civil disaffections do infallibly follow between
Sovereigns and Subjects upon any Diversity in Religion; as is evident not
only in Germany, Poland, France, Ireland and Scotland, (where the greatest
popular dis-satisfactions and asperities against their Princes were still
raised by the jealousies which some people had of their Religion) but also in
England, while Subjects suspected as if their Governors in Church and State did
daily warp from that Religion which was Reformed, and established in the Church
of England: from which, at last, it appears none varied less than those that
have been most destroyed, none more than those whose jealousies and passions
for Reformation have overborn them and this Church to as great deformities as
there are novelties, and to as many distractions as there are divisions; which
in Religion, as wounds, do not only divide, but deface the beauty of any body
Natural, Civil and Ecclesiastic. Nor can there be any public discrepancies
of Religion between Prince and people, but either the Prince cries out of
Faction, Sedition and Rebellion, against his subjects; or subjects complain of
Tyranny and Persecution, as to their Princes injunctions, at least of
superstition, as to his profession, if it be with more ceremony or less
solemnity than they fancy, or are wonted to. Yea, we find by some men's
interpretation of their Covenant, the clause for allegiance thus limited in the
preservation of true Religion* that is, say some, as far as we think the King
preserves what seems to us true Religion, so far we will be faithful to him;
if he varies from that, we may fall from him.

Besides these mischiefs, which are either imminent or incumbent, and indeed
unavoidable, where Prince and People are still left to choose their several
Religions amidst the Varieties and Uncertainties of different Modes and Forms,
of opposite Preachers, Parties, Professions and Churches, (such as now divide
not only England, but all Christendom) in time the Prince or chief Magistrate
here in England, or any Christian and Reformed Church, may be either an
Atheist, as unsettled in any Religion, because he sees so many; or else he may
be an Idolater, an Arrian, a Socinian, a Papist, an Anabaptist, a Familist, a
Seeker, a Quaker, any thing or nothing, as well as a Protestant, or Professor
of the true Reformed Religion, which is never well Reformed, if it be not well
united and established, no more than a diseased body is well cured or purged,
which is daily breaking out in boyles and botches.

And since experience shows us in England, that many Subjects, by the scandal
of our Divisions, are turned Atheists, Papists, Socinians, Anabaptists,
Familists, Seekers, Ranters, Quakers, any thing, yea nothing, as to true
Religion, which consists in Piety, Equanimity, Charity, the Love of God and our
Neighbor; what shall hinder those that hereafter may be in Sovereign power,
and exposed to many temptations, to take the same freedom when they list, and
to profess Popery or any thing, when Religion is left to their choice and
Indifferency? there being no public Worship, Catechize, Articles or Canons to
which all agree as the Card and Compass of Religion, by which both Prince and
People may safely and unanimously steer their course toward Heaven, in a
Christian consent and harmony, much more punctual and explicit than that is of
owning only one God, (which the Turks do) and one Lord Jesus Christ, (which
all Heretics and Schismatics do.)

Which sad fate of a Prince and People who are every day to seek and choose, or
change their Religion, cannot befall England without sore conflicts and many
bloody bickerings; the temper of the English being not so dull, and phlegmatic,
and overawed, as that which possesses some Dutchmen and Almaines, whose zeal
for trade and gain (besides their social drinking, which begins and ends all
their differences) makes them more capable to endure different professions of
Religion among them, so far as they do not endanger the civil peace, nor
obstruct their blessed commerce: yet even these Churches and States have some
settled form and profession of Religion, in Doctrine, worship and discipline:
yea, they in the Netherlands have a very handsome Liturgy, and other public
boundaries or Symbols of their Religion, from which when once their Magistrates
perceived such variations to grow, by the Remonstrants party, as might shake
their civil peace and the stability of their Church, they did, to their no
small cost and pains, stop the breach, both by the Synod of Dort and the power
of the Sword, not permitting those whom the public sense counted Innovators in
Religion, to enjoy any such freedom or toleration as might endanger any public
perturbations, which would have grown easily from such parties as wanted not
Learning, Wit and Pretentions of Piety, on each side, to carry on their
Opinions as far as their passions and interests listed, which is to have Empire
and Dominion, not only over all men's bodies, but their souls too, either by
fair or foul means: for no Opinion or Sect is content with the Trundle-bed or
Footstool, but affects the Throne and Scepter, of State and of Religion, that
it may have a complete sovereignty over men; which is never well managed by
private men's petty activities, and therefore best prevented by the public
Wisdom, Moderation and Setledness, which ought to be in every Nation, State,
Kingdom or Commonwealth that owns it self as a Church of Christ, who is but one
Lord, and has taught all his Disciples but one Religion.

All sober and honest men (whose fishing and harvest lies not in our troubles)
do sufficiently see that Religion, as Christian and Reformed, has suffered
very much in England, when it was best settled: we have upon us the wounds both
of peace and war. As our former long peace and undeserved prosperity treasured
up much morbifick matter, so the civil war, by mutual chafings and
exasperatings, did breed higher inflammations and festrings; yea, and our late
truce, rather than tranquillity, has been so far from a serious consideration
and well-advised settling of our distractions in Religion, that many men have
had but more leisure and liberty to scratch their own and other men's scabious
itchings, and to make wider the gaping corifices of our religious Ulcers.
Indeed, private hands can do no other, who besides their petulant passions,
being under no public restraint and modesty, have infinite partialities, both
as to self-flatteries and designs. It must be the Gravity and Majesty, the
Nobleness and Ampleness of public Wisdom and Authority, which must by prudence
and impartiality, both in counsels and actions, reach the depth, and equal the
proportions either of our maladies or our remedies: to which if wise and worthy
men do not in time contribute their counsels, prayers and endeavors, for the
help and healing of our Religious Affairs, doubtless the disorders and sinister
policies of either weak or wicked men will utterly ruin the very remains and
ruins of this Church. Nor can the Civil State be ever steady or permanent,
where Prince and Subjects, Preachers and People are so divided, (in their
principles and practices of Religion, both as to their Ministry and
Ministration, as to the original and exercise of all Ecclesiastical Authority
and Communion) that they still think it a great part of their Religion either
to reform or ruin each other.

It is observed to be one main pillar of the Turkish Polity, Peace and Empire,
which is so vast and diffused, yet generally so peaceable and unanimous, that
their Religion or Holy Law (as they call it) being once settled, is never
permitted by any man to be shaken or disputed, much less altered or innovated
in the least kind. I know it is not fit for Christians to follow all Mohammedan
rigors and severities, no more than their follies and simplicities; yet, if the
setledness of so wild a Rhapsody of Religion as the Alcoran contains, (which is
made up of Truth and Falsehood, of Fables and Fancies, of Dreams and Dotages) be
of so great moment to preserve their civil peace, where no wise man can be much
concerned what is believed or disbelieved by him, or any man, in such a mere
Romance of Religion, of how much more consequence and conscience would it be to
all Christians, in any Polity or Nation, to have their Religion well fixed and
settled, which is so Ancient, so Holy, so True, so Venerable, so Divine, so in
its Nature, Center and Circumference but one, so deserving to be most United
and Uniform, both as to its Doctrine and Profession? It is a shame to see
Mahometans wiser in their generation than Christians, who are, or ought to be,
the children of that Wisdom and that Light which shines upon them all by the
Scriptures, as the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness. It is childish for us,
who are cunning and careful enough to preserve civil peace, to be so careless
of religious Unity and Harmony, as to be tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, according to the sleight of men, who lie in wait to deceive the
hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18.
serving not the Lord, but their own bellies. We should rather study to be
rooted and grounded in the Catholic Truth, which is according to Holiness,
Justice, Order and Charity, after the primitive pattern and constant practice
of all true Churches, Preachers and Professors; whose Authority and Reverence
ought to sway more with us, than any new and private men's Inventions, which no
man will admire that well understands the old, which were so founded upon
Verity, so fortified by Charity, so edified in Unity, so reverend for
Antiquity, so permanent in their Constancy, according to the particular
constitutions of every Church, which still kept the great and Catholic
Communion, as to the main, amidst some little varieties of outward profession,
not as to substance, but only in Circumstances or Ceremony: For, as to the
main, every Christian, Layical or Clerical, Catechumens, Penitents and
Communicants, Deacons and Presbyters, kept the stations in which God and the
Church had set them.

Every member kept to its Congregation, every Congregation to its ordained
Presbyter or lawful Minister, every Presbyter to his own Bishop, every Bishop
to his Metropolitan, every Metropolitan to his Patriarch, every Patriarch
(not to the Pope, but) to the General Councills, and every General Council
to the Scriptures, and those Apostolic Traditions which were Catholic, and so
agreeable to them. All which orderly gradations were, certainly, in the
Catholic Church as lawful as those which the policy of Presbytery has
invented, for Congregationall, Classical, Provincial and National
Consistories: I am sure they were much more useful. For those of old preserved
every private Christian, every Family, every City, every Country, every
Province, every Nation that was Christian, not only in a Church Way or
Ecclesiastical Communion and Correspondency, as to their particular bounds and
nearer relations in every Parish, or Congregation, or City, or Country; but as
to that Catholic bond of Charity which binds up all Christians in all the
world in one fellowship of one body, and one Church, whose head is Christ; to
whom every true believer and visible Professor in the whole latitude of the
Church being, by the Word and Spirit of Christ, fitly joined together and
compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, does both edify and increase it self and
others in Truth and Love, without which all Churches, all Religion and all
Reformation are but like parts or members separate from their body, not without
flesh, sinews, substance or bones, but yet without blood and Spirits, Life and
Soul.

For, as the particular parts and members of the natural body do not live,
thrive and move, only by that particular substance, spirit, That all right
Excommunication is by the Authority, and out of the Communion of the true
Cathotholick Church.
life and aptitude which is (apart) in them, but by a concurrence with, an
influence from, and a participation of, that common Spirit, Life and Virtue
which they have from the whole, while they are in Communion with it: so is it
with Christians, singly and severally considered their virtue is small, and
separated none at all, because they want so much of Authority and Validity, as
they want of Catholic Unity and Ecclesiastical harmony, which keep Christians
and Churches entire to Christ and to each other, by that one and common spirit,
which runs through all true Christians; by virtue of which, and not of any
private spirit, all public transactions, which concern any nobler part or
portion of Christ's Church, are to be carried on, and anciently were in all
orderly Churches as branches of the Catholic.

This, this great and public Communion in the same Faith, Spirit, Power and
Authority, Council. Nic. Canon 5. De Communione privatis, sive ex clero, sive
laico Ordine, ab Episcopis per unamquamque Provinciam. (...). Council. Nic.
Canon 5. (...) etc. (...).
was it that made the just and valid sentence of Excommunication in Primitive
times so terrible, and that of absolution so comfortable, to all good
Christians, even as the sentence of Jesus Christ at the last day; which
Tertullian, Cyprian, the first Council of Nice, and others tell us of: Because
it was no private spirit of any Christian, or Congregation, or Church, or
Presbyter, or Bishop, or Metropolitan, or Patriarch, that properly did
excommunicate, but it was the Spirit, Power and Authority of Jesus Christ,
given to, diffused among, and shed abroad in, his whole body of the Catholic
Church, and in that name dispensed by the particular Bishops and Pastors of it
in their several Stations or Places; as the visuall and audible powers or
faculties which are in the soul are exerted and exercised only by the Eyes and
Ears. Hence was it that whoever was by any one Catholic Bishop with his
Presbyters and his people excommunicated, was thereby cast out of that and all
other Churches Communion in all the world; nor was it lawful, as the Nicene
Council and African Canons tell us, for any Bishop, Presbyter, or Christian
people, to receive into Church Fellowship or to the holy Communion of the
Eucharist any one that was thus secluded.

Then did this great and weighty Thunderbolt of Excommunication seemingly lose
its Primitive virtue and value, (not really, for it holds good still, according
to the Original Commission, when lawfully executed in binding or loosing, in
opening or shutting, as Christ deposited it with his Apostles and their
successors) when Factions or Schisms being risen in the Church, contrary
sentences of Excommunication were on all sides passionately bandied against
each other; not from that unity of the Spirit, which kept the bond of Truth and
Love, but from the private Passions, Presumptions, Prejudices and Opinions of
such as either openly deserted, or occasionally declined from, that Catholic
Community and Unity of one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, one Spirit, for gifts
and graces, for the Authority and Efficacy of Christ's holy Ministry.

After these preposterous and partial methods, not only many particular
Christians, but some Presbyters and Bishops, yea whole Synods and Councils,
have sometimes passed the sentences of Excommunication, both as to declaring
the guilt and merit of it, also to the act and execution of it, very
precipitantly, partially, passionately and uncharitably; even against such
Doctrines, Practices and Persons, as were orthodox and peaceable, really in
Communion with Christ and with the Catholic Church: of which one early, great
and sad instance was that in the second Century, of Victor Bishop of Rome, who
in the case of Easter grew so zealously exasperated against the Greek and
Eastern Churches, as Quartadecimans, that he thought them worthy to be
excommunicated in the name of all the Latin Churches; notwithstanding that
many grave and Learned Bishops, with their Churches, testified, that in
observing the fourteenth day of the month they followed the Primitive Custom
and pattern delivered by the Apostles to them; wherein St. Irenaeus (according
to his name) with greater Moderation and Charity sought not only to appease,
but to repress the inordinate heats of that Pope and his adherents, who had a
zeal, but not according to Charity, breaking Christian Communion while he urged
too much conformity in all outward things, beyond the liberty which was
granted, and had been long used in the Church: concluding, that difference of
times or days (not divinely determined) in the observation of the same duty,
ought not to make any breach of Catholic Unity and Christian Charity, but
rather assert and exercise that Christian Liberty which may, in
Circumstantialls as to outward Rites, be in the several parts of Christ's
Church, until all think fit to agree in that Circumstance of time, as well as
they did in the substance of the duty, which was the Eucharisticall Celebration
of Christ's Blessed Resurrections which was the reviving of the Christian faith
and hope. After this example did St. Cyprian in Africa, excommunicate those
that would not rebaptize, or did communicate with, such as Heretics and
Schismatics baptized; herein being contrary to the sense of the Catholic
Church.

At length these and the like passions or surprises even of some Orthodox
Bishops, were made patterns and encouragements to any pragmatick Heretics and
arrogant Schismatics: These, as they grew to any bulk and number, (like
Snow-balls by rouling) ventured to handle this hot Thunderbolt of
Excommunication, when they had most cause to fear it; because their Petulancy,
Obstinacy and Contumacy against the true and Catholic Churches Judgment and
Communion most deserved it, if their first error did not. Hence Excommunication
was at last every where reduced and debased to private spirits, full of pride,
revenge and partiality; the Catharists or Novatians, the Donatists and Arrians
feared not, by their Pseudoepiscopal Conventicles and Schismatical Assemblies,
to denounce these Terrors and Anathema's, and to use the sharp sword of
spiritual curses against the soundest parts of the Church; as some dared to do
against Athanasius, and all the Orthodox, both Bishops, Presbyters and People.

This made in aftertimes all Excommunication very much slighted and despised,
while it either served to little other use than to execute the Popes wrath, for
many hundred years of great Darkness and blind Devotion, or afterward, in times
of more Light and Heat, it was u^ed as Squibbs are, rather to scare and smut,
than much to burn or blast, those who either used it or abused it rather to
gratify their own private spirits, than to execute that public power and
Authority which Jesus Christ has committed, with his Spirit and Word, to his
Church and the Rulers of it; by which who so was justly cut off, cast out, and
given over to Satan, was looked upon as separate from the comfort of Communion
with Jesus Christ and the true God, as well as the true Church in all the World.

Nor was this only a declarative act, as to the merit of that fearful doom
and state, confirmed by the consonant suffrage of all the Church as damnabl^
without Repentance and Reconciliation, (of which every private Christian might
easily make a verbal report and oral denunciation;) but it was an authoritative
and effectual act, executive of the just and deserved judgment of God, so as
to be ratified in Heaven, according to the original tenor and validity of
Christ's Word and Commission, without Repentance: just as what is by virtue of
their Office done by any public Judge, Notarie or Herald, is not only
declarative, but also executive of the Will and command of the Prince,
specified in the authentic Commission or mandate under the Broad seal, which
is not only the voice of the King and his Council, but of the Law and public
Justice it self, yea of the whole Republic or Community; as every man lawfully
condemned by any Judge, or cast by any Jury, is virtually cast and condemned by
the Will, suffrage and consent of the Body politic, who are all consenting to
the Law, and concerned that justice be duly executed on some evil Members for
the good of the whole. So that the several degrees and subordinations in the
ancient Church of Christ, Canon 6.
even long before the first Nicene Council (as there is expressed) among
Churchmen and Bishops, (against which some have made so loud and ridiculous
clamors) were chiefly for this end, as Mr. Calvin and others have as
ingenuously as truly observed, that the holy correspondency of all Christians
and all Churches in one Faith and Truth, in one Spirit and Power, might not
only be most evident to the world, but most aptly carried on and preserved
against all Factions, Variations and Divisions, that they might by these means
be known to be of one heart and mind in the Lord, that they might all speak the
same things, and walk in the same steps; that what one condemned all might in
the same spirit condemn, what one forgave all might forgive; that none might,
upon any private passions, either excommunicate others by injurious abscission,
or themselves by voluntary separation, or make new confederacies and
associations with those who are either deserters of the Catholic Communion, or
justly excommunicated from it: which distempers of Ignorance, and Impatience,
and Imprudence among Christians have brought, as we see, this great power of
the Keys, and this exercise of Christian Discipline, so far into contempt,
that no man almost regards it from any hand; every one daring to make what
retortions they please, and to excommunicate any one or more, yea and whole
Churches, that do excommunicate them for any the most notorious errors and
insolences. Thus, as the Popes of Rome heretofore, so the people now in many
places challenge to themselves this power against their Neighbors and
Brethren, yea against their Preachers and Bishops, against the Fathers that
begat them, and the Mother- Church which did bear them.

So that, I confess, there is not so much cause of terror as of pity in most
Excommunications, as they are now managed by private and unauthoritative
spirits. O what sorrow, what shame is it to see so Sacred, so Solemn, so
Divine, so Dreadful an Institution, vilified and nullified, which was designed
for the health and welfare of the Church of Christ, by just and necessary
severi^ies, when it was, as it ought to be, soberly applied by wise, holy, and
impartial Governors of the Church in the name of Christ, and in the Catholic
Spirit or consent of all Orthodox Bishops, Presbyters and people, which was
able to shake Heaven and Hell, to open and shut the Everlasting doors of
Salvation or Damnation, according as the penitency or impenitency of offenders
did appear! To see this flaming sword, which was put by Christ into the
Cherubims hand (those that were the Angels of his Church) to keep the way of
the tree of life, to see this made the scarecrow and scorn of vile men, the
sport of petulant and peevish Spirits; who neither fear to inflict
Excommunication upon whom they list, as much as lies in their impotent malice,
nor yet to suffer it from the most Just, Impartial and Authoritative hands in
the world; from whom being once proudly separated, they fancy they are ((...))
out of the reach and danger of this just terror, and the others true Authority,
as lawful Bishops or Governors of the Church! whose heavy sentence if I
should incur so far, that any one true Bishop with his Clergy should pass it
against me, upon just grounds of my scandalous and obstinate sinning against
God and his Church, (according to the ancient, rightful and lawful way of
such proceedings in the Name and Spirit of Jesus Christ, to which all true
Christians in this Church and in all the world do submit and assent,) I confess
I should much more fear, living and dying, to lie under such a censure and
sentence, than to be condemned in my Estate, Liberty or Life, by any Court of
humane Justice, which reaches not to the Souls eternal estate, as
Excommunication rightly managed does; it being a most undoubted Oracle of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that whose sins the Apostles, and their lawful successors,
as Rulers of the Church, do bind on Earth, they are bound in Heaven.

Who their lawful and authoritative successors have been, are, and ought to be,
in all Ages and places of the Church, is evident to all that have any fear of
God, or reverence of his Catholic Churches Testimony. This is certain, as
Excommunication carries with it the joint spirit and suffrage of the whole
Church, and every true Member of it, either explicitly or implicitly; so the
regular and authoritative managing of it was ever from the respective Bishops
Authority and Order, as chief Pastors in every Church, to whose fatherly care
and Inspection, with the counsel of their Presbyters, the Flock of Christ is
committed; especially as to the discreet use of such Discipline as highly
concerns the salvation or damnation, the hopes or despair, the binding or
loosing, the abscission or restoration of any part: which ought not to be
judged, determined and executed by every private spirit of Minister or people,
but by such venerable Bishops and their Presbyters, as have the authentic
transmission of the Apostles ordinary governing power delivered to them as from
Christ; being in this like the Judges in commission for Life and Death: though
the Sentence be the Laws, and the power the chief Magistrates, and the
transaction or publication in the Face of the County, to which all the Bench of
Justices, the Jury and other honest Men do tacitly give their votes and assent;
yet is the Cognizance and Examination of the merits of the Cause, and the
judicial solemn Declaration of the Sentence, committed specially to the Judge,
both in respect of his learned Abilities and known Integrity, also for the
Honor and Order which are necessary to be observed in proceedings of so great
concernment to Mankind as are matters of Life and Death. Such is the power,
such ought to be the procedure of all due Excommunication; such they were in
the purest and primitive times, when all Christians, all Congregations, all
Presbyters, all Bishops, all particular Churches, were so united, that, as many
Spokes make but one Wheel, and many Stones one Building, and many Members one
Body, so these made but one Church, in the same Faith, the same Baptism, the
same Ministry, the same Spirit, the same Order, the same Power, the same Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

From which Blessed Harmony and Spiritual Communion if any Christian, or any
particular Congregation, or any part of the Church, (as those of the
Donatistick party and the Novatians in Africa, with others) either proudly,
passionately and peevishly did separate themselves, or were deservedly
separated by the just censure of any part of the true Church, and thenceforth
falling to mangling of all by mutual Excommunications, so as to fly in the
faces of their lawful Bishops and Pastors, or else turn their backs on them
and their Communion; certainly there could nothing hence be expected but such
sad effects as always follow the dividing or any part from the whole, whose
integrity is the common Safety, Beauty and honor. All breakings, severings and
dissociatings among any Christians, or in any Church, are the fatal
forerunners of much misery, decay and death, as to that Truth and Love which
are the life and vigor of all Christian societies.

And such, I fear, in time will be the state of this languishing and
lamenting, this broken and bleeding Church of England, where every man's hand of
late years has been and still is lifted up against his brother, and the Sons
against their Fathers, wounding and tearing, destroying and devouring one
another; where none are afraid either to Excommunicate themselves, or others
whom they list, or to deserve any the justest sentence of Excommunication from
any others in whom the true power and judgment under Christ resides. This,
this seems to be the state of the Church of England, which heretofore was ever
justly esteemed as a Noble, Ancient, Renowned and Principal part of the
Catholic, Militant and visible Church of Christ, until it came to be thus
torn and mangled into many Churches, thus wounded and divided by uncharitable
factions, thus swollen and inflamed by proud and passionate separations, thus
deformed and dying by continued and uncured Distractions; which will destroy
the whole, as to all Honor, Beauty, Unity, Integrity and Authority, while men
study to foment and advance their private and several parties, contrary to the
real and public interests of the whole Church of England, both as National
and as a Member of the Catholic.

In whose behalf I know not how to express ( before I dye) a greater zeal for
Gods glory, or love to my Redeemer, or Charity to my Country, than by thus
recommending to your Pious, Princely and Generous care (O my Worthy and Honored
Countrymen,) the state of the Church of England and of the Reformed Religion,
sometime so professed in her, that she was the Glory, Crown, Rejoicing and
Triumph of all Christian and Reformed Churches.

CHAP. XXVI.
BEseeching You again and again, A further Caution against Sacrilege, upon the
occasion of D. B his Case lately published, about purchasing Bishops Lands.
as persons of Wisdom and Power, of Piety and Honor, of Grandeur and Candor,
first by all means to redeem the Interests of this Reformed Church, of true
Religion and its true Ministers, from those undeserved diminutions and
sacrilegious depredations, to which they are still exposed by the Envy, Malice,
Injuriousnesse, Presumption and unsatiable Covetousness of many men of later
years grown up in England. Alas, poor and despicable men will as certainly
make poor Ministers, as lean hackneys in long traveling will tire; you may as
soon mix Oil and Water, Clay and Gold, as fix any Honor or Regard upon that
Ministry or Clergy which is depressed, in these last and worst, these brass
and iron times, to popular dependence, and its necessary consequents, Poverty,
or, which is worse, Flattery. Such as make no scruple to take away from
Ministers, even from the best and chiefest of them, one part of their double
Honor, a settled, competent and honorable maintenance, will never make
conscience to deprive them of the other part, which is civil respect and
verbal value, which are but the shells and shadows of Honor; men will make no
bones to take away fleece and all, who will venture to steal the carkase of the
sheep.

You cannot but (with me) see that there are many men of a new light, and sight
too, who look upon nothing which has been given to the Church, either for its
Instruction or Government, for its Ministers Education or Entertainment, for
Charity or Hospitality, for Decency or Honor, under any notion, I do not say of
sacred, as devoted to our God and Savior, (alas! this is blasted for
superstitious and superfluous, as neither needful nor acceptable to God,) but
not so much as just, in any civil Right or common Equity, so far as the
proprietors have the use and possession of them, according to as good law as
any man has his Lands and Goods; of which they cannot in justice be disseised,
unless they are convicted by law to have forfeited them, by Felony or Treason,
or such Misdemeanour as the law thinks fit to punish by such deprivation.

Who almost is there of these new Illuminates that makes any scruple or
conscience to shark, to defraud, to detain, to delay, to deny any thing that
belongs to the ^ergy or Ministry, comply they never so much with the popul^
^ther what they requ^re as their Right, by Law as well as (...) ^ewish, or
Superstitious, or Popish, or Pompous, or Super^ (...), or Abused, and so may
better be turned to other (...) other men of civil Trades and Professions,
(...) ^ssary to the Commonwealth than any Ministers (...) ^riledge is in every
corner, yea and in Marketplace (...), yea often in Churches and Pulpits;
Murmuring, (...)* Rep^ing, Coveting and Plotting how to eat up, not only all
the Houses of God in the Land, but all his chief servants, the Rulers and
Ministers of his Son Jesus Christ, the Pastors and Teachers of his Church.

We have already seen, if some men like to have no Bishops, as chief Fathers,
Presidents and Governors, nor any Deanes and Chapters, as their constant
Presbyteries and Counsel, (which all Reason and Religion, all Policy and
Order, all Practice and Custom of the Church of God, old and new, all Wisdom,
Divine and Humane, either commands or commends in all Polities, Societies and
Fraternities of men,) presently away with all these Amalekites, their Revenues,
Houses and Honors must be sold and converted to other uses.

If others, or the same genius, like to have no Presbyters or Ministers, as set
apart and ordained for that Office and Calling, will not, nay do not, their
Teeth ache, and fingers itch, to take away all Glebes and Tithes from all
Ministers, though never so industrious and deserving, and by Law invested in
them, as to all civil Right? Would not some men either have Ministers fall to
Spinning and Carding, to Thrashing and Digging, to Begging and Stealing, to
Starving or Hanging, as well as to Preaching? or else they will bring Diggers
and Thatchers, Combers and Weavers, with other Godly Mechanics, who will
preach all things, and demand nothing as due, however no Tithes; which are to
some as abominable as feeding upon Mice and Rats.

So, if others like to have no Scholars bred to Humane Learning, (which, they
say, does but obstruct the teachings of Gods Spirit, and puff up Ministers
with the leaven of Philosophy, Arts and Sciences, above the simplicity of the
Gospel, and above the Plowes, Carts and High-shoes of their silly neighbors) O
how do they grieve and pine away day by day, (as Amnon did for love of Tamar)
or as Ahab did for Naboths Vineyard) that they might once seize upon the Lands
and Colleges of both Universities, and all Free-Schooles which go beyond
Writing, Reading and Cyphering? O what fine Estates, what pretty Dwellings
might be picked out of those needless seminaries of Scholars, Priests and
Preachers?

If others like no local Churches, as Superstitious, Popish, Jewish,
Heathenish, who had all such like gross and material Temples, which are
needless to those that are themselves living Temples of the holy Spirit, and
need not that any men should teach them in Piles of Wood and Stone, or out of
Desks and Pulpits; down, down even to the ground with these Steeple Houses,
these Hornets and Wasps nests: the rubbish, if it will not sell, will at least
mend the highways to Markets, and spare the Town or Country Charges of
digging gravel; the Bells, Stones and Timber will turn to good money, the
Commonwealth may need them, they will save taxes a while. Thus will some men
boldly dare, if they might have their will, to take away both the Foal and the
Ass, with ( Dominus opus habet,) or rather ( Dominus opus non habet) the Lord
of Heaven needs not these things, so much as some that long to be our Lords on
Earth.

Last of all, (that I may search this Fistula to the bottom,) if any that are
young and lusty, full-fed and frolic, shall dislike to have any lazy poor
people to be maintained as Moths and Leeches, Teeks or Vermin, gratis, upon
the public Alms and Charitable Foundations, presently (as if they quite
forgot that themselves might be so Aged, Poor and Feeble, that they might be
glad of such constant relief; or as if they did not remember how many of their
Fathers and Mothers, their Grandsires and Grandames, have lived and dyed,
either in some such Almes-House and Hospital, or have been kept at the Town
Charges,) away with all the Lands and Houses of Almes-Houses and Hospitalls,
those drones nests, where they neither have daily service of God, nor frequent
Prayers, Sermons and Sacraments, as Cathedral Churches had; which either are
most-what demolished, or in a fair way to drop down and be destroyed.

Whither, I beseech you, will not this Gangrene of covetous and sacrilegious
Humor spread? Who will give any thing, living or dying, to any good work of
durable Piety or Charity, when he shall see nothing is like to be secure? Were
it not high time to examine what the Sin of Sacrilege is? whether there be any
such Sin, since so many holy and learned men affirm it in word, and yet so many
others of godly pretentions in deed own no such thing? If it be found to be a
Sin, it must needs be a dreadful Monster, like Python or Hydra, with a very
great paunch, and many wide mouths; a Gigantick Sin, that fights against God,
defies Heaven, devours things sacred, dares to rob the Poors bellies, and
starve their souls.

It is not to be checked or stopped, but by some public Censure, Decree and
Detestation, declaring it to be a Sin injurious to God, reprochful to any
Religion, as Heathenish, Jewish, Christian and Reformed, dishonorable to any
Nation, desolating to the Church, destructive to Ministers and people, to
Piety, Charity, Learning and Industry. No Bank or Rampart is sufficient to keep
out this black and dead sea, when once it has undermined the common principles
of Gratitude, Reverence and Worship toward God, of Justice and Righteousness
toward Men; which it is very like to do, when I find D. B. a man of my own Coat
and Calling, a prof^ssed Presbyter or Minister heretofore according to the
Ordination of the Church of England, who has the character of holy Oders by
Bishops hands still upon him unrenounced, when (I say) such men come to be
proctors and promoters, patrones, pleaders and solicitors (in any case) for
alienating of those Church Lands which belonged to the Bishops, Deans and
Chapters: the issue indeed of difficult, distressed and turbulent times, which,
it may be, Necessity rather than choice drove some men to; yet this in cool
blood must be applauded by a grave O, that so he, a late purchaser, may have
part of that bl^ssed Corban, which, he knows, did sometime belong to his Mother
this Church, and to his Fathers the Bishops of it: whose right to keep what
they had by Law was, I suppose, once undoubtedly as good as any that thisor any
man can plead, for what it seems he never yet had possession of. Sure it was as
just for those to have kept their Estates, as it can be for him to get part of
it: he cannot strengthen his own private and purchased Title, but he must
justify theirs more, who had received and enjoyed them as public Ministers,
Governors and officers of the Church, upon a public, both civil and sacred,
Title; First, from the pious Donors, who doubtless had, as St. Peter tells
Ananias, a power to give what was their own, as they did to God and his Church,
by valid Acts in Law, and such deeds as expressed their last Will and Testament,
which, St. Paul tells us, no man ought to disannull; Secondly, especially
considering, in the next place, that what was so given, was no way to the
prejudice of the public; Thirdly, yea by public Permission, Approbation,
Confirmation and Acceptance; Fourthly, wherein the whole Nation, Church and
State, has a public right and common interest, as things given for the good
Order and Honor of the Nation as it is Christian: Fifthly and lastly, add to
the personal right of the Donors and Possessors, also to the public right of
the whole Nation, that highest right (paramount) which all learned and
impartial men have ever judged to be in God; either in such things as he is
pleased precisely to demand of us, as he did the Firstborn, the First Fruits,
many Sacrifices and Oblations, besides the Tithes of all, and some Cities with
their Suburbs for his Ministers of old; or in those things which he has left
in our free Will and Gratitude to Vow, Offer, Give and Dedicate to his Service,
or to his Son Jesus Christ, (as the wise men at first did their Myrrh, Gold and
Frankincense, which certainly no men would have taken from that holy Babe, who
would not, with Herod have taken away his life.) By which holy Liberalities we
Christians may honor our God and Savior with our substance, and not serve them
only with that which costs us nothing: nor is God in these to be mocked; if
once we have vowed and devoted them to him, as we ought to pay our Vows, so we
ought not to break and frustrate either our own or others Dedications to God
who is ((...)) the great Asylum of all, not to be violated in the least kind.
Who ever doubted but that God accepted and owned as his peculiar, those things
which any men consecrated as means fitting to advance the good ends of his
Glory and public Service in the right Teaching, Ordering and Governing of his
Church, in instituting and supporting his Ministry, and in relieving his Poor?
All which being so very necessary for the Church, and so agreeable to the Word
of God, they must needs be strangely avaritious who think it superstitious for
any man to give of his Lands or other Estate to these Uses, and to invest in
Gods name his Church or Ministers, as a holy Corporation, in such a right, as
is hard to imagine how it can be ever justly alienated, till the free consent
of all parties concerned be had and declared. First, the present possessors,
they must freely resign their personal and temporary Right, which they had no
way forfeited. Secondly, next, the whole Nation, as Church and State in
Parliament and Convocation, Prince, Peers, Clergy and Commons, for themselves,
their Heirs and Successors, must fully and freely remit their public Interest.
Thirdly and lastly, Gods Mind must be known, that he is willing to be deprived
either of that Service and Honor he and his Son Jesus Christ had, or of those
means for the Maintenance of it which were devoted to him. Nor can any power
(that I know) but only Gods Omnipotence, absolve the living and survivors from
that right which the Donors had when yet living, and that Bond which from them,
though dead, yet still lies on the Consciences of those survivors, who for ever
stand bound to discharge their trust, by observing as sacred the Will of the
Dead, which, if once lawful, is not to be made void wilfully and
presumptuously. If at any time public necessities do drive men to some
temporary dispensations and seisures, yet these must be so recompensed
afterward in quiet times, as may keep them from being made, beyond
inconveniences, intentional and eternal Injuries to God and his Church, that it
may be but a Borrowing, and not a Robbing of God or his Church.

If neither the Ministers of Christ, nor his Church, nor the State, nor God,
nor the Dead, nor the Living, have any right, claim or Interest in such things,
whose they either once were, or at present are, as to the Possession, Property,
Use and Enjoyment, which way can any men that are mere strangers to them and
had no special right in them, make such claim and power to them, as to dispose
of them? unless they were things so relinquished as none owned them, or had
never been in any man's rightful possession, and so fell to those ( jure
occupantis) who first could seize on them, without dispossessing any of them
who had a right to them, and challenged that right in Gods, the Churches, and
their own name, as by legal possession: which, under favor, is not the case
whence this great pleader either draws his Title, or their supreme and
superdivine right, who undertook to alienate Bishops and other Church Lands,
which were neither relinquished, nor resigned, nor forfeited by God or Man.

Doubtless those supreme Disposers of that part of the public Patrimony, had
either some other principles, or higher dictates and dispensations, than this
Advocate either understands or can bring forth, or else they will have much
ado to answer the Dead or the Living, the Church or the State, God or their
own Consciences, the present Age or Posterity. For to pretend that Bishops and
Episcopacy were but a superfluous and superstitious superstructure added to the
government of Christ's Church, raised by Ambition and Superstition, is not only
very untrue, but very immodest, considering the purity and sanctity of those
primitive and catholic Churches, which (he knows) had Bishops even from the
Apostles days, for the well being of all Churches: To allege that their
Estates and Lordships were superfluous, ill bestowed and ill used, is to
calumniate or envy so many worthy persons (every way his equals at least) that
were Bishops, Deans and Prebends in England; who, without peradventure, were
every way as Learned, as Liberal, as Unspotted, as Useful, as Beloved of God
and man, as Deserving their Estates and Pre^erments, as ever this pleader
(without disparagement) was or is, by any men on any side, thought to deserve
his Doctorship, or Wa^ford, or St. Magnus, or Paul's Lecture, or any part and
portion of Bishops Lands, or Deans and Prebends Houses

If this complaining Champion bring not forth greater spears and shields to
defend that from Sacriledg, which some men have not only suspected in all Ages,
but shrewdly charged, actum est, this Goliath will be overthrown by every little
David that can but distinguish his right hand from his l^ft, or knows what
belongs to meum and tuum, to the doing to others as you would have done to your
self, agreeable to Laws in force and principles of common justice.

If his weak and impotent allegations may go for current, contrary to the sense
of Jew and Gentile, of Law and Gospel, of the greatest Divines and ablest
Lawyers, of the wisest Princes and soberest Parlaments that ever were, besides
all Synods and Councills of the Church, (which he may suspect as partial to
their own interest;) if the little wax and small shot which this pleader claps
to the bowl may over-bias the case against all those so many ponderous
prejudices which have on all sides been alleged to secure Gods right and
Religions interests, actum est de Ecclesia: such popular (that I say not
parasitick) Pleas will in time so spread among the heady, easy and greedy sort
of common people, that we may bid farewell to all things given for public
encouragement and reward, to Learning and Religion, to Preaching or Ruling
Ministers, yea to relieve the poor and Aged: all these things will seem loose
and free hereafter, whenever any men that have a mind to it shall have it in
their power or pleasure, to take away all as superstitious or superfluous, and
to apply them to civil or secular uses. A work (to speak freely) fitter for
Mahometans than any Christians, for the Ruiners rather than Reformers of
Religion.

I wonder that this Pleader, who is thought so great a Politician, does not see
that his Estate as a Presbyter is no less maligned and quarrelled at by many,
than the Bishops were and are by him. Such as have seen the Masters Cabin made
prize, will they spare the Masters mate? A small Prophet may, without any great
inspiration foresee and foretell, that if some men's Spirits were left to their
own sway, they would not only buy and sell, or pull down, Bishops Palaces,
Deanes and Prebends Houses, and Cathedral Churches, but all Chancels, and
Churches, and Steeples, all Parsonage and Vicariage-Houses, in fine, all settled
maintenance would be stripped, and Religion, with its Ministry, exposed to its
Primitive nakedness: which were no shame, if it were attended with the
Primitive innocence, liberality, gratitude, love and chari^y which were in the
first Christians, who differed as much from the modern temper, as giving all
to, and taking all from, the Apostles, the Governors and Ministers of Christ's
Church.

If the Plea be good in conscience before God and good men, that whatever any
men shall think given superfluously or superstitiously to any pious or public
use, may be honestly alienated, farewell all, when every party in England has
acted its part according to its principles, whereto the stimulations of this
Pleader may contribute much with vulgar and Mammonitish minds: nothing will be
left in a few years, unless some potent stop be put to the progress of
Sacrilegious impulses, by some public Anathema of utter detestation, grounded
upon principles of most evident justice, divine and humane, to be declared
against all such Alienations for the future as the Wisdom, Piety and Honor of
the Nation shall think to be sacrilegious, unlawful and abominable to God and
good men. Possibly such Parlamentary terrors may work more upon this and other
men's purchasing consciences, than all those ancient execrations, which were
not, as he fancies, causeless, but deserved, curses; not rashly imprecated, but
justly denounced, against all unjust Violators of such Donors Wills, who
knowing (that Auri sacra fames,) the audaciousnesse of covetousness, even
against God as well as man, in all Ages, sought piously and prudently, as much
as in them lay, to fortify and defend their Just, Religious and Charitable
gifts to God, his Church, or his poor, as it were with Thunder and Lightning,
with Flaming Swords and Hellfire, upon which they thought none would adventure
but such as were either very blind or very foolhardy; since their righteous
Deed and Invocation being allowed and recorded in the Court of Heaven (as much,
no doubt, as the charge of the Father of the Rechabites upon his children,) the
Estate and Gift seems so inseparably intailed together with the Curse, that
they certainly concluded, the God who graciously accepted the one would also
ratify the other, and infallibly execute his wrath and vengeance upon those
who should break this strong bar, set against all alienation as an odious
((...)) violation of the dead, who are under Gods more immediate custody and
protection.

It were very good therefore that we might at length know the public sense in
the case of the remaining Church Lands and Revenues, especially of such men who
are no purchasers, nor like to be, of any Church Lands: because I now find not
only some great examples of Laymen, but even of Clergymen, (sometime very
conformable ones,) who once professed to me their utter dislike against
extirpating of Episcopacy; yet such an one I find teaching men his rare Art,
how to crack such Thunderbolts like nuts, how to make mincemeat or wholesome
pottage of those curses which others count as Coloquintida or deadly
bitterness in the Prophets as well as the peoples pot: but he, like Leviathan,
scorns those spears like bulrushes; like the Italian Lithophagus, he can feed
upon stones, and without a miracle answer Satan's demand of turning them into
bread; yea more, he can turn darkness into light, and cursing into blessing,
making that a step to Heaven and Reformation, which was judged (heretofore) by
many Learned and Godly men, as the very gate of Hell and high way to most sure
Damnation, without repentance and restitution to a satisfaction.

Whether this party wear a Crown of Imperial bays, or have some other charm
which is capable to disarme any such Thunderbolts, I know not: But I find him
(while I was even now concluding my last request for the Church of England,)
boldly and openly justifying from all suspicion of sacriledg the late taking
away of all their Revenues, Lands, Houses and Dignities from Bishops, Deanes
and Prebend^; of which fact, I believe, few knowing men that Voted and Acted in
it, but had at first some scruples and secret grief for the tyranny of the
necessity urging them to act against many of their jealousies and scruples of
conscience, till they were, it may be, salved and solved, but by better
solutions (I suppose) than this Pleader produces, only to make way for his
own Title, and to corroborate his new purchase.

But does any wise man think that this Pleader for his own Title, and absolver
of all men's consciences, would have been of the same mind, and have judged such
alienation to have had no tincture or smell either of sacrilege or injustice
to God or man, if himself had been a Bishop, a Dean or a Prebend? Were not the
Ecclesiastical estates which those worthy persons had, as lawfully theirs as
two good Livings could be his, or the way-bit of a morning-Lecture, greater in
Salary than Auditory at Paul's? Were not these as much and as superfluous as
some Bishoprics and Deaneries? If he had been deprived of these, when once
lawfully possessed of them, and having no way forfeited them, only by will and
power, would he not have been very impatient, and as studious of either
recovery or revenge as Sampson was for the loss of his two eyes? Yet not
content with these, I have heard from a person of Honor and Valor, that a D.
whose name began with B. offered at least a thousand marks for another Living
which was better than either of those. Certainly Simony will seem but a mote
where the mountain of Sacriledg shrinks to a molehill; which if it be a sin,
must needs be of a very high nature, and so may (as the highest stars or
planets) seem but little to some eyes on earth, however they are very great in
themselves.

If this great Casuist have no sense of other men's rights to their Estates as
Clergymen, how comes he to take it so ill that himself, in a Lay-capacity, as
a Purchaser, cannot get quiet possession of what he fancies to be his by
purchase, yet not so much of choice (belike) as of Necessity, nor as an emption
(forsooth) so much as a redemption? For he needlessly deprecates the Odium and
Envy of being forward in giving the Handsel, unless he had at first some
grumblings and cold qualms about his heart, as either unsatisfied of the
Lawfulness, or fearing that Bishops might recover their places and Estates
again: till he thought them as good as dead, and past recovery, (as the
Amalekite that dispatched King Saul) he would not put forth his hand against
them, or the spoils of them; but being (it seems) imbarqued in a fair adventure
of some thousands of pounds (at 8. per cent. I suppose) in the safe Castor and
Pollux of the public faith, (for which the honor of the two Houses of
Parliament was engaged) he was loath to perish with his money, principal and
interest too, or to be saved without it, as many an honest man is fain to be.

Alas (good man) his Charity, it seems, has great sympathies for himself and
his own concerns, but little for others: if others lose all, (which was once
theirs by as good right as what he seeks most to secure as his) he cries, Euge,
factum been; if he be in danger to lose, not all, but some, not of what he ever
had, but only hoped for, how does he bestir himself? Flectere si nequeat
superos, etc.

O What a vociferation and outcry would he make to all the English world,
which he now does, (as if all men were mightily concerned in so eminent and
leading a case of a rich Presbyter purchasing Bishops and other Church Lands)
if what he now presumes he has purchased of Bishops Lands should by any Act of
peremptory and powerful resumption be taken from him, not as forfeited or
evicted by Law, but ex mero placito, out of Will and pleasure, to relieve some
public necessities, or to advance some godly design? Would not he lift up his
voice like a Trumpet, beyond any Stentor, against Parlaments, House or Houses,
and Committees, seem they never so zealous and reforming, as very unjust,
unreasonable and injurious to him, his Family and children, no less than now he
inveighs against the Town or City (whether Town or City it is dubious now they
have no Bishop, whose seat of old made a City, however an ancient Corporation)
for not letting him have quiet possession of his precious Purchase? In which,
it seems, they are not satisfied of his right, no more than I or any man can
believe that he has better cards now to show for this Estate, than the Bishops
had in Law, Conscience and Merit, when they were deprived of them: yet they are
and have been long silent, they make no public complaints or proclamations,
which are a kind of alarm to parties to divide men's judgments, and to provoke
to war, (all suits of Law being but civiller warrings, and must at last be
executed by the posse comitatus, by open force, if the sentence given be
obstructed.)

Which public Motion and Commotion against a whole city or Town, is more than
ever the Bishops jointly or severally did, as to begin that which he calls, by
a vulgar mistake and calumny, Bellum Episcopale: which if it were only se
defendendo, in order to defend themselves, not from any judicature or just
punishment for their faults, but only to preserve what they had honestly
gotten, and lawfully enjoyed for some years, and never forfeited any more than
their pious Predecessors, who many hundred of years had them in quiet
possession; possibly it might have seemed to some men as lawful a War in
Bishops, under lawful authority, as any Presbyterian War could be to dispossess
them of their legal rights, as unforfeited enjoyments; of which this plaintiff
having purchased a good buccoon, and craving for more, we see makes so loud and
great a noise, as if the Earth must be moved out of its place, and Jupiter
might not take his rest in Heaven, till this complainant have right done him
according to his mind, who seeks to retain even whole Parlaments, three
Nations, and all Mankind to be his Counsel of his Advocates: yet would he be
most impatient not presently to stop the mouth of any Bishop, Dean or Prebend,
if, as St. Paul, they should begin to plead, yea but to peep, or mutter their
losses and indignities; which they must not call injuries, but public justice
done upon them before they had sinned, as Sacrifices propitiatory to appease
some angry Presbyterian brethren, and to make way for this Purchaser.

(...). Quis coelum terrae non misceat, and mare coelo? Clamet Melicerta
perisse Frontem de rebus -- No Satyrick cento's are sufficient to perstringe so
great partialities. I see some men are so black that they cannot blush. Are not
those Ministers justly ensnared in the briars and thorns of secular Conflicts
and Lawsuits, who dare to entangle themselves, yea and to justify that as
done to others (every way their betters) which they cannot endure should be
done in the least measure to themselves? May I not call God and Man to be
Judges, and Heaven and Earth to be Witnesses in the case? Has D. B. a better
title to a part, than L. B. had to the whole? Is money and purchase a better
title and surer tenure, than merit and public gift, as a reward of Learning
and Worth? Had L. B. possession by fraud or force any more than D. B? or had L.
B. any more forfeited his Estate then D. B. has? unless long and undoubted
succession, and present lawful possession were crimes deserving Confiscation.
Were not those Laws which were heretofore made, and for many Centuries
confirmed, in the most serene and peaceable times, by unanimous Princes, Peers
and people, (nemine absente aut contradicente) as just, valid and complete, in
point of right, as any new Acts or Ordinances could be, which were made, as all
the world knows, in broken and bleeding times, and to which the supreme
Magistrate (as the Plaintiff very well knows) never gave his consent, first or
last, because in conscience (as he told them) he could not; fearing, it seems,
the sin of Sacrilege, yea and of Perjury, having sworn at his Coronation to
preserve the Rights and Liberties of the Church and his Clergy as much as any
men's? What pity it was this Casuist had not in time been the last poor Kings
Confessor? How blessed, large and benign a soul has this pleader, that can
presently resolve all conscience into power, and right into might? whose rule
seems to be, not the Word of God, or the Laws of men, but the Will of those
that have the strongest sword; upon which presumption, no doubt, he went, when
he so eloquently and effectually declaimed against Deans and Chapters.

I know his grand Asylum is the Plenipotency, if not Omnipotency, as he
supposes, of the two Houses of Parliament, guided by the honesty and integrity
of their intentions. I will with him presume that they did intend all things
for the best; that finding the North wind had raised a great storm, they
thought it necessary to lighten the Ship of what they thought might best be
spared, in order to the public peace, and that which they counted the Supreme
Law, Salus publica: And being all Laymen, much acted at that time by
Presbyterian Influences and Interest, who promised to steer the Ship much
better and with more right from God than any Prelates had done, they cast
Bishops, Deans, Prebends and Chapters, etc. with their Houses, Lands and
Revenues overboard, in the present distress and tempest, not for that they
disliked them so much, as because they could not safely keep them, and carry on
their other interests of public safety. These and the like reasons of State
may possibly be alleged in behalf of those Laymen, who had then work enough
upon their hands, and who were to get wages to pay their Workmen with the least
grievance to the public.

But this plaintiff, as a Learned Doctor and Grave Divine, must pass a
stricter scrutiny and finer sieve. There is usully made a great difference
between such as take interest, and those that are necessitated to give it; so
there may be between these sellers and this purchaser, who makes himself so
peremptory a Casuist in so great and disputed a Case, concerning the Rights of
God, his Church and his Ministers; toward whom all men should have always a
most tender regard, and Clergymen chiefly, so as to do Gods Prophets, and
their Brethren or Fathers, no harm, since their injuries do more immediately
redound to the reproach of their profession, their Savior, and their God. As in
all cases of common justice, so specially in the Rights of Churchmen, (who are
always as pupills and minors in the world, Gods, the Kings and the States
Wards, as Sir Edward Cook calls them) power never so prevalent ought to be
either limited by present Laws in force, or by common principles of equity and
righteousness, which are set down in Gods word, and written in all men's
hearts: which is, To do as they would be done unto; Not to be punished further
than they have offended; To be heard and fairly tried before they be condemned
and executed. These limits ought to be observed by all men in their greatest
power and passion, so far as no one man may be notably injured, to gratify
many (without any after-amends;) nor may Paul be exposed to present death or
danger, in order to appease the furious multitude of the Jews.

Let this great pleader and plaintiff answer; Are they not poor and pitiful
Gods, who in their supposed supremacy of power may sin, must dye, and be judged
by the most high God? may not many men sin as well as few? and wise men as well
as simple? and choice Laymen as well as all the chiefest Clergymen in
England? (which they must all be supposed to have done in a very high nature,
to be justly and so grievously punished.) Have not all men cause to be jealous
of their own hearts, lest at any time, and in any case, they offend God or man?
Ought any Prince or Parlaments, whatever they be, forget they are but men, or
to flattered by themselves or others that they cannot err or be deceived? Have
we not read of Parlaments, though great ships, yet tossed to and fro in a few
years with several winds of Doctrine? one while to renounce and cast off the
Popes yoke; a little after, as Camels on their knees, to stoop down and receive
that burden again, as in Queen Mary's days, with the less scruple (as one
notably observes) because the Legal Cardinal Pool made no mention or demand of
restoring the Abby-lands? Though Parlaments should be as the Assemblies of the
Son of God, may not Satan come in among them? May not Parlaments as well repent
before God, as often revoke before men, what they Vote and Enact? Does any thing
betray wise men more than to have too great confidence of themselves? If
Ecclesiastic Synods and Councills (except perhaps such as are truly Catholic
and free) may be subject to err, and have erred, why not civil Senates and
Parlaments? Have they any porter that can keep sin out of their doors? or any
walls that keep out infirmities from surprising them, which they carry always
not so much about them as within them?

But what if there be such a sin as Sacriledg, yea and in the case which the D.
puts it? (which his equals, and far his betters in all respects, have earnestly
affirmed, and the more impartially, because long before this particular case of
the Bishops of England was put,) may not many men, yea whole Nations, be guilty
of this sin, and infected as with an Epidemick plague, so far as they act,
abet, approve or applaud? Does not God himself (when the Priests and Levites
were overawed, and durst not complain against the general vogue) charge the
whole Nation of the Jews with robbing him, and denounces by his Prophet an
heavy curse against them for robbing God? Although they reply with great
confidence, (as commonly there is least brow where most guilt) wherein have we
robbed thee? God answers them, in Tithes and offerings. Was the detaining, or
denying, of these from the Priests and Levites a robbing of God? and had it
been no such matter, if every Tribe had taken away those Houses and Lands,
those Cities and Suburbs, which God had appointed them by the ancient
distribution, not only for a bare and necessitous subsistence, like Micahs
Levite, but for such an honorable entertainment as became that Tribe, and that
service they did to the God of Israel?

If it be a mocking of God as well as man for any man to keep back, or to
resume what once he has by a valid and declared Act given to any pious and
charitable use, or to any one poor man as an Alms, how dangerous is it in
public cases to be done, without very clear and sure grounds? No wise men are
so vain as to think themselves in any capacity inerrable and infallible: nor
may any good man fancy, that at any time, or in any case, he has Gods
dispensation to commit, no nor to permit, if he can hinder, the least sin, much
less so great an one as Sacriledg is esteemed by many men who are no children
in understanding. Let this pleader ask Jews and Gentiles, old and new
Testament, Vid. Mr. Bazier his excellent treatise against Sacriledg.
Papinian and Plowden, Justinians Institutes and Justice Cooks, Canon and
Civil, Imperial and Municipall Laws: yea he cannot be ignorant what the great
Reformers, Luther and Melanchthon, with the Augustane Protestants, say, what
the grand Masters for Presbytery (whom I suppose he has not of late believed
in that point) Calvin, Zanchy, Bucer, Knox, Cartwright and others; did they not
first or last suspect, condemn and cry down as sin and Sacriledg, the
Confiscation or Alienation of such Lands as were properly Church Lands, (for
the maintaining the Ministry, Order, Government and Honor of the Church, to a
Charitable, Hospitable, and Honorable amplenesse?) Their Testimonies are every
where extant, diligently collected, easily perused: and possibly they would
have been more speedy and severe in their censure of it, if they had seen it
done against any Bishops and Clergymen who sincerely professed, diligently
preached, and mightily maintained the Reformed Religion against the Roman
Superstition; which they were loath to nourish with such full breasts of Plenty
and Honor. But sure, they would never have envyed or denied them to so Learned
and Godly. Bishops, with other Churchmen, as were here in England; whom Mr.
Calvin would have much honored, as he professes so earnestly, that he
Anathematizeth all that would not; who might easilier have been Reformed, and
it may be at a cheaper rate to the public, than by being so terribly fleeced
and flayed, as they were, of all their Ecclesiastical dignities and revenues
belonging to them.

I will put a Case or Quere to this great Vindicator; what he would have
thought of those men who Voted or Created themselves a Parliament, that is, the
Supreme Power as Deputies or Representative of the English People, (though not
chosen by the people, nor any way such an one as some men had so zealously
covenanted to maintain in their Freedom and Privilege,) if these Grandees had
gone on (for they were as near it as two Groats are to nine pence) and had
peremptorily Voted this good D. with all other Beneficed Ministers in England
and Wales out of their beloved Glebes, Tithes and Mansion-Houses, (after the
Precedents which they had lately seen acted against green Trees, the Learned
Bishops, Deanes and Prebends, as to all their Ecclesiastic Revenues annexed to
their dignities;) who would have cried Sacriledg with greater contention of
Voice and Lungs, than this Venerable resolver of No Sacriledg in selling
Bishops Lands?

O! but this he tells us freely, and with some earnestness (as concerned) had
been horrid Sacriledg, because of those he has a good share, those he hopes to
enjoy together with his Bishops Lands. Thus this irrefragable D. resolves, that
to rob the lesser Gods is Sacriledg, but not to rob the greater Bishops were
but Egyptians, whom the Presbyterians, as true Israelites, might strip and
spoil. So it were a sin to take any thing from an ordinary Citizen and common
soldier, but not from an Alderman or a Colonel. It is lawful to deprive
Governors in Church or State of what they have, but not the Governed.
Presbyters must ( jure divino) have meat and drink and clothes to maintain
them, that they may eat and preach; but they need no Overseers or
Church Governors to take care they preach no strange Doctrine, nor live
scandalously: They must have victuals as beasts, but they need no Government
as Men, Christians and Ministers. O thrifty project! O Blessed Paradox! If it
hold in all societies, Civil and Military as well as Ecclesiastic, it will
spare the State many thousands of pounds upon the Civil account, as it has got
it many upon the Church-account, by taking away Bishops and their Revenues,
there being no need of such Governors and such Maintenance of Honor in the
Church; no more will there need any Judges in the Law, nor Captains and
Colonels in the Army; their places, their pensions, their pay may be spared: if
these be necessary, why were not Bishops so, for Order, and Honor, and
Government, and Judgment among the Clergy?

But he fancies that himself and other doughty Presbyters can do the work, and
govern without Bishops. Possibly he may do it the better, not only for his
grave carriage and reverend fashion of Living, for his moderate, meek and quiet
Spirit, for his great Learning and rare Endowments, for the high Esteem that is
had of him, but especially because he is rich, and has a good part of the old
Bishops Lands; it may be a Spirit of government may go with them, as a Spirit
of prophecy did with the Highpriests Office in Caiaphas: but as for other
poorer Presbyters and petty Rulers of his brethren the Antiepiscopal Ministers,
how fit they will be to govern in common, and how well they have managed
Phoebus his Chariot since they undertook to drive it, I leave to all wise and
sober men to judge.

But it may be this purchaser is not against Bishops, but against landed and
Lorded Bishops; he would have primitive and Apostolic Bishops, which had no
Revenues, or Lordships, or Lands, or Palaces. How sad is it that so good a man
should have so evil an eye against the good hand of God, and the bounty of good
Christians, only as to their munificence to the Bishops and chief Pastors of
Christ's Church? But why so blind and partial against Bishops, when it is as
primitive and Apostolical for Presbyters to have no Tithes, or Glebes, or
Livings? These were the settled blessings of the Church after the glory of
Constantines time, whom the Revelation seems so much to set forth, to the
Beauty, Rest and Honor of the Church. If this Pleader will be honest and
impartial, let him conform himself a Presbyter, as well as Bishops, to the
primitive pattern. They have not left, but forcibly lost all: let Presbyters
leave also their Livings; let this great Example begin, let him turn sportulary
Presbyter, as well as he would have beggarly Bishops; let him and others depend
upon the Basket of Charity, and the Bishops Distribution, as was of old, both
for occasional contributions of Decimal Oblations and Imperial pensions, of
which Presbyters at first had no parochial portion or right, which now this
Pleader so much challenges, as if it had been his purchase or pennyworth, and
not the Alms of the Nation, excited hereto chiefly by the piety of primitive
Bishops and other Ministers, in imitation of Gods ancient portion, which they
thought still the right of Jesus Christ, Lord of all, as to his merit and
priestly portion, to be kept in his Churches possession for his Ministers
enjoyment, especially since it has, by the devotion of the Nation, been
legally dedicated to his service, and the support of his Servants: which may be
as well said of Bishops and other Church Lands, as of Presbyters little
Livings; unless this Pleader think that those were too much for Christ and any
of his chief Ministers to enjoy; or that there was less of Law and public
consent, as well as of private gift, in them than other Donations; or lastly,
unless he fancy there is not as much need of Government, Order and Discipline,
and consequently of meet Bishops, as chief Pastors or Shepherds for Christ's
flock, as there is of pasture. It seems he is more for the Bag, Scrip and
Wallet, than for Crosier, Crook or Shepherds staff.

O! but his blessed Tithes, his rich Glebe, his fat Parsonage, these, these he
challenges as his right in Gods name, as (patrimonium Crucifixi) Christ's
patrimony, the Presbyterian Churches Dowry, the Priests portion, the Levites
wages, the Laborers hire, the most holy things, and utterly unalienable: even
Impropriations seem to him sacrilegious Alienations, derived from no other
title than the Popes Usurpation, annexing them to Monasteries, and by a
continued succession of Sacrilege given to the Crown, and so at last become
Lay-fees. Thus he seems to make Princes and Parlaments guilty at the second
hand of this foul sin of Sacriledg; which only lies against Tithes, Glebes and
Parsonage-Houses, the only preferment it seems that this plaintiff has been
capable of, or now aspires to.

O how far is reason from some men's Religion, and justice from their
Consciences? And what (I beseech all wise, sober and upright men) were Bishops
Houses and Revenues, but greater Glebes and Livings, given to men of the same
calling, for the same holy and good ends, for the service of God and the
Church, though to some higher degree of Duty and Dignity, of Office and
Authority? not only to preach the Gospel, and administer the holy Sacraments
in common with Presbyters, but further to preserve a right succession of
Ministers, and to dispense the power of holy Orders by a Catholic Ordination,
(which ever was Episcopal:) also to manage duly that Ecclesiastical
Discipline and Government, which ought to be carried on, as by men of greater
Age, Gravity, Ability and Authority than ordinary Presbyters use to be, so with
a proportionable conspicuity for Honor and Estate, for Hospitality and Charity;
all which are as lawful, just, and becoming a Bishop or chief Governor among
the Fraternities of Ministers, as a greater pay or Salary is to Judges,
Colonels and Captains; not for their doing more drudging work and duty than
common men or soldiers may do, but for that eminent worth, and prudence, and
sufficiency which they are presumed to have in order to Rule and Command
others, who are men equal as themselves, and possibly as Valiant, Pious and
Moral: yet Wisdom being the highest humane endowment, and politic or
gubernative prudence being the noblest exercise of wisdom in this world, for
the public and common good of mankind, (few of whom are fit to govern
themselves or others) it is but fit that greater public encouragements and
preferments of Honor and Estate should be given to these, than only to
strength, which alone is but brutall, the endowment of a body, which men have
common with beasts; but the other is proper to our reasonable souls, by which
we are not far from Angels, and near of kin to God.

In which excellencies since some Ministers may and do exceed others, (which
makes these want Governors, and the others fit to govern,) what is there of
Humane or Divine Law that can be against so prudent, so necessary an Order and
Polity in the Church as Bishops are and ever have been? Whose so envied Estates
and Dignities were still no more than that double honor which the Apostle
challenges from all Christians as due to those that rule well, and labor in
the Word and Doctrine, not only by teaching and writing themselves, but by
taking care that others do so too, within the limits of sober Life and sound
Doctrine; which works many, yea most, I hope, of our Bishops did, and all
might, yea should have done* since the Reformation, with as much pains, and to
as much public good, as this or any other Antiprelatist can pretend to.

So far was the case of Bishops and Deanes and Prebends different from that of
Monks and Abbots, which this great D. seeks to parallel, as equally needless,
idle, odious and pittiless; when he cannot be ignorant, that Bishops being
immediate Successors to the Apostles, with whom were anciently resident in
Cities the Venerable Colleges of Presbyters, which were Deanes and Prebends,
as their ordinary Counsel, these must needs be much elder than any Monastic
Orders; unless he think Jo. Baptist began those. Bishops were, as placed by
the Apostles, ever owned in all Ages and Places, and reverenced by all orderly
Presbyters and Christian people, yea and by all Christian Princes; by whose
pious munificence they were endowed with Revenues and Honors long before ever
Presbyters had their Glebes apart, and Tithes appropriate to them: yet were
these Bishops and the Colleges of Presbyters more severely used than the Monks
and Abbots, who had pensions for life allowed them if they stayed in England.

I appeal to all that are not Levellers in Church or State, Is not Government,
good order and comely subordination as necessary in the Church, among all men,
both of the Laity and Clergy, as the family of Christ, the Household of faith,
and an holy Polity, City or Commonwealth, as it is in all civil Fraternities
Companies and Communities, or in this paintiffs family? Where, besides food and
other necessaries which he provides for himself in common with his Servants and
Children, yet (doubtless) he still reserves for himself a Benjamins portion, as
to the eminency of his Estate and Authority above them as a Father and
Governor. Were it robbery and violence to take away any thing unjustly from
his children, and not so to take all from him as a Father?

Let this great advocate (who pleads, I suppose, without his see, uncalled and
unhired, against the poor Bishops) let him freely declare next bout to all the
world, whether if he had been a Bishop (which honor few men are of the Heresy
to think he would have refused, being a double-Beneficed and very Conformable
man) he would have been content that measure should have been offered to him,
which he thus justifies and triumphs in as offered to his Fathers the Bishops,
men much his betters every way; some of whose shooe-latchets he was not worthy
to unloose, unless he have more worth in him than ever yet he discovered to
the world, whose agitations have (yet) been as various, as many, and as
importune to and fro as any Presbyters in England. Besides that, he endeavors
for ever to obstruct any generous return of this Nation to put the Church and
Clergy into any Estate of Order, Honor and Estate, worthy of such Learned and
Worthy men as might be bred up, if such public encouragements were not wanting.

I do in no sort doubt of his Tenderness, Touchiness and Impatience if the case
had been his own: I find how he is netled for a little portion of Bishops
Lands, to which he pretends a right of purchase. I have ever heard this
character of this plaintiff, that he was ad rem satis intentus, nor was he
among Pharaohs lean Kine, that needed to have fed upon the fatter. Quo teneam
modo? How partial are the principles of some Protestant Preachers, of some
Quodlibetick Presbyters! They may well be (...) who are so far (...),
self-tormenting who are self-condemned, who seek to ingratiate and corroborate
with men of power, by an absolute commending of that for lawful, just and good,
without any peradventure, which has always been a case scarce disputable
among Learned and Godly men in all Ages; so much did they ever not only
incline, but generally resolve the case, quite contrary to this great Casuist.
However, it is the safer side ( no doubt) not to alienate any Church Lands; and
in dubious cases a Divine, yea a Doctor, and a great one, that undertakes to be
Confessor and Absolver to Parl. and people, he should rather advise in tutiorem
partem, to the safer side, than adventure upon, or encourage to that which has
any thing dubious or dangerous in it as to sin, yea and a sin of an high
nature, as Sacriledg is esteemed by all Nations, by all Christians that have
not buried Christianity and Christ in the Mount Calvary of covetous hearts, the
Golgotha's or places of skulls, where no Helena will ever look for the Cross
of Christ, in hope to find it. They, are far enough from being true Christians,
who dare Crucify the Pastors, Preachers and Ministers of this Crucified Savor.

O how glorious and gracious an example to all sorts of men, in the present and
after-Ages, has this Rabbi, this great Master now in our Israel given! Prima
est haec ultio, quod se judice, etc. May not all men hereafter venture, in any
case, never so doubted, to follow this one Doctors opinion, if any way
plausible or probable, against the general stream and current of all Learned
men? (A latitude which of late I find some Jesuits have allowed in cases of
conscience.) Truly, it might seem venial for secular and military men, In the
Mystery of Jesuitism.
in cases of civil urgencies, and, as they imagined, necessities, of self-
preservation, to seize upon the show bread, the Priests portion, and Goliahs
sword too, as David and his men did by the good leave of the Priests: but it
had become a Clergyman and an eminent one, who still ownes I think his
Academick degrees as deserved, and his Ecclesiastic Orders, which sure were
from the Bishops hands and Authority, as holy and valid (else the Tithes, and
Glebes, and Spiritual Livings cannot be so sacred and inviolable in his use
and possession, as he affirms them to be) I say, it had become such an one at
least to have been silent, who is too rich and knowing to be a Liveller, or an
Anabaptist, or a Quaker, or a disowner of all Order and Office Ministerial. He
should not have cast oil, by his eminent example and eloquent plea, on that
fire which he sees is ready to consume even all Presbyters as well as Bishops
settled maintenance. However if he could not avoid this rock of purchasing
Bishops Lands, his modesty had been some expiation, and his silence a great
abatement of the scandal; he might have swallowed those holy (but now
desecrated) morsells in secret, and not have proclaimed on the housetop to all
the world, the rost-meat he has gotten, the Venison (or part at least) which
he has taken, together with his great appetite and good digestion. The world
is not much concerned to know all these things, nor much pleased at his
swallowing down without chewing any bit of Bishops Lands or Deanes Houses, or a
whole College or a Cathedral Church, if he can compass them by his purse or
policy; for where a crum of this kind goes easily down, in time a laden cart
with six horses may follow.

Were there not others, Statesmen, Laymen and Military-men enough to have
bought those Bishops and Church Lands, if they must needs have been sold? They
might possibly have some Reasons of State, and solutions of deeply Learned
Lawyers, which such an one as I and other simple Divines know not of, and
therefore may not censure: But as to the principles of Scholars, and the
conscience of all Churchmen generally, we resolve, that if it be but a
disputable case where sin lies at the door, if there be but any notable
appearance of evil, we are (above all men) to abstain from it. If it may be
venial in others pleading their ignorance or urgent occasions, yet it must
needs seem a most uncircumcized act for a grave Minister, and of the Church of
England, In aliis vitia, in sacerd^tibus sunt sacrilegia. Chrysol. de Ebrietate.
a great Doctor and a Reverend Divine. Churchmen ought in any things of
pregnant scandal to be most circumspect and cautious, because their example is
most contagious, allowing, as it were of course, many grains of further
liberty to Laymen, who never think that their girdles ought to be so strait as
Ministers; if ours be loose, theirs will be unbuckled, and at last quite thrown
off. Hence many of our Domestic and new- started Presbyterians, whom I well
knew, Mr. C. Mr. W. Mr. S. and others, with all the Smectymnuan Legion, who
were earnest enough at first for the pruning of the overgrown, or sear, or
too much over- dropping boughs of Episcopacy, and afterward they so far served
the times and their Lords, as to conspire to the felling down of those ancient
and stately Standards in the Church; yet I well know, they never intended that
Laymen should have gone away with the Bark, Tops, Timber, Bodies, Chips and
all: no, they (good men) intended very honestly and zealously, that these
superfluities of Bishops and Deanes Estates, etc. should have been applied to
buy in all Impropriations, to augment poor Livings, to put Presbyters generally
into so good a plight and habit for back and belly, that they might be fit to
rule in common, and have some Majesty (as Aldermen of Cities and Burgesses of
Towns usually have) in their Cheeks and on their Backs; for starveling and
thread bare Governors, like Consumptionary Physicians, discredit their
profession and deprecate their dignity. We other poor Ministers, who follow the
sense of all the ancient Fathers and Councills, of the Canon and Civil Laws,
of Schoolmen and Casuists, of Reformed and not Reformed Churches, both Greek
and Latin, we wonder what Angel from Heaven has whispered to this purchaser
and pleader, to tell him of Gods non- acceptance of Bishops lands, Persons or
Profession, of which he was pleased to make so much and so good use, to his
glory and his Churches good, both in England and all the Christian world for a
thousand years, yet now he is content (it seems) they should all be
Alienated, Extirpated, Destroyed, Possessions, Persons and Function of Bishops,
as unnecessary, yea pernicious to the Church and Ministry, in Honor, Order,
Government, Charity and Hospitality; all which are better Reformed to Parity,
Popularity and Poverty. This he reports as from the Cabinet-Counsell or
Committee of Heaven, where it seems he has been since he purchased Bishops
lands. Truly, if an Angel from Heaven had told some Divines and other Gentlemen
thus much, they would not have believed him, because they are persuaded so much
of the Evangelicall Order, the Apostolic Authority, and the Catholic
Succession, the prudent necessity, the honorable decency of Bishops in the
Church of Christ* upon which presumptions (if not sure persuasions) they
conceive it had been a modesty in all Learned and weighty Ministers, who had
received their Ordination from Godly, Orthodox and Reformed Bishops, (such as
Calvin, and Beza, and Vedelius would have honored and submitted unto, without
any envy or diminishing of their Estates and Honors,) not to have touched so
much as a shooe-latchet of what by Right, Law and Merit had been theirs; that
it might at least have been upon Record to after-Ages, for the Honor of the
English Reformed Clergy in their lowest ebb and depression, Ecclesiae and
Episcoporum bona inter Presbyteros Ecclesiasticos non invenerunt emptorem.
There is no doubt there would have been buyers enough beside, men of larger
Estates, yet not of stricter consciences: even this great and glorious
purchaser, (who though he has paid his money, yet has not so put off his
Armor hitherto as to have any great cause to boast,) seemed not at first so
satisfied as to be forward, (not coming at the beginning of the Fair, when
sure the best peny-worths, for example sake, would have been sold to so eminent
a D. the better to decoy on other purchasers;) but alas, he seems (obtorto
collo and renitente Minerva,) against his genius to be drawn in, driven and
necessitated at the fag end of the Market, to take such eggs for his money as
had been sat upon by a Bishop so many hundred of years, and may (as it seems)
be either addle, or eggs of contention to this purchaser, now so resolved and
triumphing in his conscientious freedom, to buy and sell in the Temple; when
other poor Scholars are still wind- bound and narrow-soled, as imagining that
Christ long ago drove all such kind of Merchandise out of the Church, as ill
becoming Christians as it did the Jews; yea and St. Paul teaches Believers
equally to abhor Sacriledg as Idols.

To conclude this long digression, (whose scandalous occasion lay so high in my
way that I could not avoid it) this one great instance telling to all the world
what this purchaser has swallowed, and how well he has digested these Bishops
Lands, (which now seem as a Lay fee to nourish the Beast and Man, not the
Presbyter, Minister or Bishop as him) will give the world cause in after-Ages
to look as narrowly to him and his posterity how they thrive, as the Roman
Soldiers did to the Jews Guts and Excrements, Josephus de Excid. Hiero.
when they searched for the Gold which they had swallowed, as Josephus tells
us. Some are so superstitious as to imagine that Bishops and all Church Lands
or Revenues, properly such, (as pertaining to the support of that Order,
Government, Authority, Ministry, Charity and Hospitality, which ought to be in
Clergymen) are like Irish wood to Spiders and venomous beasts, prone to burst
them, so that vix gaudet tertius haeres; nay, though they possess them, yet
they do not enjoy them, for nothing temporal can be enjoyed without a serene
Mind, an unspotted Fame, and an unscrupulous Conscience: all which if this
gallant purchaser enjoyes, together with his Bishops Lands, and other fine
things which he has bought, truly he is an object of most unfeigned Envy;
where I leave him and his Vindication. This I am sure, some men, Ministers and
others, are so scrupulous in such a case, that they never think a good
pennyworth can be had of Bishops or Church Lands; nay, they would not have
them gratis, to stuff their Feather-beds fuller, lest they should lie and sleep
less at their ease, highly magnifying that one thing recorded as commendable
among the Jews in their greatest Hard-heartedness, Madness and Sedition, that
during the siege, straitness and famine of Jerusalem under Titus-Vespatian, yet
they were not wanting to furnish the Temple, Priests and Altar of God with that
(juge sacrificium) daily sacrifice, Vide Usserij Annal. Chronol.
Morning and Evening, which God had once required, till the great sacrifice of
Messiah had finished all by his once Oblation of himself; which their blindness
and unbelief would not understand. Nothing can be too much for his Service who
is the Giver of all. But I return whence I was forced to digress.

CHAP. XXVII.
BEsides the Preservation of the Churches patrimony and Ministers maintenance,
Further commending the Unity, Honor and Support of the Religion and Ministry of
this Church.
which needs more an honorable Augmentation than any sordid Diminution; there
is in the second place great need (O my worthy and honored Countrymen) of your
redeeming this Church, its Reformed Religion and its worthy Ministers, from
plebeian Arrogancies and Mechanic Insolences, from private Usurpations and
popular Intrusions, whereto both some Peoples Petulancies and some Preachers
Pragmaticalness or Easiness are prone to betray them, to the utter dissipation
and destruction of that Order, Honor, Power and Authority of Religion, which
ought by wise men to be preserved as much as in them lies.

It is certain that the Ministers of the Church of Christ, (which are made up
of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons duly ordained and united in an orderly
Subordination) are as the Arteries of the Body politic in any Nation, State or
Kingdom which is Christian: these carry from the Head, which is Jesus Christ,
the vital and best (that is, the Religious) spirits to all the parts; as good
Laws do in respect of civil Justice and Commerce, like veins, convey the animal
Spirits, with the blood and grosser nourishment* from the Heart or Supreme
power. Once check, abate or exhaust those vital Conduits of Piety and true
Religion, all parts of Church and State, both noble and ignoble, will soon be
enfeebled, abased, mortified; neither Common People, nor Yeomen, nor Gentlemen,
nor Noblemen, nor Princes, neither Governors nor Governed will ever have
either that Esteem, Love and Honor for Religion which becomes it and them, nor
will they receive that Vigor, Influence and Efficacy from it which is
necessary for them; while in the general Levelling, Impoverishing, Shrinking
and Debasing of Scholars and Clergymen, none shall have either discreet Tutors
for their Children, or learned Chaplains for their Families, or able Preachers
for their Livings, or grave Reprovers for their Faults, or prudent Confessors
for their Souls relief, or reverend Governors to restrain them, or spiritual
Fathers to comfort them for none of their petty Pastors, Preachers or
Ministers, will appear to them much beyond the proportions of Country-pedants,
not under any such character of eminent worth, either for their personal
Abilities, or any such beam of public Dignity and Conspicuity, as may either
deserve or bear the love, respect and value of either Nobility, Gentry or
Communalty in England, which are all high-spirited enough. Not only the civil
and visible Complexion, but the inward Genius and religious Constitution of
this Nation, will extremely alter in a few years, (as it is already much abated
and abased) by reducing all Scholars that are of the Clergy or Ministry to a
kind of public Servility, Tenuity and Obscurity, beyond any men of any
ingenuous profession: none of whom are so excluded, but that, by their industry
and Gods blessing, they may attain such eminence and encouragements, as may
make them most useful both to Church and State, both in Policy and Piety:
neither of which can thrive or flourish to any Respect, Power or Splendor of
Religion in any Nation, where the Clergy are made the only Underlings and
Shrubs, condemned everlastingly to the basest kind of Villenage, which is a
sneaking and flattering Dependence: which posture not only streightens and
shrinks, but aviles and embaseth the spirits of any men; there being nothing
left them as to public Favor, Employment or Reward, under any notion of hope,
which might heighten their parts, or quicken their spirits to any such generous
industry, as might at least seek to merit them, though they never attained
them: for still the Public will hereby have the benefit of Ministers improved
abilities, however few Ministers obtain the deserved eminency, the merit and
capacity of which is many times better than the real enjoyment.

Having thus commended to you the public interest of Church and State, as they
are very much depending upon the Honor and Happiness of your Clergy; in the
last place I beseech all persons of sober sense and judgment, not to suffer
themselves to be so far scandalized against the true Reformed Religion, or this
Church of England, by its present distempers and sufferings, as to abate of you
former value and esteem of Her, or of your present pity for Her, nor yet of
your prayers and endeavors to repair Her. O give not such advantages to your
own innate corruptions, or to other men's fond Innovations, or to the Papists
Triumphs, or every Jesuits Machination, or the Devils Temptations, as either to
discountenance, or desert, or decry, or distrust the former excellent
Constitution and Reformation of true Religion in the Church of England; in
which I am fully persuaded in my conscience there was nothing wanting to the
being and well-being of a true Church and true Christians.

The first (your own inordinate Lusts) will be well enough content with no
Religion, or at least such an one as shall most find fault with the Church of
England and all its Religion: For I have found by experience that no men have
proved move factious, affected and fanatic, than those men and women who have
been most conscious to their youthful Enormities. They presently apply to the
gentlest Confessors and easiest Repentance; which is rather to quarrel with and
forsake the Religion they have most violated, than seriously to repent and
amend: without which severities Papists and Separatists think their Converts
sufficient, if they do but turn to their side and party. The second (Novellers)
will be content with any mere fancies or factions in Religion. The third (the
Jesuited Papists) with no pure, united and well-reformed Religion among us. And
the fourth (the Devil) will be content with any Religion that is called
Catholic, Reformed and Christian, so it be not true, or not pure, or not
well-reformed, or not orderly settled and uniform, or not charitably united, or
not authoritatively managed and governed: Any of which will in time very much
unchristen any Christians, and unchurch any Church, by deforming and dividing
them from the Beauty and Communion of the Church Catholic.

Take heed of betraying your selves and your posterity to Atheistical,
licentious, immorall and irreligious courses, by your Apostasies from and
despiciencies of the Learning and Piety, Gifts and Graces, Ministry and
Ministrations, Order and Government, which were happily settled in the Church of
England. Go over all the world, search all successions of the Church from the
Apostles to our days, you shall not find any thing more worthy your Love and
Esteem, your Veneration and addiction. Have you found any thing comparable to
it in all the new vapors and florishes of Reformations, in any new Inventions,
Conventions, Associations, Separations, Distractions, Distortions, Confusions?
Which may make you giddy by turning you round, but they will never make you any
progress in Wisdom, or Piety, or Charity.

The Church of England was a most rare and Paragon Jewel, shining with
admirable luster on all sides. First, in its Doctrine, or Articles of Religion,
which were few, clear and sound. Secondly, in its Sermons or Homilies, which
were learnedly plain, pious and practical. Thirdly, in its Liturgy or
Devotions, which were easy to be understood, very apt, pathetick and complete.
Fourthly, in its paucity and decency of ceremonies, which adorned, not
encumbered Religion, or over-laid the Modesty and Majesty of a comely
Reformation. Fifthly, in the Sanctity and Solemnity of its public duties,
which were neither excessive nor defective. Sixthly, in its Ministry, which had
good Abilities, due Ordination and divine Authority. Seventhly, it its good
Government and Ecclesiastical Discipline, where good Presbyters and good
Bishops had leave and courage to do their duties and discharge their
consciences, whose Fatherly Inspection, Catholic Ordination and Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction, being wisely managed by worthy men in their several stations,
did justly deserve the name of an Hierarchy, an holy Regiment or happy
Government, when it was exercised with that Authority, yet Charity and
discretion, which were ever intended by the Church for the common good of all
those Christians that were within her bosom and kept her Communion.

If others do forget her, through fatuity or faction, covetousness or
ambition, pride or petulancy, as undutifull and ungrateful children, yet you
may not, you will not, you cannot so far neglect your own and your posterities
happiness, or forfeit your own honor, or violate your consciences, as to
neglect the relief and recovery of your Spiritual Mother: But if you of the
better sort of men and Christians, from whom all good men expect all good
things, should slight and neglect Her after the vulgar rate (which God forbid)
yet must I never so far comply with you or all the world, as to call her former
light darkness, or her present darkness light. Precious with me must the name
of the Church of England ever be, whose record is in Heaven, and in all
gracious hearts, who were Born and Baptized, Instructed, Sanctified and Saved
in her.

To this Church of England, as I owe, (with many thousands) so I return (with
some few) the Charity of a Christian, as to all Christian Churches; the duty of
a Son, as to a deserving parent; the order of a part or member, as united and
devoted to the whole; the obedience of an Inferior, as to a Superior* the
gratitude of acknowledging Her Worth and Merit, the love of adhering to her
unity, the candor of approving and conforming to her decent ceremonies, the
modesty of preferring her Wisdom before my own or any other men's
understanding, the Humility of submitting to her Spiritual Authority and
Governors, the Piety and Prudence of relieving and restoring (as much as lies
in me,) Her Catholic Order, Polity, Peace and Government: all which I believe
were allowed of God, and I am sure have been approved by as Learned, Wise and
Holy men as the world affords.

I am deeply sensible of the many and great obligations which I have to this
National Church, and to its Ministers and Bishops, for my Baptism,
Instruction, Confirmation, Communion and Ordination, not only as a Member, but
as a Minister; which I account my greatest Honor, notwithstanding the great
depression of the times in which I have late ward lived.

I am ambitious to do not only what becomes my private station, but to
preserve and express the public respects which are due to this Church; whose
Despisers and Destroyers have never appeared to me with any Remarques of Beauty
or Honor for Learning or Grace, for Modesty or Charity, for Prudence or
Policy, comparable to those that were the first Founders, Reformers, Defenders
and Preservers of this Church* I must ever profess that I find nothing like
her Adversaries, nor any thing exceeding her friends, in all that was
commendable in Catholic and true Antiquity.

In behalf of this Church having offered many things to the consideration of
all good Christians which are my worthy Countrymen, I hope, as my infirmities
may exercise their Charity, so my integrity may expiate my infirmities, if I
have in any thing expressed my self less becoming the honest and holy design
which I undertook, and have now by Gods help finished; which was to set forth,
First, the Tears and Sigh^ of the Church of England; Secondly, the original
of her Disorders and Distractions; Thirdly, the dangers and distresses, if not
remedied; Fourthly, the probable ways of cure and recovery, by Gods blessing,
to such Order, Honor, Unity, Purity and Peace as becomes so famous a Church
and so renowned a Nation, whose greatest Crown was Christianity.

I know there will be many who cannot well bear that freedom of soberness and
Truth which either my self or others may use in speaking or writing for the
Church of England, and its pristine Honor, Order and Government, (although
themselves use never so great Liberties, Reproaches and Injuries, in Speaking,
Writing and Acting against them.) For my part, I appear in this only as wrapped
my self in my Scholastic and Ecclesiastic Gown; I meddle not with any civil
affairs, or Military transactions, properly such: Those are of an other
sphere, and of other principles, which I neither censure, nor, it may be,
understand. I quarrel with no particular men's persons; I encounter only that
colluvies of factions, parties and novel principles, which, like the sewers
collected from many sinks and kennells, have met together to besmeare or
over-beare the Church of England. I despise no man's Religion, so far as it is
Religion, deserving that holy name in any Catholic and Christian sense: But I
abhor an unreasonable, immodest, unjust and licentious way in any. I esteem
and embrace with all Charity whatever of Gods Spirit, of Christ's Truth, of
Grace and Virtue, of Gifts and Parts, of Moral Honesty and Humanity I find in
any men of any side: But I am too old and serious to be abused with vaporings,
with affectations, with popular pretentions, with rude and rash Reformations; I
am for solid, sober, orderly, humble constitutions, or restitutions rather, of
Order, Honor and public encouragement to Religion, the Church and Clergy. No
man has justled or offended me in all these turbulent times worth owning, nor
have I an evil eye or an ill will against any man: What I write as to my
Ecclesiastic Calling, Honor, and the Church of Englands common concernments,
may (possibly) have something of salt, but nothing of gall; there may be some
corrosive to mortify and meet with the diseased and proud flesh, but no venom
to poison or hurt either the diseased or the whole parts. It extremely grieves
me to see how far the contagion of Ignorance, Impudence, Profaneness,
Irreligion, Faction, Division, Levity, Popularity, Disorder and
Uncharitableness has spread among some of my brethren of the Ministry and
many of my Countrymen, without any present advance, that I can see, or future
hopes, (I say not as to their own Honor or Profit, but) as to Gods glory, or
the public interests of the true Christian and Reformed Religion, or the good
of men's souls, or the improvement of any grace and virtue. What any side
offers as really good or convenient I allow; what they partially cry down, and
causelessly condemn or change, that I defend upon the account of this and all
Churches Wisdom, Honor and Happiness. If what I have written may do any good
to the present or after-Ages, I have my design; if not, I shall, by Gods help,
hereafter redeem this waste of time and labor, by applying to studies more
suitable to my Genius, Spirit and Age, which may more improve those graces
which are least in dispute among good Christians: yet in this I have not wholly
lost my labor, because I have hereby further discharged my own soul, my
conscience and reputation, from any approbation of what I judge to be either
the sins or imprudencies, the wickedness or weakness of this Age, in which I
do not so much live as dye daily, weary that my soul finds so little hope of an
happy rest or composure, unity or harmony in our Church; which I had rather see
and enjoy before I dye, than to have the greatest preferment in the world. I
envy no men that have wrapped up their worldly interests in their religious
policies, and daily gain by the shrines of godliness they have made. I do
indeed boldly rifle their godly principles and pretentions, as to their
novelties; for I see no reason as yet to yield to any of them, no not for an
hour, though they seem never such pillars, while they import as if the Church
of England had heretofore consisted of a company of silly people and silly
Priests, whose either ignorance, or superstition, or sottishness, or
baseness, had hidden the beauties and blessings of true Religion from all
peoples eyes, so that neither Bishops, nor Presbyters, nor Princes, nor
Parlaments, nor Convocations, ever till now saw what was fit to know and do in
Church Matters, which are now to be taught and brought to light by the new
methods of Presbytery and Independency, or by Anabaptism, Quakerism, and other
rarities of Religion, untried and untamed Novelties, every way as short of the
Piety, Prudence, Unity and Majesty of the Religion and Church of England
heretofore, as they are wide of or beyond the true ancient bounds and Catholic
grounds of Order, Government, Unity and due Authority, I may add, and of the
Blessings or Prosperities, internal or external, spiritual and temporal, which
attended Episcopal Order and Paternal Presidency; which I profess to value, as
now it is in its rags and ruins, far beyond the others in their silks and
sprucenesses.

Episcopacy is now far from being the object of any sober men's Flattery or
Ambition; yet I cannot but look upon it with such an eye of pity and
reverence, as primitive Christians were wont to do upon their Bishops, such as
Polycarpus, Ignatius, Irenaeus, Cyprian, and other Martyrs, when they saw them
imprisoned, beaten, tormented, destroyed.

I know, yet I plead for those men and for that cause, which was once strong, 1
Cor. 4.10, 11.
but now is weak; was honorable, and is now despised; was favored, but is now
frowned upon by many (yea, I fear, most) men of ordinary spirits: yet I plead
for that reverend Order, and those reverend persons, who have been made a
spectacle to Angels and Men, such as to this present hour suffer both hunger
and thirst, are naked and buffeted, having no certain dewlling place; which
being reviled do bless, being persecuted have suffered with patience, being
defamed do entreat, and being the Glory of all Churches, as to Order, Unity and
Government in all Ages, are now looked upon by many as the filth and off
scouring of all things: yet am I one of those Angels which attend Lazarus on
his Dunghill; I have chosen to follow the clear, though now more exhausted,
stream of Antiquity, rather than the troubled torrents of any Novelties, which
may be as short-lived as they have been suddenly started. I have looked upon
all men's principles and pretensions, as to Ecclesiastic affairs, with what
Candor, Equanimity and Sincerity I could. If in any thing I was inclinable to
be partial, it was neither for Presbytery nor Independency, I confess, which I
never was catechized in, nor accustomed to, nor convinced of, as to any such
Piety or Policy, Wisdom or Worth in them, which might make me see cause to
desire or esteem them; but I was swayed against some things, not in the
constitution so much as some men's administration of Episcopacy. I was
originally principled to no small jealousies of Bishops actions, when they were
in their greatest glory and power; nor do I yet think but that some Bishops
might have been greater Masters of pious Arts than they have proved: yet I find
now that in many things people were more afraid than hurt. For the main I
conclude, no Ministers or Governors, no Superintendencies or Presbyteries, in
any Reformed way, exceeded the Usefulness, Merit and Excellency of our English
Bishops and Presbyters; nor is any thing as to Church Government comparable to
a primitive Episcopacy, which includes the just Rights, Liberties or
Privileges both of Presbyters and People. I neither dispute nor deny any men's
Morals, Intellectuals, Devotionals or Spirituals, further than they seem much
warped and eclipsed by their over-eager Heats and injurious Prosecutions
against their Antagonists the Episcopal Clergy and Church of England: but I
absolutely blame those Ministers want of politics and prudentials, who by
their Antiepiscopal transports have so far diminished not only themselves and
their Order as Ministers, but the whole state of this Church, as to its Harmony
and Honor, its Peace and Plenty, its Unity and Authority.

In whose behalf since all wise and worthy men are highly concerned, I cannot
conclude with words of greater warmth and weight, than those of the blessed
Apostle St. Paul, Phil. 2.1, 2.
who was not more sollicitous to plant Churches in truth and purity, than to
settle and preserve them in Order and Unity: If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels of Mercy; Let us all fulfill the Apostles joy, this Churches joy,
the Angels joy, yea Christ's joy; in being like-minded and of one accord, in
having the same Love, in doing nothing through strife or vainglory, but in
Lowliness and Meekness, looking every man not only to his own things but also
to the things of others; that the same mind may be in us which was also in our
Lord Jesus Christ. That in the expectation and experience of holy, wise and
united hearts and hands on all sides, the Church of England (from whose head
the Crown is fallen, from whose eyes Rivers of tears do flow, while she lies
weeping under the Cross) may take up the words of Zion in the Prophet, Micah 7.


Therefore will I look to the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation:

Rejoice not against me O mine Enemy: when I fall, I shall rise; when

I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against

To the King Immortal, the only wise and blessed God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, be all Glory for ever, Amen.
In Oratione Constantini Magni ad Concilium Nicenum. (...).

Mihi quidem omni bello pugnave gravior atque acerbior videtur intestina in Dei
Ecclesia seditio, quae plus doloris quam externa omnia mala secum affert.


THE END.
The Names of Books written by Dr. Gauden, and printed for Andrew Crook, at the
Green Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
HIERASPISTES.
1. A Defense of the Ministry and Ministers of the Church of England, in
Quarto. 2. The Case of the Ministers maintenance by Tithes, in Quarto. 3. Three
Sermons preached on public occasions, in Quarto. 4. Funerals made Cordialls,
in a Sermon prepared and in part Preached at the solemn interment of the Right
Honorable Robert Rich, heir apparent to the Earldom of Warwick, in Quarto new.
A CATALOGUE OF THE NAMES Of all the ARCHBISHOPS and BISHOPS of England and
Wales, ever since the first planting of Christian Religion in this Nation, unto
these later Times: With the year of our Lord in which the several Bishops of
each Diocese were Consecrated.
CANTERBURY, Archbishops.
1 AUGUSTINE the Monk. A. D. 596 2 Laurence. A. D. 611 3 Melitus. A. D. 619 4
Justus. A. D. 624 5 Honorius. A. D. 634 6 Adeodatus or Deus dedit. A. D. 655
The Sea vacant 4. years.

7 Theodor. A. D. 668 8 Brithwald. A. D. 692 9 Tatwin. A. D. 731 10 Nothelm. A.
D. 736 11 Cuthbert. A. D. 742 12 Bregwin. A. D. 759 13 Lambert. A. D. 764 14
Athelward. A. D. 793 15 Walfred. A. D. 807 16 Theogild. A. D. 832 17 Celnoth.
18 Atheldred. A. D. 871 19 Plegmund. A. D. 889 20 Athelm. A. D. 915 21 Wulfelm.
A. D. 924 22 St. Odo Severus. A. D. 934 23 St. Dunstan. A. D. 961 24 Ethelgar.
A. D. 988 25 Siricius. A. D. 989 26 Alfric or Aluric. A. D. 993 27 St. Elphage.
A. D. 1006 28 Living or Leoving. A. D. 1013 29 Agelnoth, alias Aethelnot. A. D.
1020 30 St. Eadlin. A. D. 1038 31 Robert Gemeticensis. A. D. 1050 32 Stigand.
A. D. 1052 33 St. Lanfranck. A. D. 1070
The Sea vacant 4. years.

34 St. Anselm. A. D. 1093 35 Rodolph. A. D. 1114 36 William Corbell, al.
Corbois. A. D. 1122 37 Theobald. A. D. 1138 38 St. Tho. Becket. A. D. 1162 39
Richard the Monk. A. D. 1171 40 Baldwin. A. D. 1184 41 Reginald Fitz-Jocelin.
A. D. 1191 42 Hubert Walter. A. D. 1193 33 Steph: Langton Card. A. D. 1206 44
Ri: Wethershed. A. D. 1229 45 St. Edmond. A. D. 1234 46 Boniface of Savoy. A.
D. 1244 47 Robert Kilwarby Ca. A. D. 1272 48 John Peckham. A. D. 1278 49 To:
Winchelsey. A. D. 1294 50 Walt. Reynolds. A. D. 1313 51 Simon Mepham. A. D.
1327 52 John Stratford. A. D. 1333 53 Th: Bradwardin. A. D. 1348 54 Simon
Islip. A. D. 1349 55 Si: Langham C. A. D. 1366 56 Will: Wittlesey. A. D. 1367
57 Simon Sudbury. A. D. 1379 58 Will: Courtney. A. D. 1381 59 Tho. Arundell. A.
D. 1396 60 Hen: Chicheley Car. A. D. 1414 61 Jo: Stafford Car. A. D. 1443 62
Joh: Kemp Car. A. D. 1452 63 Tho: Bourcheir. A. D. 1454 64 John Moorton Card.
A. D. 1486 65 Henry Deane. A. D. 1502 66 Will: Warham. A. D. 1504 67 Tho:
Cranmer. A. D. 1533 68 Reginald Poole Car. A. D. 1555 69 Matthew: Parker. A. D.
1559 70 Edm: Gryndall. A. D. 1575 71 John Whitgift. A. D. 1583 72 Rich:
Bancroft. A. D. 1604 73 George Abbot. A. D. 1610 74 William Laud. A. D. 1633
Beheaded on Tower Hill, Jan, 10. 1644.

S. ASAPH.
1 Kentigern. A. D. 560 2 Saint Asaph, and after him many hundred years 3
Geffrey of Monmouth. A. D. 1151 4 Adam a Welshman. 5 Reiner. A. D. 1186 6
Abraham. A. D. 1220 7 Howel ap Edneuet. A. D. 1235 8 An^anus I. A. D. 1248
The sea vacant 2. years.

9 Anianus II. of Schonaw. A. D. 1268 10 Lewellin of Bromfeild. A. D. 1293 11
David ap Blethin. A. D. 1319 12 Ephraim. 13 Henry. 14 John Trevaur I. 15
Lewellin ap Madoc ap Elis. A. D. 1357 16 Will. of Spridlington. A. D. 1373 17
Laurence Child. A. D. 1382 18 Alexander Bach. A. D. 1390 19 John Trevaur II. A.
D. 1395 20 Robert. A. D. 1411 21 John Low. A. D. 1493 22 Regin. Peacock. A. D.
1444 23 Thomas. A. D. 1450 24 Rich: Redman. A. D. 1484 25 Dav: ap Owen. A. D.
1503 26 Edm: Birkhead. A. D. 1513 27 Henry Standish. A. D. 1519 28 Will:
Barlow. A. D. 1535 29 Robert Parfew alias Warton. A. D. 1536 30 Tho: Goldwell.
A. D. 1555 31 Richard Davies. A. D. 1559 32 Thom: Davies. A. D. 1561 33 Will:
Hughes. A. D. 1573 34 Will: Morgan. A. D. 1601 35 Richard Parry. A. D. 1604 36
John Hanmer. A. D. 1622 37 John Owen. A. D. 1629
BANGOR.
1 St. Daniell. A. D. 516
many hundred years after.

2 Hervaeus. A. D. 1109 3 David. A. D. 1120 4 Maurice. A. D. 1139 5 William. 6
Guye. 7 Alban. A. D. 1195 8 Rob: de Salopia. A. D. 1197 9 Caducan I. A. D. 1215
10 Howell I. A. D. 1236 11 Richard. A. D. 1250 12 Anianus. A. D. 1267 13
Caducan II. A. D. 1306 14 Griffith. A. D. 1306 15 Lewis. A. D. 1320 16 Matthew.
A. D. 1334 17 Thom. of Ringstead. A. D. 1358 18 Gerv. de Castro. A. D. 1367 19
Howell II. A. D. 1370 20 John Gilbert. A. D. 1374 21 John Bishop of Clone in
Ireland. A. D. 1376 22 John Swaffam. 23 Rich: Young. A. D. 1400 24 Lewis II. 25
Benedict Nicols. A. D. 1408 26 Will: Barrow. A. D. 1418 27 Nich: or John Canon
of Chichester. 28 Thomas Cheriton. A. D. 1436 29 John Stanbery. A. D. 1448 30
James Bishop of Achaden in Ireland. 31 Thom: Ednam. A. D. 1464 32 Henry Deane.
A. D. 1496 33 Thomas Pigot. A. D. 1500 34 John Penny. A. D. 1504 35 Thomas
Skevington. A. D. 1505 36 John Capon alias Salcot. A. D. 1534 37 John Bird
Bishop of Ossory. A. D. 1539 38 Arthur Bulkley. A. D. 1541 39 William Glyn. A.
D. 1555 40 Roll: Merrick. A. D. 1559 41 Nic: Robinson. A. D. 1566 42 Hugh
Bellot. A. D. 1585 43 Rich: Vaughan. A. D. 1595 44 Hen: Rowlands. A. D. 1598 45
Lewis Baylye. A. D. 1616 46 David Dolbyn. A. D. 1631 47 Edm: Griffith. A. D.
1633 48 Will: Roberts. A. D. 1637
BATH and WELLS.
The Bishops of this Diocese were first Bishops of Wells, and afterward of Bath
and Wells, as follows.

Bishops of Wells.
1 Adelm. A. D. 905 2 Wulfelm I. 3 Elphege or Alphege. 4 Wulfelm II. 5
Brithelm. A. D. 955 6 Kineward or Kinewald. A. D. 973 7 Sigar. A. D. 985 8
Alwyn or Ealfwyn. A. D. 995 9 Burwold. 10 Leoning. A. D. 1002 11 Ethelwin. 12
Brithwin. 13 Merewith. 14 Dudoco alias Bodeca. A. D. 1031 15 Giso. A. D. 1059
Bishops of Bath and Wells.
1 John de Villula. A. D. 1088 2 Godfrey. A. D. 1123 3 Robert of Jews. A. D.
1136 4 Reg. Fitz-Jocelin. A. D. 1174 5 Sauaric. A. D. 1192 6 Jocelin of Wells.
A. D. 1205 7 Roger. A. D. 1224 8 William Bitton, alias Button I. A. D. 1247 9
Walter Giffard. A. D. 1264 10 William Bitton, alias Button II. A. D. 1267 11
Robert Burnell. A. D. 1274 12 William de Marchia. A. D. 1292 13 Walt:
Haselshaw. A. D. 1302 14 Jo: Drokensford. A. D. 1310 15 Ralph of Shrewsbury. A.
D. 1329 16 John Barnet. A. D. 1336 17 John Harewell. A. D. 1366 18 Walter
Skirlaw. A. D. 1386 19 Ralph Erghum. A. D. 1388 20 Henry Bowet. A. D. 1401 21
Nic: Bubwith. A. D. 1408 22 John Stafford. A. D. 1425 23 Tho: Bekinton. A. D.
1443 24 Rob: Stillington. A. D. 1465 25 Richard Fox. A. D. 1491 26 Oliver King.
A. D. 1495 27 Adr: de Castello. A. D. 1505 28 Tho: Wolsey. A. D. 1518 29 John
Clerk. A. D. 1523 30 Will: Knight. A. D. 1541 31 Will: Barlow. A. D. 1549 32
Gilbert Bourn. A. D. 1554 33 Gilbert Barkley. A. D. 1559 34 Tho: Godwin. A. D.
1584 35 John Still. A. D. 1592 36 Jam: Mountagu. A. D. 1608 37 Arthur Lake. A.
D. 1616 38 William Laud. A. D. 1626 39 Leonard Mawe. A. D. 1628 40 Walter
Curle. A. D. 1629 41 William Peirs. A. D. 1632
BRISTOL.
One of the 6. new Bishoprics erected by K. Hen. 8.

1 Paul Bush. A. D. 1542 2 John Holyman. A. D. 1554 3 Richard Cheney. A. D.
1562 4 John Bullingham. A. D. 1581 5 Richard Fletcher. A. D. 1589 6 John
Thornborough. A. D. 1603 7 Nicholas Felton. A. D. 1617 8 John Scarchfield. A.
D. 1619 9 Robert Wright. A. D. 1622 10 George Cook. A. D. 1632 11 Rob: Skynner.
A. D. 1636
CHICHESTER.
The Bishops of this Diocese were first Bishops of Selsey, and then of
Chichester, as follows.

Bishop of Selsey.
1 Wilfrid. A. D. 711 2 Eadbert. A. D. 711 3 Eolla. 4 Sigelm, Sigfrid or Sigga.
A. D. 733 5 Alubrith. 6 Osa, alias Bosa. A. D. 790 7 Giselhor. 8 Tota. 9
Wighthun. 10 Ethelulph. 11 Beornege. A. D. 906 12 Coenred. 13 Gothard. A. D.
960 14 Alfred. A. D. 970 15 Eadelm. A. D. 970 16 Ethelgar. A. D. 980 17
Ordbright. A. D. 988 18 Elmor. A. D. 1019 19 Ethelrick or Agilred. A. D. 1019
20 Grinketell. A. D. 1039 21 Heca. A. D. 1047 22 Agelrike. A. D. 1057
Bishops of Chichester.
1 Stigand. A. D. 1070 2 William. 3 Ralph. 4 Seffrid I. A. D. 1125 5 Hillary. 6
Jo: of Greenford. A. D. 1174 7 Seffrid II. A. D. 1187 8 Simon of Wells. A. D.
1199 9 Nic: of Aquila. A. D. 1209 10 Richard Poor. A. D. 1215 11 Ralph of
Warham. A. D. 1217 12 Ralph de Nevil. A. D. 1223 13 Richard de la Wiche. A. D.
1245 14 John Clipping. A. D. 1253 15 Stephen de Berksted. A. D. 1261 16 Gilbert
de S. Leofando. A. D. 1288 17 John de Langton. 18 Robert Stratford. 19 William
de Lenne, alias Lulimore. A. D. 1362 20 William Read. A. D. 1369 21 Tho:
Rushock A. D. 1385 22 Richard Mitford. 23 Robert Welby. A. D. 1395 24 Robert
Read. A. D. 1396 25 Stephen Patrington. A. D. 1417 26 Henry Ware. A. D. 1418 27
John Kemp. A. D. 1421 28 Tho: Poldon. A. D. 1423 29 Jo: Rickingale. A. D. 1428
30 Sim: Sidenham. A. D. 1430 31 Richard Prary. 32 Adam Molyns. A. D. 1445 33
Regin: Peacock. A. D. 1450 34 John Arundell. A. D. 1458 35 Edward Story. A. D.
1477 36 Ric: Fitz-James. A. D. 1504 37 Rob: Sherborn. A. D. 1508 38 Rich:
Sampson. A. D. 1536 39 George Day. A. D. 1543 40 John Scory. A. D. 1551 41 John
Christopherson. A. D. 1557 42 Will: Barlow. A. D. 1559 43 Rich: Curteis. A. D.
1570 44 Thom: Bickley. A. D. 1585 45 Antho: Watson. A. D. 1596 46 Lancelot
Andrews. A. D. 1605 47 Samuel Harsnet. A. D. 1609 48 Georg^ ^arleton. A. D.
1619 49 Ric: Mountagu. A. D. 1628 50 Brian Duppa. A. D. 1638 51 Henry King. A.
D. 1641
COVENTRY and LITCHFIELD.
The Bishops of this Diocese were first Bishops of Litchfield, and then of
Coventry and Litchfield.

Bishops of Litchfield.
1 Dwyna. A. D. 656 2 Cellach. 3 Trumhere. 4 Jarumannus. 5 St. Chad or Cedda.
A. D. 669 6 Winifrid. A. D. 672 7 S. Sexulf or Saxulf. A. D. 672 8 Headda alias
Eathed. A. D. 692 9 Aldwyn alias Worcester. A. D. 721 10 Witta. A. D. 733 11 Hemel.
12 Cuthfrid. A. D. 764 13 Berthum. 14 Sigbert alias Higbert I. A. D. 785 15
Aldulph was Archbishop of Litchfield. A. D. 793 16 Humbert I. 17 Herewin. 18
Higbert II. 19 Ethelwold. 20 Humbert II. A. D. 857 21 Kinebert alias Kenferth.
A. D. 864 22 S. Cumbert or Cymbert. A. D. 872 23 Tumbright ali. Bumfrith. A. D.
928
Florent. Wigorn. has this order of succession from Berthun to Tunbright, as
follows.
1 Berthun. 2 Higbert. A. D. 785 3 Aldulf. A. D. 793 4 Herewin. 5 Ethelwald. 6
Humberht. A. D. 857 7 Cineforth. A. D. 864 8 Tunbright. A. D. 928
Bishop Godwin follows the order set down by Matthew Westminster from
Tunbright, thus,
1 Ella. A. D. 928 2 Alfgar. A. D. 928 3 Kinsy. 4 Winsy. 5 Elphege alias
Ealphege. 6 Godwin. 7 Leofgar. 8 Brithman. 9 Wulsius. A. D. 1039 10 Leofwin. A.
D. 1054 11 Peter removed the Sea to Chester. A. D. 1067
Bishops of Coventry and Litchfield.
1 Robert de Limesey. removed the Sea to Coventry. A. D. 1088 2 Robert Peche
alias Peccam. A. D. 1117 3 Roger de Clinton. A. D. 1119 4 Walter Durdent. A. D.
1149 5 Richard Peche. A. D. 1161 6 Gerard Puella alias la Pucelle. A. D. 1182 7
Hugh de Novant alias Nunant. A. D. 1186 8 Geffrey de Muschamp. A. D. 1191 9
Walter de Gray. A. D. 1210 10 William de Cornhull. A. D. 1215 11 Alexan. de
Savensby alias Wendock. A. D. 1220 12 Hugh Pateshull. A. D. 1240 13 Roger de
Wescham. A. D. 1245 14 Roger de Longespe alias de Molend. A. D. 1257 15 Walter
de Langton. A. D. 1295 16 Roger Northborough alias Northbrook. A. D. 1322 17
Rob: Stretton. A. D. 1360 18 Walter Skirlaw. A. D. 1385 19 Rich Scroope. A. D.
1396 20 John Burghill. A. D. 1399 21 John Keterich. A. D. 1415 22 James Carry.
A. D. 1419 23 Will: Heyworth. A. D. 1420 24 William Booth. A. D. 1447 25
Nicholas Close. A. D. 1452 26 Roger Butler. A. D. 1453 27 Jo: Halse alias
Hales. A. D. 1459 28 William Smith. A. D. 1492 29 John Arundell. A. D. 1496 30
Geffrey Blyth. A. D. 1503 31 Roland Lee. A. D. 1524 32 Rich: Sampson. A. D.
1543 33 Ralph Bayn. A. D. 1555 34 Thom: Bentham. A. D. 1559 35 Will: Overton.
A. D. 1578 36 George Abbot. A. D. 1609 37 Rich: Neile. A. D. 1610 38 John
Overall. A. D. 1614 39 Thom Morton. A. D. 1618 40 Robert Wright. A. D. 1632 41
Accepted Frewen. A. D. 1644
S. DAVID'S.
Dubritius Archbishop of Carleon in Wales resigned his Archbishopric to S.
David, who removed his See to S. David's A. D. 519. who was the first
Archbishop of S. David, the rest follow.

Archbishops of S. David's according to Giraldus Cambrensis.
1 S. David. A. D. 519 2 Conauc. 3 Eliud or Teilon. 4 Ceneu. 5 Morwall. 6
Haerunen or Haernurier. 7 Elwaed. 8 Gurnuen. 9 Lendivord. 10 Gorwyst. 11
Gorgan. 12 Eluoed. 13 Anian. 14 Eluoed. 15 Ethelmon. 16 Elanc. 17 Molscoed. 18
Sadermen. 19 Catellus. 20 Sulhaithnay. 21 Nonis. 22 Etwall. 23 Asser. 24
Arthuael.
Another Catalogue of the Archbishops of S. David's, different from Gyraldus,
taken out of an Antiquity belonging to the Church of S. David.
1 S. David. A. D. 519 2 Eliud. 3 Theliaus. 4 Kenea. 5 Moruael. 6 Haernurier. 7
Eluaeth. 8 Gurnell. 9 Lendymyth. 10 Gorwist. 11 Gorgan. 12 Cledanc. 13 Eynaen.
14 Eludgeth. 15 Eldunen. 16 Elnaoth. 17 Maelschwyth. 18 Madenew. 19 Catalus. 20
Sylvay. 21 Namys. 22 Sathuency. 23 Doyth wall. 24 Asser. 25 Athuael. A. D. 906
26 Sampson.
Bishops of S. David's using Archiepiscopall power.
1 Ruclinus. 2 Elgum. 3 Lunuerd ali. Lyward. 4 Norgu alias Vergu. 5 Sulhider
alias Hubert. 6 Eneuris alias Euerus. 7 Morgena. 8 Roderic. 9 Nathan. A. D. 961
10 Jevan. 11 Argustel. 12 Morgenueth ali. Urgeney. 13 Eruen alias Hurnun. A. D.
998 14 Tramorin alias Carmerin. A. D. 1038 15 Joseph. A. D. 1055 16 Blethied.
17 Sulheim. A. D. 1070 18 Abraham. A. D. 1076 19 Rythmarch. 20 Wilfrid alias
Griffri. 21 Bernard. A. D. 1115
Bishops of S. David's after Bernard, Suffragans to the Sea of Canterbury.
1 David Fit. Gerald. A. D. 1148 2 Petrus or Piers. A. D. 1176 3 Geffrey. 4
Sylvester Gyraldus or Gyrald. Cambrensis. A. D. 1198 5 Jorworth or Edward. A.
D. 1215 6 Alselmus. A. D. 1228 7 Tho. Wallensis. A. D. 1247 8 Thomas Carren. A.
D. 1255 9 Thomas Beck. A. D. 1280 10 David de S. Edmundo. A. D. 1293 11 David
Martin. A. D. 1320 12 Henry Gower. A. D. 1328 13 John Thorisby. A. D. 1347 14
Reginald Brian. A. D. 1349 15 Thomas Fastolf. A. D. 1353 16 Adam Houghton. A.
D. 1361 17 John Gilbert. A. D. 1369
The Sea void 4. years.

18 Guy de Mona alias Mohun. A. D. 1401 19 Hen. Chicheley. A. D. 1409 20 John
Keterich or Cataricus. A. D. 1414 21 Stephen Patrington. A. D. 1415 22 Benet
Nicolls. A. D. 1417 23 Thomas Rodburn. A. D. 1424 24 Will: Lynwood. A. D. 1435
25 John Langton. A. D. 1446 26 John Delabere. A. D. 1447 27 Robert Tully. 28
Richard Martin. A. D. 1482 29 Thom: Langton. A. D. 1483 30 Hugh Pavy. A. D.
1485 31 John Morgan alias Young. A. D. 1503 32 Rob: Sherborn. A. D. 1504 33 Edw:
Vaughan. A. D. 1509 34 Rich: Rawlyns. A. D. 1523 35 Will: Barlow. A. D. 1536 36
Robert Ferrar. A. D. 1549 37 Henry Morgan. A. D. 1554 38 Thomas Young. A. D.
1559 39 Richard Davies. A. D. 1561 40 Marmaduke Middleton. A. D. 1567
The Sea vacant 4. years.

41 Anthony Rudd. A. D. 1594 42 Rich: Milborn. A. D. 1615 43 William Laud. A.
D. 1621 44 Theophi* Field. A. D. 1627 45 Roger Manwaring. A. D. 1635
ELYE.
1 Hervaeus Bishop of Bangor. A. D. 1109 2 Nigellus. A. D. 1133 3 Galfridus
Rydall. A. D. 1174 4 William Longechamp. A. D. 1189 5 Eustachius. A. D. 1198 6
Jo: de Fontibus. A. D. 1219 7 Galfr: de Burgo. A. D. 1225 8 Hugh Norwold. A. D.
1229 9 Will: of Kilkenny. A. D. 1255 10 Hugh Balsam. A. D. 1257 11 John de
Kirkby. A. D. 1286 12 Will: de Luda. A. D. 1290 13 Ralph Walpool. A. D. 1299 14
Robert Orford. A. D. 1302 15 John de Keeton. A. D. 1310 16 John Hotham. A. D.
1316 17 Sim: Mountacut. A. D. 1336 18 Thomas Lyde. A. D. 1344 19 Sim: Langham.
A. D. 1361 20 John Barnet. A. D. 1366 21 Tho: Arundell. A. D. 1375 22 John
Fordham. A. D. 1388 23 Philip Morgan. A. D. 1425 24 Lewis Lushbrough. A. D.
1435 25 Tho: Bourchier. A. D. 1443 26 William Gray. A. D. 1454 27 John Moorton.
A. D. 1478 28 John Alcock. A. D. 1486 29 Rich: Redman. A. D. 1501 30 James
Stanley. A. D. 1506 31 Nich: West. A. D. 1515 32 Tho: Goodrich. A. D. 1534 33
Tho. Thirlby. A. D. 1554 34 Richard Cox. A. D. 1559
The Sea vacant 20 years.

35 Martin Heton. A. D. 1599 36 Lancelot Andrews. A. D. 1609 37 Nich: Felton.
A. D. 1618 38 Jo: Buckeridg. A. D. 1628 39 Franc: White. A. D. 1631 40 Matthew
Wren. A. D. 1638
EXETER.
This Diocese was at first in two Bishoprics, viz. Cornwall and Devon, and
afterward united into one, viz. Exeter.

Bishops of Cornwall.
1 Athelstan I. A. D. 905 2 Conan. 3 Ruydocus. 4 Aldred. 5 Britwyn. 6 Athelstan
II. 7 VVolfi. 8 Woronus. 9 Wolocus. 10 Stidio. 11 Adelred. 12 Burwald.
Bishops of Devon.
1 Werstan or Aedulph. A. D. 905 2 Putta. A. D. 906 3 Eadulph II. A. D. 910 4
Ethelgarus. A. D. 932 5 Algar. A. D. 942 6 Alfwold. A. D. 952 7 Alwolf I. A. D.
972 8 Sideman. A. D. 981 9 Alfred al. Alfric. A. D. 990 10 Alwolf II or
Alfwold. A. D. 999 11 Eadnothus. A. D. 1014 12 Livingus. A. D. 1032
This Livingus after the Death of Burwald Bishop of Cornwall, united the two
Bishoprics of Cornwall and Devon into one Bishopric, removed by his successor
to Exeter.

Bishops of Exeter.
1 Leofric removed the Sea to Exeter. A. D. 1049 2 Osbert or Osbern. A. D. 1079
3 Will: VVarewast. A. D. 1107 4 Rob: Chichester. A. D. 1122 5 Rob: VVarfwast
alias VVarwast. A. D. 1150 6 Barth: Isanus. A. D. 1159 7 Jo: the Chaunter. A.
D. 1186 8 Henry Marshall. A. D. 1191 9 Simon de Apulia. A. D. 1206 10 Will:
Brewer. A. D. 1224 11 Rich: Blondy. A. D. 1245 12 Walt: Bronescomb. A. D. 1257
13 Peter Quivill. A. D. 1280 14 Thomas Button. A. D. 1293 15 Wal: Stapleton.
A. D. 1307 16 James Barkley. A. D. 1326 17 Jo: Grandison. A. D. 1327 18 Thom:
Brentingham. A. D. 1370 19 Edm: Stafford. A. D. 1395 20 John Ketterich. A. D.
1419 21 John Carry. A. D. 1419 22 Edmond Lacy. A. D. 1420 23 George Nevill. A.
D. 1455 24 John Booth. A. D. 1466 25 Peter Courtney. A. D. 1477 26 Richard Fox.
A. D. 1486 27 Oliver King. A. D. 1492 28 Robert Redman. A. D. 1495 29 Jo:
Arundell. A. D. 1501 30 Hugh Oldham. A. D. 1504 31 John Voisei alias Harman. A.
D. 1519 32 Miles Coverdale. A. D. 1551 33 James Turbervil. A. D. 1556 34
William Alley. A. D. 1560 35 VVil: Bradbridge. A. D. 1570 36 John VVoolton. A.
D. 1579 37 Gervase Babington. A. D. 1594 38 Will: Cotton. A. D. 1598 39
Valentine Carry. A. D. 1621 40 Joseph Hall. A. D. 1627 41 Ralph Brownrigge. A.
D. 1641
GLOUCESTER.
One of the 6. new Bishoprics erected by K. Hen. 8.

1 Jo: VVakeman. A. D. 1541 2 John Hooper. A. D. 1550 3 James Brooks. A. D.
1555
The Sea vacant 3 yearts.

4 Rich: Cheney. A. D. 1562
The Sea void three years.

5 Jo: Bullingham. A. D. 1581 6 Godf: Goldsborough. A. D. 1598 7 Thomas Ravis.
A. D. 1604 8 Henry Parry. A. D. 1607 9 Giles Tompson. A. D. 1611 10 Miles
Smith. A. D. 1612 11 Godfrey Goodman. A. D. 1624
HEREFORD.
1 Putta. A. D. 680 2 Tirtell. 3 Torteras. 4 VValstold alias VValstod. 5
Cuthbert. A. D. 740 6 Podda. 7 Ecca. 8 Cedda. 9 Albert. A. D. 857 10 Esna. 11
Celmund. A. D. 885 12 Utellus. 13 Wlfhard. 14 Benna. 15 Edulf. 16 Cuthwulf. 17.
Mucel. 18 Doorlas. 19 Cunemund. 20 Edgar. 21 Tidhelm. 22 VVulfhelm. 23 Alfrike.
24 Athulf. 25 Ethelstan. A. D. 1055 26 Leovegard. A. D. 1055
The Sea vacant 4. years.

27 Walter. A. D. 1060 28 Rob: Lozinga. A. D. 1079 29 Gerard. 30 Raynelm. A. D.
1107 31 Geffr: de Cliva. A. D. 1115 32 Richard Clerk of the Seal. A. D. 1120 33
Rob: de Betune. A. D. 1131 34 Gilb: de Foliot. A. D. 1149 35 Rob: de Melun. A.
D. 1162 36 Robert Foliot. A. D. 1174 37 Will: le Vere. A. D. 1186 38 Giles de
Bruise. A. D. 1200 39 Hugh de Mapenore. A. D. 1216 40 Hugh Foliot. A. D. 1219 41
Ralph de Maidston. A. D. 1234 42 Peter de Egueblank. A. D. 1239 43 John Breton
the famous Lawyer. A. D. 1260 44 Tho: Cantilupe. A. D. 1275 45 Richard de
Swinfeild. A. D. 1282 46 Adam de Orleton. A. D. 1317 47 Tho: Charlton. A. D.
1327 48 John Trillock. A. D. 1344 49 Lewis Charlton. A. D. 1361 50 Will:
Courtney. A. D. 1369 51 John Gilbert. A. D. 1376 52 John Trenevant al.
Trefnant. A. D. 1389 53 Robert Mascall. A. D. 1405 54 Edmond Lacy. A. D. 1417
55 Thomas Polton. A. D. 1420 56 Tho: Stofford. A. D. 1422 57 Richard Beauchamp.
A. D. 1448 58 Regin: Butler. A. D. 1450 59 John Stanbery. A. D. 1453 60 Tho:
Myllyng. A. D. 1474 61 Edm: Audley. A. D. 1492 62 Adrian de Castello. A. D.
1502 63 Richard Mayo. A. D. 1504 64 Charles Booth. A. D. 1516 65 Edward Fox. A.
D. 1535 66 Edm: Bonner. A. D. 1538 67 John Skypp. A. D. 1539 68 John Harley. A.
D. 1553 69 Robert Parfew alias Warton. A. D. 1554 70 John Scory. A. D. 1559 71
Herbert Westfaling. A. D. 1585 72 Robert Bennet. A. D. 1602 73 Franc: Godwin.
A. D. 1617 74 Augustine Lyndsell. A. D. 1633 75 Matthew: Wren. A. D. 1634 76
Theoph: Field. A. D. 1635 77 George Cook. A. D. 1636
LANDAFF.
1 Dubritius. 2 St. Telian alias Eliud. A. D. 522 3 St. Oudoceus. 4 Ubilwynus.
5 Aidanus. 6 Elgistill. 7 Lunapeius. 8 Comegern. 9 Argwistill. 10 Gurvan. 11
Guodloiu. 12 Edilbinus. 13 Grecielus. 14 Berthygwn. 15 Trychan. 16 Elvogus. 17
Catgwaret. 18 Cerenhir. 19 Nobis. 20 Gulfridus. 21 Nudd. 22 Cimeliauc. 23
Libian. 24 Marchluith. 25 Pater. 26 Gucanor alias Gogwan. A. D. 982 27 Bledri.
A. D. 993 28 Joseph. A. D. 1022 29 Herewald. A. D. 1056 30 Urban. A. D. 1107
The Sea vacant 6. years.

31 Uhtrid. A. D. 1139 32 Geffrey. A. D. 1148 33 Nic^ap Gurgant. A. D. 1153 34
William de Salso Marisco. A. D. 1183 35 Henry. 36 William. A. D. 1219 37 Elias
de Radnor. A. D. 1229 38 Will: de Burgo. A. D. 1244 39 Jo: de la Ware. A. D.
1253 40 Will: de Radnor. A. D. 1256 41 Will: de Brews. A. D. 1265
The Sea vacant 9 years.

42 John de Monmouth. A. D. 1296 43 Jo: de Eglescliff. A. D. 1323 44 John
Pascall. A. D. 1347 45 Rog: Cradock. A. D. 1362 46 Tho: Rushook. A. D. 1383 47
William de Bottlesham. A. D. 1385 48 Edmond de Bromfield. A. D. 1389 49
Tydeman. A. D. 1391 50 Andrew Barret. A. D. 1395 51 John Burghill. 52 Tho:
Peverell. A. D. 1399 53 John la Zouch. A. D. 1408 54 John Wells. A. D. 1423 55
Nich: Ashby. A. D. 1441 56 John Hunden. A. D. 1458 57 John Smith. 58 John
Marshall. A. D. 1478 59 John Ingleby. 60 Miles Saley. A. D. 1504 61 George de
Athequa a Spaniard. A. D. 1516 62 Robert Holgate. A. D. 1537 63 Anthony Kitchen
ali. Dunstan. A. D. 1545
The Sea void 3. years.

64 Hugh Jones. A. D. 1566 65 Will: Blethin. A. D. 1575 66 Gervase Babington.
A. D. 1591 67 Will: Morgan. A. D. 1595 68 Franc: Godwyn. A. D. 1601 69 Geo:
Carleton. A. D. 1618 70 Theoph: Field. A. D. 1619 71 Will: Murray. A. D. 1627
72 Morgan Owen. A. D. 1639
LINCOLN.
This Diocese at first contained two Bishoprics, Dorchester and Sidnacester,
which were afterward united into one Bishopric of Lincoln.

Dorchester Bishops.
This Dorchester is about 7. miles from Oxford, out of which was taken the
Bishopric of Winchester, by Kenwalchus King of the West Saxons.

1 Birinus. A. D. 635 2 Agilbertus. A. D. 650
The Sea vacant a long time.

3 Tota. 4 Edbert. A. D. 764 5 VVerenbert. 6 Unwora. A. D. 768 7 Rethunus. A.
D. 816 8 Aldred. A. D. 851 9 Ceolred. A. D. 873 10 Halard. 11 Ceolulph or
Kenulph. A. D. 905 12 Leofwin. A. D. 959
In this last Bishops time Sidnacester was united to Dorchester.

13 Ailnoth. A. D. 960 14 Ascwin alias Aescwy. 15 Alshelm. 16 Eadnoth I. 17
Eadhericus. A. D. 1016 18 Eadnoth II. A. D. 1034 19 Ulfus a Norman. A. D. 1052
20 VVulfinus. A. D. 1053
After this Bishops time Remigius his successor removed the Sea to Lincoln.

Sidnacester Bishops.
Sidnacester was a Town in Lincolnshire near Gainsbrough, its Diocese taken
out of Dorchester, A. D. 678.

1 Eadhed. A. D. 678 2 Ethelwin. 3 Edgar. 4 Kinebert alias Embert. 5 Alwigh. A.
D. 733
About this time A. D. 737. another Bishops See was erected at Leicester, but
soon after removed to Dorchester.

6 Eadulfus I. A. D. 751 7 Ceolulf. A. D. 764 8 Eadulf II. A. D. 787
The Sea vacant many years.

9 Brightred. A. D. 872
This See having lien vacant almost 80. years, was at last united to
Dorchester by Leofwin Bishop of that Diocese, as before, and so continued till
Remigius the last Bishop of Dorchester removed the Sea to Lincoln.

Lincoln Bishops since the removal by Remigius.

1 Remigius. A. D. 1070 2 Robert Bloet. A. D. 1092 3 Alexander. A. D. 1123 4
Robert de Chesney al. de Querceto. A. D. 1147
The Sea vacant 17. years.

5 Walter de Constantiis. A. D. 1183 6 St. Hugh. A. D. 1186 7 William Blesensis
or de Blois. A. D. 1203
After the Sea had lien vacant three years,

8 Hugh Walls. A. D. 1209 9 Robert Grosthed alias Grouthed. A. D. 1209 10 Hen:
Lexinton. A. D. 1254 11 Bened: de Gravesend. A. D. 1258 12 Oliver Sutton. A. D.
1280 13 John Aldberry alias Alderby. A. D. 1300 14 Thomas Beak. A. D. 1319 15
Henry Burwash. A. D. 1320 16 Thomas Beck. A. D. 1341 17 John Synwell. A. D.
1351 18 Jo: Bokingham. A. D. 1363 19 Henry Beaufort. A. D. 1397 20 Phil:
Repindon. A. D. 1405 21 Will: Fleming. A. D. 1420 22 William Gray. A. D. 1431
23 Will: Alnwick. A. D. 1436 24 Marmaduke Lumley. A. D. 1450 25 Jo: Chadworth.
A. D. 1452 26 Thomas Rotheram alias Scot. A. D. 1471 27 John Russell. A. D.
1480
The Sea vacant 5. years.

28 Will: Smith. A. D. 1495 29 Thom: Wolsey. A. D. 1514 30 Will: Atwater. A. D.
1514 31 Jo: Longland. A. D. 1521 32 Henry Holbech. A. D. 1547 33 John Tailor.
A. D. 1552 34 John White. A. D. 1553 35 Thom: Watson. A. D. 1557 36 Nic:
Bullingham. A. D. 1559 37 Thom* Cooper. A. D. 1570 38 Will: Wickham. A. D. 1584
39 William Chaderton. A. D. 1594 40 Will: Barlow. A. D. 1608 41 Rich: Neile. A.
D. 1613 42 Geo: Mountayn. A. D. 1617 43 John Williams. A. D. 1621 44 Tho:
VVynnyff. A. D. 1641
LONDON.
This Bishopric was first an Archbishopric, erected by Lucius the first
Christian King of the Britans An. Christi 180. the Archiepiscopall See was
removed to Canterbury, and London made an Episcopal See by Augustine the Monk,
A. D. 604. There are only 16. names of the Archbishops, which are these.

1 Thean, who built and made S. Peter's Church in Cornhill London, his
Archiepiscopall See of London under King Lucius. 2 Elvanus. 3 Cadar. 4 Obinus.
5 Conan. 6 Palladius. 7 Stephen. 8 Iltut. 9 Theodwyn al. Dedwyn. 10 Thedred. 11
Hilary. 12 Restitutus. A. D. 366 13 Guitelnius. 14 Fastidius. 15 Vodinus. A. D.
436 16 Theonus. A. D. 553
After the Archbishops succeeded the Bishops of London following.

Bishops of London.
1 Melitus, placed by Augustine the Monk. A. D. 608 2 Ceadda. A. D. 654 3 VVina.
A. D. 666 4 Erkenwald. A. D. 675 5 VValdher. 6 Ingwald. 7 Egwolf. 8 VVighed. 9
Eadbright. 10 Eadgar. 11 Kenwalch. 12 Eadbald. 13 Hecbert or Heathubert. 14
Osmund alias Oswyn. A. D. 801 15 Ethelnot. A. D. 833 16 Ceolbert. 17 Renulph
al. Ceorulf. 18 Swithulf. 19 Eadstan. A. D. 851 20 VVulfius. A. D. 860 21
Ethelward. 22 Elstan. 23 Theodred the Good. A. D. 898 24 VVulstan I. 25
Brithelmus. 26 Dunstan. A. D. 961 27 Alfstan. A. D. 962 28 VVulfstan II. 29
Alhun. 30 Alwy. 31 Elfward alias Alword. 32 Robert. A. D. 1044 33 William the
Norman. A. D. 1050 34 Hugh de Orival. A. D. 1070 35 Mauritius. A. D. 1087 36
Richard Beaumes alias Rufus I. A. D. 1108 37 Gilbert Universalis. A. D. 1128
The Sea void 7 years.

38 Rob: de Sigillo. A. D. 1140 39 Richard Beaumes alias Beauvys II. A. D. 1151
40 Gilbert Foliot. A. D. 1161 41 Rich: Nigellus. A. D. 1189 42 William de
Sancta Maria. A. D. 1199 43 Eustachius de Fauconbridg. A. D. 1222 44 Roger
Niger. A. D. 1229 45 Fulk Bassett. A. D. 1244 46 Henry de VVingham. A. D. 1259
47 Richard Talbot. A. D. 1261 48 Henry de Sandwich. A. D. 1263 49 Jo: de
Chisal. A. D. 1247 50 Richard de Gravesend. A. D. 1280 51 Ralph de Baldock. A.
D. 1305 52 Gilb: Segrave. A. D. 1313 53 Rich: Newport. A. D. 1317 54 Step:
Gravesend. A. D. 1318 55 Richard Bentworth al. Wentworth. A. D. 1338 56 Ralph
Stratford. A. D. 1339 57 Michael Northbrook. A. D. 1355 58 Simon Sudbury alias
Tybald. A. D. 1361 59 VVil: Courtney. A. D. 1375 60 Rob: Braybrook. A. D. 1381
61 Rog: Walden. A. D. 1404 62 Nic: Bubwith. A. D. 1406 63 Rich: Clifford. A.
D. 1407 64 John Kempe. A. D. 1421 65 William Gray. A. D. 1426 66 Robert
Fitzhugh. A. D. 1431 67 Robert Gilbert. A. D. 1435 68 Thomas Kemp. A. D. 1449
John Marshall mistaken for Landaff.

69 Richard Hill. A. D. 1489 70 Thom: Savage. A. D. 1497 71 Will: Warham. A. D.
1500 72 Will: Barnes. A. D. 1505 73 Richard Fitz-James. A. D. 1506 74 Cuth:
Tonstall. A. D. 1522 75 Jo: Stokesley. A. D. 1530 76 Edm: Bonner. A. D. 1540 77
Nich: Ridley. A. D. 1549 78 Edm: Gryndall. A. D. 1559 79 Edwyn Sands. A. D.
1570 80 John Elmer. A. D. 1576 81 Rich: Fletcher. A. D. 1594 82 Rich. Bancroft.
A. D. 1597 83 Rich: Vaughan. A. D. 1604 84 Thomas Ravis. A. D. 1607 85 Georg
Abbot. A. D. 1609 86 John King. A. D. 1611 87 Geo: Mountain. A. D. 1621 88
William Laud. A. D. 1628 89 William Juxon. A. D. 1633
NORWICH.
This Diocese originally was the Bishopric of the East Angles, which was
afterward divided into two Bishoprics, Elmham and Dunwich: this of Dunwich
being extinct, that of Elmham in Norfolk continued till Herfastus removed his
See to Thetford, and Herbert Losinga afterward removed his See from Thetford
to Norwich, where it has since continued.

Bishops of East Angles.
1 S. Faelix a Burgundian. A. D. 630 2 Tho: Diaconus. A. D. 647 3 Bregilfus
Bonifacius. A. D. 652 4 Bisus. A. D. 665
This Bisus divided the Bishopric of East Angles into Elmham and Donwich.

Bishops of Elmham after the division.
1 Bedwin. 2 Northbertus. 3 Headulacus. 4 Edilfridus. 5 Lanferthus. 6
Athelwolphus. 7 Alcarus. 8 Sibba. 9 Alherdus. 10 Humbertus al. Humbiretus.
Bishops of Dunwich after the division.
1 Acca. 2 Astwolphus. 3 Eadforth. 4 Cuthwin. 5 Aldberth. 6 Eglaf alias Algar.
7 Heardred alias Hardulf. A. D. 747 8 Aelphunus. 9 Tidferth alias Todfrid. 10
Weremund. 11 Wilred.
These two Bishoprics by reason of the Danish wars lay vacant 100. years:
afterward An. 955. Athulfas was ordained Bishop of the East Angles by Edwyn
King of the West Saxons, who kept his See at Elmham, Dunwich being quite
extinct, as above.

Bishops of both Sees after the vacancy of 100. years abovesaid.

1 Athu: al. Astulfus. A. D. 955 2 Alfredus. 3 Theodredus al. Theodoricus. 4
Theodred. 5 Athelstan. 6 Algar. 7 Alwin. 8 Alfricus. 9 Alifreius alias
Alfricus. A. D. 1038 10 Stigand. 11 Grinketell. A. D. 1044 12 Egelmar alias
E^helmar. A. D. 1047
All these till the time of William the Conqueror had their Sees at Elmham.

After Bishop Egelmar King William the Conqueror caused Arfastus or Herfastus
his Chaplain to succeed Egelmar, who removed the Sea from Elmham to Thetford,
where it continued three successions.

Bishops of Thetford.
1 Herfastus or Arfastus. 2 Gul. Galsagus. 3 Herebertus Losinga al. Gul.
Herbertus. A. D. 1088
This Losinga translated the Sea from Thetford to Norwich, where it has since
continued.

Bishops of Norwich since the removal of the Sea from Thetford.

1 Herebertus Losinga al. Gul. Herbertus. A. D. 1088 2 Everardus. A. D. 1120 3
William Turbus a Norman. A. D. 1151 4 Jo: of Oxford. A. D. 1177 5 John Gray. A.
D. 1200
The Sea void 7. years.

6 Pandulfus the Popes Legate. A. D. 1222 7 Thomas de Blundevile. A. D. 1226 8
Radulphus. A. D. 1236
The Sea void 3. years.

9 Will: de Raleigh. A. D. 1239 10 Walt: de Sufeild. A. D. 1244 11 Sim: de
Wanton. A. D. 1253 12 Roger de Skerwyng. A. D. 1268 13 Will: Middleton. A. D.
1278 14 Ralph Walpool. A. D. 1288 15 John Salmon. A. D. 1299
Robert Baldock elected, but refused it.

16 Will: Ayermin. A. D. 1325 17 Antho: de Beck. A. D. 1337 18 William Bateman.
19 Thomas Percy. A. D. 1354 20 Hen: Spencer. A. D. 1370 21 Alexander Prior of
Norwich. A. D. 1408 22 Ric: Courtney. A. D. 1413 23 Jo. Wakering. A. D. 1416 24
Will: Alnwick. A. D. 1426 25 Tho: Brown. A. D. 1436 26 Walter Heart. A. D. 1445
27 Ja: Goldwell. A. D. 1472 28 Thomas Jan. A. D. 1499 29 Richard Nyx. A. D.
1500 30 William Rugg alias Reps. A. D. 1536 31 Tho: Thirlby. A. D. 1550 32 John
Hopton. A. D. 1554 33 Jo: Parkhurst. A. D. 1560 34 Edm: Freake. A. D. 1575 35
Edm: Scambler. A. D. 1584 36 Will: Redman. A. D. 1524 37 John Jegon. A. D. 1602
38 John Overall. A. D. 1618 39 Sam Harsnet. A. D. 1619 40 Franc: White. A. D.
1628 41 Rich: Corbet. A. D. 1632 42 Mat: Wrenn. A. D. 1635 43 Rich: Mountague.
A. D. 1638 44 Joseph Hall. A. D. 1641
OXFORD.
This was one of the 6. Bishoprics newly erected by K. Hen. 8.

Bishops of Oxford.
1 Robert King last Abbot of Oseney. A. D. 1541 2 Hugh Curwyn, the Sea having
been vacant ten years. A. D. 1567 3 John Underhill, after the Sea vacant 20.
years. A. D. 1589 4 John Bridges, after the Sea vacant 11. years. A. D. 1603
5 John Howson. A. D. 1619 6 Rich: Corbet. A. D. 1628 7 John Bancroft. A. D.
1632 8 Robert Skynner. A. D. 1641
PETERBOROUGH.
This was another of the 6. new Bishoprics erected by K. Hen. 8.

Bishops of Peterborough.
1 John Chamber, last Abbot there. A. D. 1541 2 David Poole. A. D. 1557 3 Edm:
Scambler. A. D. 1560 4 Rich: Howland. A. D. 1584 5 Thomas Dove. A. D. 1600 6
William Peirs. A. D. 1630 7 August: Lyndsell. A. D. 1632 8 Francis Dee. A. D.
1634 9 John Towers. A. D. 1639
ROCHESTER.
1 Justus. A. D. 606 2 Romanus. A. D. 622 3 Paulinus. A. D. 631 4 Ithamar. A.
D. 644 5 Damianus. A. D. 656 6 Putta. A. D. 669 7 Quichelmus or Gulielmus. A.
D. 676 8 Gebmundus, Godmundus, or Godwynd. A. D. 681 9 Tobias. A. D. 693 10
Adulfus. A. D. 717 11 Dun or Duina. A. D. 741 12 Eardulfus. A. D. 747 13 Diota.
14 Weremund 15 Beornmod ali. Beornred. A. D. 800 16 Tadnoth. 17 Bedenoth. 18
Godwin. 19 Gutherwulf. 20 Swithulf. 21 Buiricus. 22 Cheolmund. 23 Chineferth.
24 Burrhicus. 25 Alfanus. 26 Godwin II. A. D. 984 27 Godwin III. 28 Siward. A.
D. 1058 29 Arnostus. A. D. 1075 30 Gundulph. A. D. 1077 31 Ralph. A. D. 1108 32
St. Earnulphus. A. D. 1115 33 John Archd: of Cant. A. D. 1125 34 Ascelinus. A.
D. 1137 35 Walterus. A. D. 1147 36 Gualeranus. A. D. 1183 37 Gilbert de
Glanvile. A. D. 1185 38 Benedictus. A. D. 1214 39 Hen: de Sanford. A. D. 1227
40 Rich: de Wendover. A. D. 1238 41 Laurence de S. Martino. A. D. 1251 42
Walter de Merton, founder of Merton College. A. D. 1274 43 Jo: de Bradfield.
A. D. 1278 44 Tho: Inglethorp. A. D. 1283 45 Thomas de Wuldham. A. D. 1291 46
Haymo de Heath. A. D. 1319 47 Jo: de Shepey. A. D. 1352 48 Will: Wittlesey. A.
D. 1361 49 Thomas Trillick alias Trilley. A. D. 1363 50 Tho: Brinton. A. D.
1372 51 William de Bottlesham al: Bolsham. A. D. 1389 52 John Boltsham alias
Bottlesham. A. D. 1400 53 Rich: Young. A. D. 1404 54 John Kemp. A. D. 1419 55
John Langdon. A. D. 1422 56 Thomas Brown. A. D. 1434 57 Will: de Wells. A. D.
1436 58 John Low. A. D. 1443 59 Tho: Rotheram. A. D. 1467 60 John Alcock. A.
D. 1471 61 John Russell. A. D. 1476 62 Edm: Audley. A. D. 1480 63 Thomas
Savage. A. D. 1492 64 Richard Fitz-James A. D. 1496 65 John Fisher. A. D. 1504
66 John Hilsey. A. D. 1536 67 Nich: Heath. A. D. 1539 68 Henry Holbech. A. D.
1544 69 Nich: Ridley. A. D. 1547 70 John Poynet. A. D. 1550 71 John Scory. A.
D. 1551 72 Maurice Griffin. A. D. 1554 73 Edm: Guest. A. D. 1559 74 Edm: Freak.
A. D. 1571 75 John Peirs. A. D. 1576 76 John Young. A. D. 1578 77 Will: Barlow.
A. D. 1605 78 Richard Neile. A. D. 1608 79 Jo: Buckeridg. A. D. 1611 80 Walter
Curle. A. D. 1627 81 John Bowl. A. D. 1630 82 John Warner. A. D. 1637
SALISBURY.
This Diocese was formerly in two Bishoprics, Sherborn and Wilton: out of
Sherborn Wilton wast aken: which were afterward united together into Salisbury
by Bishop Herman A. D. 1045.

Bishops of Sherborn.
1 Aldhelmus made the first Bishop of Sherborn by Ina King of the West Saxons.
A. D. 705 2 Fordhere. A. D. 709 3 Hereward. A. D. 730 4 Ethelwold. 5 Denefrith.
6 Wilbert. 7 Eahlstan. A. D. 817 8 Eadmund. A. D. 868 9 Ethelrage. A. D. 872 10
Alfsy. 11 Asser Menevensis. 12 Swithelm or Swigelm. A. D. 883 13 Ethelwald or
Ethelward.
The Sea void 7. years.

A. D. 905. Three Bishoprics were taken out of the Diocese of Sherborn by
Plegmond Archbishop of Canterbury, one for Cornwall, another for Devon, of
which see Tit. Exeter, the third at Wells for Somersetshire of which see Bath
and Wells, and a fourth afterward at Wilton for Wilt-shire, of which see
afterward. Now to proceed with Sherborn Bishops next after Ethelwald.

14 VVerstan. A. D. 905 15 Ethelbald. A. D. 918 16 Sigelm Il. 17 Alfredus. A.
D. 934 18 VVulfsinus. A. D. 940 19 Alfwold. A. D. 958 20 Ethelricus. A. D. 978
21 Ethelsius. 22 Brithwin al. Brithric. 23 Elmor. A. D. 1009 24 Brynwyn alias
Brythwin. 25 Elfwold.
After the death of Elfwold, Herman the last Bishop of Wilton was Bishop also
of Sherborn, and joined both Bishoprics again into one, and then removed the Sea to Salisbury.

Bishops of Wilton.
Whose Sees were sometime at Wilton, sometime at Ramesbury and otherwhile at
Sunning, and thereupon sometime named Bishops of those places.

1 Ethelstan at Ramsbury A. D. 905 2 Odo, there also. 3 Osulphus at Wilton. A.
D. 934 4 Alsstanus. A. D. 970 5 Alfgarus or VVolfgarus. A. D. 981 6 Siricius. 7
Alfricus or Aluricius. A. D. 989 8 Brithwoldus. A. D. 998 9 Hermannus Chaplain
to King Edward the Confessor, whom Cambden calls Bishop of Sunning, from his
Episcopal See there: he being after the death of Elfwold Bishop of Sherborn
joined that and Wilton into one, and then removed his See to Salisbury, since
which time they have been called Bishops of Salisbury.
Bishops of Salisbury after the removal of the Sees thither by Bishop Herman
as above.

1 Herman the last Bishop of Sherborn and Wilton, and first bearing the Title
of Bishop of Salisbury. A. D. 1045 2 St. Osmond. 3 Roger. A. D. 1107 4 Jocelin.
A. D. 1139
The Sea vacant 4. years.

5 Hubert Walter. A. D. 1189 6 Herebert or Robert Pauper. A. D. 1193 7 Richard
Poor. A. D. 1217 8 Rob: Bingham. A. D. 1229 9 Will: of York. A. D. 1247 10
Giles of Bridport. A. D. 1256 11 Walter de la Wile. A. D. 1263 12 Robert de
Wikhampton. A. D. 1274 13 Walt: Scammell. A. D. 1284 14 Henry de Braundston. A.
D. 1286 15 Laur: de Hawkburn. A. D. 1287 16 Will: de Comer. A. D. 1288 17 Nich:
de Longespe. A. D. 1291 18 Simon de Gandavo. A. D. 1298 19 Roger de Mortivall.
A. D. 1315 20 Robert Vivill. A. D. 1329 21 Ralph Erghum. A. D. 1375 22 John
Waltham. A. D. 1388 23 Rich: Metford. A. D. 1395 24 Nicholas Bubwith. A. D.
1407 25 Robert Halam. A. D. 1408 26 Jo: Chaundler. A. D. 1417 27 Robert Nevill.
A. D. 1427 28 William Aiscoht. al. Hacliff. A. D. 1438 29 Ric: Beauchamp. A. D.
1450 30 Lion: Woodvill. A. D. 1482 31 Tho: Langton. A. D. 1485 32 John Blyth.
A. D. 1493 33 Henry Deane. A. D. 1500 34 Edm: Awdley. A. D. 1502 35 Laurence
Campegius Card. A. D. 1524 36 Nicholas Shaxton. A. D. 1535 37 John Salcot alias
Capon. A. D. 1539 38 John Jewel. A. D. 1559 39 Edm: Gheast. A. D. 1571 40 John
Peirs. A. D. 1578
The Sea void 3. years.

41 Rich: Coldwell. A. D. 1591
The Sea void 2. years.

42 Henry Cotton. A. D. 1598 43 Robert Abbot. A. D. 1615 44 Mart. Fotherby. A.
D. 1618 45 Rob: Tomson. A. D. 1620 46 John Davenant. A. D. 1621 47 Brian Duppa.
A. D. 1641
WESTMINSTER.
There was an Episcopal See erected at Westminster by King Hen. 8. one of the
6. new Bishoprics by him ordained upon the suppression of Religious Houses,
whereof Thomas Thirlby was the first and last Bishop, Consecrated An. 1641. He
being thence removed to Norwich, the Diocese belonging to this new Bishopric
(which was Middlesex) was restored to London, and the Bishopric of Westminster
ceased.

WINCHESTER.
This Bishopric was first taken out of the Diocese of Dorchester by Kenwalchus
King of the West Saxons, and conferred on VVina the first Bishop thereof A.D.
650. Of the Bishops of Dorchester See Lincoln.

Bishops of Winchester or Winton.
1 VVina or VVini. A. D. 650 2 Eleutherius. 3 S. Headda. A. D. 673 4 Daniel. A.
D. 704
In this last Bishop Daniels days Ina King of the West Saxons divided his
Province into two Dioceses: in the one he placed Adelmus at Sherborn, whereof
see in Salisbury; in the other this Daniel at Winchester, whose successors
follow.

5 Humfrey. A. D. 744 6 Kinchard. A. D. 756 7 Athelard or Hathelard. 8 Egbard.
9 Dudda. 10 Kenebert. 11 Alhmundus. 12 VVightheinus. 13 Herefridus. 14 Edmund.
A. D. 834 15 Helmstan. 16 S. Swithun. A. D. 837 17 Adferth or Athelred. A. D.
863 18 Dunbert. A. D. 871 19 Denewulsus a Hogheard under King Alfred. A. D. 879
20 S. Athelmus alias Bertulphus. A. D. 888 21 Bertulph. A. D. 897 22 Fristan
consecrated by Archbishop Plegmond An. A. D. 905 23 Brinstan. A. D. 931 24
Elpheg: Calvus. A. D. 946 25 Elffinus or Alffins. 26 Brithelmus. A. D. 958 27
S. Ethelwold. A. D. 963 28 S. Elphege. A. D. 984 29 Kenulph. A. D. 1006 30 S.
Brithwold. A. D. 1008 31 Elsinus alias Ealsinus. A. D. 1015 32 Alwinus, accused
to be naught with Emma, Wife to King Edward Confessor but acquitted. A. D. 1038
33 Stigand afterward Archbishop of Canterbury An. A. D. 1047 34 VValkelin. A.
D. 1070
The Sea void 10 years.

35 Will: Giffard. A. D. 1107 36 Henry de Bloys or Blesensis Card. A. D. 1129
The Sea void three years.

37 Richard Toclive alias More. A. D. 1174 38 Godf: de Lucy. A. D. 1189 39
Peter de Rupibus al. de la Roche. A. D. 1204 40 Will: de Raley alias Radley.
A. D. 1243 41 Ethelmar alias Adelmar. A. D. 1249
The Sea void 4. years

42 John Gernsey alias John of Oxford. A. D. 1265 43 Nic: de Ely. A. D. 1268 44
John de Pontissara al. Pontois. A. D. 1280 45 Henry Woodlock A. D. 1304 46 John
Sandall alias Kendall. A. D. 1316 47 Reginald de Asser the Popes Legate. A. D.
1320 48 John Stratford. A. D. 1323 49 Adam d'Orlton alias Tarlton. A. D. 1333
50 Will: de Edington al. Edendon. A. D. 1345 51 Will: de Wickham founder of new
College in Oxford. A. D. 1365 52 Henry Beaufort Car. Son of John of Gaunt. A.
D. 1405 53 William VVaynflet founded Magd. College Oxford. A. D. 1447 54 Peter
Courtney. A. D. 1486 55 Tho: Langton. A. D. 1493 56 Richard Fox. A. D. 1502 57
Tho: Wolsey Card. A. D. 1530 58 Stephen Gardener. A. D. 1534 59 John Poynett.
A. D. 1550 60 John White. A. D. 1556 61 Robert Horn. A. D. 1560 62 John
Watson. A. D. 1580 63 Tho: Cooper. A. D. 1584 64 William Wickham. A. D. 1595
65 William Day. A. D. 1595 66 Thomas Bilson. A. D. 1597 67 Ja: Mountagu. A. D.
1617 68 Lancelot Andrews. A. D. 1618 69 Richard Neile. A. D. 1627 70 Walter
Curle. A. D. 1632
WORCESTER.
Ethelred King of Mercia An. 679. divided his Country which had but one Diocese
into five Bishoprics, whereof this of Worcester was one, and consecrated
Boselus the first Bishop thereof by Theodore Archbishop of Cant.

1 Boselus. A. D. 679 2 Ostforus. 3 S. Egwin. A. D. 693 4 Wilfrid. A. D. 714 5
Milred. A. D. 717 6 VVeremund, others say Denebertus. 7 Tilherus. A. D. 778 8
Enthored. A. D. 781 9 Devebertus. A. D. 799 10 Eadbert or Hubert. A. D. 822 11
Alwin. A. D. 844 12 VVerebert, VVerefrid or Herefrid. A. D. 872 13 VVilferth I.
A. D. 911 14 Ethelhun. A. D. 915 15 VVilferth II. A. D. 922 16 Kinewold. A. D.
929 17 S. Dunstan. A. D. 957 18 S. Oswald. A. D. 959 19 Adulfus. A. D. 971 20
VVulstan. 21 Leoffius. 22 Briteagus. A. D. 1033 23 Livingus. A. D. 1038
This Livingus was Bishop of Devon and Cornwall, which he united together and
held it with his Bishopric of Worcester.

24 Aldred. A. D. 1049 25 S. VValstan, built the Cathedral of Worcester. A.
D. 1060 26 Sampson. A. D. 1097 27 Theolphus. A. D. 1115 28 Simon. A. D. 1125 29
Alured. 30 John Pagham. 31 Roger. 32 Baldwin. A. D. 1281 33 William of
Northale. A. D. 1189 34 Robert. A. D. 1191 35 Henry. 36 John de Constantiis. A.
D. 1196 37 Mauger. A. D. 1200 38 Walter Gray. A. D. 1212 39 Silvester. A. D.
1216 40 Will: de Blois. A. D. 1218 41 Walter de Cantilupe. A. D. 1237 42 Nic:
de Ely. A. D. 1268 43 Walter Gifford. A. D. 1269 44 William of Gainsborough. A.
D. 1302 45 Walt: Reynold. A. D. 1308 46 Walter Maydeston. A. D. 1313 47 Tho:
Cobham. A. D. 1317 48 Adam de Orlton. A. D. 1327 49 Simon de Mountacut. A. D.
1333 50 Tho: Hennyball. A. D. 1337 51 Wulstan de Bransford. A. D. 1342 52 John
Thursby. A. D. 1349 53 Reginald Brian. A. D. 1352 54 John Barnet. A. D. 1362 55
William VVittlesey. A. D. 1363 56 VVil: de Lynne. A. D. 1368 57 Henry
Wakefield. A. D. 1375 58 Tidecomb de VVinchcomb al. Rob. Tideman. A. D. 1395
Will: Badbury about this time, as Bale writes. A. D. 1380 59 Rich: Clifford.
A. D. 1401 60 Tho: Peverell. A. D. 1407 61 Philip Morgan. A. D. 1419 62 Tho:
Polton. A. D. 1426 63 Tho: Bourchier. A. D. 1435 64 John Carpenter. A. D. 1443
65 John Alcock. A. D. 1476 66 Robert Morton. A. D. 1487 67 John Gigles. A. D.
1497 68 Silvester Gigles. A. D. 1499 69 Jul: de Medice, after Pope Clem. 7. A.
D. 1521 70 Hieron: de Nugutiis. A. D. 1522 71 Hugh Latymer. A. D. 1533 72 John
Bell. A. D. 1539 73 Nich: Heath. A. D. 1543 74 Jo: Hooper in Commendam. 75
Richard Pates. A. D. 1554 76 Edwyn Sands. A. D. 1559 77 Nic: Bullingham. A. D.
1570 78 Jo: Whitgift. A. D. 1577 79 Edm: Freake. A. D. 1584 80 Rich: Fletcher.
A. D. 1593 81 Thomas Bilson. A. D. 1596 82 Gervase Babington. A. D. 1547 83
Henry Parry. A. D. 1610 84 John Thornborough. A. D. 1617 85 John Prideaux. A.
D. 1641
DIOCESE of YORK.
York is the ancientest Metropolitan See of Engl. first erected with two other
Archiepiscopal Sees, London, and Car-leon in Wales, by Lucius the first
Christian King of the Britans An. Christi 180. The first Archbishop seated
here by King Lucius was Sampson, and Tadiatus the last in the Britans time. The
Names of the other Archbishops of the Britans (by the injury of the times) are
lost: Therefore we must be content to begin with Paulinus sent hither by Pope
Gregory the Great to convert the Saxons.

Archbishops of York.
1 S. Paulinus. A. D. 622
The Sea void 20. years.

2 Cedda. A. D. 666 3 Wilfrid I. 4 Bosa. 5 St. John of Beverley. A. D. 687 6 S.
Wilfrid II. A. D. 718 7 S. Egbert. A. D. 731 8 Adelbert. A. D. 767 9 Eanbald
I. A. D. 781 10 Eanbald II. A. D. 797 11 VVulsius. 12 VVimund. A. D. 832 13
Wilfer. A. D. 854 14 Ethelbald. A. D. 897 15 Redward alias Lodeward. 16
VVulstan I. 17 Oskitell. A. D. 955 18 Athelwold. A. D. 972 19 St. Oswald
founded Ramsey Abbey. A. D. 972 20 Aldulf. A. D. 999 21 Wulstan II. A. D. 1003
22 Alfricus Puttoc. A. D. 1023 23 Kinsius. A. D. 1050 24 Aldred. A. D. 1061 25
Thomas I. A. D. 1070 26 Gerard. A. D. 1101 27 Thomas II. A. D. 1109 28
Thurstan. A. D. 1119 29 Henry Murduc. A. D. 1141 30 St. William. A. D. 1153 31
Roger. A. D. 1154
The Sea void ten years.

32 Geffrey Plantagenet brother to King Rich: I. and King John. A. D. 1191
The Sea void 4 years.

33 Walter Gray Lord Chancellor. He bought White Hall and called it
York-place, which K. Hen. 8. got from Card Wolsey. A. D. 1217 34 St. Sewall.
A. D. 1256 35 Godfrey de Kinton. A. D. 1258 36 Walt: Giffard. A. D. 1265 37
William VVickwane. A. D. 1279 38 John Roman. A. D. 1285 39 Henry Newark. A. D.
1288 40 Thomas de Corbridg. A. D. 1299 41 William de Greenfield. A. D. 1305 42
William de Melton. A. D. 1317 43 Will: Zouch. A. D. 1342 44 John Thursby. A.
D. 1352 45 Alexand: Nevill. A. D. 1373 46 Tho: Arundell. A. D. 1388 47 Robert
VValby. A. D. 1396 48 Richard Scroop, beheaded. A. D. 1397 49 Henry Bowet. A.
D. 1406 50 John Kemp. A. D. 1425 51 William Booth. A. D. 1453 52 George Nevill.
A. D. 1466 53 Laurence Booth. A. D. 1477 54 Thomas Rotheram al. Scot. A. D.
1480 55 Thom: Savage. A. D. 1501 56 Christopher Bambridg. Card. A. D. 1508 57
Thomas Wolsey Ca. A. D. 1515 58 Edward Lee. A. D. 1531 59 Rob Holgate. A. D.
1544 60 Nich: Heath. A. D. 1553 61 Thom: Young. A. D. 1560 62 Edm: Gryndall. A.
D. 1570 63 Edwyn Sands. A. D. 1576 64 John Piers. A. D. 1588 65 Mat: Hutton. A.
D. 1594 66 Toby Matthew. A. D. 1606 67 George Mountain. A. D. 1627 68 Samuel
Harsnet. A. D. 1628 69 Richard Neile. A. D. 1631 70 Jo: Williams Lord Keeper.
A. D. 1641
There was an Episcopal See in Northumberland in the Saxons time, destroyed
^fterwards by the Danes, named Hexam, Hagulstad and Hextold, which was
afterward united to York, the Names of ten Bishops thereof follow.

X. Bishops of Hexam.
1 St. Eata the fifth Bishop of Lindesfarn. A. D. 655 2 St. John of Beverley.
A. D. 685 3 St. Acca. A. D. 709 4 Frithebert. A. D. 734 5 Alhmund. A. D. 769 6
Tilhere. A. D. 781 7 Ethelbert. A. D. 789 8 Heandred. A. D. 797 9 Eanbert. A.
D. 800 10 Tidferth the last Bishop of Hexam.
CARLISLE.
Carlisle at the first was part of the Diocese of Whithorn or Candida Casa in
Galloway in Scotland, then belonging to the Kingdom of the Saxon Northumbers.
But after the Scots had regained Galloway with the Bishops See, Carlisle A. D.
679. was bestowed by the King of Northumberland upon S. Cuthbert Bishop of
Lindisfarn or Holy Island, and so it continued till An. 1133. at what time a
Bishops See was there first erected.

Bishops of Carlisle.
1 Athelwolf, Adelwald or Athelward. A. D. 1133 2 Bernard died A. D. 1186
The Sea void 32. years.

3 Hugh. A. D. 1218 4 Walter Man. A. D. 1223 5 Silvester de Everden. A. D. 1247
6 Thomas Vipont. A. D. 1255 7 Robert Chanse. A. D. 1258 8 Ralph de Ireton. A.
D. 1280 9 John de Halton. A. D. 1288 10 John de Rosse. A. D. 1318 11 John de
Kirkby. A. D. 1332 12 Gilbert de Welton. A. D. 1353 13 Tho: de Appleby. A. D.
1363 14 Robert Read. A. D. 1396 15 Thom: Merkes. A. D. 1397 16 William
Strickland* A. D. 1400 17 Rog: Whelpdale. A. D. 1419 18 Will: Barrow. A. D.
1423 19 Marmaduke Lumley. A. D. 1430 20 Nicholas Close. A. D. 1450 21 William
Percy. A. D. 1452 22 John ^ingscot. A. D. 1462 23 Richard Scroop. A. D. 1464 24
Edward Storey. A. D. 1468 25 Richard Dunelmensis or of Durham. A. D. 1478 26
William Sever. A. D. 1496 27 Roger Leibourn. A. D. 1503 28 John Penny. A. D.
1504 29 John Kite. A. D. 1520 30 Rob: Aldrich. A. D. 1537 31 Owen Oglethorp. A.
D. 1556 32 John Best. A. D. 1561 33 Richard Barnes. A. D. 1570 34 John Mey. A.
D. 1577 35 Hen: Robinson. A. D. 1598 36 Rob: Snowdon. A. D. 1616 37 Rich:
Milborn. A. D. 1620 38 Rich: Senhouse. A. D. 1624 39 Francis White. A. D. 1628
40 Barnaby Potter. A. D. 1629
CHESTER.
This is one of the 6. Bishoprics erected by K. Hen. 8. upon the Dissolution
of Religious Houses.

1 John Bird. A. D. 1541 2 John Cotes. A. D. 1556 3 Cuthbert Scot. A. D. 1556 4
Will: Downham. A. D. 1561 5 Will: Chadderton. A. D. 1579 6 Hugh Billett. A. D.
1595 7 Rich: Vaughan. A. D. 1597 8 George LLoyd. A. D. 1604 9 Thomas Morton. A.
D. 1616 10 John Bridgman. A. D. 1618
DURHAM.
This Bishopric of Durham was erected there by Aldwin Bishop of Lindisfarn or
Holy Island A. D. 990. That ancient Bishopric being destroyed by the Danes
about An. Christi 800. and till that year 990. wandering up and down unsettled;
which Bishop of Lindisfarn was first erected by Oswald King of Northumberland,
A. Christi 637

Bishops of Lindisfarn or Holy Island.
1 St. Aidanus. A. D. 637 2 St. Finanus. A. D. 651 3 Colmannus. A. D. 661 4
Tuda. A. D. 664 5 St. Eata. A. D. 665 6 St. Cuthbertus. A. D. 684 7 St.
Eadbertus. A. D. 687 8 Egbertus I. A. D. 698 9 Ethelwold. A. D. 721 10 Kenulph.
A. D. 738 11 Higbald. A. D. 781 12 Egbert II. A. D. 802 13 Egfrid. A. D. 819 14
Eanbert. A. D. 845 15 Eardulf. A. D. 854 16 Cuthard. 17 Tilred. A. D. 915 18
Witherd. A. D. 927 19 Uhtred. A. D. 944 20 Sexhelm. 21 Aldred dyed A. D. 968 22
Alfius. A. D. 968 23 Aldwin. A. D. 990
This Aldwin first settled the Sea at Durham, where it has ever since continued.

Bishops of Durham after Aldwin last Bishop of Lindisfarn.
1 Eadmund. A. D. 1020 2 Eadred. A. D. 1048 3 Egelricus. A. D. 1049 4
Egelwinus. 5 Walcher Earl of Northumberland. A. D. 1071 6 William de Carilefe
alias Cairliph. A. D. 1080
The Sea void 4. years.

7 Randall Flambard. A. D. 1099 8 Geffrey Rufus. A. D. 1128 9 William de S.
Barbara. A. D. 1143 10 Hugh Pudsey Earl of Northumberland. A. D. 1154 11 Philip
de Pictavia. A. D. 1197 12 Rich: de Marisco. A. D. 1217 13 Rich: the Poor. A.
D. 1228 14 Nic: de Fernham. A. D. 1241 15 Walter de Kirkham. A. D. 1250 16 Rob:
Stichell. A. D. 1260 17 Rob: de Insula. A. D. 1274 18 Anthony Beck Patriarch of
Jerusalem. A. D. 1283 19 Richard Kellow. A. D. 1311 20 Ludovicus Beaumont. A.
D. 1317 21 Rich: de Bury. A. D. 1333 22 Tho: Hatfeild. A. D. 1345 23 John
Fordham. A. D. 1381 24 Walter Skirlaw. A. D. 1388 25 Tho: Langley Card. A. D.
1406 26 Robert Nevill. A. D. 1438 27 Laurence Booth. A. D. 1457 28 Willi:
Dudley. A. D. 1476 29 John Sherwood. A. D. 1483 30 Richard Fox. A. D. 1494 31
Will: Sevier. A. D. 1502 32 Christopher Bambridg. A. D. 1507 33 Tho: Ruthall.
A. D. 1508 34 Tho: Wolsey. A. D. 1523 35 Cutbert Tunstall. A. D. 1530 36 Ja:
Pilkington. A. D. 1560 37 Rich: Barnes. A. D. 1577
The Sea void 2. years.

38 Matthew: Hutton. A. D. 1587 39 Toby Matthew. A. D. 1594 40 Will: James. A. D.
1606 41 Richard Neile. A. D. 1617 42 George Mountain. A. D. 1628 43 John
Howson. A. D. 1628 44 Tho: Moorton. A. D. 1632
Of the Bishops of the ISLE of MAN.
This Bishopric of the Isle of Man was first erected by Pope Gregory 4. The
Bishops See is in Russin or Castle-Town, and the Bishops are termed in Latin
Episcopi Sodorenses. The VVestern Islands ( now belonging to Scotland) who have
now a Bishop of their own, did anciently belong to this Bishopric. The new
Bishop (upon a vacancy) is nominated by the Lords of the Isle ( who have been
the Stanleys Earls of Darby) and presented to the King, and then consecrated
by the Archbishop of York. And this seems to be the cause why the Bishop of
Man is no Lord of the Parliament, because it is not at the Kings disposing, none
having Suffrage in Parliament but those who hold immediately from the King.

The Names of the Bishops of this See are not exactly known, having (as yet) no
means to procure a Catalogue thereof: such as are extant are these.
1 Machilla. A. D. 518 2 Michael. 3 Nicholas. A. D. 1203 4 Reginald. A. D. 1217
5 Richard. A. D. 1257 6 Robert Walby. A. D. 1396 7 Henry. A. D. 1556 8 John
Merick. 9 George LLoyd. A. D. 1604 10 Forster. 11 Richard Parry. A. D. 1641
In the Catalogue of the Bishops of Bristol, p. 695. add 12 Tho: Westfield.
1642. 13 Tho: Howel. 1644.


ADDENDA.
In the Marginall Notes.

PAge 321. Propter Ecclesiae bona ubique bellatur; Romanenses, ut retineant,
Reformati, ut obtineant. Grotius Pacific.

Page 326. Sir H. Spelman values the L. Cromwell's estate in K. Hen. 8s: days
worth 20000 l. sterling. MS. of Sacrilege.

Page 329. Piaculum olim, nunc lusus Principum and profanorum sacra profanare;
and adhuc quaerimus cur bellis tam atrocibus vastamur Christiani? Grot. Pacif.

Page 337. Procopius in vita Justiniani tells of the vessels of the Jews
Temple, which at last were sent by that Emperor to the Church at Jerusalem.

ERRATA.
Page 16. l. 4. read, growing up. p. 92. l. 13. r. flagrancy. p. 132. l. 39. r.
Proteustant. p. 244. in the title, for descending r. deserving. p. 282. l. 29.
for sand r. saw. p. 326. l. 20. r. 20000. p. 418. l. 39. r. abated. p. 419. l.
4. dele next. p. 449. l: 17. r. evident by. l. 27. r. unsubordinate. p. 643. l:
25. for them read those. p. 682. l. 16. for part, r. park. p: 684. l. 14. for
as him, r. in him.

In the Catalogue of Books written by the Author, p. 692. add, A Treatise of
Christian Marriages to be solemnly blessed by Ministers, in Quarto.

THE END.

