MYSTERIES UNVAILED. WHEREIN The Doctrine of Redemption by Jesus Christ,
flowing from the glorious Grace, and everlasting Love of God, the very fountain
of Life and Salvation unto lost Sinners, is ^a^d^ed.

The most usual S^^^p^ures explained, and Reasons answered, which are urged
for the universa^^^y of the death of Christ for all Perso^^.

Wherein the unsoundnes of (...) opinion together with diverse other
conclusions, as depending upon it, are di^^^ver^d, and the (...),

By ROBERT GARNER.

1 COR. 2.13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the holy Spirit teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual. Printed in the year 1646.

To the Churches of God in London and elsewhere in all places with the Bishops
and Deacons.
BRETHREN.
COnsidering with my self the usefulness of this little Treatise (through the
Blessing of God) as also the seasonablenesse thereof at this time, when so many
are doubting and wavering in their Judgment, concerning the Doctrine of
redemption, I cannot but commend it unto your serious perusal, and the rather
because, you are able to judge of the hope of this work for the Benefit not
only of the Churches, but also of all the people of God, who shall read the
same. The Doctrine of Redemption by Jesus Christ flowing from the glorious
grace and everlasting love of God to Mankind, is handled herein plainly, and
spiritually: Also the most usual Scriptures (which are alleged by Master Den.
Thomas Moore, Thomas Lamb, and others to prove the Universality of the Death
of Christ, extended to all persons) are explanted, and freed from the corrupt
sense, and unsound interpretations, which are put upon them: And the most
weighty Reasons urged by them in defense of that their Opinion are fully and
clearly answered. Moreover there are diverse Mysteries concerning our Redemption
by Jesus Christ Unvailed in this small Treatise, in the diligent reading
whereof, you will not only understand the knowledge, which God has given his
faithful servant and our beloved Brother in the Mystery of Christ, But shall
(I hope) be made partakers (through Grace) of the same to the Glory of God, and
your own Establishment in this present. Truth, which is the desire of him, who
is

Your Brother in the Faith and Fellowship of the Gospel, and Companion in
Tribulation. HANSERD KNOLLYS.

The Preface.
THis ensning unvailing Treatise, may, by the providence of God, fall into the
hands of men of differing judgments.

Some, who are clearly instructed in the knowledge of the Nature, end, and
power of that Redemption wrought by Jesus Christ crucified, and risen from the
dead: Who see no spiritual ground or reason, leading them to receive that
opinion of Christ's dying for, or redeeming all persons, as hold forth by many.

Who are a second sort of Readers, directly contrary to the former in this
point.

A third sort there are, who are wavering in their Judgment, and stand in
doubt concerning these things.

For the further establishment of the first, who already embrace the truth: The
instruction of the second, who in this point are contrary minded; although many
of them are faithful, and godly; The satisfaction and settlement of the third:
(if the Lord so please) I have willingly made public the ensuing Treatise.

Having confidence (through the Lord) that it will be of use and benefit to
those who are sober minded, seeking the truth in the love of it.

I desire such to accept of the poor, but upright endeavors of

Their faithful friend ROBERT GARNER.

MYSTERJES UNVAILED CONCERNING REDEMPTION
By JESUS CHRIST.
THose who desire and endeavor to maintain that JESUS CHRIST died for All
Persons, and has redeemed and reconciled All persons: They usually propound a
certain distinction, as the ground of what they pretend to prove.

Which Drstinction of theirs points at a twofold Redemption. The First, (say
they) is a Redemption, Reconciliation and Salvation wrought by Jesus Christ in
his own body, with God for men.

The Second, (say they) is a Redemtion, Reconciliation, and Salvation wrought
by his Spirit in Men to God.

The First they call a reconciling of God to Men.

The Second they call a reconciling of Man to God.

Which distinction of theirs, in their sense, will appear to be weak from a
twofold consideration.

First, in that the Scripture warranteth no such distinction in their sense.
Mr. Den, when he begins to treat of the reconciliation of God to Man, he
confesses in his fifth page of that Treatise, that it is improperly spoken of
him that was never an enemy, Neither indeed do I find this distinction to be
agreeable either to the Doctrine or Language of the Scripture.

Secondly, in that these things are propounded by them rather in way of
Separation then Distinction. For (say they) CHRIST has wrought Redemption and
Salvation for All persons, (before God) but he has not wrought Redemption and
Salvation for All Persons (in themselves. And thus they divide CHRIST and his
Redemption.

Now, in searching of the Scripture, we shall find, that when mention is made
of Redemption, Reconciliation, and Salvation, as concerning persons redeemed;
we are to understand it to be spoken of those who are reconciled unto God, or
made partakers of Redemption, Reconciliation, Justification, and Salvation, in
themselves, before God, by JESUS CHRIST. So we are to understand these
Scriptures following, Galat. 3.13. 1 Pet. 1.18. Revel. 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. Coloss.
1.14. Romans 3.25. Hebrews 2.17. Ephesians 2.16. compared with 13, 14, and 15
verses. Col. 1.21.

And it will not be impertinent to the thing in hand, if we further consider,

That when mention is made of Reconciliation, Propitiation, or atonement made,
or to be made for any persons under the Law, we must understand it to be
spoken of such an Atonement or Reconciliation, as was wrought for them, and
they were legally partakers of in themselves, before GOD, by means of those
Sacrifices offered for them, which were a Figure of Jesus Christ. To this
purpose consider these Scriptures following, Levit. 1.4. and 4.20.26, 31, 35.
and 6.7. and 12.7.8. and 16.33. and 23.27.28. Numbers 8.19. and 25.13. 2 Chronicles.
29.24. Nehem. 10.33.

And truly (as answering those Figures) whenever we read of reconciliation,
Propitiation, or Atonement made for any persons by Jesus Christ; we are to
understand it to be spoken of such a Reconciliation or Atonement, as was
obtained for them, and they were partakers of in themselves, before God, by
means of that One Sacrifice Jesus Christ, which he himself Once offered, to
bring them into a glorious estate of persecution, and to uphold and preserve
them in the same for ever. This is most clear from what is writren, Heb.
10.10. and 14. verses compared together. And hitherto is agreeable that in Romans
5.10.11. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son. And, We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the Atonement. And whereas Thomas Moore, as an addition to the former
distinction, in the fifth page of his book, says, The former was by
Bloodshedding, the latter by Blood-sprinkling, or washing.

I shall make it appear in the sequel of the Treatise, that all the blood
which Christ did shed, is the blood of Sprinkling. Whereby it will appear how
unsound in it self, and how dishonorable to Christ his distinction is.

And as for those Scriptures, to wit, John 4.42. 1 John 2.2. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1
Peter 2.24. Hebrews 2.9. 1 Timoth. 2.6. John 1.29. Romans 3.24. and Hebrews
9.14. which in his second page he alleges for the proving of the former
distinction.

I shall through the Lords help, make it appear in the sequel of this
discourse also, we are to understand them, (and that according to their proper
meaning) in another sense then he puts upon them. And that they are, all of
them, spoken of such, who are partakers in themselves before God, of
reconciliation, atonement, remission of sins, and salvation by the price and
power of the death or bloodshed of Jesus Christ. And whereas in page 22.
speaking of the several ends of the death of Christ, (and that aptly in some
things) He says that when the death of Christ in respect of that end, which
was for propitiation and ransom is only mentioned, as it is for all, (says
he) so it is expressed in such general words only, as the World, all men, etc.
And for this he alleges, 2 Cor. 5.14.15.19. 1 Timothy 2.6. Hebrew 2.9.

In answer to which, The Reader must consider, that this Conclusion of his
belongs to the first part of their distinction. And as their distinction is in
it self unsound, as will be still more evident by the consequent matter: So
his Conclusion is unsound also; Which will appear from what is written in
Hebr. 9.28. In which Scripture mention is made of the death of Christ in
respect of ransom and propitiation only, and that as a ground of faith: and
yet it is not expressed in such general words, as the World, or all Men. For it
is there said, Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them
that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto
salvation. Mind it, He was once offered to bear sins; Here is the end of his
death in respect of ransom, and propitiation only, and yet it is not applied
unto all persons, but unto many.

And as for those 3. Scriptures alleged by him to maintain his Conclusion, I
shall speak something to them in their due place.

And before J leave this distinction, J cannot but give you to take notice,
That, Mr. DENN, in his Drag-net page 80. does not let to affirm, That Jesus
Christ redeemeth all persons, according to the second part of their
distinction: to wit, In drawing them to himself, by the workings of his Spirit
in them. To which purpose he alleges what is written in Acts 2.17. It shall
come to pass in the last days (says God) I will power out of my Spirit upon
all flesh, etc. This pouring out of the Spirit, he says belongs to all
persons.

To which I answer, If we consider,

First. What is the matter of the promise, together with the measure of it: to
wit, The pouring forth of the Spirit.

Secondly, The Time appointed for the performance of it: It shall come to pass
in the last days.

Thirdly, What is meant here by all flesh: Which concerns the persons
interested in this promise.

Fourthly, What are the effects of the performance of this promise: to wit,
Your Sons and Daughters shall prophecy etc. I say, if we consider and
understand these things. It will appear how weakly, and wrongfully Mr. Denn
applies this Scripture to this purpose.

And as for his following Scriptures, which he alleges to the same purpose,
If he will mind, and duly weigh them, in their several circumstances and
expressions, he may see, that they hold not forth the same thing which that in
the Acts does. And as for his interpretation of the words of Christ, in John
12.32 (which are the ground of that his discourse, which he calls the Dragnet) I
shall in the sequel of my Treatise (in opening the same words) discover what an
unsound sense he puts upon them. Now of the things before spoken, this is the
sum.

Whenever we read of Atonement, redemption, reconciliation, as touching
persons redeemed, reconciled or saved by Jesus Christ. We are to understand,
That it is such an Atonement, reconciliation or redemption, which they are
partakers of in themselves, before God, according to the riches of his grace,
by Jesus Christ. Which good pleasure and grace of God was given them in Christ
Jesus, before the world began, But is now made manifest by the appearing of
Jesus Christ. And is then made manifest in the hearts of those, to whom Jesus
Christ appears, abolishing death, and bringing life and immortality to light
through the Gospel, 2. Tim. 1.9.10. This that I have said may serve thus far
to clear the truth, and to discover the unsoundnesse of that distinction, or
rather separation which they make in the redemption of Christ.

And whereas Thomas Moore, in the two last lines of page 23, further says;
That the Scripture distinguishes and puts great difference between the
Redemption life and Justification that is In Christ for men: and the same Upon
or In men through the enjoyment of Christ. And for this purpose alleges, Romans
3.24. and 4.24.25. and 5.6.10.11.15.18. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 John. 5.10.11.12. And
the former of these says he is larger then the latter.

I answer, First, I do not find that these Scriptures do hold forth any such
distinction.

As for that in Romans 3.24. Where it is said, We are justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

I answer, Does he not here speak of such persons, who in themselves, before
God, are freely justified from all their sins, by the grace of God, through
that redemption which is in or by Jesus Christ only, through faith in his
blood; that so the righteousness of God in Christ might be declared, that he
only might appear just, and the Iustifyer of him that believes in Jesus.

And whereas he also alleges Romans 4.25. Where it is said, He was delivered
for our offenses, and raised again for our justification.

Is not this also to be understood ^f that life and justification which (...)
IN MEN, through faith in Christ ^rucified and risen from the dead? ^or so it is
applied in Chapt. 5. ver. ^. And this is the meaning also of that in verse 24.
says he, The righ^eousnesse of life is imputed unto those that believe on him,
that raised up jesus our Lord from the dead, that ^s, The righteousness of
life is not through our own works, though never so excellent, (for that is
the thing he drives at) but in receiving the righteousness of another, to
^wit, Jesus Christ crucified, and risen from the dead.

And whereas he further alleges, Romans 5.6. where it is said, When we were
yet without strength, in due time, Christ dyed for the ungodly. And so it
agrees with that in Rom 4.5. He justifyeth the ungodly.


There meaning is, When we were without strength, and altogether ungodly ones,
Chtist dyed for us. It is spoken of those who enjoy the riches and benefit of
his death, that is, He, by the price and power o^ his death has redeemed us,
justified us, saved us, and set us in an estate of blessedness before God,
through faith in him: and all this when w^ were altogether ungodly and without
strength.

And that which follows in the 8.9.10.11. verses, will justify this
interpretation; says he, Herein i^ the exceeding greatness of Gods love
toward us, in that while we were sinners, ungodly, Christ dyed for us, that
is, We are in our selves, before God justified by his death, or bloodshedding;
for so it is said in verse 9. We are now justified by his blood* And then
follows an accompanying glorious fruit of this our justification; We shall be
saved from wrath through him.

And then great joy arising from the enjoyment of this blessedness in Christ;
We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus these things do sweetly
depend upon each other. And whereas he alleges the 15. verse.

I conceive, it does rightly and excellently hold forth thus much, to wit.

That the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, JESUS
CHRIST, is much more, and has abounded much more unto many, then that one
offense of that one man Adam, which brought death unto them; for, says he,

The judgment was by One sin unto condemnation: but this grace of God, and
gift by grace, is of many offenses unto justification.

Mark the abundance of this grace to whom it is given, It is of many offenses
unto justification. And therefore, says he, Whereas by that One offense of
that One man, death reigned by One: Much more, They which receive, this
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness (abundance indeed, for it
abounds unto their justification from many offenses) shall reign in life,
(that is, shall much more reign in life) by One Jesus Christ. This is the
substance, and meaning of the 15.16. and 17. verses.

And whereas, he further alleges verse 18. to prove that there is life and
justification, or justification of life Jn Christ for All persons; for so he
says in page 23. line 7.

I answer, That which the Apostle still drives at is to show, That the grace
of God, and the gift by grace which is by Jesus Christ has much more abounded
above the offense of the first Adam in respect of the Effect of it; for says
he,

As by that One offense of One man, judgment came upon all men unto
condemnation: that is, It came powerfully upon them. Even so by that
righteousness of Christ alone, the grace of God came upon all men unto
justification of life: that is, It came gloriously and powerfully upon them,
unto justification of life.

"And here it is to be minded how weakly and vnwarrantably he alleges this
Scripture to prove that there is life and justification In Christ (as he says)
for all persons.

When as it is most manifest that the Apostle in these words speaks of those
only, who are, in themselves, before God, through faith in Christ, actual
pertakers of justification of life by him. And this will appear from two
reasons.

First, From the consideration of the nature of this justification of life here
mentioned. It is that, which in the highest degree stands in opposition to
condemnation mentioned in the same verse. Justification of life. That is,
Righteousness of life, remission of sins, blessedness, salvation, eternal
life. It is the same Justification mentioned in Chapt. 3.24.26. Chapt. 4.5. and
in the 4. verse of this Chapter also.

Secondly, from the consideration of the application of this justification of
life. Unto the persons here mentioned.

In verse 15. it is said, This exceeding grace of God, by Jesus Christ, has
abounded Unto many. And in verse 16 it is said to be Unto their Justification.
And in this 18. ver. it is said, That the grace of God, or the free gift Came
upon all men Unto Justification of life. And in verse 19. it is said, That by
this grace of God in Christ, many shall be Made righteous. And that which is
chiefly to be observed is that in verse seventeene. Where it is to be noted,
That this justification and salvation here mentioned, is spoken of those only
who receive this abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness which is
by Jesus Christ. Those who receive it, that is, Those to whom the Lord gives
his grace and righteousness by Jesus Christ. And therefore you shall observe,
that in the 15.16. and 17. verses, The grace of God, and righteousness of
Christ is ^. times called ^ gift: Which to whomsoever the Lord gives. They
shall reign in life by Jesus Christ.

And thus in the opening of this Scripture it appears, That by All men in the
latter part of this verse, We can neither understand all persons from first to
last. Neither can his distinction be justified from hence. For he here speaks
or such a justification of life as Comes Upon men, or is Given Unto them,
according to the grace of God in Jesus Christ.

And whereas he further alleges that in 2 Cor. 5.19. to justify his
distinction, I shall clear that in it is due place from such a sense: and shall
refer the Reader to what I shall there lay down in the opening of this
Scripture.

And whereas he further alleges the first of John 5.10.11.12.

I conceive that this Scripture teaches us thus much, to wit.

That he that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself, and
bears record to the truth of God, to wit, That eternal life is his gift,
through Jesus Christ, and that this life is no way to be obtained, but through
faith in Christ only. And that therefore whosoever seeks for life and
salvation, by his own works or righteousness, or in any other thing which
stands in opposition to Jesus Christ crucified, and risen from the dead, he
makes God a Liar, because he receives or believes not the record which God
gave of his Son.

And whereas, He thinks to strengthen his distinction, by saying, There is
life and justification In Christ for all persons.

I desire the Reader to consider. That these words IN CHRIST when they are
spoken of, or applied unto redemption, justification, salvation and the like,
They do properly signify, By, or Through Christ: And hold forth unto us, A
reast, glorious, and sure En^o^ment, which those have of redemption,
justification and salvation in Christ, of whom the things are spoken.

So the words are to be understood in Ephesians. 1.7.11.13. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. IN whom also, we have
obtained an inheritance IN whom also ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of
promise.

Who see'th not but that this is the meaning, to wit.

We do really and urely enjoy redemption, forgiveness of sins a glorious
inheritance, and the sealing of the Spirit (as the earnest of that inheritance)
In, By, or Through JESUS CHRJST.

And thus we are to understand that in Romans 3.25. and other Scriptures which
speak of Redemption, justification, remission of fi^s, life and salvation In
Jesus Christ.

And thus in opening of these Scriptures, and these expressions, it appears
how unsound and unwarrantable his distinction is.

And whereas he further says, speaking of this distinction, concerning this
twofold redemption by Christ, That the form^r of these is larger then the
latter.

I would but know, Where the Scripture Speaks of such a twofold redemption,
the One of which is larger, and the other straiter.

And because, with one consent, they allege diverse Scriptures and reasons to
maintain that Christ dved for all persons, and has redeemed all persons,
according to the first part of their destinction, and according to the larger
redemption, as they call it.

I shall therefore in the next place proceed to the consideration and trial of
the most usual Scriptures and reasons alleged by them to that purpose.

And first it is needful to set down in their own expressions, how they
deliver their judgment in this point.

And thus they express themselves, to wit.

Christ (say they) dved for all the sins of all men. He suffered punishm^n^
due for the sins of all Mankind. The sins of all believers, and unbelievers
are washed away, in the blood of Christ. Christ suffered to procure
justification and saivation for all.

His sufferings for all are of the same nature, whether men believe it or not.
The blood of Christ is of a purging nature for all.

These things are thus se^ down in a little Book se^ forth in Print, by
Thoma^ Lamb and others, in way o^ Question and Answer upon this point. to wit,
In the 2^ Question and Answer o^ page z, the 2. Question and Answer of page 6.
the 2^ Question and Answer o^ page 7. the latter part of the first Answer of
page 8. the latter part of the first Answer of page 9. the 7. line of page 10.
the 2. last line^ of page 12. The first Q. and A. of page 15. The first Q^ and
A. of page 17. The 4. and 5. lines of page 23.

The which opinion they ^retend to prove two ways: First, from diverse places
of Scripture: Secondly, from diverse Reasons.

Both which (through the Lords help) I shall weigh in ^he balance of the
Sanctu^ry, that we may accordingly

The most usual places of Scripture which they ^ropound to justify this
o^inion, are these that follow, ^ Corinth. 5.14.15. He^rewes 2.9. 1 Timothy
2.6. Esa. 53.6. John 1.29. and 13.16.17. 1 John 2.2. John 6.51. and 4.42. and
12.47. 2. Corinthians 5.19.21. He^rewes 9.26. Luke 2.30, 31.^2. ^2. John 11.
50,51 52. Acts ^3.47. Esa. 49.6.

These fore-mentione^ Scriptures are most of them urged by Thomas Moore in the
several passages of hi^ Book upon this point: An^ all of them by Mr. Lamb in
the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth lines of page 2. Also in the
nineteenth, twentieth and one and twentieth lines of page 7. And in the twenty
three and twenty four lines of page 9. of the forementioned Book.

I shall first search and try the Scriptures they have alleged, and then
proceed to the declaration and examination of their Reasons.

And before I enter upon the trial of the Scriptures, it is necessary to
premise one caution, to wit, That it is unsafe and unwarrantable to take all
expressions in the Scripture, as simple or undepending expressions, not
seriously considering their dependence upon some part of the Scripture
before-going, or following after, or both: For so doing, it is the high way to
pervert the Scriptures, and to run headlong into dangerous opinions This rock,
those who made that Book, and others of their judgment, do run upon, in
seeking to maintain this opinion of General redemption, as it is usually
called.

But it is safe, warrantable, and needful in the interpretation of many
expressions in Scripture, to consider well their dependence, that so the mind
of the holy Spirit may (through his own teaching) be understood.

This way I shall tread, in the interpretation of the several Scriptures now
to be considered that as the Lord gives me understanding, I may discover the
mind of God in them. And the rather I am encouraged to this undertaking
because I know and am persuaded, that I have the Spirit of God, which will
reveal spiritual things to me, yea the deep things of God.

One Scripture propounded by them to maintain their opinion is the 2 Cor.
5.14, 15. The fir^^ Scripture
The words are these following; For the love of Christ constrains us, because
we thus judge: that if one died for all, then were all dead. And that he died
for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him which died for them and rose again.

In the interpretation of this Scripture, The difficulty of this Scripture.
the greatest difficulty lies in the word (All) They say, we are here to
understand the word universally for all persons, that is, Adam and all his
posterity from first to last; I say we are to understand it generally and under
another consideration.

Before I come to declare the meaning of this Scripture, I shall first give too
reasons from the words themselves to clear them from that corrupt sense which
they put upon them. Two reasons to clear the words.


First, All those for whom Christ died are in time made alive by the power of
his death. Two reasons to clear the words.
This is clearly held forth in verse 15. He died for all, that they which live,
or they which are made alive, mark that. That is, He died for all to make them
alive, to recover them from death, and to bring them into an estate of life, by
his dying for them and rising again. This indeed is the force and meaning of
these words; and so they do agree also with other Scriptures. The holy Spirit
speaks to the same purpose, 1 John 4.9. God sent his only begotten Son
into the world that we might live through him. And can this be any less but
that the Son of God gives life by his death unto all these for whom he died?
And the same is taught us by the Lord Jesus in John 6.51. The bread which I
will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the World, that is; The
world shall be made alive by my death, and above in verse 33. The bread of God
is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life to the world. And if any
shall doubt what life he speaks of, they may be resolved from Christ himself
in verse 51. It is a life which shall last for ever. And the same lesson he
teaches us in John 12.32.33. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth will draw
all men to me. And this he said signifying what death he should die, that is,
by the virtue and power of my death, I will give life to all men, or, I will
draw all men to my self. Neither do I know that the Scripture any where
teaches that Christ died for any, but such as are in time made alive by his
death. And indeed it is a most weak and carnal conceit, which some have of the
death of Christ, who speak of his death, and yet separate a glorious and a
living power from it. Now this being a truth (as is clear from the words
themselves, and the harmony of these Scriptures above mentioned) that he died
for all to make them alive, to recover them from death, and bring them into an
estate of life: we cannot then by the word all in this place undestand all
persons, or every person, as they say.

The second reason, to clear these words is taken from the nature and force of
the word (for) in this place. There is a ^orce in ^he word (for) in his place.
He died (for) all, and he died (for) them and rose again. This word (for) in
this place, and others of the like nature, is very significant. It signifies
interest, or propriety, and carries the force of promise and performance in
it, unto the persons concerned therein. He died (for) all; that is, they have
an interest or propriety in the glory, virtue, power, life, and riches of his
death: the benesit of his death is certainly theirs for life and salvation to
them. And truly, so far as I know, this word (for) when it is used upon such
occasions in Scripture, as for all, for many, for thee, for us, and the like)
it always signifies interest or propriety, and carries the force of a
promise and performance in it. It signifies a certain speciality, right, or
interest that those persons have in it, of whom it is spoken. I will give a few
instances instead of many, Rom, 8.31. If God be (for) us: that is, if we have a
special interest, and right, or propriety in him: If he be our God, our
strength, and our portion. And again in the next verse, He that sparred not
his own Son, but delivered him to death (for) us all. FOR us all, that is,
we have a propriety, right, and interest in him: we do partake in him: he is
ours, and we shall enjoy all good, riches, blessings, and comforts with him, as
the words following do declare. Again, Romans 4.25. He was delivered (for) our
offenses, and was raised again (for) our justification. that is, we have an
interest, right, and benefit in his death, and resurrection, whereby we are
justified from our sins. Again, Romans 5.8. Chrisi died (for) us; that is, we
have an interest in his death, we enjoy the benefit of his death, we are
justified by his death, as the words following do declare. Again, 2 Cor. 12.9.
my grace is sufficient (for) thee: that is, my grace is thine, it is thy
portion, thou have an interest in it, I will give it to thee for thy strength,
and help in time of need. So also John 6.51. The bread that I will give is my
flesh, which I will give (for) the life of the world: that is, the world has
an interest and propriety in it, the world shall certainly live by it. And
least I should be thought by some te peake this without ground, I des^re them
to consider, what he says above in verse 33. The bread of God is he that
comes down from beaven, and gives life (to) the world. That which he says
in 51. is (for) the like of the world: he says in this verse, it gives life
(to) the world. I desire that this may be well minded; And it will serve, to
discover the unwarrantablenesse of that destinction, which some make, who say;
That Christ gave himself to be life for all, but not to all. But certainly, to
be (for) all, and (to) all, is the same in the account of Christ. These
instances are sufficient (though many more might be added) to clear the thing
in hand. Wherefore, I conclude that when he says in this place we have now in
hand, died (for) all: we are to understand, that the benefit, riches, and power
of his death, and resurrection is certainly theirs, or belonging to them for
life and salvation. Now how these things will agree to All persons, I leave to
themselves to judge.

And having thus far cleared the words, The true meaning of these words.
I shall come in the second place to declare the true and proper meaning of
them. To which purpose we are to consider, that this word [All] is diversely
taken in Scripture, according to the diverse, or various matters spoken of. In
this place it is taken for all nations, or all kindreds of people, in way of
opposition to one nation, or one kindred of people only. And this I shall
prove both to be agreeable to this Scripture in hand; as also that the word
[All] is so to be understood in many other Scriptures of the like nature. It is
agreeable to this Scripture in hand: The which thing I shall prove from two
considerations in the words both before going, and following after.

First, says he, There are some who glory in appearance, and not in heart,
verse 12. And this, no doubt, we are to understand to be spoken especially
concerning the Jews, who did much glory in appearances; that is, in outward
and fleshly privileges. Their boasting was, That they were Jews by nature,
they were Abraham's children, they were circumcised ones, they alone were
partakers of many excellent privileges. And indeed, it was ordinary with them
to glory in these appearances, fair shows, outward and fleshly privileges.
Yea, so much they did boast in them, as that they accounted all people and
nations, but themselves, forlorn and wretched. And the preaching of salvation
by Christ to the Gentiles, was a thing which they much despised and stumbled
at. And this I conceive to be the reason of that saying in verse 13. Whether we
be besides our selves, it is to God. Those who gloried so much in appearances,
they acounted the Ministers of the Gospel, who preached Jesus Christ, and
salvation through him to the Gentiles, to be mad men, men besides themselves:
But, says he, What we do, it is to God: For the love of Christ constrains
us: because we thus judge, that Christ died for All, that is, Let them not
marvel why we preach Jesus Christ, and the word of reconciliation to the
Nations of the Gentiles: Let them know that we have good reason for it, A
twofold mystery in the words.
because we thus judge, that Christ died for all Nations, not of the Jews
only but of the Gentiles also. And in the words thus considered, there is a
twofold heavenly mystery infolded.

First, That there is no way to life and salvation for any people, but through
Jesus Christ only.

It is not their circumcision, nor being the children of Abraham, nor their
enjoyment of any outward privileges, though never so excellent, that can
commend any to God; It is not these appearances that gives men an interest in
God, or makes them to live in the sight of God. For, faith he, All are dead:
not the Gentiles only, who had no privileges, but the Jews also who had many
privileges. There is no betternesse before God in the one then the other, Romans
3.9. And there is but one way to life and glory both for Jews and Gentiles; to
wit, by Jesus Christ, who died and rose again. And this was now to take away
all glorying in the flesh, in appearance, in outward privileges, or in any
other thing: That as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

The second mystesy in the words is this, to wit, that Christ died for All;
that is, for all nations, or all kindreds of people: not of the Jews only,
who had many outward privileges, but of the Gentiles also, who had nothing at
all to glory in: that so the freeness and riches of the grace of God, might
(through the death of Christ) be exceedingly magnified unto them also: that so
all nations of the world might enjoy life and salvation through the death of
Christ. This is the grace of God given to the Gentiles, which he speaks of in
the next chapter, and exhorts them to walk worthy of that so that ministry of
reconcilation, which God had committed to him, and others to preach amongst
them, and which God had made effectual ^o them, in bringing them to Christ,
might in no wise be blamed. And thus now, they had something to answer them
which gloried in appearance, that is, in outward and fleshly privileges, and
not in heart. And thus much concerning the first consideration from the words,
to prove that the word (All) in this place we are to understand (as the proper
meaning of it) All Nations, or kindreds of people, not Jews only, but Gentiles
also.

The second consideration is from those words in verse 16. Wherefore henceforth
know we no man after the flesh: that is, time was, when we knew, or
acknowledged men according to outward or fleshly privileges: and God did so
require it. Time was when we set a high esteem upon the Circumcision, the
Jews only, because they were distinguished from all others by many excellent
outward privileges: But Now Jesus Christ by his death has taken away that
difference, which was between them and others. He was manifested for All, he
died for All, without respect to any such differences, as was once between Jew
and Gentile; Therefore henceforth, or from this Time we make no difference
between one and other: we know no man according to any outward or fleshly
privilege: For Christ has laid down his life, as well for the Gentiles as the
Jews, whereby all such difference is Now taken away. And thus from these two
considerations. I conclude, that by the word (All) in this place, we are to
understand All nations of men, or kindred of people, in way of opposition to
one nation or people only. All nations had now, not before (in point of
execution) a door of life and salvation opened to them by the death of Christ.
And indeed there is a glorious mystery held forth to us under this
consideration of the word All, to wit, That the grace of God was more
abundantly enlarged or stretched forth by the manifestation and death of
Christ, then before.

The grace of God was now extended far and wide unto all Nations and kindreds
of people: It was now without bounds and limits, enlargnig it self unto the
ends of the Earth, without making any difference be tweene Jew and Gentile.
Until then it was limited or bounded unto the Jewish Nation only; I say, the
grace of God, and the way of Life and Salvation was bound up within that
compass or corner only: and all other Nations were without Christ and without
God in the World: But in due time by the manifestation and death of Christ, the
grace of God was extended to all Nations without any difference. This I
conceive is that which the holy Spirit teaches in the second verse of the next
Chapter (as an accomplishment of the prophecy in Esa 49.8. I have heard thee
in a time accepted, and in the day of Salvation have I succored thee: behold
now is the accepted time: behold, now is the day of Salvation: that is, now
that the Son of God has appeared in the flesh, and suffered death upon the
Cross for the sins of all Nations: and now that the word of reconciliation
is to be preached or declared to all Nations: Now is the accepted time, now is
the day of Salvation. And he ushereth in each expression with a note of
attention and admiration: Behold now, Behold now. As if he should say, mind it
well, and wonder at it: Now there is a door of life and salvation opened to all
Nations of the World. And this indeed is a misery which the Scripture much
speaks of, which if it be well minded and considered, is of great use, both
to discover the unsoundnesse of that opinion of Christ's dying for all persons,
as also to give much light to the understanding of many other Scriptures,
wherein we are to understand All to be meant of Nations, or Kindreds of People,
and not of Persons. I will mention a few Scriptures for many, Psalm. 22.27. and
67.2, 3, 4, 7. and 72.11, 17. and 117.1. Esa 45.22. and 52.10. and 56.7. Luke
2.10, 30.31. and 3.5, 6. John 1.7. and 12.32 33. Ephesians 3.9. Titus 2.11. In
these Scriptures, and in many others, we have this mystery held forth to us,
both by way of prophecy and performance: to wit, That the grace of God by the
manifestation and death of Christ (and not before) is extended far, and wide
to all Nations of the World.

Until then, it was limited and bounded by himself into a little corner: but
then it was enlarged unto all the ends of the Earth. The understanding Reader
will weigh things together. And thus I have (through the Lords help) both
cleared this Scripture from that corrupt sense, and declared the true and
natural meaning thereof; being persuaded that what I have said herein is the
mind of Christ, being no ways crossing either to the scope of the place it
self, or to any other Scripture.

Another Scripture propounded by them to justify their opinion is that in Heb.
The second Scripture.
2.9. The words are these following. But we see Jesus, who was made a little
lower then the Angels, through the suffering of death, crowned with glory and
honor, that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. The last
clause of the verse (that he by the grace of God should taste death for every
man) is that which they pitch upon to maintain Christ's dying or suffering for
the sins of all persons, even of every man.

Before I come to declare the meaning of this Scripture, it is something
needful to clear the translation it self. In our translation the words are
rendered, that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. But in
the Greek they run thus, (...) ut gratia dei pro omnibus non proomni, as (...)
per omnia. gustaret mortem, that he by the grace of God should taste death for
all.

Now before I close with the words themselves, 1 Timothy 2^.6.
I shall first show that this word (all) or (every) in Scripture is not always
taken generally for all persons in the world, but sometimes it is to be
understood with a limitation, according to the matter spoken of in each
Scripture. I will give a few instances for many, Acts 2.44.45. They that
believed sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to (all) men, as
(every) man had need. And in chapter 4.45. Distribution was made to (every)
man, according as he had need: that is, to all or every one of the Disciples
to all believers, to all that were of the Church, who had need of contribution.
Again, Acts 4.21. All men glorified God for that which was done: that is, All
men in those parts, All men that knew of it, all them that dwelt in Jerusalem,
as is expressed in the 16. verse of the same chapter. Again, Luke 16.16. The
Kingdom of God is preached, and (every) man presses into it: that is, every
man in whose heart the Lord stirs up a holy violence, every violent man, as
Matthew expresses it, chapt. 11. verse 12. So also, Heb. 8.11. All shall know
me from the least to the greatest. The judicious Reader will easily see, that
although the word (all) or (every) be expressed very generally in these
Scriptures, yet it is to be understoode with a limitation (as in many other
Scriptures also) according to the matter which each Scripture speaks of.

Having promised this caution, I will now close with the words themselves. And
before I declare, what I conceive to be the meaning of them, the clearing of
the words by some reasons.
I will propound some reasons, showing why we cannot understand them according
to their sense.

First,

Secondly, (tasting) in this place for suffering; then (as I conceive) there
will be a needless repetition, and much harshnesse in the words: for then they
will run thus, to wit, we see Jesus, through the suffering of death, crowned
with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God should suffer death: mind
now, He suffered death, that he should suffer death; would not here be a
needless repetition and much harshnesse?

Thirdly, (tasting) in this place for suffering of death: then (as I conceive)
it will follow, that Christ underwent a second suffering of death; to wit, a
suffering of death, after he is crowned with glory and honor, through that one
and bitter suffering of death upon the cross; For the words run thus, we see
him through the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he
should taste death. If therefore by the tasting of death, in this place, we
understand his suffering of death, then it follows that he suffers death after
he is crowned with glory and honor, and this is so assured, and false that
every one will reject it.

Fourthly, tasting death, we are not to understand, his suffering of death, but
an effect or fruit of his suffering of death, and being crowned with glory: And
then, we are to understand the words (tasting death) to be a sweetning or
relishing of death, a making of death tastefull, savorie, sweet, useful, and
gaynefull. He tasted death, that is, he made it tastefull, sweet, and savory.
And so I say, it is an effect of his suffering of death, and being crowned with
glory: that is, He through his suffering of death, being crowned with glory,
has according to the grace of God made death tastefull, Although the word All
in some Scriptures, upon some occasions is to (...) taken (...) all persons
from first: last: y^^ in this (...) Scripture^ it is to b^ understood wit^ a
limitati^ on according to the nature and scop^ of the place, a^ will be evident
to the understanding Reader.
savorie, and gainefull: he has taken out the sting and bitterness thereof,
and made it sweet and wholesome. And then, by (all) in this place, we are not to
understand every person but those many Sons spoken of in the following verse:
even those whom he calls Brethren and Children to Christ, in the 12, 13, and
14, verses. For, or unto all these, and every of these, he by his sufferings
and glory, has made death tastefull and savory: he has sweetened death, and
made it an entrance or passage unto glory for them all: that as the Captain of
their Salvation was made persect through sufferings: so every one of them shall
be made perfect through sufferings also. This (I conceive) is the true and
natural meaning of this Scripture; and I am sure it is agreeable to other
Scriptures. And therefore death unto every one of Christ's Brethren, or
Children, is but a sleep, a rest, and a passing over (as it were) unto a more
glorious condition, which they shall enjoy with the Lord Jesus in the morning
of the resurrection.

A third Scripture propounded by them to justify their opinion, The third
Scripture.
is that in the 1 Timothy 2.6. The words are these following, Who gave hi^^self
aransome for all, to be testified in due time.

In which words (as I conceive) is held forth to us especially in four things:

First, That the man Christ Jesus gave himself unto death: for so we are to
understand that expression, he gave himself: that is, he gave himself unto
death, he gave his life, he laid down his life. And so it agrees with the
words of Christ in Matthew. 20.28 and Mark 10.45. The Son of man came to give his
life a ransom. And this teaches us the voluntary readiness of Jesus Christ
in giving himself freely to suffer death; According to what he witnesses of
himself, John 10.18 No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my
self.

Secondly, (as following upon the former) The end and power of his death; and
that is expressly declared in these words, He gave himself a ransom for all.
The death of Christ is of a ransoming, redeeming, saving power. This is the
power of it, and this is the end of it.

Thirdly, The application of it, and that is implied and signified in the word
(for.) He gave himself a ransom (for) all (...) pro omnibus, 1 Timothy 2.6.

Fourthly, The reason of all this, and that is. To be (...) a testimony in due
time. In our translation the words are read, To be testified in due time. But
the former reading is more a reeable to the text and so they are read in the
old translation, and in the margen: also of our new translation. Here also the
greatest difficulty lies in the word (all.) They say we are here to
understand it to be spoken universally, concerning persons, that is, All
persons. I say we are to understand it generally, and under another
consideration. The words cleared by some reasons.
That we cannot understand it according to their sense, I shall prove from
three or four reasons in the words themselves, and those depending upon them.

The first reason is taken from the consideration of the end and power of the
death of Christ, the death of Christ is of a ransoming, redeeming, saveing
power: This is the power of it, and this is the end of it. Thus he says
himself, of himself, Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. Those for whom
Christ died, he ransometh them from the power of Satan to God, from death to
life, from captivity to liberty, from darkness to light, from sin to grace
by the power of his death. So he says by Peter, Ye know that ye were not
redeemed, Pet. 1.8.19.
or ransomed with ^orruptible things; but with the precious blood of Christ, as
of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. And so it is said, Heb. 9.12. By
the shedding of his own blood, he has obtained eternal redemption. This is
the end and power of the shedding of his blood. And so he says also in the
15. verse, That by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions
under the first Testament; that is, This is the end and power of his death, to
ransom and redeem us from the transgressions which the first Testament could
not redeem us from. Now if this be the end and power of his death, to ransom,
redeem, or save: and if all those for whom he died, be ransomed, redeemed, and
saved by the power of his death: then by the word (all) in this place we cannot
understand all persons.

The second reason is taken from the consideration of the nature and force of
the word (for) in this place. interest or propriety, and carries the force of
an application in it, He gave himself a ransom for all, that is, He gave
himself to death for the redemption and salvation of all; that is, All shall
be certainly ransomed, redeemed, and saved by the power of his death. In Matthew.
20.28. Christ says of himself, The Son of Man came to give his life a ransom
(for) many. And Chapter 26.28. This is my blood of the New Testament which is
shed (for) many for the remission of sins. And Luke 22.20. He says, This cup
is the new Testament in my blood which is shed (for) you. Who will not
acknowledge with me, that the word for in these Scriptures signifies interest
and propriety, and carries the force of an application and communication in
it? that is, Many shall certainly, and powerfully, and perfectly be ransomed by
the power of my death. Many shall certainly and perfectly enjoy remission of
all their sins, by the shedding of my blood for them. So in this place when he
says, He gave himself a ransom (for) all: It signifies, All shall be
certainly ransomed, redeemed, and saved by the power of his death. And
therefore, this cannot agree to all persons.

The third reason is taken from the mediation of Christ: Those for whom Christ
is the ransom, he is for them the Mediator also. This is manifest from the
connection of these words with the former. There is one Mediator between God
and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. Whence it
is evident, that for whomsoever Christ is a ransom, he is for them a Mediator
also. And indeed his Mediatourship depends, yea inseperably depends upon
his giving himself to be a ransom: as is manifest Heb. 9.15. Now the
efficacy of his Mediatorship is to apply unto the hearts and minds of all
those for whom he shed his blood, all the grace, blessings and promises of the
new Covenant. (for of that he is the Mediator.) He writes his laws in their
hearts, calls them to God, makes them his people, gives them remission of
sins, and the promise of an eternal inheritance. Heb 8.6.10.11.12. and
9.14.15. Thus the Mediatourship and ransom do agree in one, and inseperably de
depend on each other. And therefore this cannot agree to all persons.

Fourthly, Because the word (all) in the 4. verse (which has its dependence
upon the 5. and 6. verses) cannot be understood to be spoken concerning all
persons^ The words are these following Who will have all men to be saved and to
come to the knowledge of the truth. These words are rendered absolutely, He will
have all men to be saved. It is not said, All men may or might be saved, but he
will have all men to be saved. Now the will of God is free, absolute,
powerful, righteous and unchangeable; whatsoever he does will, he performs
always with full power. Whence I conclude, that if by (all men) in this place
we understand (all persons) then it will follow that all persons shall
certainly, powerfully, and undoubted be saved, because God does so will it. But
this is unagreeable to the word of truth. Therefore as by (all men) in this 4.
verse, we cannot understand (all persons) neither so can we understand the word
all in verse 6. for they depend sweetly and inseparably upon one another. But
we are to understand it in both places under another consideration, The
natural meaning of this Scripture. It is observable in another case that the
same thing which by Mark. 13.13. and Luke 21.17. is rendered All men, is by Mat.
24.9. rendered All nations; this explaining those.
according to the matter in hand: that is, by (all) in these places, we are to
understand all degrees of men, but chiefly all nations or kindreds of men, not
of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also. According to what is written, Is
he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? yes of the
Gentiles also. Romans 3.29. This interpretation of this place, as it is agreeable
to other Scriptures: so to this Scripture it self also. The which thing is
evident from the 7. verse of this chapter: for when it is said in the 6. verse.
He gave himself a ransom for all: he says in the next words, Whereunto I am
appointed a Preacher and an Apostle, a Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and
verity. The grace of God by the death of Christ, or by the giving of himself
to be a ransom was now, or at this time magnified and manifested unto all
nations of the world: and now God appointed or commanded his Servants to
declare remission of sins and everlasting life to all nations of the world
through faith in Christ. And hence it is, that the giving of himself a ransom
for all, is said to be, a Testimony in due time. There was a time or season
which God appointed and promised for the magnifying and manifesting the
exceeding riches of his grace and love in Christ Jesus unto all nations of the
world. Genesis 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18.
This time or seas^n was the manifestation and suffering of Christ in the
flesh: for so it is said, He gave himself, that is, he gave his own life unto
death. At which time (which is the due time here spoken of) he was a testimony,
or a witness (for so he is called in Scripture) of the rich mercy and grace of
God, Esa. 55.4.
which was formerly promised to all nations of the world, and prophesied of in
the Scriptures of the Prophets: to wit, That the Nations of the Gentiles (a
people which he neither formerly knew, neither did they know him) should be
called and redeemed by Jesus Christ. Hither to also (as I conceive) agrees
that in Matthew. 26.28. The son of man came to give his life a ran some for
many, and 26.28. This is my blood of the new Testament which is shed for many
for the remission of sins. Until Christ gave his own life and shed his own
blood, there was but a (few) ransomed or redeemed, even a few (as it were) out
of one nation or corner of the world, a few in comparison of after times: But
when he gave himself, laid down his own life, shed his own blood, the end and
power of this was, to ransom or redeem or save many, even many out of all
nations and kindreds of the world, many in comparison of former times. This was
the end and power and fruit of his own death, and the shedding of his own
blood, even the redemption and salvation of many, I say many out of all nations
of the world, many in comparison of former times. And thus these Scriptures do
sweetly agree together.

This that I have said, (I conceive) is the true and natural meaning of this
Scripture, as if the Apostle should thus have said, God our Savior will have
all Nations of men to be saved through the knowledge of Jesus Christ: for there
is one Mediator between God and men the man Christ Jesus, who gave his life a
ransom for the salvation of all nations of the World, to be a testimony of the
exceeding grace of God (formerly promised) by Jesus Christ: Whereunto I am
appointed a Preacher and an Apostle, a teacher of the Gentiles, that they
should know and enjoy the benefit of this mystery, which has heene hidden from
former ages and generations. And this is directly agreeing with that which is
written, Romans 16.25.26. where he says, That the preaching of Jesus Christ is
now, according to the Commandment of the everlasting God made known to all
Nations for the obedience of Faith. Mark it, It is (now) made manifest to (all
Nations) for the obedience of Faith. Thus (as J conceive) I have laid open the
mind of God in this Scripture, whereby I have cleared it from that corrupt
sense which they put upon it;

A fourth Scripture propounded by them is Esaias 53.6. The 4th. Scripture.
All we like Sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own
way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.

By (All) in this Scripture they understand all persons from first to last. I
shall from the words themselves clearly prove that we are to understand the
word (All) in this place under another consideration according to the matter in
hand.

It is to be minded that the word (All) in this Scripture is conjoined with
(We) and (Us) All we, All Us, All we have gone astray, and the Lord has laid
on him the iniquity of us all, That is, he has laid on him the iniquity of all
we, or all us, who do enjoy peace with God through him, and are healed by him;
as it is plainly expressed in the words before going; The chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed, that is; We are healed of
our backslidings, of our goings astray, of our turnings away from God: We are
now returned unto the Lord, and do enjoy peace with him through Jesus Christ.
And thus Peter interprets the word healing, 1 Pet. 2.24.25. By whose stripes ye
were healed, for ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your souls, He makes healing, and returning unto Christ
to be both one. Ye are healed by his stripes, that is, ye are enabled by the
power of the death of Christ to return unto him. These things are without
doubt a sure fruit of Christ's woundings, bruisings, stripes and chastisements
for our sins, to wit our peace with God through him, and healing by him. And
this is most sweetly in a Prophetical way set forth by the Prophet Hosea,
6.1.2. Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal
us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up, etc. These words are certainly a
prophecy of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, wherein is declared
that he was torn, and smitten for our sins, that we might undoubtedly and
powerfully receive healing and binding up by him. And therefore the words are
set down by way of promise, He will heal us, and he will bind us up. And this
grace of his to us, is the very ground and cause of our returning to him: for
so the words are to be understood, Come and let us return to the Lord, for he
will heal us, and he will bind us up, We may no think that our returning to
the Lord is the cause of our healing: but our being healed and bound up by the
wounds of Christ for us, is the cause of our returning to God. Yea, our
returning to the Lord is no other thing but our being healed by the stripes of
Christ. From what has been said, it is clear, that all those for whom Christ
was bruised, wounded and chastised, are such who are in time healed by him, and
do enjoy peace with God through him: for his stripes do powerfully bring
forth healing; that is repentance or turning to the Lord, unto all those for
whom he did bear the same. The very end and power of the sufferings of Christ
for us, is to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. O how full of power, life, virtue
and healing, are the stripes of Christ! There was never a stripe of Christ but
is of a healing nature, Now how those things will agree to all persons, (as
they would have it) I leave to the consideration of the understanding Reader.

Another thing I desire to observe from the words, to wit, whereas Esaias
says, God has laid on him the iniquity of us all: Peter speaking of the same
place says, He bare our iniquities, both which have indeed one meaning, the
latter explaining the former. And truly the words are of great force, He
(bare) our iniquities, he did not shrink or faint under them, or bear them to
the halves, but he bare them: that is, he bare them strongly, fully, powerfully
until the work was done, until he was a conqueror over them all in our
behalf, that we might be enabled to die to sin and live to righteousness.
This is indeed the fruit of Christ's powerful bearing of our sins, as the
holy Spirit witnesses, 1 Pet. 2.24.25. Now how these things can agree to all
persons let the understanding Reader judge.

I do therefore conclude as before, that by (all) in this Scripture, we are to
understand all we, all us, that is, all we who do enjoy peace with God through
him, all us who are healed by him, And thus the word all, is to be understood
in Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son but delivered him up to death
for us all, mark it, for us all; that is, us all who are called by him, and
justified by him, as the two former verses do clearly teach. And thus the word
(all) is to be understood (although upon another occasion) in Gal. 4.26.
Ierasalem which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all, that is, us
all who are the children of God, believers in Jesus Christ. Thus much for the
opening of that Scripture.

A fifth Scripture propounded by them to Justify their opinion, The fifth
Scripture
is that in John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of
the world.

Now that I may (as the Lord helps me) discover the mind of God in this
Scripture, and clear it from that corrupt sense which they put upon it: I will
first show in what several respects or acceptations the word (World) is taken
in the Scripture, because herein lies the chief difference between us: and
then make application to the thing in hand.

The diverse acceptations in which the word (World) is taken in Scripture, I
conceive may be all comprehended under these following.

First sometimes it is taken, and that very often, for that round compass of
the Earth with the inhabitants thereof, especially mankind, which God created
and fashioned in the beginning, and has renewed and governed from time to
time. Psalm. 24.1. and 50.12. Into this World Christ came, and out of this world
(after he done the will of his Father) he ascended again to sit at the right
hand of his Father.

Secondly, The word World is sometimes taken for a part of the World only, and
yet in a general term is called the World, John 12.19. Acts 19.27.

Thirdly, It is sometimes taken, and that but seldom in the Scripture, but
oftentimes in our ordinary speech, for a great number or quantity of any thing.
James 3.6.

Fourthly, It is sometimes taken, and that very often in Scripture, for the
fading joys, pleasures, riches, honors, and liberties which are here below:
as also, for sinful customs, evil manners, ungodly works, worldly
doctrines, and lusts: as they stand in opposition to those joys, riches, and
honors, which are above: and those ways, works and doctrines which are
according to the will of God, Romans 12.2. Gal. 6.14. James 1. last, 1 Ioh. 2.15,
16, 17.

Fifthly, It is sometimes taken for worldly or ungodly men, as they stand in
opposition to holy and godly men, the called and beloved ones of God, Mat.
18.7. John 15.18, 19. and 17 9, 14, 16. 1 John 3 13. Rev. 11.9. and 13.3.
compared with verse. 8.

Sixthly, The word world is sometimes taken for the Nation of the Gentiles, who
in Scripture are called the world in way of opposition to the Icwish Nation,
who alone were the Church of God, until the wall of partition was broken down
by the death of Christ. This is clear from what is written in Romans 11.12. If
the fall of them (that is of the Jews) be the riches of the world, and the
deminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, And again, verse. 15. If the
casting away of them be the reconciling of the world. In this Scripture it is
most evident, that the Nation of the Gentiles are called the world, as standing
in opposition to the Jewish Church. And thus also we are to understand the
words of Christ in John 17.21, 23. where he prays, That the world may believe
that the Father sent him, and that the Father loved them, as he loved him. And
in Luke 12.30. compared with Matthew. 6.32. It is manifest, That the Gentiles are
called the Nations of the world. Thus much also the Apostle teaches in Ephesians.
2.11.12. In time past (says he) ye were Gentiles in the flesh, called the
uncircumcision, in way of opposition to that which is called the circumcision
in the flesh, made by hands. And at that time, (says he) ye were without
Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. Does not he
here teach so much, That there was a time when the Gentiles were called the
world, or the uncircumcision, in way of opposition to the Jewish Church, who
were called the circumcision of the flesh, and enjoyed many great and glorious
privileges.

Seventhly, The word world is sometimes taken for all Nations of people, Jews,
and Gentiles, as standing in way of opposition to one nation of people only,
Mat. 24.14. Mark 14 9. and 16.15.

Lastly, it is sometimes taken for the world to come, in way of opposition to
this present world, Ephesians. 1.21. Heb. 2.5. and 6.5.

And having thus far made entrance into the matter, I will now proceed to the
consideration of the Scripture in hand, Ioh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the sin of the world. By (world) here they understand all
persons, or all men and women from first to last.

Before I come to give the true, and natural meaning of this Scripture, I
shall first show one or two Reasons from the words themselves to clear them
from the corrupt sense which they put upon them.

The first reason is taken from the consideration of these words (takes away)
He (takes away) the siune of the world. The opening of this Scripture.
The words are exceeding clear, and full, and of great force. He does not say,
It is probable, or it is possible, he may take them away: but he takes them
away; that is, He certainly, fully, freely, perfectly, powerfully, and for ever
takes them away. And I am confident that the words take away, taken away, and
takes away, when they are spoken of things done, or to be done, do always
signify in Scripture a perfect powerful, absolute, and complete removal or
taking away of things: so that the things do not remain any more. I could give
many Scriptures to prove this: but I will content my self with a few, which I
desire may be well noted, Esa 6.7. Thine iniquity is taken away, Romans 11.27.
This is my Covenant with them when I shall take away their sins, Heb. 10.9.
He takes away the first, that he may establish the second, 1 Ioh. 3.5. And ye
know that he was manifested to take away our sins. So that in the Scripture
Language to take away a thing, it is powerfully, thoroughly, perfectly, and for
ever to take it away, so to remove it as that it come not into remembrance any
more. And therefore the reason why there was a remembrance of sins once every
year under the sacrifices of the Law, was because those sacrifice, could not
take away sin, Heb. 10.3, 4. Implying, that if their sins had been taken away
by those Sacrifices then they should never have been remembered any more.
Therefore I conclude, that when John says of the Lamb of God, he takeh away
sins; we are to understand, He so removes them, or takes them away as makes
to the perfection and salvation of those from whom he takes them away: so as
they shall never come into remembrance against them any more. Agreeable to that
of David, Psalm 103.12. As far as the East is from the West: so far he removes
or takes away our transgressions from us. And this will be further manifest,
if we consider what it is to take away sin. Now to take away sin, in the
Scripture sense, is to take away the merit, wages, power, dominion, Lordship,
and strength of sin: so as neither the one or the other shall ever return
again any more. And therefore when it is said, Romans 11.27. This is my Covenant
with them, when I shall take ^way their sins: He says in the former verse,
There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness
from Jacob. And indeed, this is the office and power of ^his Deliverer, to take
away sins and ungodliness in all respects; not only ^n respect of merit and
wages, but of strength and Lordship also. So that such who have their sins
taken away, they have the merit and wages of their sins taken away: they have
their ungodliness, disobedience, dark^esse, pride, and rebellion of heart
taken away: and are enabled by the power of this Deliverer to turn unto Christ,
and believe in him. And therefore repentance and remission of sins always
goes together in Scripture, either expressed or understood. Neither do I read
that the sins of any are said to be remitted, ^ut such to whom the Lord gives
repentance also, enabling of them to return and believe in him. Not that
repentance is a condition of remission: but to teach us, that these two are
never separated, but are bo^^ given together (as being linked o^ within
another) by this Lamb o^ God, this Deliverer, this Prince a^ Savior, who
gives repentance t^ Israel, and remission of sins. A^^ I say further, That
he so takes aw^^ sin, both the merit, strength a^ power of it, as that
neither the o^ nor the other shall ever again retu^^ upon those, or any of
those from whom it was taken away. This (...) the meaning of that place of John
i^ his first Epistle, 3.5. Ye know the he was manifested to take away o^
sins, and in him is no sin. And th^^ I have in part declared what it is t^
take away sin.

And this will be further manifest if we consider in the second place who it is
that John says takes awa^ sin, to wit, the Lamb of God. The Lamb of God
which takes away t^^ sin of the world: that is, The Lam^ of God, in giving
himself a Sacr^fice to God for the sins of the World, does (by the price,
power and virtue of that Sacrifice) powerfully, perfectly, and for ever take
away their sins. And so he answers most fully, perfectly, and superabundantly
unto those Lambs slain, and other Sacrifices under the first Covenant, which
did carnally, and as figures for the time present, take away the sins of the
people. Levit. 4.32. to latter end; and cap. 5.6. And indeed this Lamb of God.
by the price and power of his bloodshed, does perfectly, powerfully, and for
ever take away sins: for he thereby has wrought and obtained, a most perfect,
full, and eternal redemption, Heb. 9.22. Neither do I know that he has
obtained any other redemption (in this sense we have now in hand) but that
which is perfect and eternal. And thus the Lamb of God takes away the sin of
the world.

And if any shall make scruple at the word sin, because it is here expressed
Sin (in the singular number) and not Sins: Let them consider, that it is
usual in the Scripture indifferently to put the one for the other: as is
evident by comparing Esa. 53.6. with 1 Pet. 2.24. That which Esaias calls
iniquity, in the singular number, Peter calls iniquities, or sins in the
plural number. And again, by comparing Esai. 59.20. with Romans 11.27. That
which Esaias calls transgression, Paul calls transgressions. And although
John express it here in the singular number, yet is it most certain that under
this word sin, he includes all sius of all degrees and all times.

Now from all that I have said, we are thus to understand the words.

The Lamb of God by the price and power of his bloodshed, does perfectly,
powerfully, and for ever, take away the sins of the world. Now how this does
agree to all persons, or to every man in the world, I leave to the
consideration of the understanding Reader, who I doubt not, will weigh these
things together which I have declared, for the clearing of this Scripture from
that corrupt sense which they put upon it.

And having thus far opened these words, The natural meaning of this
Scripture.
I shall now come to the true and natural meaning of them.

By the World in this place, we are to understand the nations of the Jewish
Church. Psalm. 107 19, 20. Rom 11.24. Ephesians. 5.12, 13.
And they are therefore called the world, because until the manifestation of
the death of the Lamb of God, they were shut out from all privileges, they
were far off, they were the wild olive tree, a forlorn and hopeless people.
For thus they stood in opposition to the Jewish Church. The nation of the Jews
were the Church of God, the Gentiles were the World: the Jews were the
Circumcision, the Gentiles were the Heathen, or the uneircumcision: The Jews
were nigh, in respect of many excellent laws, and glorious privileges, the
Gentiles were far off, as being without privileges: The Jews were the
natural branches, the Gentiles were the wild Olive tree: The Jews did enjoy
Christ and God, in respect of many glorious Ordinances, Sacrifices and
Offerings, (which in their time were glorious) as many figures and shadows of
Jesus Christ, the Gentiles were without Christ, having no hope, and without God
in the world: The Jews were the people of God, and his peculiar treasure, in
respect of an out ward covenant, the Gentiles were not the people of God. In
these and the like respects, the Gentiles are called the world. And for this
World this Lamb of God is now manifest, ready to be slain to take away their
sins. And therefore this Lamb of Cod stands here in opposition by way of
power and excellency to all other Lambs. The Lambs slain under the Law, which
are shadows of Christ, extended no further then the Jewish nation, who were
the Church of God: the Gentiles, who were the World, had no share in them: But
this Lamb of God, by the price and power of his bloodshed, takes away the
sins even of the world. O glorious mystery! Here is a Lamb indeed, a Lamb by
way of eminency: the Lamb of God which redeemes this uncircumcised world, this
world without Christ, without God, without hope, without privileges, without
law, without Ordinances. And therefore John sets him out in this place with a
note of attention and admiration, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sin of the world. Mind it well, and admire at it. This indeed is that
glorious mystery which is so much spoken of in the Scripture, to wit, That the
Gentiles, THE WORLD, should obtain remission of sins, and salvation by the
death of Christ, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 3.5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy
3.16. Esai. 11.10. and 42.1.6. Jer. 16.19. Mal. 1.11. Matthew. 4.15. and 12.21.
Luke 2.32. Acts 28.^8. Romans 15.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Gal. 3.13, 14. And this is
that which the Jews so much stumbled at, and was so much enraged at, to wit,
That the Gentiles, the WORLD, the uncircumcision, the heathen, a people without
privileges, without Laws and Ordinances, should be accounted the people of
God, and obtain remission of sins, and salvation by Jesus Christ. Act. 22.21,
22, 23. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15, 16.

Neither is that necessary or warrantable, that in the Scriptures above
mentioned, we should understand every person, or every man and woman amongst
the Genriles: for it is very usual in the Scripture, to speak of the Gentiles
indefinitely, or generally, and that in point of conversion and salvation, when
but a remnant, or residue is understood. I will give you two or three instances
for many. Matthew. 12.18.21. Acts 10.45. and 11.1.18. and 13.48. and 14.27. and
15.3. conmpared with the 17. and 19 verses. In the third verse he speaks of the
conversion, of the Gentiles, indefinitly or generally: and yet who knows not,
but that a certain remnant or residue is understood: which also is evident from
the 17 and 19. verses. For there he applies this conversion to a residue, or
remnant. And the same is clear also in the other Scriptures above mentioned.
And why should we wrangle with God, or question the wisdom of the holy Spirit,
for speaking to us after such a manner. Thus much for the clearing and opening
of that place in John.

A sixth Scripture propounded by the^ is, John 3.16.17. The sixth Scripture.
For God so loved the world, that he gave his onlybegotte^ son: that whosoever
believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent
not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through
him might be saved. The greatest difficulty in this Scripture lies also in
the word World. They say we are here to understand all persons, or all men and
women in the world.

In answer to which (before I come to give the natural meaning of this
Seripture) I shall give two or three reasons from the words themselves,
compared with other Scriptures, to clear them from that corrupt sense which
they put upon them.

First, it is here said, God so loved the world. He loved the world: yea, he so
loved the world. Now I do not find any where in Scripture, That God is said
to love any, and so to love them, but we are to understand it to be spoken of
his everlasting, powerful, quickening, drawing, saving love in his Son. I
find the Scripture plainly speaking to this purpose, 1 John 4.9. In this was
manifested the LOVE of God toward us. And verse 10. Herein is LOVE, not that
we LOVED God, but that he LOVED us. And verse 11. Beloved, if God SO LOVED
us. Romans 5.8. But God commends his LOVE toward us. So also Ephesians. 2.4.5. His
great LOVE wherewith HE LOVED US. and 5.2. Christ also has LOVED us. Again,
Titus 3, 4, 5. The kindness and LOVE of God toward man appeared. So also,
Rev. 1.5. He LOVED us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. All which
places, and others of the like nature, where mention is made of the love of
God, we are to understand to be spoken of the everlasting, powerful,
quickening, pardoning, saving LOVE of God in his Son: as is manifest to such,
who read with understanding. And, as I said, I do not know any Scripture that
speaks of the love of God to men in sending or giving Christ for them (for
this the thing in hand) but we are to understand it to be spoken of the
everlasting saving love of God to them.

And this leads me now to the second thing considerable in the words, and that
is, He GAVE his only begotten Son. God so loved the world, that he GAVE his
only begotten Son. Which words include in them, his sending of him, and
delivering him up to death; for that which in this verse is called giving, is
in the next verse called sending. Now I do not read any where in Scripture,
that God is said to give, send, or deliver his Son unto death: or, that Christ
is said, so to give himseif for any: but we are to understand therein the
everlasting blessedness and salvation of those for whom God gave, sent, or
delivered him unto death.

And this follows naturally, and sweetly upon the former consideration; to
wit, That Gods giving, sending, or delivering his Son unto death is a fruit
flowing from the everlasting, free, rich, saving love of God, bringing
salvation unto all those for whom God gave him. When we ^ade in cripture ^f
Gods ^iving, ^ending or ^elivering is Son ^todeath ^r any: we ^e therein (...)
under^^ and the ^^ffednes (...) salvati^^ of those (...) whom ^od gave ^nt,
orde^ered (...) unt^ath, this ^le^re ^m ma^^ Scri^^res.
The Scripture is abundant to clear this, Gal. 1.4. He (GAVE) himself for our
sins, that he might redeem us from this present evil world, according to the
will of God and our Father. Thus Paul speaks concerning himself, Gal. 2.20.
He loved me, and (GAVE) himself for me. And thus he speaks also concerning
the Church. Ephesians. 5.25.26.27. Christ loved the Church and (GAVE) himself for
it, etc. that is, That which is now and shall be the Church of God, sanctified
and glorious, it is so by virtue of Christ's love, and giving himself for it.
To the same purpose is that also in Titus 2.14. He (GAVE) himself for us that
be might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works, Hitherto also agrees that in John 3.17. God
(SENT) not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved. And again, Romans 8.3. God (SENT) his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh; that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, And verse 32, He that spared not his own Son, but
(DELIVERED) him up for us all: how shall he not with him freely give us all
things, So also Romans 4.25. He was (DELIVERED) for our offenses, and was raised
again for our justification, I will conclude this with that in the 1. John
4.9. Jn this was manifest the love of God toward us, because that God (SENT)
his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. And
verse 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
(SENT) his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

All these Scriptures teaches us, (and I know no Scripture to the contrary)
that Gods giving, sending, or delivering of his only begotten Son unto death,
does include in it the blessedness and salvation of all those for whom God
gave him, sent him, or delivered him unto death.

Now then, to return to the place in hand; If by the love of God in this
place, we are to understand the everlasting, powerful, quickening, saving love
of God; And if Gods giving sending, or delivering his Son unto death, does
include in it the blessedness and salvation of all those for whom he gave him,
or delivered him unto death; I do then conclude, that by the World in this
Scripture, we may not understand all persons, or all men and women in the world
from first to last: for then it would follow that God loved all persons in the
world with an everlasting, powerful, quickening saving love in his Son: and
that all persons in the world should certainly be saved and blessed by Jesus
Christ.

But by World in this Scripture, we are to understand the Nations of the
Gentiles as standing in opposition (before the death of Cnrist) unto the
National Jewish Church. The natural meaning of this Scripture.
The Jews were (within) in respect of many glorious privileges, the Gentiles
were without. The Jews were the Church in respect of that choice which God
made of them, and the many excellent Laws and ordinances which he gave to them
only: the Gentiles were the World, as being a cast-out people, aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the World: this world it is which is here spoken of:
God so loved the WORLD, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have ever lasting life. A twofold
glorious mystery in this Scriture.


And the words thus understood do hold forth to us a twofold glorious Mystery.

First, that God so loved that vncircumsised, forlorn, hopeless formerly
far off, (as I may say) forgot people, the World, the nations of the
Gentiles, Aliens, strangers, Common and unclean, (as Peter calls them,) Wild
beasts, creeping things, fowls of the Air, (as the Lord expresses them.
Acts, 10.) that he gave his only begotten Son for them, to save them, to
give them remission of sins, and everlasting life, through believing in him.

I say in these words we have held forth to us this glorious mystery, this
exceeding abounding love of God to this World, which was hidden from former
ages and generations, but was made manifest in due time. God So loved the
World, So richly, So exceeding abundantly, so as was never known or heard of
before, that he gave his only begotten Son to bring redemption and salvation
unto them. The Son of man was lifted up for all Nations of the World. The
brazen Serpent (as all other shadows of Christ, and ordinances of the Law) was
appropriated unto the Jewish nation only: but the Son of man was lifted up,
That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
These words, (whosoever believes in him) does not imply any power in lost man
to come to Christ, or believe in him: But they are expressed to show, that
there was a door of life and salvation set open for all nations, yea for this
most hopeless and most wretched WORLD through the death of Christ. And
therefore the Lord Jesus speaking of his death, in John 12.32. he says, And I,
if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all NATIONS of the WORLD to believe
in me. Here is the exceeding riches of the love of God magnified to this most
hopeless world, in the death of his Son, who never till now tasted the
sweetness of the same. And thus it follows in that place of John. 3.17. God
sent his Son into the world (that is into or upon the Earth) to condemn the
WORLD that is the nations of the world: but that the world through him might be
saved, that is, He was not sent to execute vengeance upon this forlorn,
formerly forgotten, cast-out, hopeless world: but God so magnified his free,
rich, unspeakable, unsearchable, everlasting love to this most wretched, most
hopeless world, that he gave his only begotten Son to die for them, that they
might certainly and powerfully enjoy life and salvation through him. This I
conceive to be the true and natural meaning of this Scripture.

And whereas some (who take hold of the word (might) in this Scripture) do
say, that all persons in the world (might) be saved: and that all (might) be
saved who are not saved: I desire them to consider that the word (might) in
this place does carry in it the force of an undoubted and absolute certainty,
and it is as much in this place as (shall) be saved, or shall certainly be
saved. J shall propound some other Scriptures (a few for many) to clear up the
truth of this to us. Gal. 1.4. He gave himself for our finnes, that he (MIGHT)
redeem us from this present evil world, and 4.4.5. God sent forth his Son to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons, Ephesians. 5.25.26.27. Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it that
he (MIGHT) sanctify it, and that he (MIGHT) present it to himself a glorious
Church. Titus 2.14. He gave himself for us that he (MIGHT) rodeeme us from all
iniquity. 1 John. 4.9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us,
because God sent his only befotten Son into the world that we (MIGHT) live
through him. Now J desire the understanding Reader to consider whether the word
(might) in these Scriptures does not carry in it the force of an undoubted
certainty, and an absolute promise or performance: to wit, that the thing is
done, or shall certainly, and undoubtedly be done. And so in this place, where
he says, The world through him (might) be saved: the meaning is, The world
through him shall certainly and powerfully be saved.

And this will be yet more clear, if we consider, what the holy Spirit
means, when he says, (through him.) The world (through him) might be saved:
that is, Through his death, through his life, through the giving forth of his
Spirit to them, enabling them to believe in him unto life everlasting. And thus
the world is saved through him.

And thus I have cleared up the first glorious mystery which is held forth to
us in this Scripture, to wit, That God so loved that uncircumcised, forlorn,
hopeless, far-off people, the Nations of the Gentiles, the world, aliens,
strangers, common and unclean, wild beasts, creeping things, fowls of the
air, (so called as standing in opposition to the Jewish Church) that he gave
his only begotten Son for them, that they might certainly besaved throughhim.

The second glorious mystery held forth in these words, is this, to wit,

That the only way to life everlasting, is through believing in the Son of
God. This is that rightousnesse which is of faith, which stands in opposition
to the righteousness of the Law. The righteousness which is of the Law, says
on this wise, The man which does these things, shall live by them. But here is
another, a new, a blessed lesson which the Lord Jesus teaches Nicodemus, and
is written for our learning, to wit, That the Son of Man is lifted up, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. We
are not to understand believing in this Scripture, or any other of the like
nature, to be mentioned as a condition or work wrought by us: but we are to
understand it as standing in opposition to working for life and salvation. The
way to life is not by our workings, or our righteousness: but in receiving the
righteousness of another, to wit, of the Lord Jesus, through the faith of the
operation of God. And thus we are to understand all these Scriptures which
speak of justification by faith. We are not justified and saved by our own
working, or our own righteousness, but in receiving the righteousness of
another, through the faith of the operation of God.

And thus (through the help of God) I have cleared this Scripture from that
corrupt sense which they put upon it: and have declared the mind of God in it.

And thus that forenamed Scripture (Ioh. 1.29) and this do agree in one.

A Seventh Scripture propounded The 7th Scripture.
by them is 1 John 2.2. The words are these following, And he is the
propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world.

In which words (that I may declare the mind of God in them, he opeing of it.
and clear them from that corrupt sense which they put upon them) these things
are considerable, to wit.

First, Jesus Christ the righteous, as he is here expressed.

Secondly, for sins, that is, for the remission of sins.

Thirdly, We and the whole world. He is the propitiation for our sins, and the
sins of the whole world.

But what are we to understand in this place by the (whole world.)

They say, We are here to understand all persons in the world, or every man and
woman in the world from first to last. And hence they conclude, That Jesus
Christ the righteous, is the propitiation for the sins of all persons in the
world from first to last.

I shall show the unsoundnesse of this opinion, Some reasous to clear thi^
Scripture
and of this interpretation of this Scripture, from two or three considerations
in the words themselves, with these depending upon them.

First, Jesus Christ the righteous is the propitiation for our sins, in the
very same sense, (and in no other) he is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world: that is, he is the propitiation for fins under one and the same
consideration only. Now the holy Spirit teaches us, (and it is best to cleave
to his testimony) Romans 3.25. That God set forth Jesus Christ to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood. The holy Spirit here teaches us in
what sense, or under what consideration, Jesus Christ is the propitiation or
reconciliation for sins, to wit, through faith in his blood: that is, he is
the propitiation for the sins of those, and those only, who do believe in him,
for remission of sins. And thus we are to understand the word (Our) in this
place of John, John 5.3.
He is the propitiation for OUR sins: that is, for us who (through his power
do believe in him unto righteousness. For it is well known that John writes
here unto believers, such as believed in Christ unto remission of sins. And
in the very same sense we are to understand that in the fourth chapter of this
Epistle, verse 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us,
and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins: that is, such or so
great is the love of God, that he has given us remission of sins, and
reconciliation with himself through faith in the blood of his Son. To the
same purpose also is that in Romans 5.10. When we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son: that is, through faith in his death,
as is most plain from the former part of the chapter. And verse 11. We joy in
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.
We have received the atonement: that is, we are reconciled to God through
faith in Christ. Now then, if the holy Spirit witness that Jesus Christ is the
propitiation, or reconciliation for sins, through faith in his blood, and no
otherwise: and that he is no propitiation, reconciliation, or redemption to
any, but through faith in his blood only: I then conclude, that by the whole
world in this place, we can in no wise understand all persons, or every man and
woman in the world.

The second reason is taken from the consideration of the end and benefit of
this propitiation, for sins, that is, for the remission of sins. Whosoever have
a part or interest in this propitiation, they have all their sins fully and
perfectly remitted to them, washed away in his precious blood. There is not one
person to or for whom Christ is a propitiation or reconciliation, but he has
all his sins washed away in his precious blood, and shall certainly be saved.
Therefore this cannot agree to all persons in the world.

Thirdly, something is to be learned from the connection of these words with
those before-going, If any man sin (says he) we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: And he is the propitiation for our sins;
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Hence I
conclude, that all those for or to whom Jesus Christ is the propitiation, he is
for them an Advocate also. And though some do separate between the propitiation
and advocation, saying, That he is the propitiation for many, for whom he is
not an Advocate: yet certainly, these two are so inseparably linked together,
that though we must distinguish them, yet we must not, yea we cannot separate
them. There is no advocation without propitiation, such a weak, empty, and
beggarly benefit, as that it goes alone without advocation. And surely those
who do understandingly know what is the end and benesit of this propitiation,
and under what consideration Jesus Christ is the propitiation for sins, to
wit, through faith in his blood: they will acknowledge with me, that all those
for or to whom Jesus Christ is the propitiation, he is for them an Advocate
also. And how this can agree to all persons, or to every person in the world, I
leave to the consideration of the understanding Reader.

And having thus far cleared the words from that corrupt sense, it is
needful that I show what is the true and natural meaning of them.

I desire therefore it may be considered, that this expression (the whole
world) is diversely taken in Scripture.

Sometimes for the whole compass of the earth, with the creatures in it. So
we are to understand that expression of Elihu, in Job. 34.13.

Sometimes for the glory, riches, and pleasures of this present world. So it is
taken in Math. 16.26. Mark 8.36. Luke 9.25.

Sometimes for the generality of all Nations, as standing in opposition to a
little or small number amongst them. So it is to be taken in Rev. 12.9.10. and
11. verses compared together. And chapt. 16.14. 1 John 5.19. In these
Scriptures the generality of people of all nations of the world, as wicked and
ungodly, do stand in opposition to the little or small number of believers
among them.

Sometimes this expression (the whole world) is taken for all nations and
kindreds of people, as standing in opposition to one nation or kindred of
people only. So it is taken Matthew. 26.13. Mark 14.9. Romans 1.8. And so we are
to understand that of Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel unto every creature; that is, Go ye amongst all nations and kindreds,
The natual mean^ng of the words.
and tongues and people, and preach the Gospel to them. And thus (by the whole
world) in this place of John, we are to understand all nations and kindreds of
the world, as standing in opposition to one corner, or one part, or one nation
of the world only. This then is the meaning, to wit, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is our advocate with the Father, he is the propitiation or
reconciliation for our sins, It is well known that John did nextly write
unto the believers amongst the Jews. A tvvofold mystery in the words.
who amongst the Jewish nation do believe in him unto righteousness: and not
for ours only, but also he is the propitiation or reconciliation for the
sins of those who amongst all nations of the whole world, do and shall
hereafter believe in him unto righteousness.

The words thus considered, do hold forth unto us a twofold glorious mystery,
to wit,

First, That there is no remission of sins, reconciliation, or redemption,
but only through faith in the blood of Christ, which cleanses us from all
sin. This is the meaning of that place in Romans 3.25. God has set forth his
Son to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. And so it stands in
opposition to the Law of works, which says on this wise, The man that does
these things, shall live by them. This indeed is a glorious mystery, which is
the sum of the Gospel, Jesus Christ is the propitiation or reconciliation
through faith in his blood. Neither is there any remission of sins,
reconciliation, or redemption, but only through faith in the blood of Jesus
Christ.

Secondly, that the grace of God, by the death of Christ, is more abundantly
enlarged and stretched forth, then in former ages and generations. Until the
death of Christ, that which was revealed (which was in figures and shadows)
was limited and bounded unto the Jewish nation only, as it were in a corner of
the world: but in these after ages and generations, by the death of Christ, it
was enlarged and extended unto all nations of the world. And this is the
meaning of that place in the fourth chapter of this Epistle, v. 14. We have
seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son, the Savior of the world.
Where it is to be noted, that the saving, redeeming, or recon^iling of the
world, that is, the ma^ifestation of the rich love and grace of God to the
nations of the Gentiles in giving remission of sins and salvation to them by
Jesus Christ, does directly and properly belong to the Father's sending of his
Son. We have seen and do testify that the Father (sent ^his Son) the
Savior of the world. This is indeed a glorious mystery. And thus Jesus Christ
the rignteous is the propitiation, reconcihation, or redemption for the full
and perfect remission of the sins of the whole world. And thus, the whole
world without any difference, shall have remission of sins and everlasting
life, through faith in the blood of Christ.

Now judge thou, understanding Reader, whether this that I have said be not
agreeable both to this Scripture in hand, and many others also.

Another Scripture propounded by them is that in John 6.51. The 8th Scripture.
The words are these following, The bread that I will give, is my flesh, which
I will give for the life of the World. By World here, they understand, as
before, all persons, or every man and woman in the world.

I shall propound one or two reasons from these words, The cleating of the
words by reasons.
and those before-going to clear them from that corrupt sense which they put
upon them.

First, I will give my flesh (for) the life of the world. It is said above in
the 33. verse, The bread of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives
life (UNTO) the World. So that, to be life (for) the world, it is to be life
unto the world, in Christ's meaning.

Secondly, everlasting life, or life for ever; as it is expressed in the 47 and
51. verses. I therefore conclude, That if Christ thus give himself to be life
for the world, that is, to be everlasting life unto the world: we cannot
understand that by the world in this place is meant all persons; The natural
meaning of them.
or every person in the world. But by world in this place, we are to understand
(as I conceive) the Nations of the Gentiles, who are here called the world, and
in other places, the Heathen, the uncircumcision, as standing in opposition
unto the Jewish Church, who alone in their times had the enjoyment of many
glorious privileges.

And thus there is a glorious mystery held forth in these words, A mystery in
them.
to wit:

That Manna (as all other things also which were for the time present shadows
and figures of Christ) was appropriated by God unto the Jewish Nation only. And
therefore they say, Our Fathers did eat Manna in the Desert, verse 31. And
Christ agrees to it, Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Desert, verse 49. No
other Nation in the whole world had a propriety in these glorious privileges,
which were lively figures of Christ, but the Jewish Nation only. But this true
bread, Jesus Christ, he is not limited unto the Jewish Nation only, as that
Marin^ was: but he is sent of God to giv^ life, everlasting life unto the
Nation^ of the Gentiles, the Heathen, the World* And here is the excellency of
this Manna, according to what he says verse 33. The bread of God is he which
comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world. And this is a mystery
which the Scripture much speaks of, to wit, the salvation o^ the Gentiles by
Jesus Christ. Thu^ much briefly concerning that Scripture.

A Ninth Scripture propounded by them is John 4.42. The ninth Scripture
The words are these following, And they said unto the woman, Now we believe
not because of thy saying: for we have heard him our selves, and know that
this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World.

By world here they understand, The natural meaning of it.
as before, all persons, or every person in the world. I shall be brief in the
clearing of this Scripture. It is well known to every understanding Reader,
that the Samaritans (with whom Jesus was now dealing, and by whom these words
are here uttered) were the Nations of the Gentiles, which the King of Assyria
placed in Samaria when he carried away the Israelites captives, 2 Kings 17.24.
These Nations of the Gentiles are called the world, as standing in opposition
to the Jewish Church, being a people far off, as it were forgotten, and
without hope until the manifestation and suffering of Christ in the flesh.
With this world, as being a first fruits of the calling of the Gentiles, Jesus
Christ is now dealing, and by his power reveals himself and grace in them,
whereby they tasted and knew his love and grace toward them, and their
redemption and salvation by him: for no less then so is the meaning of the
words. Mark it, In the verse before-going it is said. Many more believed
because of his own word; that is, His word was mighty and powerful in them,
opening their understandings to know him, and persuading their hearts to
receive him or believe in him. Upon this they make this solemn profession of
him and his power in them, Now we believe (said they to the woman) not because
of thy word: for we have heard him our selves (that is, we have felt the life
and power of his word in our hearts) and we know (that is, we know by most
sweet and comfortable experience) that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior
of the world. That is, We who hitherto have bin the outcast world, do now
know Jesus Christ, and his grace and power in us, and we are able to say, not
upon hearsay, but upon knowledge and experience from his own teaching, that
he is thus become the Savior of the world, and that the world now does enjoy
salvation by Jesus Christ. Here is a precious mystery, and here is the precious
knowledge of it. This is indeed the natural meaning of the Holy Spirit in this
Scripture, which will in no wise agree to their interpretation of it.

Another Scripture propounded by them, is John 12.47. The ten^ Scripture
The words are these following, If any man hear my words, and believe not, I
judge him not; for I came not to judge the world but to save the world.

By world here, as before, they understand all persons, or every person in the
world. In answer to which, consider.

First, It is here said, The clea^ing of it (...)
Christ came to (SAVE) the world. Now by (saving) in this place, we are to
understand no less then a complete, perfect, powerful, everlasting saving or
salvation: for so it stands in opposition to judging or condemning in this
place, as it does also in John 3.17.

Secondly, (as that which follows naturally upon the former) it is said, Christ
(CAME) to save the World. Now without controversy. Whatsoever Christ was sent
to do, or came into the world to do, he did fully and perfectly perform the
same: for as it was his delight to do so, John 4.34. So he was enabled with
power also to do the same, Esa 63.1. Therefore he is bold to affirm even before
his Father who sent him, when he is now ready to leave the world; I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do, John 17.4. And therefore when we
read in Scripture that the Son of God (came) for such an end, or to do such
a work, we are to understand, that he did verily and perfectly, and fully
perform and finish the same. The Son of God did not his work by halues: for
he had both will and power to finish and fulfill the same. Now if these two
things be well considered, it will be clear to the judicious Reader, that we
cannot understand these words according to their sense: for then it would
follow that every person in the world shall certainly and powerfully be saved.

But by the world in this Scripture, The natu^all meaning of the words.
we are to understand the nations of the Gentiles, who (as I have declared) are
often times in Scripture called the world, as standing in opposition to the
Jewish Church, as being a people (until the manifestation and suffering of
Christ in the flesh) cast out a far off, and as it were, forgetten. These
nations of the Gentiles, this world, the Son of God came to save. He came not
to judge, that is, to condemn, to take vengeance upon this cast-out, farr-off,
forgotten, most wretched world, these gentile nations: but he came to magnify
the exceeding, superabounding riches of the grace of God to them, in bringing
salvation to them by his death.

This interpretation of this Scripture, I shall confirm from two or three
reasons set down by the holy Spirit in the words before going.

First, when certain Greeks (which were of the Gentile nations) came up to
worship at the feast, and desired to see Jesus: He being made, acquainted with
it, said, verse 23. The hour is come that the Son of man should be
gloristed: that is, The time is now come that the Son of man shall
beglorified in bringing salvation to the Gentiles by his death. This is that
much fruit of his death, which he speaks of verse 24. And hitherto also tends
that in verse 28. Father glorify thy Name: then came there a voice from
heaven, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again: that is, I will
more abundantly, then formerly, magnify my grace and power by thy death, which
is now at hand.

Secondly, (as depending upon what before goes) The Lord Jesus says, verse
31. Now is the judgment of this world. By judgment here, we are to understand
righteousness, deliverance, or salvation: and by the world, we are to
understand the Nations of the Gentiles: and by the word (now) in this place, we
are to understand the time of his personal death, or lifting up upon the
Cross. This then is the meaning, to wit, Now that I am ready to be offered up
upon the Cross, Now is the judgment, righteousness, deliverance, or
solvation of this world, that is of the Gentile nations. This is a glorious
mystery, And so it is sweetly and fully agreeing to what was before prophesied
by Esa. 42.1. I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment,
that is, salvation to the Gentiles. And so it is expressed by Christ himself,
Mat. 12.18. I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the
Gentiles. And verse 21. And in his Name shall the Gentiles trust. mind it,
what was before prophesied, is now fulfilled. Now is the judgment of this
world; Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out.

Thirdly (as yet depending upon what before goes) He says in verse 32 And I,
if I be lifted up from the earth will draw all men to me. This he speak
signifying what death he should dye; that is, By the power of my death upon the
Cross, I will draw all Nations of men to me, to be saved through faith in me.

I desire the Reader to lay these things together, and then to judge whether my
interpretation of the 47. verse be not agreeable to the mind of God.

And whereas it is said in the former part of the verse, if any man hear my
words and believe not, I judge him not: the meaning is, I do not now judge
him, I do not now sit upon my Tribunal to execute vengeance: that is reserved
unto another time, or day, as it is expreslly said in the next verse, The word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.

Thus much for this Scripture.

Another Scripture propounded by them is, The Eleventh Scripture.
2 Cor. 5.19.21. The words are these following. God was in Christ reconciling
the world to himself not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has
committed to us the word of recenciliation. For he has made him to be sin
for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.

By world in this place they understand, as before, all persons, or every
person in the world.

In way of answer to which, The (...) clearing of the words reasons.
I shall declare two reasons from the words themselves, to clear them from that
corrupt sense.

The first reason is taken from the consideration of the time, of which the
holy Spirit here speaks, where he says, God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself. The time (I conceive) of which the holy Spirit here speaks,
is the actual or real manifestation and suffering of Christ in the flesh; I
mean, his personal death, or the offering up of his own body unto death upon
the tree. Is it not manifest that he speaks of this death in the 14. and 15.
verses of this chapter, (which words I have before opened) where he says, That
Christ DIED for all? And these words have their dependence upon those. It is
true indeed, in respect of purpose he died before the foundation of the world,
1 Pet. 1.20. In respect of promise he died from the foundation of the world,
Rev. 13.8. In respect of diverse shadows and figures (which were appropriate
only to the Jewish nation) he died all along under that dispensation, Heb.
9.7, 8, 9, 10, But his personal manifestation and death was once in the end of
the world, Heb. 9.26. And indeed his personal manifestation and death, as it
was more wonderful glorious, and mystical (in respect of the declaration of
the wisdom, power, and grace of God, which did more wonderfully shine forth in
it) then either the promise or shadows of his death: So it was more wonderful
and glorious then those, in respect of the power and fruit of it also. His
death in promise was exceeding glorious: his death in shadows was very
glorious also for the time present; but not so glorious, fruitful and
powerful as his personal death, which did excel in glory. The power and
fruit of this was the breaking down of the partition wall which was between
Jews and Gentiles: it was the bringing of life and salvation unto all nations
of the world. This I conceive (...) the meaning of that saying in John ^2.24.
Except a corn of wheat fall in^o the ground and die, it abides alone: ^ut if
it die, it brings forth much fruit. His own death brought forth much fruit.
And to this purpose is that also in the 32. and 33. verses. And I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to me. This he spoke signifying
what death he should die. From whence it appears, That his ^ersonall death
was mavelous powerful to bring forth abundance of fruit, even so much, as
the drawing of all men, that is, all nations of men, to the knowledge of
himself, and the enjoyment of salvation through him. For as the personal
manifestation and death of Christ was a wonderful, glo^us, new thing, a great
mystery, (Esa. 43.18.19. Jer. 31.22. 1 Timothy 3.16.) So the power and fruit of it
is a new, (...) wonderful thing also, such as never before was heard of. This
is that which was foretold by the Prophet Esa. 43.18, 19, 20. Behold, I will do
a new thing: now it shall spring forth, shall ye not know it? I will even make
a way in the Wilderness, and rivers in the desert. The beast of the field
shall honor me, the Dragons and the Owls, because I give waters in the
Wilderness, rivers in the Desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen. Mind
the mystery of the words, and you will see so much held forth in them, as I
allege them for, to wit, the bringing in, or the saving of Beasts, Dragons,
Owls, that is, the Gentiles, who are here likened to such wild creaturs, and
that not only, or simply, in respect of their natural estate, but
comparatively also, as in opposition to the Jewish Church, as being not owned,
or regarded, or honored with any laws or ordinances, concerning Christ, but
cast out, as it were into a wild, hopeless condition, without laws, without
government, without privileges, even like wild beasts, Owls and Dragons; I
say, in these words is prophetically held forth to us the bringing in, and the
saving of these wild, brutish, hopeless, fierce, wretched people, by the
glorious and wonderful power of the death of Christ. This very same thing also
is foretold in the 42. chapter oftnis Prophefie, verse 9. to 17 the
consideration of which I leave to the understanding Reader. The same thing (I
conceve) is chiefly aimed at by the holy Spirit in this Scripture we have now
in hand. It is said in the 17. verse, Old things are past away, behold all
things are become new: that is, old figures and shadows, and such like things
are past away, and God has now wrought new things; he has given his own Son
to die, that is new: and in the death of Christ, he has reconciled the world
to himself, that is new also, even such a thing as never before was in being,
until the Son of God suffered in the flesh.

Thus I have, with what brevity and plainness I could, declared the time of
which the holy Spirit here speaks of, when he says, God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself: that is, when Christ suffered in the flesh,
when he died personally, Then, I say, Then God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself. Hence I conclude, that by the world in this Scripture, we
can in no wise understand all persons, or every person in the world from first
to last.

The second reason for the clearing of the words from that corrupt sense, is
taken from the consideration of the Nature of this reconciliation, which is
here spoken of. This reconciliation of the world unto himself, is no other
thing then the remission of all their sins through faith in Christ: It is no
less then making them the righteousness of God by Jesus Christ. And therefore
when he says in this place, That Cod was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, he says in the very next words, not imputing their trespasses unto
them.

Now according to this Scripture not to have sin imputed, it is to be truly
blessed. And therefore, the very same thing which David in the 32. Psalm
calls, the not imputing of sin, Paul in Romans call-leth, the imputing of
righteousness through faith in Christ. Romans 4.11.22.23.24. James ^^.23.
And so far as I know, we never read of the not imputing of sin, or the
imputing of righteousness, but only through faith in Christ. So that, when it
is said, God imputed not their sins to them, we understand that he imputed the
righteousness of Christ to them, through faith in him: or that they were made
righteous through faith in Christ. And so it agrees with that in the 21.
verse, where it is said, He was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: that is, we who believe in Christ, (for he
speaks of himself and other helievers) are made the righteousness of God in
him. And thus God was in Christ: that is, in the death of Christ, reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them: that is,
giving them the remission of all their sins, and putting them into a condition
of perfect righteousness and true blessedness, through faith in Christ. Of
this power indeed was the personal I death of the Son of God, thus to
reconcile the world unto God: and this power of his death has run along ever
since in all ages, in the ministry of the Gospel, until this time, and so
shall do until this mystery of the Gospel be finished.

Now if the time and the nature of this reconciliation be well considered, And
if we rightly understand what the holy Spirit means, when he says, God was
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself: We can by no means understand
the world in this place to signify all persons, or every person in the world
from first to last.

But by world in this place, we are to understand the Gentiles, who by the
power of the death of Christ (and not until then, except some first fruits)
were reconciled to God, through faith in him. This then is the sum and
meaning of thse words, to wit, God was in Christ (that is, in the death of
Christ) reconciling the world (that is, the Gentiles) unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, that is, giving them remission of all
their sins, and putting them into a condition of perfect righteousness, and
true blessedness, through faith in Christ, wrought in them by the power of God
in the mi^istry of reconciliation. And thus (as I conceive) this Scripture
agrees most sweetly with that in Romans 11.11.12.13, 14, 15. In which place the
Gentiles are called the world as standing in opposition to Israel according to
the flesh; This world is said to be reconciled; The time of this reconciliation
is upon the stumbling of the Jews at Jesus Christ crucified, and the preaching
of Jesus Christ crucified unto the Gentiles; The nature of this reconciliation
of the Gentiles is no less then salvation through faith in Christ; all which
the understanding Reader will find out in the perusuall of this Scripture. And
thus the words of God do most sweetly accord with one another. Thus much for
this Scripture.

Another Scripture propounded by them is Heb. 9.26. The twelfth Scripture.
The words are these following. But now once in the end of the world has he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. ^he meaning of it.
The sum of which words is this, to wit, that Jesus Christ did appear in the
end of the world, perfectly and powerfully to put away, or take away sin, by
that once giving of himself a sacrifice for sin. This indeed is a certain
truth: but that he did so for all persons in the world from first to last, this
Scripture does not affirm. In the 28. verse, it is said, He was once offered
to bear the sins of many, that is perfectly and powerfully to take them away
from them, in respect of the merit and Lording power of them. Therefore mind
it, whenever you read in Scripture that Christ does bear sins, take away
sins, or put away sins. We are to understand no less then the perfect and
powerful taking away of all sins, both in respect of the merit and
captivating power of them by the application of the virtue and power of his
death unto them. And I am sure this cannot be understood of all persons in the
world. I shall say no more concerning this Scripture, because the words are
clear in themselves.

Another Scripture propounded by them is Luke 2.30.31, 32. The thi^ teenth
Scripture
The words are these following. Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou
have prepared before the face of all people: A light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the glory of thy people Israel.

By (all people) as it is expressed in the 31. verse, they understand, it
seems, all persons, or every person in the world from first to last.

But doubtless, by all people, The meaning of it.
we are to understand, in this place, all nations of people, or kindreds of
people, as standing in opposition to one nation, or kindred of people only.
And those words in the 32. verse will clear this interpretation: for those
which he calls all people in the former verse, he calls the Gentiles, and
thy people Israel in this verse: that is, not thy people Israel only, but the
people of the Gentiles also: that is, All nations of people whatsoever, And it
is usual in the Scripture to mention all people, when as, all nations, and not
all persons is understood. ^ Read Psalm 67. throughout. Romans 15.11.
Read Psalm. 67. throughout Romans 15.11. In this place of Luke then, I
conceive, the holy spirit does teach us thus much, to wit, that the exceeding
riches of the grace of God was now ready to be magnified and manifested to all
nations of people, not to Israel only, but to the Gentiles also, in bringing
light and salvation, and glory to them by the death of Christ. This is that
which was foretold by the Prophet Esa. 42.6.7. I will give thee for a Covenant
of the people, for a light of the Gentiles: To open the blind eyes, to bring
out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
prison house. And chapter 49.6. And he said, It is a light thing that thou
should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
dissolations of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be my salvation to the end of the earch. This latter Scripture,
does agree almost word for word with that place of Luke. And this is the sum,
to wit, That God formerly promised, and has now performed to magnify and
manifest the exceeding riches of his grace to all nations of people, without
any difference, in bringing, or giving light and salvation and glory to them,
by the manifestation and suffering of Christ in the flesh. The which mystery
was not in being until the time appointed of Christ's personal manifestation
and suffering in the flesh. These things being well considered, it will be
manifest to the understanding Reader, that it is a perverting and darking of
this Scripture, to conclude from hence, that Jesus Christ died or suffered for
the sins of all persons, or every person from first to last.

Another Scripture propounded by them is, ^he four^centh ^cripture.
John 11.50.51, 52. The words are these following, Ye consider not that it is
expedient that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation
perish not. And this he spoke not of himself: but being high Priest that
year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation: And not for that
nation only, but that he should gather together in one the children of God
that were scattered abroad.

Wherefore they allege this Scripture to justify their opinion, I know not.

I shall briefly discover what I conceive to be the mind of God in it. ^he
^eaning of it.
The 51. and 52. verses do interpret the 50. ^ow my^^eries in ^^e words.
verse. In which two verses there are two great mysteries declared, by way of
prophecy, to wit, First, that Jesus Christ should die for all nations of
people, ^oth Jews and Gentiles: for when he says in the 51. verse That he
should die for that nation; he means the Jewish nation: And when he says in
the following verse, And not for that nation only, but that he should gather
together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad: he means, the
outcast Gentiles: for such a scattered, dispersed, outcast, hopeless people
were they (as I have before proved) until they were gathered to the Lord, and
into the fellowship of his body by the death of Christ. And if any shall ask,
why they are here called, the children of God? I answer, They are so called in
this place, (as I conceive) not according to what they were for present, as
though they were the children of God before they were gathered unto him, by the
power of the death of Christ: but according to what they should be hereafter,
as a blessed fruit flowing from the power of the death of Christ. And so we
are to understand (as I conceive) those words of Christ in John 10.15.16. and
those of Paul Ephesians. 5.25.

The second mystery declared in these words is, the glorious saving power of
the death of Christ; for when he says in the 51. verse, That he should die for
that nation: he means, that he should save them, that he should bring them to
God, that they perish not. And the words following do teach so much: for he
there says, And not for that nation only, but that he should gather together
in one the children of God that are scattered abroad. The force of the words
lies in that expression of gathering together: whereby we are taught, that
such is the glorious and saving power of the death of Christ to gather together
scattered, and lost, and outcast ones. And we are here further taught, That to
die for them, and to gather them together in one, is one and the same thing, as
is plain by comparing the 51. and 52. verses together. So that in the
Scripture sense, to die for them, it is to save them, it is to bring them to
God, it is to gather them from their scattered lost estate, into an Estate of
fellowship with God, and one with another in him. For it is impossible to
separate between Christ's dying for lost men, and his gathering of lost men to
God by the power of his death. This Scripture, being thus cleared, is of sweet
consideration, but in no wise tending to justify their opinion.

Two other Scriptures, The two last Scri^ tures.
propounded by them are, Acts 13.47. Esa 46 9. I put both these together,
because in sum, they are both one. The one set down by way of prophecy, the
other by way of performance.

The words in Esaias are these following, I will also give thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the Earth. In
the Acts, the words are, I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that
thou should be for salvation unto the ends of the Earth.

I shall briefly open the words, and then it will appear how unfitly they urge
them to justify their opinion.

I have set thee, or given thee (speaking concerning Christ) to be a light to,
or of the Gentiles; that is, Thou shall be a light in them, revealing in them,
and giving to them remission of sins, salvation, life everlasting through
faith in Christ. Thou shall cause the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
to shine into their hearts. I have before proved (and so much is taught in the
words now in hand) that until the death of Christ, the Gentiles did wholly sit
in darkness, being denied of God all those Laws, Ordinances, Oracles,
Privileges, Miracles, which the Jews enjoyed, by the appointment of God, as
so many means whereby Christ did gloriously, for the time present, shine forth
among them.

But now, ^om. 5.15.
as it is written, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and they that
have not heard, shall understand. So that, the people which sat in darkness,
saw great light: and unto them which sat in the region and shadow of death,
light did spring forth.

And whereas, it is said in the next words, That thou should be (for
^alvation) unto the ends of the earth. These words do justify the
interpretation of the former; for such a light is Christ, giving salvation, or
bringing salvation unto all those to whom he is a light; that is, He reveals
himself in them, drawing their hearts to believe in him unto life everlasting.
And therefore, it is said in the next words. As many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed. For indeed, thus Christ is light and salvation to us,
as he reveals himself in us, drawing us thereby to believe in himself unto
salvation.

And if any shall object, that it is here said, He (should) be for salvation. I
answer, The word should, or might, in this Scripture as in others of the like
nature) does signify no less then shall, He shall be my salvation unto the
ends of the earth. And therefore Esaias says in Chap. 52.10. The Lord has
made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the Nations: and all the ends of the
earth SHALL see the salvation of God. They shall see it, that is, they shall
look upon Jesus Christ, and believe in him, and be saved by him. As it is
written, Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth.

And whereas it is here said, He shall be for salvation unto the (ends of the
earth.) the meaning is, unto all Nations, or Kindreds of the earth. And Esaias,
in the forenamed place, does make it plain, The Lord has made bare his holy
arm in the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the
salvation of our God. And here is this mystery held forth in it, to wit, That
whereas until the death of Christ, the mysteries of salvation, under many
shadows, was limited only to the Jewish Nation: now, by his appearing and
suffering in the flesh, those mysteries are not only more clear in
themselves, as being wholly unvailed by the sacrifice of himself: but also the
benefit of them is enlarged far and wide unto all the nations of the earth,
who before ^d never heard of, nor known the ^eetnesse of them. And now was
^lfilled what was written by the ^^ophet, Behold my servant shall pro^er, he
shall be exalted, and be very ^^gh. As many were astonished at thee, be^use his
visage was marred: So shall (...) sprinkle many nations, the Kings shall ^ut
their mouths at him: for that which ^ath not been told them shall they see, and
that which they had not heard, shall ^hey understand.

And this is further to be minded ^n the place we have in hand, That ^he
Gentiles, and the ends of the earth belong both to one and the same people.

This then is the sum of the words, to wit, I have given thee to be a light
to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, to set up a heavenly light in them, to
give them the knowledge of Christ, and faith in him, that so thou may be for
salvation unto all the nations of the earth.

This mystery was not in being until the manifestation and suffering of Christ
in the flesh.

Now then let the understanding Reader judge, if this Scripture be^ not
unwarrantably urged by them to maintain their opinion of Christ's dying for all
persons, or every person in the world from first to last.

And thus (as the Lord has helped me) I have examined the sever all Scriptures
propounded by them, and declared the mind of God in them. The reasons which
some propounded to justify this opinion.


I now proceed to the consideration of some reasons propounded by them, to
prove (as they conceive) that Christ died for the sins of all persons.

And they are these following:

First, because (say they) Christ and the Prophets,

Secondly,

Thirdly, so, John 4.42. 1 John 4.14.

Fourthly,

These four reasons I find expressed by Mr. Lamb in a little boek.

To their first reason, The trial of them.
I answer, That neither Christ, Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures: I answer does he there say that Christ died for the sins of all
persons, or every person? Does he not say, Christ died for (our) sins? that is,
for us who receive him, and believe in him, and stand fast in his grace and
righteousness; He died for Our sins, and we shall be saved by him, as he
plainly speaks in the first and second verses. This is that Gospel which he
here speaks of, and remindes the Brethren of, to wit, That the alone way
whereby to attain unto righteousness, remission of sins, and salvation, is
only through faith in the death of Christ, and standing fast in the grace and
righteousness of the Lord Jesus. So much in answer to the first reason.

Secondly,

I answer, Christ indeed commanded his Disciples to go forth unto all nations,
and so make Disciples: as is expressed by Matthew. And it is true also, that
when he sent them forth, he commanded them, Into whatsoever house ye enter,
first say, Peace be to this house: as it is expressed by Luke. And it is
written also by the same Luke, That repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in the Name of Christ among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And
it is true also, as Paul expresses it, That the Gospel and the preaching of
Jesus Christ, is now, by the Commandment of the everlasting God, made known
to all nations for the obedience of faith. But does any of these Scriptures, or
any other say that Christ required them to preach that he died for the sins of
all persons, or of every person? Or can it be proved that this opinion of
theirs is the Gospel of Christ? And as for that of Luke 10.5. (which may seem
most difficult) where it is said, Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say,
Peace be to this house: We must understand, that their declaration of peace,
unto whatsoever house the^ come, was a ministerial (not an absolute or
powerful) declaration o^ peace; or a ministerial salutation, o^ well-wishing
to that house. And s^ it is expressed in Mat. 10.12. An^ when ye come into an
house salute it (...) that is, with all happiness, and peace* and salvation to
it. And if the house be worthy, or as Luke says, If the Son of peace be
there: that is, If he manifest his grace and power in them, persuading their
hearts to receive you, and embrace your words, then shall your peace, or
salvation, or well-wishing, rest upon that house: if not, it shall turn to you
again. So much in answer to their second reason.

Thirdly, (say they) The Saints are commended for believing so. For this
purpose they allege, John 4.42. 1 John 4.14.

I answer, The Saints in Scripture did not believe so, to wit, that Christ died
for the sins of all persons, or of every person from first to last. Neither is
it any commendation, before God, unto any of (...) who do now believe so:
seeing the Scriptures rightly understood, holds forth no such thing to us.
And as for those places of John 4.42. and 1 John 4.14. they admit not of such
(...) interpretation as they put upon them, but teach another Doctrine, which
is holy, precious and glorious: Both which things I have largely declared
above, in the opening of those Scriptures.

Fourthly, because (say they) It is a condemning sin, to any, hearing the
Gospel, not to believe so, to wit, That Christ died for their sin. For this
purpose they allege, John 3.18.19. and 12.47.48. and 16.9. 1 John 5.10.

I answer, It is most true, that whosoever (though formerly never so sinful)
hears the word of Christ and believes in him, that is, receiving him (...)
our Savior submits to his righteousness, trusts in his grace, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death to life. And it is also most certain, that whosoever does not believe in
Jesus Christ, nor submit to his righteousness, nor trust in his grace, nor
kiss his Septer, but trusts in his own righteousness; or loves to continue
in ways of darkness, disobedience and rebellion against Christ: every such
one is in the estate of condemnation, none of his sins are forgiven, but they
are all and every one of them charged against him, and he, with all his sins
upon him, lies naked under the bitterness and terror of the just wrath of
Almighty God. For indeed, there is no other way whereby we can escape the wrath
of God, and attain remission of sins and everlasting life, but only through
believing in the righteousness of another, to wit, the Lord Jesus: And
whosoever is drawn, by the power of the Father to believe in Jesus Christ, he
is righteous even as Christ is righteous, he has all his sins covered with the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. But whosoever does not believe in him, all his
sins are uncovered, and he, like a miserable, naked, sinful guilty, cursed
wretch, lies with all his sins charged upon him, under the wrath of God.
This that I have said, is the very mind of GOD those Scriptures above
mentioned: none of which righly understood, does in any measure serve to
justify their opinion, of Christ's dying for the sins of all persons. And
whereas they say, That there is no other means whereby an unbeleever should
become a believer, then the hearing of this report, That Christ died for the
sins of all, alleging for this, Romans 10.14. How shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? I answer, It is most true what the Scripture says,
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? But that such a
report as they speak of, is the Gospel of Christ, and that which should be
preached as a truth of God, cannot be proved from the testimony of God, in
this, or other Scriptures.

Thus much in answer to the Scriptures and reasons propounded by them to
maintain this opinion. In which answers it appears, how greatly they are
mistaken, and how much they err in this matter from the right understanding of
the Word of truth.

And before I leave this point, Diverse errors attending upon the forementioned
opinion.
I conceive it not unnecessary, to show some other mistakes and errors, held
forth by them, most of which do attend upon this opinion, of Christ's dying for
the sins of all persons.

I shall not trouble my self nor the Reader with all the unsound passages of
their several books: but point at those which are most considerable.

And herein I shall refer the Reader chiefly to that forementioned book set
forth by Thomas Lamb, and others upon this point.

First, Romans 3:28. Gal. 2.16. Col. 1^ 21, 22. and 2.13, 14. Ephesians. 2.13, 14 15.
This is the substance of what i^ contained in the 13, 14, 15. lines of page 4.
and in the 19, 20, 21, 22. lines of page 5.

In answer to which, first, That all the Prophets give witness unto Jesus
Christ, that through faith in his Name, whosoveer believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins.

Secondly, their conclusion is not agreeable either to the scope or language of
the Scripture.

Thirdly, the Scriptures they allege, do no ways seem to justify their
conclusion: but are all of them spoken to, and of such as actually, through the
power of Christ, believe in him unto remission of sins, as the understanding
Reader will easily discern.

Fourthly, this conclusion of theirs contradicts another conclusion of their
own, in the 19, 20, 21, 22 lines of page 4. Where it is resolved, by them, upon
the question, That all men's sins are not pardoned in Christ, as a truth to be
preached to, and to be believed by all. Now if it be not a truth to be
preached to all, that their sins are pardoned in Christ, as they themselves
confess) How then can that conclusion stand firm, That all men ought to
believe, that all their sins are pardoned? Shall they believe a thing which
is not a truth? And thus themselves do contradict themselvesr

Secondly, it is affirmed by them, That nothing is required of any to make them
partakers of remission of sins, but only faith to believe the report of the
Gospel. This is the substance of the 17. and 18. lines of page 4. and 26. and
27. lines of the same page.

In answer to which, bare assent to the truth of the Gospel. And, say they,
nothing is required of any to make them partakers of remission of sins, but
only faith to believe, or to assent unto the truth of the Gospel preached.

Surely the precious faith of Gods elect is of more glorious, excellent nature,
And though an assent unto the truth of the Gospel, be included in all lively,
or living faith, yet something else is required and found also in such afaith
as embraces and receives Jesus, Christ unto remission of sins.

Thirdly, it is resolved, by them,

I answer, in the nature of evils, is not clear to me from the testimony of
Scripture. And they themselves confess (as is is most true) in the last
question and answer of the same page, That all the sins of all believers, are
so washed away in the blood of Christ, that the guilt of them does not all
remain against them. And surely if there be no guilt, there is no curse, no
sting, no evil in those chastisements, which God as a Father, in love, in
measure, and for their profit, does inflict upon them.

Fourthly, Romans 3.22.23, 24, 25. John 1.29. and 12.47. Chap. 3.16, 17. This is
the substance of the 11, 12, 13, 14. and 15. lines of the sixth page.

I answer, further satisfaction, I refer the Rea^er to what I have already
declared ^o be the meaning of these Scrip^ures,

Secondly, it is most certain, that the ^ins of no persons are washed away ^n
the blood of Christ, but such who ^re drawn by the power of Christ to ^eleeve
in him, Romans 3.21, 22, 23.24, 25, 26. 1 Cor. 6.11. Titus 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Thirdly, they themselves confess, that not the sins of any are pardo^ned,
or remitted until such time as they believe in Christ. This is the substance
of what they say in the fifth question and answer in page 4. Now what
difference is there between remission of sins, and washing away of sins? I
am sure the Scripture makes no difference. And I am sure also, that such who
have their sins remitted, or washed away in the blood of Christ (being
justified persons) shall certainly be saved.

Fifthly, It is resolved, by them, upon the question, that the sins of
believers are washed away otherwise then in unbeleevers. This is contai^ ned in
the fifth question, and auswer^ page 6.

I answer, Act. 10.43. and 13.39.

Secondly, it is as certain, that the sins of unbeleevers (whilst they continue
in unbelief) are not pardone^ nor washed away, but abiding in tha^ condition,
they abide under the power and merit of all their sins, an^ the wrath of God
abides on them John 3.36. And I am sure, it is no^ agreeable either to the
language, o^ meaning of the Scripture, to say, tha^ the sins of believers are
washed a^ way otherwise then in unbeleevers.

Sixthly, Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. Col. 3.3, 4. 1 John 3.2. Romans 8.23. This is
also expressed in the same question and answer, page 6.

I answer, first,

Secondly, the Scriptures they have ^lledged (as the understanding Rea^er in
the perusal of them may easily ^erceive) do not in the least mea^ure point at
such a thing as they al^edge them for.

Thirdly, it is certain, that the sins ^f all those who believe in Christ, ^re
perfectly, fully, and for ever, even (...) this present life remitted, or
washed way in the blood of Christ. Yea, all their sins are now as perfectly
and ^lly remitted, or washed away in ^oint of justification, as they shall be
(...) the Kingdom of glory Acts 13.^9. 1 Cor. 6.11. Heb. 10.17. 1 John ^.7.
Rev. 1.5.

Fourthly, it is indeed most cer^^in, that believers, or justified persons,
whilst they are in this earthly ^abernacle, come far short of that ^ory
which they shall enjoy at the ^ppearing of the Lord Jesus. And thus indeed
there is an unspeakle difference between the condition of a believer in the
state of mortality, and when mortality shall be swallowed up of life. And this
is that which those forementioned Scriptures, alleged by them, teaches us.
But what is this to prove, that the sins of a believer glorified, are
otherwise washed away, then the sins of a believer in the estate of grace,
not glorified? This is to make remission of sins, or justification to be
imperfect to a believer in this present life.

Seventhly,

I answer, in themselves good and precious: but that they are in the nature of
benefits, or good things to them, or that Christ died to procure outward and
temporal benefits for them, as benefits to them, it is not clear to me. But
if I mistake in this, or any other thing, I am willing to be informed.

Eighthly, John 17. is very unagreeable to the mind of Christ.

Christ's Prayer (say they) is to be distinguished in respect of the things
prayed for. Some things (say they) were special, only belonging to believers,
verse 9. compared with verses 11.15. and 17. And some things, (say they) are
common to all, and for such things, Christ did pray for the world, as verses
21, 23. though not in respect of the things in special, belonging only in
peculiar to the Saints. And (say they) he only prayed for the unity of the
faithful, as a means tending to cause the world to believe that his sufferings
for all is of the same nature, whether men believe it or not. This is the
substance of what they say in the last answer page 7. and the first answer page
8.

In answer to which I shall briefly declare,

First, those for whom he prays, verses 6.11.15.17. are actual believers,
such as were for the present called of God out of the world, and given to Jesus
Christ, thus much he often times expresses in his prayer.

Secondly, those for whom he prays, verses 20.21, 22, 23. are such as should
afterward (that is, from that time to the end of the world) through the power
of Christ, in the ministry of the Gospel, believe in him.

And whereas, he says, in these verses, That the (world) may believe: He
herein aims chiefly at the conversion of the Gentiles, which he here calls
the world, as they are elsewhere called in other Scriptures, as standing in
opposition to the Jewish Church.

And whereas, he says, That the (WORLD) may believe: He does not leave the
matter as uncertain: Neither does this word (may) in this place signify any
such thing, as that they may believe, or they may not: But the words do carry
an undoubted certainty in them, and signify as much, as that the world shall
believe. And so much he faith in the 20. verse, I pray for them which shall
believe in me, through the word.

And whereas he says, That the world may believe that thou have sent me: we
are to understand, that according to the Scripture, To believe that the Father
has sent Christ, is really and truly to believe in Christ. Thus much Christ
teaches us in John 16.27. Where he thus witnesses of his Disciples, Ye have
loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. And again in this 7.
chapter verse 8. They have known surely that I came out from thee, and they
have belived that thou did send me: he means, That the world may believe in
him unto life everlasting. And therefore he enlarges himself in verse 23.
where he says. That the world may know that tho^ have sent me, and have loved
them, a^ thou have loved me.

Again, take notice, that this expression of Christ, that the world may
believe that thou have sent me is an entire petition in it self: and runeth
thus, Father, I pray that the world may believe that thou have sen^ me, and
have loved them as thou has^ loved me. And surely, the Father di^ hear, and
answer him in all things according to his prayer.

Lastly, take notice, that wherea^ he says in verse 9. I pray not for the
world, and yet here in verses 21. and 23. he does pray for the world: W^ are to
understand the world in these two places in a different sense. By the world in
verses 9. We are to understand such as live and walk and continue to live in
ignorance, disobedience and hatred against Christ These are called the world,
as standing in opposition to whom the Father calls, or draws unto Jesus
Christ; agreeable to that in John 15.18.19. And thus, he prays not for the
world, but for those whom the Father gives him out of the world verses 6.9.

By the world in verses 21.23. we are to understand (as I said before) the
Gentiles, which had not yet the Gospel of Christ preached amongst them, except
some first fruits of them. These are called the world, in opposition to the
Jewish Church, as being an outcast people hitherto. And for the world he here
prays, that they through the power of God, in the preaching of the Gospel,
may be drawn to believe in Christ, and enjoy the love of the Father in him.

What I have said, concerning these passages of Christ's prayer, does clearly
discover their interpretation of the same to be unagreeable to the mind of
Christ, both darkening the matter, and crossing the very end and power of
Christ's prayer. For is there any such thing pointed at in Christ's prayer,
(verses 21.23.) as that he only prays (as they say) for the unity of the
faithful, as means tending to cause the world to believe that his sufferings
for all is of the same nature, whether men believe it or not? I will only say
thus much, that there is not only much darkness in their own words, but that
they tend also to darken the words of the Lord Jesus.

Ninthly,

I answer,

Secondly, It is a gross mistake, and contrary to the truth of Scripture to
say, that Christ's sufferings and prayer are of equal extention for all.

Thirdly, whereas they say, that the sufferings and prayer of Christ for all,
are of equal extention, as a means tending to canse them to believe, and if
they do not, they are left without excuse: This is to make the sufferings and
prayer of Christ to be a weak means, without power: whereas they are mighty
and powerful for, and unto all those who are concerned in them, and not one
shall fail to enjoy the uttermost benefit of them (who according to the
abundant grace of God) are concerned therein.

Tenthly, they say,

I answer, I would know what difference they make between the payment of the
price, and the application of it. If a ransom be paid, is it not then applied?
What is payment but application? So that in affirming the price is paid for
all, they affirm that it is applied for the benefit of all. But if they say, It
is paid to the Father for all, though all have not the benefit of it, I answer,
It is a carnal and unrighteous distinction to say, that the Father has
received the full payment of the price for those to whom he does not powerfully
apply the saving benefit of the same. And what is this but to charge either
weakness or unrighteousness upon the most righteous and mighty God? as though
he should receive the payment of the price, or ransom, at the hands of Christ
for those, to whom he will not, or cannot powerfully apply the saving benefit
of the same?

And as for the Scriptures they allege, Heb. 2, 9. 1 Timothy 2.6. I have above in
their proper places showed the meaning of them.

And whereas they make such a difference between the giving of the price for
men, and to men: I have already declared, that the giving of the price for men
and to men, according to the Scripture, signifies the same thing.

Eleventhly, they say, Pet. 1.1. Matthew. 21.42. John 1.11. These things are
expressed by them in the 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. lines of page 12.

In answer to which, To whomsoever God gives faith, and so Christ. And again,
To them he gives with that faith and that Christ. And again, Although Faith and
Christ be not given to all.

Now certainly, here is a great mistake in putting Faith before Christ. But
concerning this, I will only say thus much, That God in giving Christ into the
heart of any man, gives him faith to receive him, or believe in him.

Secondly, whereas they say, It appears he suffered for all, because some for
whom he is given, do deny him: I will prove their Argument it self (according
to their sense) to be unsound, and then their conclusion from it, will further
appear to be unsound also. Their Argument is this, That some for whom Christ
is given, do deny him. This they would prove from 2 Pet. 2.1. Math. 21.42. John
1.11. that of Pet. seems the most strong for them, where the Apostle says,
There were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false
teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them. They take much hold of these words of Peter, They
deny the Lord that bought them. Concerning which Scripture in way of answer and
resolution,

First, I say, that this Scripture in it self, and being rightly understood,
is most holy, spiritual, and precious.

Secondly, I say, that all those, whom Christ the Lord buyeth, or redeemeth, he
redeemeth them perfectly and for ever: and not one of his redeemed ones shall
thus deny him, or be denied by him, but shall be enabled to own him, and shall
be owned by him unto everlasting, Psalm. 107.2. and 111.9. and 130.7.8. Heb.
10.38, 39. And therefore when Peter here says, They deny the Lord that bought
them, he does not mean that such persons are really and in truth the redeemed,
or bought ones of the Lord Christ: for that were to cross the truth of the
Scriptures, and the nature, power, and end of the redemption of the Lord Christ.

But thirdly, he means that these persons here spoken of, are bought or
redeemed in point of profession, not in truth and reallity: that is, they do
for a time, and it may be for a long time, profess themselves to be the bought
or redeemed ones of the Lord Christ: they are such as are much enlightened, and
know much concerning the way of righteousness, concerning the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, concerning his death and shedding of his precious blood: they do
for a time make show to be washed and cleansed from the sins and pollutions
of the world, and to cast up all such unclean ways like a filthy vomit: and
they make large profession of receiving the Commandments of God, and walking
in the ways of righteousness: and in respect of profession, they seem to be
living trees, and such as bring forth much fruit of knowledge, obedience and
righteousness: and upon a profession of knowledge and holiness, they desire
to join themselves with the Saints, and are received by them into the
fellowship of the body, walking with them in the ordinances and worship of the
House of God. In a word, they are very Saintlike in profession, making a large
confession of Jesus Christ, professing themselves to be the bought or redeemed
ones of the Lord Christ. But after some time (having not the faith nor love of
Christ within them, having no root in themselves, or having not the root of the
matter in them) in time of trial, and through covetousness, for the love of
gain, or of the wages of unrighteousness, they turn from the holy
commandment, they forsake the ways of truth and holiness, all their former
fruit of righteousness, love and obedience, now withers, and they now
appear to be indeed rotten and dead trees, whatsoever profession of life, and
fruitfulness they formerly made; they now turn again, like the Dog to their
vo^it, and like the sow that was washed, ^o their wallowing in the mire of sin,
and are like men that have forgot^en that they were once washed and ^urged (as
they once professed to be ^e) from their old ways of sin and uncleanness:
they scarce remember what a profession of righteousness they once made, but
return with greediness to lick up their old ^omit, and to wallow in the mire
of ^nne again: and whatsoever esteem ^hey did formerly profess to have ^f the
grace of God, they now make ^o other use of it, but to encourage them on in
ways of wickedness: and though they did once walk like ^aints, yet now they
make it manifest before all men that they never had a Saints heart, but were
then inwardly dogs and swine, even when they did outwardly walk like Saints:
Such a one in some respects was Judas, of whom the Scripture says, he was
guide to them that took Jesus, Acts 1.16.17.18. In a word, whereas they did
once make a flourishing confession of Christ, and di^ once profess Christ to
be their Lon^ and Savior, and themselves to b^ the Servants and redeemed ones
o^ Christ, they do now deny him, an^ dishonor him, and walk altogether
contrary to the love and obedience of the Lord Christ. And by reason (...)
these, and such as these, it has bee^ and is, that the way of truth is ev^^
spoken of. And thus I have shewe^ in what respects and under what c^^sideration
these men are said to be the bought, or redeemed ones of the Lo^^ Christ, to
wit, not in truth and rea^ty, as though it were indeed so: b^ in point of
profession, they did pr^fesse themselves to be so. And tho^ whom the Lord does
teach, to re^ with understanding, will easily understand in the perusal of
this whole second chapter, that which I have said herein is the very mind of
God. Hitherto also is agreeable many other Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.9. 1 Timothy
4.1.2. and 3.4.5. Heb. 10.25, 26, 27, 28.38.39. Acts 20.30. Jude 4. to the 20.
And amongst the rest, consider wearily that in Acts 20.30. Where Paul speaking
to the Church of Ephesus, he says, Of your own selves (mark that expression,
Of your own selves, Or from amongst your own company) shall men arise speaking
perverse, things to draw away disciples after them. And consider also that of
Jude, in verse 12. (where he speaking of the same men of whom Peter speaks,
who deny the Lord Jesus, as is manifest verse 4.) he says in the latter end of
that verse, They are trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead,
plucked up by the roots: that is, In respect of their natural estate, as
fallen in Adam, they were dead; as indeed, all his posterity, so considered,
are. This is the first death of these trees which Jude speaks of. But these
men being planted where the Gospel is preached, professed, and held forth in
power and simplicity, (by those who are the called of Jesus Christ) they take
upon them the profession of the Gospel, and for a time make a flourishing
confession, living Saint-like, appearing as though they were living trees,
bringing forth much outward fruit of knowledge and righteousness, forsaking
many sins, and doing many things in themselves holy, good and righteous: and
thus they appear like living, fruit-bearing trees: but after a while, (not
having life and root within) in time of trial, and for covetous ends, they
fall away from that profession, wither away by degrees in that love, knowledge
and righteousness which they once made profession of, until (after a while)
they be without fruit, bringing forth nothing but bitter, unrighteous and
deadly fruits. And this is the other, and so a double death, which Jude here
speaks of, which these trees are under the power of. And thus they are trees
whose fruits withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots.

Thus these Scriptures (with others of the like nature) do teach us that many
who have made a large and flourishing profession of Christ to be their Lord and
Savior, and themselves to be his servants and redeemed ones, have fallen from
that profession of Christ, denied him and walked altogether contrary to him:
But none of these Scriptures, nor any other, do teach that any who are Christ's,
his redeemed ones, receiving him, or believing in him, shall at any time (no
not one of them) thus deny him or be denied by him. I have been the longer upon
this place of Peter, comparing it with other Scriptures, especially that of
Jude (which is the very same with it) both that I might declare what is the
mind of God in them, and might also clear them from those false
interpretations, which some, who pervert the Scriptures, would put upon them.

Thus having cleared this place of Peter, I shall now proceed to the other two
Scriptures, to wit, Mat. 21.42. John 1.11. which they allege to prove, that
some for whom Christ is given do deny him.

As for that place of Mat. 21.42. where it is said, The stone which the
builders rejected, etc.

What serves this place unto,

And as for that place of John 1.11. where it is said, He came unto his own,
and his own received him not, we are to understand, flesh, because he was made
of them, or came from them: according to that, Romans 1.3. and 9.5. These indeed
Christ came and sent unto, and they, in respect of the generality of them,
received him not. But those who are Christ's own in a spiritual sense, that is,
those who are redeemed through him, drawn by him, and loved of him, they do
receive him, believe in him, love him, and persevere in this faith and love,
through his power, unto salvation John 13.1. And thus in opening these
Scriptures, I have discovered the unsoundnesse of their argument, their
misunderstanding of the Scriptures, and so consequently the corruptnes of the
conclusion which they draw from thence.

Twelfthly, It is resolved, this Doctrine, (to wit, of Christ's redeeming all
persons, dying for all persons) for (say they) it is a foolish Doctrine, and
enmity to the wisdom of every natural man, 1 Cor. 1.23. and 2.13. and 2.14.
Romans 8.7.8. And the light and understanding thereof (say they) is only had by
the power of the Spirit of God, 1 John 4.13.14. And all men naturally (say
they) are more averse to this then any other thing, John 5.44. Mat. 23.37. This
is expressed, by them in the 12.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 lines of page 13.

I answer, Christ's redemption of all persons, is in it self an unsound
Doctrine, a Doctrine of men, and not of Christ, and it is very pleasing to
corrupt nature, neither did I ever see or find Satan, or the world, or corrupt
nature opposing this Doctrine, simply as it is a doctrine: but I have seen by
experience that it is a very easy thing to entertain and peremptorily to hold
fast this opinion: yea, it is more easy and pleasing to corrupt nature, then
some other corrupt opinions are: yea, some that are godly are too easily
beguiled with it. Therefore their affirmation is unwarrantable, and the
Scriptures they allege are unrightly urged by them to that purpose.

Thirteenthly, they say, that the matter of free conveyance of power is offered
in the covenant of grace, which would be covneyed thereby, were it not opposed,
despised, or neglected. This is the substance of what is expressed, by them, in
the 17.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. lines of page 14.

In answer to which concerning the strangeness, unspirituallnesse, and
cloudinesse of these their expressions, I will say nothing. But whereas they
say, the matter of free conveyance of power is offered in the covenant of
grace: I say, that the power, grace, or mercy which is held forth in this
covenant, is absolutely, freely, and richly promised. And who knows not but
there is a wide difference between an offer, and an absolute promise? And I am
sure that whosoever are truly acquainted with this covenant, they will readily
acknowledge that such is the nature thereof, that whatsoever power, grace, or
mercy is contained therein, it is held forth by way of free and absolute
promise, and not of offer only.

And whereas they say, The power which is offered in the covenant, would be
conveyed to them, were it not opposed or neglected.

I answer, That there are none who have any part or share in this covenant,
but those with whom the Lord does freely make it. And as for all those with
whom he makes the covenant, he does powerfully subdue their ignorance, pride,
and rebellion, and gives them power to receive, and embrace, and hold fast the
grace and mercy (which according to the nature of the covenant) is therein
promised. Therefore they are much mistaken in the nature of the covenant of
grace: for I do not find offers only, but free and absolute promises in that
Covenant.

Fourteenthly, they say,

I answer, First, it is most certain, that all persons, by nature, are children
of wrath, or of eternal death; and whosoever believes this, they believe a
truth.

But secondly, to believe that there is an infinite love extended to all, is to
believe that which the word of truth does no where teach. That love which is
infinite, is a love without bound or limit, both in respect of the measure and
time of it. That which is infinite, is without end. Therefore whatsoever their
opinion, of Christ's dying for all persons, does necessarily tie them to beleve,
I am sure the Scripture does not teach us to believe so. And besides, great
absurdities and untruths does necessarily follow upon such belief: for then it
will certainly follow, that all persons shall enjoy the unspeakable love of God
unto eternity. And whereas they allege John 3.16. It is most certain, that
this Scripture does not teach us that there is an infinite love extended to all
persons from first to last. But because I have already opened the meaning of
this Scripture, I shall say no more of it in this place, but refer the Reader
to what I have abovesaid thereof in its proper place.

Fifteenhly, Question is, How shall I find that he has suffered for me? But
if I believe he has suffered for all, then I do necessarily believe that he
has suffered for me. And again (say they) not to believe this, it takes away
the certainty of faith from any man in respect of Christ: for if any man be
excluded from the benefit of his death, I may be the person as soon as any
other, and I have no ground to believe the contrary. And again (say they) No
persons have any true ground to believe that Christ has suffered for them,
otherwise then he is declared in Scripture to have suffered for all. And no
saving faith (say they) stands in opposition to this Doctrine of Christ's
suffering for the sins of all. These things are expressed by them in the 18,
19, 20, 21, 22 lines of p. 15. And in the 19, 20, 21, 22. lines of p. 16. And
in the 17.18, 19, 20, 21. 22, 23 lines of page 21.

I answer, First, of Jesus Christ, nor agreeable to the Scriptures rightly
understood. Therefore to make this the ground, or foundation of faith (as they
do) is to build upon a sandy foundation; And if the foundation be sandy, I am
sure the building cannot be strong.

Secondly, such a person is much to be questioned for the truth of his faith
(I say not for the strength of his faith but for the truth of it) who has no
other, or better ground to believe that Christ has suffered for him, then
this, that he has suffered for all persons. And it is much to be feared,
that such a one who thus speaks, and persists in it, has not yet felt the
lively and powerful workings of the Spirit of Christ within him, opening his
eyes, and drawing his heart to come to Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, although they say, That no man has any certain ground to believe
that Christ has suffered for him, and that he is redeemed by Jesus Christ,
except he believe that he has suffered for all persons.

Yet it is most certain, that a sinner, in whose heart and mind God is pleased
to reveal JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified, giving him to see the pretiousnesse
of CHRIST, and his need of him, drawing or calling him by his heavenly power to
receive CHRIST, or believe in him for remission of sins, and life everlasting,
teaching him to set a high price upon the righteousness of Christ, to embrace
it, to trust in it, and to account all things besides loss and dung, enabling
him withalll by the same power, sincerely to love Jesus Christ, to kiss his
Scepter, to confess his Name, to deny himself, to take up his cross daily
and follow Christ: I say, It is most certain, that such a person does freely
believe in Jesus Christ, he is a justified person through faith in Christ, he
is righteous in his righteousness, Christ is his, and he is Christ's, and he has
now no certain ground to believe, or to be assured, that indeed Jesus Christ is
his Redeemer, and he is one of the redeemed ones of Jesus Christ. And then when
God is pleased to go yet further, that is, to clear up to him, by the
teaching of his Spirit, the former gracious workings of God in him, and to
witness to his heart by the same Spirit, his reconciliation and Sonship, he
is now sweetly assured and persuaded, upon good ground, that Christ is his, and
he is Christ's, that Christ loved him, and gave himself for him, that he is
the Son of God in Christ, an heir of God, a joint heir with Jesus Christ.

These things that I have said, are agreeable to the word of God, and to the
clear experiences of many Christians, who are, and know themselves to be, the
redeemed ones of Jesus Christ, and yet see no ground from Scripture to receive
that opinion of Christ's dying for all persons. And as for them who are of that
opinion, and make it the foundation of their faith, I advise them to take heed,
that they build not their faith, hope, and comfort upon a sandy foundation. So
much for this.

Sixteenthly, That this Doctrine of Christ's suffering for all, is the subject
matter of the Gospel; and that without this, no man has any thing to preach to
the world, no glad tidings, no remission of sins, no doctrine of
reconciliation, no grace or peace at all. This is expressed by them in the 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 lines of page 17.

I answer, First, it is most evident and certain, that this Doctrine of Christ's
suffering for all persons, is not the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, nor the subject
matter of the Gospel, neither is such a thing found in the Gospel, nor in any
part of the word of God, rightly understood.

Secondly, It is strange, that no man has any thing to preach to the world, no
glad tidings, no remission of sins, no doctrine of reconciliation, except he
preach, that Christ has died for all persons, and redeemed all persons. I find
that the Preachers of the Gospel, of whom the Scripture makes mention, did
dispense or preach that one and the same Gospel in a diverse manner, or method,
according to the different estate of that people to whom they were to preach,
to wit.

Some of the Jews had a more special hand in betraying and crucifying the
Lord of life. Now in preaching to these, Their endeavor was to convince them
that this Jesus, whom they had crucified, was indeed the Son of God, the very
Christ, that holy and just one, whom God had raised from the dead, and set him
at his own right hand, there expecting until all his enemies be made his
footstool: And they did further teach them, That there was no way for them
whereby to obtain remission of sins and life everlasting, but only by this
Jesus whom they had crucified: and therefore they did earnestly exhort them to
return to him, and believe in him for remission of sins, that so they might
never any more be remembered against them, Acts, 2.22. to 39. and chapter 3.13.
to 20. and chap. 4.10.11.12. and chap. 5.29.30.31.32.33. and chap. 7.51. to 57.
And thus Christ preached himself to Saul, chapt. 9.4.5. Saul Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And he said who art thou Lord? And he said, I am Jesus,
(mark that, I am Jesus) whom thou persecutest. Whilst he is smiting of him to
the earth, he declares himself to be a Jesus, now ready to give him salvation
in himself, through faith in him.

Again the generallity of the Jews made their boast of their privileges of
the Law, that they were circumcised, they were Abraham's seed, and God had made
choice of them, above all other Nations of the earth, to be a people to
himself; They were very zealous in the observations of the Law, and trusted
that in the enjoyment of the Privileges, in the performance of the works, and
in the observations of the customs and ordinances of the Law, they should
obtain righteousness before God: for the Scripture says they went about to
establish their own righteousness, that is, they sought righteousness by the
privileges and works of the Law. Now in preaching to these, they did
endeavor to bring them off from that opinion which they had of these things,
and that confidence which they put in these things, declaring to them, with
much power and boldness, that there was no righteousness, nor salvation to be
obtained any other way, but only by the righteousness and grace of another,
to wit, the Lord Jesus, through faith in him: And that by him, all that believe
are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the
Law of Meses, Acts, 13.38.39. agreeable to that Romans 10.4.

Again, There were some from amongst the Gentiles, who did fear God, that is,
they were worshippers of God, they preached, and gave much Alms, and were very
devout in their conversation. Of this rank was Cornelius and all his house,
Acts 10.1.2. Such were they also to whom Paul speaks, Acts 13.16.26. Where you
may observe, that besides the men of Israel, the Children of the stock of
Abraham, he speaks to another sort of men amongst these, who did fear God;
that is, They did come together amongst the Jews to worship God. Such a one
also (as I conceive) was Lydia, before Paul did preach to her, The Scripture
says, She worshipped God. And such a one was that Ethiopian Eunuch, before
Philip was sent to him, He had been at Jerusalem for to worship. Now in
preaching to these they did endeavor to bring them off, not from the things
themselves, (orderly to be done) but from putting confidence in these things;
preaching remission of sins, and salvation to them only through faith in
Christ, that so they might not look for peace and reconciliation with God, by
these works of righteousness which they did, (though in themselves good, and
needful for other ends) but only by Jesus Christ, and faith in him. This is
evident from all the forementioned Scriptures, Acts 8.35. and 10.36. to 44. and
13.26. to 40. and 16.14. and 17.17.

Again, There were some amongst the Gentiles, who were eminent for wordly
wisdom, prudence and learning: they were great disputers and men of great
abilities. These did glory much in their wisdom and learning, and accounted
of most men, besides themselves, to be but fools: and as for the preaching of
Christ crucified, that was but a foolish thing in their apprehension. These are
commonly in the Scriptures called Greeks, or Grecians, such as are wise. These
are those of whom Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 1.19. to 30. Now in preaching to these,
or in disputing with them, They did endeavor to beat them off from that
opinion which they had of themselves, and from that esteem which they had of
their wisdom, learning and prudence: teaching them that to know Jesus Christ
and him crucified, is the greatest wisdom, and that all is nothing, except
they know Jesus Christ, and believe in him, Jer. 9.23.24. Acts 9.29. and
18.4.5. Romans 1.14.15.16.

Again, The generality of the Gentiles were people that were given to gross
Jdolatry, and other great impieties. These are in Scripture called Barbarians,
Scythians; and such as are unwise: For they were not eminent for wordly
Wisdom and learning, as the others were. Now in preaching to these, They did
endeavor to convince them of the vanity and sinfulness of these practices,
exhorting them earnestly to forsake these vanities, and to turn to the living
and true God, and to believe in his Son Jesus Christ, whom they did endeavor
to make known unto them. Acts 14.13. to 19. and 17.18. to the end, and 26.27.
to 24.1. These. 1.5. to the end.

Thus we see, That the Preachers of the Gospel, of whom the Scriptures make
mention, in preaching to the World, they did preach that one and the same
Gospel, in a diverse manner, or method, according to the different estate of
that people to whom they did declare the same. But in all this we do not find
(neither is it elsewhere found in the Scriptures) that they did declare to
them, that Jesus Christ suffered for the sins of all persons. But they did call
upon them, in the Name of Jesus Christ, to turn to him, to believe in him for
remission of sins; declaring to them that there is no way whereby men can
obtain salvation, but only through Jesus Christ: and that by him, whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins, and evelasting life. What I
have said herein is agreeable to the words of Christ in Luke 24.46.47. It
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. From whence we learn, That to preach the
Gospel to the World, or to the men of the world, it is to preach repentance and
remission of sins to them in the Name of Jesus Christ.

Now to preach repentance and remission of sins to the world in the Name of
Christ, it is to declare to them, and to call upon them in the behalf of
Christ, that they forsake and cast away all fleshly confidence, superstitious
vanities, and wicked practices, and turn to Jesus Christ, and believe in him
only for remission of sins: further declaring, That by him only, whosoever
believes in him shall have remission of sins.

But it must be observed, That such as preach repentance as relating to the
Law, as a legal work or duty, as a condition of righteousness, life and
salvation, as a preparation or qualification to Christ, or as something to be
done by us before we can have Christ, or believe in him unto remission of sins;
Such do not preach repentance and remission of sins in the Name of Christ,
they rather seek to drive men from Christ, and bottom them upon some other
foundation then Jesus Christ.

Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum: To preach the
Gospel to the World, it is to declare to them the death and resurrection of
Jesus Christ, and the authority which God has given him to judge the quick
and dead at his appearing, calling upon them and beseeching them, in the
behalf of Christ, to forsake all fleshly confidence, superstitious vanities
and sinful practices, to turn to Jesus Christ and believe in him only unto
remission of sins and everlasting life: further declaring to them, that there
is no way for them whereby to escapethe wrath of God, but only through faith
in Christ; and that through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission or sins, and the wrath of God ^yeth upon him, neither is there any
other way for him to escape the same. What I have said herein, we shall find
agreeable to many Scriptures, Mat. 4.17. Mark, 1.14.15. Mark. 6.12. compared
with Luke 9.6. John 3.14.15.16. Acts 2.38. and 3.18.19. and ^0.42.43. and
13.38.39. and 17.30.31. and 24.24.25. and 26.15. to 21. and 28.23.

Now when the Preachers of the Gospel have done this, when they have preached
to the World Christ crucified and risen from the dead, and have called upon men
to turn to Jesus Christ and believe in him for remission of sins, and have
declared to them, that there is no other Name whereby we must be saved, or
whereby we can escape the wrath of God, but only the Name of that Jesus which
was crucified, and is risen again from the dead: I say when they have done
this, they must leave the issue to the Lord, who only makes this Ministry
powerful to whom he pleases, giving them repentance, that is, turning them
from their iniquities unto Jesus Christ, inabling them to believe in him unto
remission of sins and everlasting life. And surely God has appointed the
Ministry, especially for this end, that by means thereof he might work faith
in all those whom he has ordained unto eternal life. Luke 10.6.7. Acts 3.26.
and 5.30.31. and 10.44. and 11.18. and 13, 47.48. and 16.14. and 28.24.28.

And thus, as the Lord has helped me, I have briefly declared, from the
Scriptures, what it is for the Messengers of Christ to preach the Gospel to the
World. But that Christ has suffered for the sins of all persons, that he has
redeemed all persons, that he has taken away the sins of all persons, that he
has redeemed all persons, that he has wrought reconciliation for all persons,
(as they say:) I find no where in the Gospel, neither is it a agreeable to the
Scriptures: And therefore to preach this, is not to preach the Gospel of
Christ, but something which men have added to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

And thus I have declared the chief mistakes and absurdities which I find
expressed by them in their several books, advising themseives to consider
what snares they are entangled in, and exhorting others to be ware least they
be ensnared with these or the like things.

The conclusion.

And now, in the conclusion of this Treatise, I shall briefly propound some few
re^sons further to prove, that this opinion, of Christ's suffering for all
persons, or redeeming all persons, is not the doctrine of Jesus Christ.

First, died, for them also he rose again, and for them he sits at the right
hand of God, and makes intercession for them. This fourfold golden chain is
so sure and strong that it can in no wise be broken or divided. It may, and is,
and must be destingvished: but it neither may, nor must be broken. This
fore-fold glorious work of the Son of God, Paul linketh together in one golden
chain, Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea,
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. And upon this ground he triumphs in behalf of
himself and others who have a part in the same love of Christ, saying, Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ. And Esaiah says, He powered out his
soul unto death, Esa. 53.
and he was numbered with transgressors, and he bear the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors. where the prophet linketh these together,
He bear the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. Those
whose sins he bare, for them also he made intercession. And the Apostle John
teaches us, that those for whom Christ is the propitiation, he is for them
also an Advocate with the Father. 1 John 2.1.2. says he, My little children,
if any of us do sin (though let us take heed of sinning) We have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: how does he prove that? says he,
He is the propitiation for our sins: that is, He who is the propitiation, or
reconciliation for our sins, he is without doubt our Advocate also with the
Father. And indeed propitiation and advocation are inseparable benefits: he
that has an interest in the one has an interest in the other also.
Propitiation is the ground of advocation, and advocation is a fruit necessarily
and inseperably flowing from propitiation. Neither is advocation without
propitiation, neither does propitiation go alone, to any persons, without the
power and benefit of advocation. And therefore those who go about to divide
advocation from propitiation, they pervert the Scriptures, and divide Christ.
And again Paul witnesses, that those who have a part in the death of Christ,
they have a part in his resurrection also, Romans 4.25. He was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our justification.

From all this that has been said, it is manifest, that whosoever have a part
in the death of Christ, they have a part in his resurrection, in his sitting at
the right hand of God, and in his intercession also. And is this any less then
salvation? Those who have a part in these things, are they not saved? Hence I
conclude, that seeing all persons have not a part in the benefit of his
resurrection, advocation, or intercession at the right hand of God, neither
have they a part in the benefit of his death, or sufferings: for these benefits
are inseparably linked together: they that have a part in the one, have a part
in the other also.

Secondly, Those whom Jesus Christ redeemeth, he redeemeth them as he is a
Priest, a King and a Prophet. These are inseparable benefits, whosoever has a
part in one, has a part in all: for though they must be distinguished, they
must not be divided. And thus indeed, the Son of God is a complete Savior and
Redeemer. The Scripture does not teach us, that Christ is a Redeemer, or
Savior, as he is a Priest only, (to shed blood, or to offer sacrifice) but as
he is a King and Prophet also, applying to us the benefit of his Priesthood or
bloodshed, ruling ih us, and teaching us the things which concern our peace. It
is said of Christ, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.
And what was this Melchisedec? He was first by interpretation, King of
righteousness, and after that also, King of Salem, which was King of peace. So
that such a Priest Christ was, a Kingly Priest, a ruling Priest, a teaching
Priest, a Priest with a Crown upon his head, and a Scepter of righteousness
in his hand. And thus indeed Christ is a perfect and complete Savior: Neither
is he a Savior to ^ey in point of Salvation otherwise then as he is a complete
and perfect Savior to them, this thing Esaiah teaches, when he says, Esa. 53.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servont justify many: for he shall bear
their iniquities. Where it is evident, that these to whom he is a Priest,
bearing their iniquities; to them he is a Prophet also instructing them in the
knowledge of himself unto justification. Thus, he is a Ransom, a Redeemer, a
Savior, and no otherwise. And hence it appears, that he shed not his blood
for all persons, neither have all a part in him, as he is a Priest, seeing that
by his Kingly and prophetical power, he does not apply to them the benefit of
his Priesthood: for these are inseparable benefits, those who have a part in
one, have a part in all: and they who have not a part in all, have a part in
none: and those who go about to divide these, they divide Christ.

Thirdly, Christ shed his blood for none but those upon whom he sprinkles the
same, to the purging of their conscience, and the remission of their sins.
Neither does the Lamb of God any otherwise take away the sins of any, or
redeem any, but by sprinkling his blood upon them. Neither does his blood any
otherwise take away our sins, but as it is sprinkled upon our conscience by the
Spirit of God, drawing our hearts to believe in him. Neither did he shed his
precious blood for any (nor for any other end) but for those upon whom he
sprinkles the same for remission of sins. This is most evident from those
paternes of heavenly things under the Law: For when Moses had spoken every
precept according to the Law, he took the blood of Calves and of Goats, with
water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and SPRINKLED both the book and the
people, saying, This is the blood of the Testament which God has enjoined to
you. Moreover, HE SPRINKLED with blood both the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels
of the Ministry. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, that
is, with the sprinkling of blood: and without shedding of blood, that is,
without the sprinkling of the blood which is shed, there is no remission, Heb.
9.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. And in the 13. verse of the same chapter it is said, That
the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, SPRINKLING the
unclean, did sanctify to the purifying of the flesh. And whosoever shall read
with understanding, what the holy Spirit witnesses in the Scriptures ( Exodus
12.7.13. and 24.5, 6, 7, 8. and 29.16.20, 21. Levit. 1.5.11. and 3.2.2.8.13.
and 4.6, 7, 17, 18, 25, 26, 30, 31. and 5.9, 10. and 7.2. and 8.15, 18, 19, 23,
24. and 9.12.18. and 14.6.7. and 19, 17 18, 19.) they shall find that the
people were legally cleansed by the sprinkling of blood, and almost all things
under the Law were purged by the sprinkling of the blood shed; and without
sprinkling or application of the blood shed, there was no remission or
atonement. Now if it was necessary that the paterns of heavenly things should
be thus purged, to wit, by the sprinkling or application of blood: then
(without doubt) the things themselves (of which those was a pattern) are so
purged also: that is, there is no taking away of sin, no reconciliation,
redemption, or atonement wrought for any, but by the sprinkling or application
of the blood of Christ upon them. Hence it is, that the blood of Christ is
called the blood of sprinkling, 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 12.24. Neither is it any other
way of use to us, neither does it any other way speak good for us before God,
but as it is sprinkled upon our conscience by the power of the Spirit.
Therefore Esaias says, Esa. 52.15
He shall SPRINKLE many Nations, that is, he shall sprinkle his blood upon
them: For that which has not been told them shall they see, and that which they
have not heard, stall they understand. And thus indeed Christ does redeem or
purchase us with own blood. sprinkled with the blood of Christ. Neither does
his blood any other way redeem, purchase, reconcile, or make atonement, but as
it is the blood of sprinkling. Wherefore it is most certain, that all persons
are not redeemed, or reconciled by the death or bloodshed of Jesus Christ,
seeing he shed his blood for none, but those upon whhom he sprinkles the same,
to the purging of their consciences, and remission of their sins. His blood is
the blood of sprinkling.

Fourehly, the End of Christ's death or sufferings, was not to redeem or save
any by the halves, but fully and for ever to redeem and save. And surely, the
Son of Man did not fail to fulfill what was the End of his dying. to work a
half redemption, or salvation, but to work a perfect redemption and salvation.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners. He does not say, Half to save them, but
to save them: that is, fully to save them, to save them as Paul was saved: for
such a saving he there speaks of. And Christ thus witnesses of himself, The
Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost; that is, to find
out, and fully to save lost sinners; to save them as Zacheus was saved; for
such a seeking and saving he there speaks of. Esa. 53.
And Esaias witnesses, that the very End of the travel of Christ's soul was
to bring forth a seed. Says he, When thou shall make his soul an offering for
sin; he shall see his seed. And again, He shall see of the travel of his
soul, and shall be satisfied. This is a glorious mystery. Why did the Son of
God suffer such childbearing pangs? Why did he undergo such a painful
travel? Was it not to bring forth a seed? Was not this the very end? It is
therefore most certain, that the very end of the death of Christ, was to bring
forth a seed, to work a full redemption, to save sinners; that is, Esa. 42.6.7.
and 49.6, 8, 9. Acts 3.26. and 5.31. Romans 11.26.27. Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.24. and
2.18. 1 Ioh. 3.5. and 4.9.
to heal them of their blindness, pride, rebellion, obstinacy; to deliver
them from the power of sin and Satan, to make them alive, to bring them to
God, to enable them to believe in him unto remission of sins, and to carry
them on in believing, by his power unto salvation. This is the redemption, and
this the salvation which Christ came into the world to work. This was the very
end of his dying.

And I say further, That as the Son of God did come into the world, and
suffered death for this very end: so he did not fail to fulfill the same: For
he was every way prepared to do the work: he wanted neither willingness,
ability, nor faithfulness to do the work most perfectly. Hence it is that the
Scripture thus witnesses of him, Psa. 82.19. Esa. 63.1.
I have laid help upon one that is MIGHTY. And it is said of him, He is mighty
to save. And Zacharias speaking of his power calls him, Aa born of Salvation'
which God has raisen up for us.

Neither was his Willingness and faithfulness less then his power: For he
witnesses himself, Ioh. 4.34. Psalm. 40.
My mea^ is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. And in
another place he says, Lo, I come, (in the volume of thy book it is written of
me) I delight to do thy will, O my God. And Esaias speaking of him, Esa.
53.10 John 17.4
says. He did prrsper in the work which he came to do. And to put all out
of doubt, Christ further witnesses of himself, I have finisted the work which
thou gave me to do.

Now then, if this was the very end of Christ's coming into the world, and of
his suffering in the world, To work a full, perfect, and eternal redemption:
and if he did not fail to fulfill and finish this work: if he did prosper
in it: (for so the Scripture says, By his own blood he entered in once into
his Holy place, having obtained eternal redemption:) men surely, they are much
mistaken, who say, that JESUS CHRIST died for all persons, and that he has
redeemed all persons: Seeing that all those whom Christ has redeemed, he has
redeemed them with a perfect and everlasting redemption: And this was the very
end of his death or sufferings.

Fifthly, Reconciliation, Redemption, Atonement, Remission of sins,
Justification, are in the Scripture sense one and the same fruit, or benefit
flowing from the death of CHRIST, through faith in him: and they are usually in
the Scripture put one for another. Let the Reader diligently consider these
Scriptures. Romans 5.8.9.10.11. Ephesians. 1.7. Colossians 1.14.21.22. 2 Corinthians.
5.18.19. In which last place the Apostle says, All things are of God, who has
reconciled us to himself by JESUS CHRIST. And whereas ^hee says in the
twentieth verse, We pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled unto God: he
means, We beseech you to believe in Jesus Christ unto reconciliation, or
remission of sins. Neither are we to understand this, as though those to
whom he writes it, were now enemies, or unreconciled ones; (for it is against
the scope and nature of the Epistle so to understand it; for it is certain, he
writes to them as believers in Christ, such as were reconciled to God through
faith in Christ.) But he here puts them in mind, that when they did
formerly preach the Gospel to them, they came to them as the Ambassadors of
Christ, with the Message of Christ, beseeching them to believe in Christ Jesus
unto reconciliation, or remission of sins.

Now then, if reconciliation, redemption, atonement, remission of sins, not
imputing of sins, justification, be in the Scripture sense one and the same
fruit flowing from the death of Christ, through faith in him: and that it is
usual in the Scripture to put one for another, as the understanding Reader may
well perceive: Then surely, redemption, atonement, reconciliation by Christ, is
another thing then many took it for. And it is most sure, that Christ died for
those only who do receive redemption, reconciliation, atonement, remission of
sins, justification by Jesus Christ.

Thus through the grace and help of GOD, I have finished what I intended in
handling these things, as also in declaring some Reasons from the Scriptures to
prove that JESUS CHRIST did not shed his blood, make an atonement, or work
redemption for all persons. And yet it is most certain (as I have before
declared) that there is a glorious Gospel, according to the command of Christ
to his Messengers, to be preached by them to all nations; Which Gospel he is
about to clear from all those mists of darkness which do yet be-dimme the
splendour of it: And then shall the glory of it shine forth so clearly in the
mouth of his Messengers, that many who sit in darkness, shall, through the
power of God in their Ministry, be brought to the knowledge and faith of the
Lord Jesus.

Who so is wise, and shall observe these things: even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

FINIS.

