CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING THE LITURGY OE THE CHVRCH of ENGLAND. In reference to
His Majesty's late Gracious Declaration, And in order to an happy UNION in
Church and State.

By JOHN GAUDEN, D. D. Bishop Elect of Exceter.

The second Edition.

Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit,
etc.

(...)

. Cl. Al. De Liturgia Anglicana: Quem librum proprium and perfectum omnis
Divini cultus judicem and magistrum esse jussimus.

Lib. Ref. Leg. Eccl. sub Edv. 6. and reg. 5. LONDON: Printed by J. G. for John
Playford at his shop in the Temple, 1661.

Considerations touching the Liturgy or Book of Common Prayer in the Church of
ENGLAND, etc.
IT is not to be doubted by any but those who are either ignorant of His
Majesty's native clemency and Christian charity, His Majesty's late Declaration
is no disesteem of the English Liturgy.
or enemies to his and all our Tranquillity, That His Majesty's design in that
indulgent Declaration, was not to show any disaffection or disesteem in His
Majesty toward the ancient and excellent Liturgy of the Church of England,
which was His companion and consort in all His distresses, and which still is
the daily rule and measure of His Majesty's public Devotions; as it has been
of His Royal Fathers, of blessed memory, and all His princely Progenitors since
the Reformation: But this temporary condescension was only in order to compose
at present the minds of all His good Subjects to some calm and Christian
temper, until such further expedients might be applied by His Majesty's Wisdom
and Charity as should not only allay former civil differences, but wholly
remove the uncomfortable dissentions of His Loyal Subjects of the Church of
England, in so great a concern as that is of Religion; yea, and of the noblest
part of Religion, Devotion; and the most eminent way of Devotion, public
Worship, of the solemn Service of God in His Church, by Prayers, Praises, and
Sacramental celebrations; which are the great characters and confirmation of
true Christians communion with God, with their Savior, and the blessed Spirit,
and by the grace of these with one another.

The Liturgy as new and unwonted to many, makes them less esteem it.
Hence His Majesty's gentleness and prudence has been pleased at present to
declare His royal pleasure, for remitting a while the penal necessity of using
the Liturgy, upon consideration that many of His good Subjects have for many
years been unaccustomed to it, and being unacquainted with it, may the less
value it; others have been unjustly, yet vehemently, prejudiced against it; and
some are less satisfied with it only for some words and expressions in it,
which they do not so well understand, and therefore are scrupulous to use them
in the way of Worship to God.

But it were too much to mistake and abuse His Majesty's Candor and Clemency,
to imagine that His Majesty had hereby dispensed with all legal, moral and
obediential ties to the use of in any part of the Liturgy: Higher ties lie upon
good Christians and Subjects than fear of punishment.
by which less imperious, but more ingenious bands, good men and good subjects
are more obliged to the use of what is good and holy, apt and indisputable in
it, (as the main of it is,) than if the fear of punishment lay upon them; which
is very servile, and below either a good Christian or a good Subject; except
where punishment is submitted to rather than sin committed; or good is therefore
omitted, because of an inseparable adherence of evil to it. Which sure cannot
be the ground of some Ministers totally neglecting to use, not only the whole
Liturgy, but even the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments, the three Creeds,
the Confession of sins, and the Church Chatechisme; all which are either holy
and necessary, or very wholesome and convenient for the Church of Christ.

It Is true, some that are reputed sober, A review of the Liturgy desired by
some learned and sober men.
learned and Loyal Ministers, in order to a firm Peace and Fraternal Union,
have for themselves and others humbly craved of His Majesty a serious review of
the Liturgy, yet no further than some modest and discreet variations or suitable
additions: Such as still retain for the main the former excellent matter and
method of it, without any discomposing or dissolving the whole; much more
without any rude despising of it, or endeavor to destroy it. For, in earnest,
The mischiefs of total change or utter abolition of the Litur^y.
such insolent and enormous changes may not in Piety or Policy be permitted,
because, First, they would most undeservedly reproach the wisdom, and blemish
the piety of the first Martyrly Composers of it: Next, they would as unjustly
as impudently disparage the Judgment and Devotion of the whole Church of
England, its Princes, Parliaments, Ministers and People, who duly and
comfortably served God, and maintained the Reformed Christian Religion in the
use of the Liturgy, even then when this Church was most flourishing in peace
and piety: Lastly, they would unreasonably damp and discourage the present Zeal
and Devotion of the greatest and chiefest part of this Nation, who are much
pleased and profited by the use of the Liturgy; The Liturgy esteemed and used
by the learnedest Non-con^^^mists of old.
which heretofore was highly approved and conscionably used, even by most of
those learned and godly men, Ministers and others, who in some things Ritual
and Ceremonial were either more scrupulous or less conformable.

Yea, (...)
His sacred Majesty could not but in all reason expect, that all learned and
godly Ministers with their people would the rather apply themselves to a
d^screet and devout use of it, in those parts of which they are satisfied, so
as might best express their grateful sense of His Majesty's tenderness and
indulgence to them in some others, which are rather verbal then material
Scruples and dissatisfactions.

Many do the rather apply to the use of the Liturgy.
Which Religious, Loyal and Ingenuous principle to my knowledge has so
prevailed with some very able and godly Ministers in London, and elsewhere,
that they have, according to His Majesty's desires, intents and expectation,
presently applied themselves to the use of the Liturgy in their respective
Congregations; being well satisfied themselves, and having fully convinced the
best and soberest, yea the most of their people, not only of its lawfulness by
Gods and Man's Laws, but also of its usefulness and fitness for this Church:
Although they did not heretofore use it, while there was no power that would
protect it and them, all things being run to Faction and Confusion, Tyranny and
Anarchy under the pretensions of Liberty and Reformation; ought not to extend
beyond the Laws of God and and man, by which the peace and welfare of Church
and State are preserved.

It is unworthy of Ministers to be now more averse from it.
So that for any worthy Ministers and sober people to be therefore more restive
(now) and averse from the use of the Liturgy at all, because of His Majesty's
clemency, is a most unexcusable moroseness, especially when they heretofore did
use it, and are still satisfied in their Consciences of the lawfulness and
expediency of it: yea, and they were disposed to have used it immediately
before the Declaration came out, in case they had been required to it according
to Laws in force, rather then for default to have been punished. For these men
to have evil eyes against the Liturgy, because the King has a compassionate
eye to some men's infirmity; for them still to foment the Anti-liturgical humor
of some men, and instead of closing those wounds, (into which the Kings charity
pours Balm) to rip and tear them up, or to widen and exasperate them, is
such a part of peevishness and ingratitude, that it looks too like Schismatical
petulancy and pride; from which dross it is high time to have all our hearts
purged, after so long trial in Gods fiery furnace; to be sure the very
appearance and show of such a frowardness does not become any good Protestant
or worthy Minister, who has no greater objection against the Liturgy, then
this, that he fancies he could in some words or phrases mend it, or put some
alias's to it and additions, which may be infinite.

Small faults or verbal defects are very venial in any things of humane
constitution, and very far from making them unlawful, merely because they are
not for word, or phrase, or form, the best that may be: It is in things of
pristine use in Religion that are of true and solid worth for faith, morality,
method and decency, as it is with some good Jewels of price, but of antique
work for their setting or fashion; their plainness and antiquity gives so much
value to them, because though they seem less curious and modishly polite, yet
they are furthest from novelty or affectation of finery.

Least of all excusable are those Ministers who out of a little point of
reputation among some people (rather weak then wise, Popular repute should be
no impediment to Ministers use of the Liturgy.
and to be pitied more then imitated) do still sacrifice their judgments (that
I say not their Consciences) to their credits, and out of a fear or lothnesse
to offend some people, (whom they might easily convince and satisfy, as well
by their examples as by their arguments,) they make no Conscience to deprive
not only the public of peace, but the people and themselves, as Ministers, The
need some have of the Liturgy.
of the benefit of the Liturgy; when possibly they most stand in need of it,
either to help their frequent infirmities, or to restrain their popular and
desultory levity; or lastly, to set bounds of discretion, decency, charity and
piety to their extravagancies, even in public ^olemn devotion and Sacramental
celebrations; which sometimes to my knowledge are such, as are no way becoming
the public worship of God, or the honor of the Church of Christ, or the
sanctity of true Religion, or the venerable Majesty of God* All which are much
abased and slighted, yea, oftentimes even blasphemed, by the rudeness,
weakness, and familiarity of some Ministers devotions; whose selfe-confidence
abhors all bounds or prescripts but those which their own various fancies,
troubled inventions, and confused judgments set to those duties which they love
to perform as they list, though to the little benefit of the sillier sort of
people, and to the great scandal of the wiser, who cannot tell how to say a
judicious and fiduciary Amen to those extemporary, rude, confused, and yet
eager effusions which some men vent, either with too much facility and fluency,
or too much pumping and contention; And if they be so sober as to fashion to
themselves set forms of devotion in all public duties, as many of them now
do, it is too much arrogance to esteem their private and single composures
better then what has been duly weighed and approved by the whole Church, and
confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, in the most screne times and tempers.

No compare between the Liturgy and Directly.
From which while some men have of late years affected to recede, and in stead
of an excellent true-born Liturgy to bring in their useless, suposititious,
loose and illegitimate Directory, no tongue can express into what a wilderness
of sin, folly and affectation both Ministers and people have run, and with what
fiery Serpents they have been stung, which venomous inflammations and humors
nothing is so probable to heal, as the setting up the Liturgy again; which some
have fancied to be an Idol, and so have studied to make it Nehustan, when
indeed it is more like the Ark of God, by restoring of which to its place in
Shiloh, the Philistines were healed of the shameful Plagues they suffered by
reason of their Mice and Emrods.

Hence it is, That the desires of the most learned, The esteem and desire of
the most and best people of England for the Liturgy.
judicious, and best-affected of His Majesty's Subjects of all qualities in
England are, that neither public Holy duties, nor Sacramental mysteries, nor
their own Consciences, nor the Churches honor, nor the Majesty and unity of the
Reformed Religion, nor the public peace and safety may any longer be exposed
to, and indeed adventured upon, such hazards of private Ministers varietys and
uncertainties; The incoveniences of some men's devotions in public.
which are many times very flat dull and indevout; other while deadly tedious
and of a confused length, (like a great Skain of Yarne, course and snarled;)
sometimes they are so dubious between wind and water, Sense and Nonsense,
Faction and Sedition, Boldness and Blasphemy, that it makes sober Christians,
who have a due reverence of the Divine Majesty, dread to hear them; others of
looser tempers, not so much fear as they laugh at, scorn and abhor such
incongruous ways of Worship and Religion, in which all things sacred, and the
eternal Salvation of poor souls, most miserably depend upon nothing but private
Ministers opinions and spirit, attended (God knows) too often in the ablest and
best of them with many indispositions and indiscretions, excesses and defects.

The end and use of Liturgies in the Church, both ancient and moden.
For the pious and prudent avoiding of which, the ancient Churches from the very
first Century, did use such public wholesome forms of sound words in their
Sacramental celebrations especially, and afterward in other holy
Administrations or public Duties, as made up their solemn, devout and
pathetick Liturgies: Which paterns all modern and reformed Churches of any
renown have followed, according to the many Scriptural examples and expressions
in set forms of prayers, Praises, Psalms, Confessions and Benedictions,
commended to us by holy men in all Ages, and by Christ himself, whose most
absolute Prayer suffered of late a strange and unheard of Ostracisme in many
Congregations of England, out of an ametrie or vulgar transport against all set
forms, though of Divine institution, and without which of old (throughout the
Christian world) no consecration in any Sacrament was thought complete or duly
performed, unless this most perfect Prayer were added to the words of
Institution. Hence it was thought fit to be repeated in every distinct Office
or Service of the Church of England; to the causeless offense of many simple
people, who make it a vain repetition, for want of a renewed intention or
constant devotion in their own hearts; as they counted the Liturgy, a dull
manner of Worship, when the dullness indeed was in their own spirits; as they
may as easily find in reading of the same Scriptures, which are divinely
inspired, and are far from any deadness or dullness in themselves.

Church-unity and solemnity in Christian Doctrines Preserved by their Liturgies.
Certainly the design and use of all our Liturgis, old and new, was not only to
keep all the members of the same Church and polity in one holy harmony, and to
secure the unity of Faith and Doctrine, which were often tainted by ill tempered
passions and courser kind of devotions: but also by the joint wisdom and
devotion of the Church they sought to preserve the sanctity and solemnity of
Holy duties from the contagion and deformity of private Ministers frequent
infirmities, either in their invention, judgment, memory or utterance; all
which ought to be avoided, as much as may be, in public celebrations of
Christian mysteries.

Nor may any Ministers single abilities be compared (especially when
extemporaneous) to that sociall and concurrent sufficiency of gifts and graces,
Ministers single abilities far short of the Liturgy.
of wisdom and devotion, which may be presumed in the spirits of the Prophets,
united and piously improving their joint abilities to the common stock of Gods
glory, and the Churches edification, while they wisely weigh, measure and fix
according to the Word of God (which is the only standard of true Religion both
in Doctrine and Devotion) the foundations of Faith, and the superstructures of
Worship, by an humble obedience, holy fervency and unanimous harmony, so firm,
complete and uniforme, that they shall least receive any prejudice, detriment,
disparagement or diminution from any Ministers weakness, depravedness or
indisposition; on which they are no more to be ventured, than the Ark upon a
Cart which should be carried on the Priests shoulders.

The established and uniforme use therefore of a well composed Liturgy, The
si^nal benefits arising from an uni^rme ^y in the Church.

In (...).


has very many great and good influences upon true Religion and every Church:

1. First it conduces much to the more solemn, complete, August and reverent
Worship of the Divine Majesty in Christian Congregations: where otherwise the
most sacred and venerable mysteries must be exposed to that rudeness and
unpreparednesse, that barrenness and superficialnesse, that defect and
deformity, both for matter and manner, judgment and expression, to which every
private Minister is daily subject, as late experience has taught us. Certainly
societies of men and Christians owe a Solemn Comely Worship in public
services to God, beyond those in private Closets; proportionable to their
dignity and eminency above single persons or families.

The Liturgy a great defense to true Doctrine as Christian.
2. Secondly, a Liturgy is a most excellent means to preserve the truth of
Christian and Reformed Doctrine, by the consonancy of public Devotions; into
which other ways corrupt minds are prone to infuse the sour leven of their
own corrupt Opinions.

A Liturgy much advances Christian Unity.
3. A Leturgy is necessary for the holy harmony and sweet communion of all
Christians, in National as well as Parochial Churches; while thereby they are
all kept in one mind and spirit, praising the same things, and cheerfully
saying Amen to the same praises or petitions. A little spark of difference in
Religion is prone to kindle great dissentions among Christians; nor does any
thing more quench the heat of Disputation, than the cool and gentle dewes of
uniforme Devotions; when Obs. and Sols. are resolved into Amens or So be it is;
which are still the seals of charity and mutual love or consent.

A Liturgy well composed and settled is most satitfactory to the most judicious
people of England.
4. Liturgical form and use is not only of great benefit and comfort to the
more knowing, judicious, and well-bred sort of Christians, but highly to their
security, and to the Holy and humble composure of their spirits in the Worship
of God; who otherwise are prone not only amidst the public devotions,
curiously to censure, but scoffingly to despise, yea, many times to laugh at;
and at best to pity or deplore the evident defects and incongruities, which
appear in many Ministers odd expressions and incongruous ways of officiating,
according to their several opinions, humors, or abilities; Hence not only
distraction but indevotion, yea great irreverence and profaneness do follow;
men of quick fight and acute understandings, being made to despise and abhor
even these holy things of God, when so unholily, at least unhamsomely handled.

5. But above all, A Liturgy most necessary for the meaner and simpler sort of
Christians.
a constant and complete Liturgy mightily conduces to the edification and
salvation, as well as unanimity and peace of the meaner sort of people; to whom
daily variety of expressions in prayer, or Sacraments, is much at one with
Latin Service, little understood, and less remembered by them. They are still
out, and to seek, when a new Minister officiates, yea and when the same; if he
affect varity of words, where the duty is the same: Alas (as I have often
observed) when poor Boys and Girls, (who have no institution of Religion from
their ignorant Parents, or Masters and Dames) when these (whose souls are
precious) begin first to gape upon the Minister in Religious duties, and to
see, as well as hear a Sermon;) which way can they in populous places be
brought to or built up in Christian principles of Religion, without some easy,
clear, and constant summary or set from of wholesome words, and sound doctrine,
in the Catechism and Liturgy, or Common prayer; frequently repeated to them,
and so inculcated on their minds and memories? For want of which, what sober
Minister sees not and grieves not to see, how of late years, ignorance,
profaneness, faction, irreverence, superstition, scandal of manners, and all
villainy of opinions as well as of practice (...) To remove this scruple, I
conceive that this merely passive regeneration, by the grace of God in Christ,
of which an Infant baptized is partaker, is sufficient for its salvation in
point of taking away the imputed guilt of Original sin by Adam, if it dye
without any actual sin: But if it live to wilful actual sin, it must have a
further active work of regeneration, by an actual faith and repentance, without
which it is sure there is no salvation for knowing, malicious, or presumptuous
actual sinners. The passive baptismal regeneration may suffice to take away
Original sin, as to guilt and penalty in Infants, and to fit them for heaven:
When from being born of flesh and blood, yea children of wrath, and death and
damnation by nature, they are by Christian baptism, instated into a relation
and condition of Grace, life and salvation, by the Spirit and Merits of the
second incarnate Adam, Christ Jesus, Mere passive grace and regeneration
suffices the infant as to that state.
effectually applied in baptism to take away the sin of the first Adam derived
to them without their actual fault. But this baptismal grace and passive
regeneration or seminal principle, and spark, if afterward smothered and
quenched by actual and presumptuous sin, will not alone, as I conceive,
suffice to save an adult Christian, under another guilt though baptized in
infancy; unless there be an (...), a further renewing and reviving by actual
faith and repentance, in which he is a worker together with the grace of God.
That first little spark and degree of grace baptismal as fire, will serve to
take tinder which is dry, and apt to kindle; but it will not take or continue
in grosser materials; nor on the same tinder, if it be grown more damp and wet;
Nor but that the same first spark of regenerative grace received in Baptism
may continue in the soul, as only raked up in the Embers of childish and common
infirmities, but not wholly quenched or extinguished by malicious actual sins;
which are ( vastantia and desolatoria) of a wasting and quenching nature; as
much water is to a weak and little fire.

But in case it should be quite put out, After actual sin there must be actual
Faith and Repentance.
as to the comfort and virtue of the first baptismal grace, yet the relation
and visible mark of Adoption by Baptism put upon an infant as Gods child by
profession, and within the bosom of the Church or flock of Christ, does still
give it both means, capacity and aptitude, for that actual renovation by faith
and repentance, beyond what can be had out of the Church of Christ, and without
which the Baptismal passive regeneration, what ever it is, as to it its first
operation, will not suffice to such a sinners salvation: As we see the same
beams of the Sun will not burn when weak and scattered, which united,
presently kindle fire in matter that is apt to burn: so may be the several
gardual operations of Gods grace proportionable to the subjects to which they
are applied; as that heat will melt soft Wax, which will not stir the hard.

If I may have leave to illustrate these spiritual things by things temporal, I
conceive, that the Baptismal grace and favor, whereof Infants are capable, and
wherewith they are duly invested in that Sacrament, seems to be proportionable
to that civil right which an Infant may have in Law settled upon it, as to any
honor, filiation, estate, place or privilege; either by adoption, donation,
joint purchase, or any other investiture; unto which some Condition, by way of
Fine, Acknowledgement, change of Name, paying of Homage, is annexed; in order
to actual possession and enjoyment of its profits, (as a taking of it up by way
of Livery and seisin) when come to an age of understanding or use of reason,
either at first years, or at any other time during their life.

The Infant has in Law a present right to that Favor, Honor or estate even
in its ignorance and infancy, which none can disseise it of; and if it dies in
that state of infancy, it dies with that Title, Honor, Gift or Privilege
actually added to its person and name: If it live to years of reason, it has a
right to, and capacity of, actual Owning, Demanding, Taking up, Possessing and
enjoying that estate and honor upon the annexed Condition at any time
performed by it; either at its first understanding of its relation and right
wherewith it is invested; or any time after in all its life, Performing the
Condition required: If it neglects its primeve advantages, and never in all its
life makes claim of its right, Estate and honor, nor performs the Condition;
the failer is not by reason of any nuility in the first Right, Donation,
Investiture, Adoption Purchase or Conveyance made by another to that person in
its infancy; but it is wholly from his own Folly, Sottishness, meannesse of
Spirit, and other diversions, which kept him now grown, from considering,
valuing, challenging and assuming his original right, and from performing at
any time those Conditions, for which he was naturally, civilly and morally
enabled.

In like manner Baptismal grace rests upon Infants as a Christian honor and
mark of Gods love or favor in Christ, sufficient for the Holiness and
happiness of them if they dye in that state, which is the next degree to
innocence; as a cloth clean washed is near to that which was never stained:
But if it live to actual sins, it shall have no benefit of this Baptismal
grace, until it perform the Evangelical Condition of actual Faith and
Repentance; which are not required of Infants, but of those that are adult, in
order to receive the right or reassume the actual possession of that
privilege which was in Baptism bestowed upon it to be a child of God
passively at first, afterward actually; laying claim to its Original right,
never wholly forfeited or lost till final impetence.

I know there is difficulty and darkness in this point of Baptismal grace, yet
not so great as we need to change those forms of charitable and Evangelical
expressions in our Liturgy, which are grounded upon the Scriptures, and that
Covenant of grace in Christ, which as we are taught to believe, extends to
Infants among Christians and Disciples, as much as it did to those of the
circumcised Jews; who thereby no doubt, became the children of God and of the
Promises, not only by that Character and Sacramental figure of their Relation,
but also by that efficacious grace which was proper, apt, and by the Lord
intended for that Infant condition.

But my design in this piece is not to dispute the Controversy, but to
vindicate the Faith, Truth and Charity of those Expressions in our English
Liturgy, by which Ministers and others do declare their belief of regenerative
grace, effectually accompanying that holy Ordinance in Infants: For how
Baptism must not be thought a Seal to a blanck, or a sign signifying
nothing, besides a visible Profession, and Relation, or the general verity of
the Gospel, or the common Faith of the Church, without any particular grace
conferred to the duly baptized, according to Gods secret dispensation and
operation; which to de^y, is to baffle the sacred Majesty and saving import of
that Sacrament, and to abate infinitely the comfort of the Church of Christ, as
well as the privileges of Christians and their children duly baptized, and
thereby visibly imitated into the communion of the True Church; yea, and
invested in all these Privileges, both outward and inward, which are hereby
indulged to the Church of Christ above all Mankind.

The late increase of Anabaptisme by disuse of the Liturgy.
To return therefore to my design, which is to show the great benefits and
blessings which this, as all Churches have by a well composed and imposed
Liturgy, we find how Anabaptisme has strangely increased in England since the
Liturgy was disesteemed and disused; And so of Popery.
yea, and the Romish Interest is highly advanced too: For take away this
public and common Bank, no doubt that Sea will soon flow in among us; against
which the Liturgy is a mighty and just Defense among all sorts of people; which
the Policy of Rome saw well enough, when the Pope so strictly forbad all
Papists, Why the Romish party are such enemies to our Liturgy, and forbidden to
join with us in it.
in the time of Queen Elizabeth, to use or hear our Liturgy; hence they were in
Law called Recusants: For, by the use of our Liturgy, to which every good
Christian may say Amen, they would soon have been both weaned and turned from
the Mass; which is so far from giving the people Bread and Wine, with the Body
and Blood of Christ, that at length it professes to give neither Bread nor
Wine to the Laity, or any other, contrary to the express Institution of
Christ, and the Apostles following practice as well as judgment, 1 Cor. 10.
and 1 Cor. 11. which all the ancient Churches followed, as did the Church of
England, in the use of both Bread and Wine.

The enemies of the Church of England enemies to our Liturgy.
It is most certain, that all parties who are most Enemies to the Reformed
Church of England, have made it their joint design to despise, decry and
destroy our Liturgy, under pretense of I know not what new Modes, and
extemporary Abilities; yea, it was a great Jesuitick Artifice and back blow
used by some to aver (though falsely) that the English Liturgy was nothing
else but the Romish Missal, or Masse-book, turned into English: It Is true some
things (very Scriptural, devout and excellent, English Liturgy far enough from
the Masse-book
which the Roman Missal had taken and retained after the form of the ancient
Liturgy of the Church) were severed and taken as wheat from chaff, and jewels
from dress, by our wise Reformers, and preserved in the English Liturgy
conform to pious and unspotted Antiquity: But nothing of the Romish corruption
in Doctrine, or Superstition in Devotion, was retained in our English Liturgy;
which took nothing either of our Doctrine out of it but what was first in the
Scriptures, nor ought of devotional expressions but what were either used in
the ancient Liturgies, or were agreeable to the true Faith, and nature of the
duty: No, nor did the Church of England retain any ceremonies, as the Cross,
Surplice, Standing up at the Creed, or Kneeling at the Lords Supper, but what
were above a thousand years old, and most in use when the Church knew nothing
of Papal Usurpation, or of Romish Superstition; as is evident in the Histories,
Councils and Fathers of the first 600. years; and being things in their nature
indifferent, were for their decent and devout use left by Gods general
Commission to the liberty, judgment and authority of this, as any other Church,
within its own polity and communion to use and inpose.

As for the real and useful gifts of learned and discreet Ministers in Prayer,
(as to Invention, Judgment, Of Ministers useful gifts in prayer.
Memory and Expression) as I do very much esteem them when used with humility,
gravity, discretion, devotion and sincerity; (nor does His Sacred Majesty deny
any Ministers such an use of them as may be advantageous to Religion and the
peoples souls good) according to those many particular occasions and instances
which no (...) to all those who (in earnest) have most need of some boundaries
set to them; not hereby to stint the spirit of prayer as some fear, (which
consists in a judicious, humble, holy, fiduciary and servent assent to what is
prayed agreeable to Gods Word, of which hearers as well as speakers, and people
as well as Ministers are capable,) but wisely to order and limit the
profuseness, confusions and straglings of Ministers private spirits, which are
many times as undevout as indiscreet.

Of a discreet review of the Liturgy.
The serious and speedy review of the English Liturgy, (much desired by some,
and not much opposed by others that are learned and sober men, which is also
graciously promised by His Majesty in his late Declaration;) as it can be of no
more inconvenience then a New Translation of the Bible was, if it be to the
better; so I hope it may be of good use for the explaining of some words and
phrases in it, which are now much antiquated, obscure, and out of vulgar
understanding; which is no news after 100. years, in which Language as all
things under Heaven suffer some change: Also it may serve for the quickening and
improveing of some passages which seem less devotional and emphatick than they
may easily be made; also for the supplying of some things in point of daily
praise and thanksgiving to God, which duty seems less full and explicit in
the Liturgy; for the frequent Doxology, of Glory to Father, Son and holy Ghost,
as it is ancient, very excellent and Angelical, so it might well bear some
larger Expressions of praise and thanks to God, whereby to set forth the
grounds, causes, and just sense we have to give all glory, praise and thanks to
the Eternal God and the ever-blessed Trinity, Small and verbal variation and
additions no diminution or reproach to the Liturgy.
for his infinite and undeserved mercies daily bestowed upon such unworthy
sinners, for this Life and a better.

This work once well and wisely done, as it may, by Gods blessing, much tend to
the satisfaction of all sober Christians, so it will not be any thing to the
reproach of our Church, and of the Liturgy in the former plainer ways of
Worship, as either defective or incomplete for the main, which they in no sort
were; but very sober, good and sufficient, as to necessity; only as one day
teaches another, so there may be (as in all outward forms of divine worship)
both harmeless additions, and innocent variations, yea and sometimes
inoffensive defalcations of some redundances, according as men and times, and
words, and manners, and customs may vary.

Therefore, No rude or reproachful change to be made in the Liturgy.
as in lesser things I can humbly and cheerfully consent to such pious, prudent
and improving alterations of the Liturgy as shall seem meet to the piety and
Wisdom of His Majesty, (whereto all men's piety and prudence, in private and
public capacities, ought to be servient;) so my judgment is, that the Liturgy
of the Church of England, as to the main and essentialls of it, in Doctrine,
devotion, consecration and celebration, for matter, order and method, may in no
case be maimed, rudely changed, or odly deformed; for it was very conform to
the Word of God, and fitted to the nature of the several duties, as may easily
be made appear by putting to all the Book of the Common prayer, in the margin,
those parallel places of Scripture, which either for Words or sense are very
consonant to it; The Liturgy consonant to Scriptures.
which work is easy to be done, and prepared by me, if it may be thought
useful and acceptable, for God forbid we should be commanded to say Amen in
any part of the public service of God, to which the Word of God does not
encourage us in faith, and so God himself and his Spirit say Amen with us; for
the Word and Spirit must go together in all our devotions.

This endeavor to fortify the Liturgy by allegation of Scriptural strength and
consent, will not only satisfy the consciences of all that are scrupulous
upon that account, but also stop the mouths of those evil speakers, and
confute the intolerable confidence, yea impudence of some, who of late (as I
know one Minister) and heretofore have blasphemed the Liturgy and the honor of
the Church of England, Objection against the first sentence in the Liturgy as
falsely cited.
as if it began its public Devotions with a lie; (for so these inpudent or
ignorant men dare to speak) alleging, That because the first sentence in the
Book of Common Prayer, is not word for word in that place of Ezekiel which is
cited in the Margin, Ezekiel 18.21, 22. Ergo, It is a lie.

Answer.
It Is very true, all the words of that Sentence are not in that place cited in
the Margin, nor could the Composers be so blind as not to see the Verbal
difference between them; nor did they cite that place in the figured Margin to
show the literal samenesse of the words, but the Evangelical soundness of that
sense, which is more fully united, and comprehensively set down in the Book of
Common Prayer, than in that one or two Verses there cited in the Margin; to
which they refer the Reader and believer of those words: which are great
Evangelical Truths, clear both in Old and New Testament, and confirmed by the
joint suffrage of many Scriptures; not to be denied by any sober Christian, nor
to be abused by any presumptuous sinners, who daily harden their hearts by
deferring their repentance, turning that Grace into wantonness which God
offers, and the Church declares, to draw men to repentance by the Cords of
Divine Love:) referring I say, not only to those single Verses figured in the
Margin, but to others both in that same Chapter, and elsewhere fully to that
sense, as Verse 27, 28, 30, 31, 32. So Ezekiel 33.11. so Isaiah 1.16, 17, 18.
and in many other parallel places, as Acts 3.19. promising free and full pardon
of sins past, to those that fully repent of their sins from the bottom, that
is, with sincere and upright hearts, having no reserve of sin under any
pleasure or power, which is inconsistent with true repentance and sure pardon.

Is this to be called a lie which is the result of so many Evangelical
Scriptures? or, The impudence of that calumny against the Liturgy.
is it new to find in the New Testament places cited out of the Old not word
for word, but to the sense, scope and summary of one or two united together? as
Heb. 10.5. and 6. cited out of Psalm 40.6, 7, 8. let these supercritical
censors compare the words: a like allegation or reference is made, yea, by name
cited out of Jeremiah, as spoken by him, Mat. 27.9. and fulfilled, when the
place is not verbatim to be found in Jeremiah, but most in Zach. 11.12, 13. and
little in Jer. 1.8. save only the historical mention of the Potter, and the
parabolical applying of his work to the Jews; so that Mat. 2.23. of being
foretold by the Prophets that Jesus should be called a Nazarene, which is not
literally read in any of them, yet collectively is in them, as Christ is called
Netzer, Isai. 53.2. or as he was typified in Sampson the Nazarite, or sacred to
God.

These and many like places well considered (upon which no brand of lie or
falsity may be fixed) though they do not literally and syllabically agree with
the quotation, (but are verified either in a partial or concurrent sense) may
sufficiently justify that place in the first front of the Liturgy, to be no
lie but a Divine Scriptural Truth: and may sufficiently shame the popular
petulancy of those Ministers who dare cast such high reproaches upon the Liturgy
and the whole Church, upon so true grounds or merits at all; which is so vile a
rashness in men, pretenders to Learning and Sanctity, as is infinitely to the
disgrace of their persons and profession, so to abuse the common people, and
maintain faction, by calling good evil, and branding Gods Truth with the Devils
mark of a Lie.

As then the present Liturgy cannot justly be exautorated and abolished without
infinite inconveniences and mischiefs, so nor may it, as I said before, (and
again cautiously repeat) be rudely changed, as to the main, beyond any want
that really is in its matter or form, which are holy and comely; which would
be an overpragmatick boldness; much to the reproach as of all times and duties
past, so to the great dissatisfaction of the present Age; in which many, yea,
most judicious and steady Christians do highly desire, justly approve, love and
devoutly use the Liturgy, as a very excellent public form of judicious,
humble, holy, united and pathetick Devotion.

The need we have at present of the Liurgy.
I am sure we all need it as to our common relations and public devotions; and
truly those commonly most need it, who are most inconsiderately eager to be rid
of it; some alleging, If nothing else, yet the great length and burden of it,
Often the length of the Liturgy
if all parts must be used by each single Minister in one Lords Day, besides
other duties of praying, preaching and chatechising expected from him; to all
which a man aged or infirm will hardly be sufficient.

For Answer to this: Truly I never knew any such rigor or exaction used toward
any Minister, that did soberly and ingenuously show his conformity to the use
of the Liturgy, as occasion required, and as his strength or time would fairly
bear; but to crowd all, or most of it, quite out of the Church, only to make
way for the pomp and ostentation of men's private gifts, this is not to obey,
but to baffle and affront the authority of Church and State, by a most
preposterous pride and disobedience: Therefore there might be an appointment of
some parts which shall never be omitted, others appointed on some days and
occasions; only in the Sacramental forms all Ministers should be commanded to
use them wholly and solely.

This is in Reason and Religion, in Order and Church-polity evident; that
private Ministers prayers, should not be as great trees over-dropping the
Church Liturgy; but only as small grafts or little inocculation added to it,
and growing modestly with it, as the main standard, test and measure of public
devotions; upon the unity and harmony of which, settled by due authority, and
preserved with efficacy, depends the peace and unity of this Church and State;
as much as the house did on its pillars, which Sampson pulled down. Nor does
any Minister upon due examination, if he pray soberly and judiciously, add any
thing in his particular forms, which is not for the main and general parallel
fore-comprised in the Liturgy.

There is no outward conservation of Ecclesiastical and Civil peace,
comparable to that of united Religion; The peace of Church and State must
depend on the Liturgy.
whose orb or sphere is true Doctrine, its center holy Devotion, and its
circumference good Government, or Autoritative order and polity. The one is
best set forth in a few clear Articles; the other in a constant Liturgy, and
the last in Catholic Episcopacy; all must be conform to the word of God for
the main; contrary to which nothing is to be believed, prayed or obeyed, in the
Church of Christ. The Liturgy not (...) liberty, (...) Bishop, without
authority.


Our Doctrine (blessed be God) as a Christian and Reformed Church is not much
shaken, or can be justly disputed by men of any worth; for it is Scripturall,
primitive and Catholic; if to this union of Doctrine we can be happy to add,
and enjoy that of an uniform Liturgy; and to join to both for their
preservation a settled Church Government, by learned, pious, industrious, and
authoritative Bishops, assisted with grave, humble, and choice Presbyters,
nothing will be wanting (by Gods blessing) to Englands happiness, or the honor
of his Majesty's most welcome person and government; whose wisdom (doubtless)
never intends either to exautorate the Liturgy, by leaving all to Liberty, or
to Enervate Episcopacy, by sending Bishops to govern without any jurisdiction
(or coercive authority) either Spiritual or Ecclesiastical; which is indeed to
make both King and Bishop despised.

The same Liturgy unites King and people.
Add to all this; How, not only comely and convenient, but even necessary it is,
in order to public peace, that people of all sorts, should be thus united, as
to each other in their public Liturgies and devotions, so chiefly to their
King or Prince and chief governor, that, as they have the honor of one God
and Savior, so they may have the comfort to enjoy the same Sacraments and holy
mysteries, in the same method, manner, form and words, without any envy or
offense, cavil or contention, censure or uncharitableness, emulation or
jealousy against each other.

(...)
Yea, doubtless Subjects cannot be so tite and firm, or so zealous and forward,
or so cheerful and constant in their Loyalty, love and duty to their
Sovereigns, if they either think themselves commanded to serve God in a worse
way then their Princes use; or, that their Sovereign and Prince serve God worse
and less acceptably then themselves* certainly the greatest honor, love and
safety of Kings is from the samenesse of true Religion with their Subjects as
to the main, though Princes may use greater pomp and solemnity in the public
worship.

From this seed of Schism or Serpents teeth of division in Devotion (and so in
Religion) arise the armed men and minds of Civil Wars; Jealousies and Wars,
arise from difference in Religion and Devotion.
of both which the good people of England, cruelly sore and circumcised, are
now equally weary, sick and ashamed: Infinitely blessing the eternal God for
his miraculous mercies, in redeeming us from the later, by the most happy
Restoration of our gracious King; and passionately praying, yea hoping, for
the other deliverance of this Church from being any longer sawn in sunder, with
factions in Religion and divided devotions, by the excellent wisdom,
condescension, and moderation of the King; who, as a common Father, is of all
men in the world, the fittest to make us all as Brethren friends, by his
natural gentleness, Christian charity, and Princely clemency; seconded with
Kingly Majesty, just Empire and vigorous authority.

For if His Majesty trust too much to peoples good natures, it is most certain
they will never agree, Authority must (...)nd the (...) Kings.
but only in this, to destroy each other, and at length their King, the whole
Church, and their own souls; neither Religion must be arbitrary, nor government
precarious. As is apparent in the late inordinate zealotries, and desperate
frolicks of Religion; which under pretense of some men's various and vertiginous
Reformations, contrary to our laws, no less then against the will, command and
conscience of the King, run themselves with this famous and flourishing Church
and Kingdoms into most miserable confusions; yea and exposed the late
incomparable King, to those infinite Tragedies, which only Gods grace and his
own Christian Heroic constancy to our Laws and Religion could turn to, and
crown (as they did) with the honor of Christian Martyrdom, for the truth of
Jesus; settled in the doctrine, devotion and discipline of the Reformed Church
of England. And we see this piece of policy was early used by some Jesuitick
engines to foment our sad divisions, the Liturgy must be laid aside, and people
taught to differ from, to be jealous of, yea to despise the devotion of their
Prince, (which is the flower, spirit, and quintescence of Religion.)

The Authors inoffensive design for public good.
For the preventing of which Iliades of miseries in Church and State for the
future, (which some men's tongues and pens of late did not obscurely threaten,)
I have as much as in me lies adventured thus freely to express my humble sense
in this great concern, for an establishment of an uniform Liturgy, now under
his Majesty's and his Loyal Houses of Parliaments consideration.

Not but that it may be I might as easily dispense with the want of a Liturgy,
(in respect of what is counted by some the gift of prayer,) as most of those,
who so gloriously contemn this and all other set forms of public devotions;
yet in reference to the public interests of this Church and State, of my most
dread and indeared Sovereign, and of my Countrymen, also of our Religion, as
Christian and Reformed, I do in all humble and conscientious freedom declare my
judgment, as highly approving, yea and admiring (since I lately perused it most
seriously) the piety, prudence, compleatness and aptitude, (for the main) of
the Liturgy of the Church of England, as the best, of any ancient or modern,
that ever I saw; and I think I have seen the most, and best of them; Some
modest and discreet alterations in some words and expressions, with some small
additions, may soon tender it most complete and polite, both for matter and
form, yea, and satisfactory to all sober Protestants and to true Catholics.

But I can never counsel or consent, in conscience or prudence, in piety,
loyalty or charity, either rudely to innovate, or totally to abrogate the
Liturgy of the Church of England; and as little to leave it free and arbitrary
to every Minister, whether he will vouchsafe to use it or refuse it.

For, first, The Liturgy not to be left arbitrary or abrogated.
I shall never live to see any thing set up comparable to the former Liturgy,
if this be once nulled and destroyed: and if after its being reviewed it be not
by Law re-established and authoritatively enjoined, but every one is left to
ramble as they please, I never hope to see Truth or Peace settled in the Church
of England, which had nothing in it of greater improvement, ornament or
muniment to the Christian and reformed Religion, than this excellent Liturgy
was.

Which I hope and believe His Sacred Majesty, as a great and constant Defender
of the true Faith, will maintain and establish with no less Christian care and
Kingly Authority, than His Royal Ancestors, King CHARLES, King JAMES, Queen
ELIZABETH and King EDWARD did; for in this both His Majesty's and His Kingdoms
welfare, as well as the Churches, is bound up.

Nothing will be considerable in England for public Piety, Honor, Order,
Beauty and Solemnity, The Liturgy a great glory and Sa^^^y to Church and State,
to King and people.
much less for Charity and Peace, if in this point of public Devotion and
Worship, Ministers and People be left to eternal variations and mutual
vexations: Farewell the Glory, Charity, Unity and Safety of England, farewell
both Reformation and true Religion.

Other Objections or scruples, which some sober men make, Changes, though for
the better, in small matters must not be easily admitted.
are easily either satisfied or charitably smothered; nor may things of public
consent and legal constitution be every day shaken or altered by every man's
supercritical curiosity and needless severity: things that are safe and settled
in the circumvallation and defense of what is true and good, are not every day
to be put upon the tenters of new mutations, in order to mend or better their
condition; or under an ambition of aspiring to the Acropolis or pinnacle and
height of what by some is thought absolutely best in its kind; many times, as
St. Augustine observes, the novelty in these things does not compensate the
scandal, difficulty and trouble of attaining it; much less of only aiming at
it with fruitless essaies of mendings, which leave all things worse then they
found them.

Our first, pious and wise Reformers, and the best Parlaments of England since
that time, with the people of all sorts heretofore, justly thought it an high
degree of happiness, to have by the Sovereign Authority such an excellent
Liturgy set up in our English Tongue, end established as it has been by many
Statutes or Laws in Parliament, never yet repealed: Now weakness and
wantonness, if not wickedness, are prone to betray men to such ingratitude
toward God and the King, that they delight with much proud squeamishness and
nauseous coyness to loath and reject this Liturgy, as the wanton Jews did their
Quails and Manna: Truly they have cause to fear lest leanness enter into their
souls, after such fullness, and consumption follow their surfeits in Religion.

The want and (...) of the Liturgy will (...) to (...) religion and (...)
station.
An easy spirit of Prophecy (which is no other than prudential) will serve to
foresee and foretell, that the want, much more the contempt, of so excellent
and useful a Liturgy will betray the Church and Nation to ignorance and
profaneness, besides infinite factions, divisions and confusions; the best
that can be expected is a devout kind of Superstition or superstitious
devotion; that instead of the English Liturgy, which men so so ingratefully,
petulantly and unjustly quarrel at, because they can understand it; they shall
be at last contented with such a Latin form of Devotion in a strange Tongue,
which they will less cavil at, and more admire when they least understand it:
It Is almost a Demonstration, That the darkness of Popery will follow the
absence of that clear light of true reformed Religion which shines in the
English Liturgy, most agreeable to Scripture and purest Antiquity.

The Book of Common Prayer, The innocence of the Liturgy.
as I have of late (by special Command) most diligently perused, to observe
wherein a sober review might be most to its clearing and improvement, as to
some words and expressions; so upon this serious perusal I must profess (as
Pilate did when he had examined our blessed Savior, and as Felix of St. Paul)
that I find no fault in it worthy of death, no nor of stripes or bonds, or any
reproaches and hard speeches, or evil surmises: much less are those many and
great things true, which some popular Orators, as Tertullus, vehemently object
against it, either as to matter or manner.

I cannot but commend the candor, justice and ingenuity of Mr. Baxter, who
lately professed to me, that he saw nothing in the Liturgy which might not well
bear a good construction, if men looked upon it as became Christians with eyes
of charity: Nor do I doubt but the faithful people of the Church of England
have since the Reformation served God acceptably day and night, in the solemn,
devout and holy use of the Liturgy, which in many places, where were small
maintenance and so but weak Ministers, was the chiefest part of the provision
which poor people had for their souls: Nor can I believe but that the blessed
Apostle St. Paul, if living, and the other holy Apostles would have joined with
it and said Amen, rejoicing to see the soundness of our faith, the sanctity of
Sacraments, the unity of Devotion, the order and decency of holy duties,
carried on with that Spirit and understanding, which best agrees to the word of
God, the honor also and harmony of Christian congregations in the worship of
God.

Of Responds.
To which I find those devout alternations and responds sometimes used by the
people, especially in the Liturgy (as the echoes of humble, intent, and
fervent affections,) are so far from being any hinderance, inconvenience or
uncomliness, when people are perfect in them, that to me they seem in the most
ample and judicious auditories, (among whom none exceeds that of the two
honorable Temples) to be very quick excitations and elevations of Ministers and
peoples spirits in prayer, and harmonious tokens of that mutual correspondency
in holy duties, which ought to be between Minister and people, when the work is
carried on (as it ought to be) gravely, decently and devoutly, not in a
huddling and perfunctory way; whereof not only some people, but many Ministers
seem very guilty, in the formal use of the Liturgy; when their lips move
apace, but their hearts not at all; they speak with their tongues in a
tumultuary and posting way; but admit no such humble and fervent impressions on
their souls, as becomes the Majesty of God, the excellent matter of that
Liturgy, and the miseries or wants of their own souls, with the humble sense
they ought to have of them.

I know some (also) have been more at discord with the Liturgy, Of Music used
with the English Liturgy.
because they find in Cathedrals and other great Churches the use of Music,
both vocal and organicall, has been applied to some parts of it; which
certainly is as lawful as any meeter, psalmody, hymnology, or singing to tunes;
which was never questioned by learned and godly men for lawful, in the worship
of God public or private, especially that of praising and giving of thanks.
Nay there is no scruple, but that, even in prayer, and the deepest notes of
that, (viz. penitentialls) both Music of voice and instruments may be so
gravely and solemnly applied, as may very much fit the temper of men's spirits,
and the spirit of that duty; when either sad and solemn with grief, or
cheerful and exalted with joy. Who doubts, but David and the whole Church of
the Jews served God in spirit and truth, amidst those joyful and harmonious
noises, they used with singers and musical instruments? The gift and use of
Music is so sweet, so Angelical, so heavenly, and divine, that it is pity God
should not have the glory and honor of it in his service, and the Church an
holy comfortable use of it; that such an orient pearl may not be used only in
civil conventions, or abused in wanton carols and vain effusions, which is to
put a Jewel in a Swines snout; certainly the Christian Church has more cause
to rejoice then the Jews had, and we see the Angels at Christ's nativity began
the Church Music with their heavenly Quire.

It Is true, Some discreet regulation in Church Music.
(possibly) there may be some discreet regulations and emendations, even in our
Church Music; so as not to sing, either the Creeds, or Commandments, as not
the Lessons, or those parts of the Liturgy, which are most plain, doctrinall,
and fundamental, (which ought to be fitted to the meanest auditors ears and
understanding;) considering, that in the pauses or intervalls of the lessons,
and in the close of Divine Service; the Psalms and Hymns, or holy and devout
Anthems may be very aptly used; not only as read, or plainly sung, but as
advanced with excellent Music; so as may sometime suit with and regulate the
common peoples tunes and singing; other while, it may be elevated to those
perfections of Skill, which are worthy of the best Quires, and those chief
singers, or Masters of Symphony, which were and still are in the Church of
England; it was only fit for those men's rudeness to abandon Church Music, who
intended to fill all things with the alarums of war, and cries of confusion.

The last shock of popular envy and displeasure, which the innocent and
excellent Liturgy of England was wonted to bear, Of Ceremonies used with the
English Liturgy.
was for those few Ceremonies which the wisdom of this Church thought fit,
(being very ancient and innocent,) to retain and fix as signal marks of
faith, or humility, or purity, or courage, and constancy, upon some parts of
the worship and service of Christ. For these ceremonies sake the Liturgy fared
the worse; yet I have known many grave and learned men, very reverently and
constantly use the Liturgy, who scrupled at some or all of the ceremonies;
which yet in time they grew reconciled unto and used, not as any Sacramental
signs conferring any grace, (which the Church of England never dreamed of, and
often declared against; as that which could not be, but where there is a word of
God instituting a duty and promising grace,) but merely as visible tokens or
memorials, apt by a sensible sign to affect the understanding with something
worthy of its thoughts as signified thereby; which not only sacred, but even
civil ceremonies, and all motions or forms under the empire of reason, do
import among all rational men, when they come to be by use and custom
instituted, and as it were imposed upon them in any Country or Church, for
meditation, or reverence, or comeliness; as I am no enemy to decent ceremonies
in Religion, of Ecclesiastical institution, use and custom, when such as S.
Austin would have them, and our Church had them, few in number, easy in
practice, apt in signification, and fixed by the laws of Church and State. So I
judge them (as the Church of England often declared,) to be no parts essential or
necessary in their nature, to any divine duty or Worship: That they fall not
under the first or second command, but under the third, fourth and fifth, as
reverentiall in the solemn calling upon Gods name, as decent in Gods public
worship on the Lords day, or any other; and as instances of our obedience to
superiors in Church and State, commanding things not contrary to Gods word in
faith, mysteries, or manners; And thereby reducing the vagrancy, rudeness or
incertainty, of necessary circumstances, (as time, place, vesture, gesture,
measure and manner, which are as the natural skin, or hair, necessarily
growing on all things done under the Sun, and inseparable from them,) to some
fixation, unity, comeliness, or fashion, (as we fit clothes to our bodies, and
perukes to our heads, and tunes to Psalms) so as seems to the Church most
comely, for the nature of that duty, for the convenience of the people, and the
honor of the Ministry in things indifferent.

Certainly Humane or Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, (...)
like shadows, neither fill, nor burden any Conscience of themselves; that
which is considerable in them is, as they are in their nature and use comely for
the duty, and instances of either our obedience or our charity and unity: And
it is no less certain what ever indulgence, as to penalty for non-practise of
ceremonies, His Majesty's clemency may please to grant to some men of weak
minds, and scrupulous consciences in these things, (which Royal charity no
good Christian will repine at, provided it be used with meekness and humility,
not insolence and factiousness,) yet as to the principle, which the Church of
England went by in matter of ceremonies; it is most true and undeniably to be
maintained even to the death. That this National Church, as all others, has
from the word of God, Every National Church has authority and liberty from
Christ in ceremonies.
liberty, power and authority, within its own polity and bounds, to judge of
what seems to it most orderly and decent, as to any circumstance and ceremony
in the worship of God; which the Lord has left unconfined, free, and
indifferent in its nature; and only to be regulated or confined by every such
Ecclesiastical polity within it self: where the consent of the major part of
Church and State both in Councils and Parlaments includes the whole, and may
enjoin its rules and orders in these things upon all under its jurisdiction,
and within its communion; as well as a Master of a family may appoint the time,
place, manner, and measure, gesture and vesture, wherein he will have all his
family to serve God with him.

But I have gone too much beyond my first design, which was only to consider
the book of Common Prayer, and to express the just value I have of it; which
truly is so great, that I think the Church of England had far better want the
so cried up gifts of particular Ministers, in their prayers, then want the use
of the Liturgy; if the question were, which should be laid aside or used; I
should for those many reasons before expressed, prefer the Liturgy as the sure,
constant and complete measure of public devotions, The ancient Bishops and
Presbyters p^aye^s.
before any private men's abilities: Nor do I find that anciently the Bishops
and Presbyters of the Church used any other, (or very little, and those but
short) forms of public prayers or praises, save those which were in the settled
Liturgies of their Churches, which were most apt and adequate to every public
duty, and to the satisfaction of all sorts of Christians.

But (God be thanked) by the divine permission as well as by the custom of
this Churnh and His Majesty's allowance, We may have both the Liturgy and
Minest as abilities in prayer.
people may enjoy, and Ministers may use their own gifts before and after their
Sermons in prayer and praises, besides the Liturgy; and sure, as it were pride
in Ministers so to prefer their own, as to reject the other; so it were a great
folly in people, and an injury to their souls, to be content with one when they
may have both; or so to dote on any Ministers private spirit and abilities in
prayer, as to neglect the public spirit in the Liturgy; the want of which, as
it already appears very much, so it will daily more, in the ignorance,
irreverence and uncharitableness of people every where, for want of due
fixations of their affections, and illumination of their judgments by some
constant light and sober heat of uniform devotion.

I have heard it from others, and find it my self, The sad (...) following the
want and disuse o^ the Liturgy.
that many aged poor people being now asked very easy questions of their
Faith, since the long disuse of the Liturgy, the Catechism, and other plain
principles of Religion, as Creed, Commandments and Lords prayer, have confessed
they had forgot what heretofore they could have given some good account of.

Nor does the hand of God only punish people by gross ignorance, fanatic
vanities and great retrogradations, as to sound and saving knowledge; but by
horrible Apostasies also, as to the moral and practical, the equitable and
charitable parrs of Religion; yea, and many Ministers leaning wholly on their
own presumed gifts, have grown so dull, flat, formal and tedious, that they
have brought and taught people to despise both them and their duties, losing
the honor and reputation which they might have kept if they had kept within
sober bounds: but running out to popular ostentations, they soon lost
themselves and the value of sober people, so far, that I have known an aged
Minister after much noise and glorying, as if he were the delight of the
factious Vulgar, reduced to so low an ebb, both as to respect and subsistence,
that having shifted from one sequestered Living to another, at last he was outed
of all, and having a great charge (which hastened the armed man of poverty upon
him) he made to me with tears and horror of his sad condition this confession,
The ingenuous confession of a po^ Minister.
That after much tossing to and fro, he knew not now which way to turn himself,
or to subsist; that Gods hand was justly against him, because he had trusted
too much to the arm of flesh, and followed popular applause; that having
against his judgment and conscience for many years forborne to use, as other
holy forms, so that of the Lords Prayer, for fear of offending some factious
and fanatic people; he saw God would teach him to pray for his daily bread by
his want of it, and by filling him with his own delusions.

Of the Chatechisme in the Book of Comm^n prayer.
Not only the Liturgy reviewed and settled by Authority, will be of great use
and concern to the good of the Church; but also that short and plain
Catechism, which is in the Book of Common Prayer, with some few other
Questions and Answers added to it; that so it might be, if not more complete,
yet more explicate and plain to common understandings; and might be distributed
into 52. heads, that each Lords day might have its portion assigned, which
every Minister should more or less insist upon, after he had first asked every
question in the Catechism, and received the answers from the Cathecumens or
younger sort: This would certainly keep up knowledge, as to fundamentals, in
all, and advance it both with the elder and younger people; who might easily by
His Majesty's command and the care of the respective Bishops and Ministers, be
digested (once for all) into two Books or Catalogues, one of the Cathecumens,
Two Books of Cath^cumens and Communicants.
the other of Communicants; the first rank of Christians to be prepared by
constant catechizing in the Afternoon for confirmation, and the standard or
proof of their knowledge to be the Church Catechism; thus confirmed they might
be admitted to the holy Communion, and put in the Roll of Communicants, as an
honor and advance to their souls; hence not to be removed or rescinded,
unless they be for scandal by the censures of the Church excommunicated, or
are self-excommunicated by not receiving at least once in half a year: The
expunging of them out of this Book of Communicants to be public and solemn, as
a note of Infamy no less than of Impiety, Impenitency and Apostasy; this
method to be begun by every Minister in his charge, taking once for all a
particular account of all those people in point of knowledge, of whose defect
he has any cause to be jealous.

But I fear to seem more forward, The Au^hors m^tive to these humble
Considerations.
curious and solicitous, than becomes any private person in these times and in
so public a concern, which requires public ^ouncills, and these ought not to
be forestalled or prejudged. My great invitations to these suggestions are, 1.
First, Gods wonderful mercy to this Church and State, offering us miraculous
opportunities of being happy, if we be not by restivenesse and peevishness
wanting to his providence. 2. The next is the remembrance of the sore
tribulations which we have felt and feared, and which are still summons to all
sorts of men, Prince and People, Bishops and Presbyters; that having been so
long in the furnace, it is fit all of us should come forth of it well refined
from our dross, lest a worse thing come unto us; that God may delight in our
constant peace and prosperity, to build us up and not pull us down. 3. My last
encouragement is the great benignity and gentleness of our Gracious King, who
being loath to grieve any friend or foe, ( Trojan or Tyrian) whom His clemency
may amend or His charity relieve, is wholly disposed both in His temper and
judgment to win, unite, reconcile, bind up and heal all parts, in which is any
thing sound sincere and honest; that by His Royal hand and Sovereign touch (as
He daily does on the infirm bodies of many) so on the ill-affected minds of men
He may work such cures and recoveries, as may make all more devoted to serve
God, His Majesty and each other, in all godliness, loyalty, honesty and
charity; which is then best done when men's minds by such gentle means being
purged of peevish, proud and uncharitable humors, and reduced to a more humble,
meek and Christian temper, our public fistula's and ulcers which were fed and
inflamed by these distempers, may come to be dried up and healed.

Fervent and (...) a m^st (...).
A mercy to be obtained, followed, and perfected, by our prayers; and to which
no supplications will be more effectual, then the devout authoritative and
uniform use of the Liturgy or common prayer, in the Church of England; which
unites all honest minds, includes all our common necessities, craves all
spiritual and temporal supplies, keeps Christians warm in their love to God,
in Loyalty to their King, and in their charity to each other; it daily
propounds the summary of all necessary religion, The excellent use of the
Liturgy.
it lays and confirms in the minds of the meanest people the foundations of
sound faith and saving knowledge, according to Gods word; it is so complete for
duties to be done, graces to be obtained, mercies to be enjoyed, both here and
hereafter, that I doubt not to affirm this truth of the Liturgy, That if the
common sort of people duly attend it, judiciously learn it, and conscienciously
live up to the duties and graces there proposed to them, (of which Ministers
particular prayers and sermons are but either Commentaries, Repetitions or
Paraphrases;) there is no doubt, but they shall please God, and be well
prepared for an happy death, and blessed eternity.

To the advance of all which excellent duties, The way of Englands happiness
in Church and State.
uses and ends, nothing (next the grace of God on men's hearts) will more
contribute then Ministers grave, reverent, deliberate, pathetick, devout, and
constant using of the Liturgy (with and before their own prayers) as an
excellent means by little and little to edify common people by frequent
inculcations in faith and charity; also to bring in and preserve a good harmony
and correspondency among the Clergy; who for many years have sounded so
confusedly and awkly, that they were like bells rung backwards, in a
conflagration or scar-fire. Lastly to consolidate the public peace of this
Church and Kingdom, by the uniformity, industry, and sanctity of Ministers
godly lives and orderly labors; which I hope will in time (by Gods blessing)
so move the piety and holiness of all other estates and degrees or Nobility,
Gentry, and Commons, (after the great example which His Majesty's charity has
given) that they will find out some way of effectual augmenting poor Ministers
maintenance to some such ingenuous competency as may become both the worth of
an able and painful Ministry, and also the piety and munificence, of this
populous and opulent Kingdom, this great and mighty Nation, whose glory is to
be furthest from idolatry and sacrilege, from a superstitious and penurious
Religion; from an ignorant, idle, and indigent Ministry. The competent support
of which would be a work as of great gratitude and acceptance to God, so of
infinite good to peoples souls, no less then to the honor of the Nation, and
the advance of the Reformed Religion every way, in the verity of our doctrine,
in the solemnity of our devotion, in the dignity of our Ministry, in the
sanctity of our duties, in the stability of our government, and peace both
Civil and Ecclesiastical; for that makes Ministers unquiet when they sit
uneasy, and hope for private benefit by public troubles or popular complyings.

The authority and efficacy of the Evangelicall Ministry is as necessary to a
just magistracy, as the string is to the bow, or the compass to the ship, or
the Sun to the world, or the soul to the body: For a Nation without lawful
Magistracy, or Magistrates without true Religion, or true Religion without a
worthy Ministry, or such a Ministry without ingenuous maintenance, or such
competent maintenance without uniform diligence, are such ^olecisms in reason,
and inconsistent with true policy as well as piety, that they tend to nothing
but contempt and confusion: For the verifying of which we need go no further
than our own late miserable experience, sufficient to make any Nation and
Church wise by its woes for one Age or Century at least, unless it be
condemned to such fatal infatuations, as make men forsake their own mercies,
and pursue lying vanities, as either ignorant of, or enemies against their own
and their posterities happiness.

FINIS.

