A SPEECH MADE BY ALDERMAN GARROWAY, AT A COMMON HALL on Tuesday the 17. of
JANUARY.

Upon occasion of a SPEECH delivered there the Friday before, by Mr. Pym, at
the reading of His Majesty's Answer to the late Petition.

Printed in the Year.

1642.

A Speech made by Alderman GARROWAY at a Common Hall on Tuesday the 17. of
January, upon occasion of a Speech delivered there the Friday before, by Mr.
Pym, at the reading of His MAJESTY'S Answer to the late Petition.
Gentlemen,
BEfore We enter upon the business of the day, I must, in discarge of my duty,
speak freely to you of the last days work which lies so heavy upon us, that if
we find not some way to free our selves of the scandal and dishonor of that
day, farewell the reputation of this Council, and of this City. We sent a
Petition lately to His Majesty, by six worthy Members of this Court, if you
will believe them, they received a very gracious entertainment from His
Majesty; and if you will believe most wise men, they brought a very gracious
Answer back from His Majesty, with directions by a Servant of His own, that
the same should be communicated to the whole City, from whom the Petition was
presumed to be sent, a Circumstance as gracious as the matter it self. See now
how we have required him: His Messenger stays ten days at the least before
we can vouchsafe to speak with him, whereas ours stayed not an hour for
admission to His Majesty, and but a day for an answer: upon the r^ceipt of our
Petition, His Majesty spoke very graciously of the City, very affectionately
of the most considerable part of it; when his Answer is read (an Answer I must
tell you, worth another manner of debate) Strangers are admitted to make bitter
invective Speeches against it, and the King that sent it; Whilst no honest
Citizen, who have only right to speak here, durst speak his Conscience for
fear of having his Throat cut as he went home. Think (Gentlemen) what an
encouragement we have given His Majesty to treat and correspond with us,
whilst he is thus used; I am far from undervaluing both, or either House of
Parliament, I have been often a Member of the House of Commons, and know well
my duty to it; but though their Privileges are infinitely grown and enlarged
since that time, I hope they have not swallowed up all other men's; though they
are the great Council and Court of the Kingdom, yet there are other Counsels
and Courts too, what do we else here? And though they have a great Liberty of
Language within their own walls, I never heard that they might speak what they
list in other places. In my time when there was any occasion to use the City,
as often there was, the Lord Major, or Aldermen, or some trusted by them, were
sent for to attend either House, but for Members of either or both Houses to
come hither, and be present at Our Counsels, and govern here by Privilege of
Parliament, was never heard of till of late: you will say it is a great Honor
to us, that those worthies take the pains to come to us, when they might send
for us, it may be an honor too great for us to bear, and truly, I believe it
has been so chargeable to us, that we ought not to be ambitious of such
honor. Mr. Pym (who has been a very costly Orator to us) told us, (and his
speech is since printed for our honor too, to show how tame a People we are)
that there were many things in that Answer of great aspersion upon the
proceedings of Parliament, and so forth. Truly I know no such thing, if we
petitioned for Peace, we were to expect His Majesty would tell us by what
means that Peace came to be disturbed, and then prescribe us a means for our
reparation. If any man's guilt has made him think himself concerned in it,
though he be not named, he is his own Accuser.

He told us that there was no occasion given by any Tumults which might justly
cause His Majesty's departure, and this he said was the opinion of both Houses,
and his proof was, because His Majesty came into the City without a Guard,
and dined at the Sheriffs next day after his coming to the House of Commons,
and returned back again to White Hall, where he stayed some days, I am willing
to believe both Houses as far as I am able, and if they had declared that it
had been Lawful to beat the King out of Town I must have sat still with
wonder; but when they declare to us matter of fact, which is equally within our
own knowledge, and wherein we cannot be deceived, they must pardon me if I
differ from them. If they should declare, that they have paid us all the Money
they owe us, or that there is no Cross standing in Cheapside, could we believe
them? Why, Gentlemen, neither of these is better known to us, then that there
were such Tumults at Westminster, as might very well make the King think
Himself in danger. We all well remember what excellent company flocked by
White Hall every day, for a week before the King went to the House of Commons,
and for His coming to the Guild Hall the next day, when he did us so much
honor, to vouchsafe us so particular satisfaction, and came without a Guard,
to show how much He trusted in our Duty and Affection. (I pray God the
deceiving that trust may never rise in Judgment against this City,) we too
well remember the rude carriage of many people to Him as He went to the
Sheriffs to Dinner, which was not so much as reprehended by any Officer; and we
all know what passed the night following, when an Alarm was given, that there
was an attempt from White hall upon the City, and so all men put into sudden
Arms, and if by the great industry and dexterity of Our good Lord Major, that
Hubbub had not been appeased, God knows what might have followed, if you will
believe some men, they will tell you the Design of those who gave that Alarm,
was no less then to pull down White Hall. There is no question but there was
cause enough for His Majesty to remove from White Hall, and how quietly he
stayed after at Hampton Court, and at Windsor, cannot be forgotten, not to
speak of that Army by Land and Water, which accompanied the Persons Accused to
Westminster, the next day after His Majesty's return, the danger of which was
so great, that no honest man could have wished the King had run the hazard of
it by staying.

His Majesty seems to be sensible that the Government of this City is now
submitted to the Arbitrary Power of a few desperate Persons, to which the
Gentleman gave us this testimony from both Houses, that we had in most of the
great occasions, concerning the Government of the City, followed their
direction; Troth Gentlemen, would they had furnished us with a better Answer.
Have we our Charter by the Grace and Favor of the two Houses, or by the
Goodness of the King? Have we those Privileges with Foreign Princes, by
which many here have gotten such estates, by the power of the Houses, or by the
Protection of the King? Why should we then govern the City by the direction of
both Houses? I am not willing to speak slightly of any Persons gotten into
Authority, only we may say, there be some amongst us, we did not think two
years ago to have met here, and yet we were wont to see an Alderman coming a
dozen year off. I cannot tell what you mean by Arbitrary power, but I am sure
we are governed by nothing we were used to be governed by. I have been Lord
Major my self, in a pleasanter time then this, and should have some share still
in the Government, before God, I have no more Authority in the City, then a
Porter, not so much as an Aldermanbury Porter. If to be governed by People
whose Authority we know not, and by Rules which no body ever heard of, or can
know, be a sign of Arbitrary Power, we have as much of it as heart can wish.

To the Kings charge of our Contributing for the maintenance of the Army which
had given Him Battle, we were told that diverse practices were made against
the Parliament before they made any preparation for their defense. By practices
I think they mean Fears and Jealousies, for all the particulars mentioned by
Him we know, and are understood by all the Boys in the street; but we are sure
there were ten thousand men raised and armed out of this Town, and the
neighbor Counties, before the King had seven hundred. To the danger the Kings
Person was in (at the thought whereof every honest heart trembles) the
Gentleman told us they were sorry for it, I dare not tell you what I think
their sorrow was. But (Masters) if you knew how much your Estates, and Being
depends upon the life and safety of our good King, you would no sooner
apprehend Him in danger, then you would run to His rescue, as you would fly
from the Plague and Beggary. But that reproach of maintaining the Kings
Children here, I confess made my heart rise, I hope it did so to many here: Is
our good King fallen so low, that His Children must be kept for Him, it is worth
our enquiry who brought Him to that condition? We hear Him complain that all
his Own Revenue is seized and taken from Him; Is not His Exchequer, Court of
Wards, Mint here, His Customs too are worth somewhat, and are His Children
kept upon Alms? How shall we and our Children prosper, if this be not remedied?

They will by no means endure that His Majesty be obeyed in the apprehension
of the Lord Major, and the other three Gentlemen, for it is the sense of both
Houses that this demand is against the Privilege of Parliament, and most
dishonorable to the City; For the first I dare not speak my mind, though I
must confess my self not able to answer the Kings reasons in many of His
Declarations upon that point; but for the second, (under the favor of both
Houses) whether it be dishonorable for the City, whether it be fit to be done
or no, we are the best, indeed we are the only Judges. I will take the liberty
to speak freely my Conscience in this Case, as a friend to Justice, as a lover
of these men, and as a Servant to the City, and as all these I protest to God,
if I were now Lord Major, and the other three were my Father, and my Brothers,
I would satisfy the King in this point. Did His Majesty ask to have them put
to death merely upon His Accusation, or have them sent bound hand and foot to
Oxford, where it might be in His power to proceed against them in an
extraordinary way, it might seem unreasonable: but to apprehend them to keep
them in safe custody, that His Majesty may proceed against them according to
the known Laws, under which they were born and bred, where if guilty, they must
be left to the Justice of the law, and His Majestics mercy, if innocent, will
receive an honorable acquittall, seems to me so just in the King to ask, and
so necessary for us to yield to, that the denying it implies a doubt in us of
the Innocence of those whom we will not submit to Justice. Here is a way to
find out the Kings Evil Counselors. If these men do their part like men of
good consciences, submit to the trial of the Law, which is the only Judge of
Guilt and Innocence, and are found clear from that heavy charge His Majesty
accuses them of, how gloriously will these men live hereafter, and the King
cannot refuse to deliver those up who have wickedly conspired the destruction
of honest men; but if we shall only cry out that the King is misinformed, and
dare not trust our selves upon a trial, we may preserve our safety, but we
shall loose our reputation: Thus much for Justice, for the Gentlemen's sakes
now: This way you see, a way to honor and safety too; if there be Innocence;
but do you think after a months longer enduring the miseries which are now
upon us, men will not more importunately, and impatiently enquire after the
causes of their sufferings, if they shall find that the denial to give up
four men (who it may be are not of any known merit too) to be tried by the Law,
being accused of High Treason, and conspiring to take away the Kings Life,
incensed our gracious King against us, and kept Him from being among us,
whereby our Trade decays, and such violences and outrages are every day
committed, I say, can any four (...) will not (...), (...) and made desperate
by their, and the common sufferings, (...) these men in pieces? We have been
all young men and Apprentises, let us remember the spirit was then amongst us,
would we have suffered all our hopes to have been blasted, and destroyed by any
four, or fourteen men? Let us not (...) our selves, there is the same courage
still in the City, which at some time will break out to the ruin of more then
those men; but I thank that worthy that told us* that it is against the rules
of Justice, that any men should be imprisoned upon a general charge, when no
particulars are proved against them; How insensibly in other men's cases do we
accuse our selves, why, how many of us within these six Months have been
committed upon a gen^rall charge? How many Persons of Honor and Reputation are
now imprisoned in this Town, when particulars are so far from being proved
against them, that they are not so much as suggested; was over any Charge so
general as to be a Malignant or Cavaller? yet you hear all such imprisonments
are against the Rules of Justice; my opinion is that for Justice sake, for the
Cities sake, for their own sakes, these four men should quietly submit
themselves to the trial of the Law; if they refuse, that they be delivered up
to the hands of Justice.

Mr. Pym told us, there was no proof that my Lord Major, and the other Persons
named, were countenancers of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries; where
should this proof be made? Do we not all know this to be true; are they not all
so much countenanced, as there is no countenance left for any body else? Did
not my Lord Major first enter upon his Office, with a speech against the Book
of Common Prayer? has the Common Prayer ever been read before him? has not
Captain Venn said that his Wife could make Prayers worth three of any in that
Book Oh (Masters) there have been times that he that should speak against the
Book of Common Prayer in this City, should not have been put to the patience
of a Legal Trial; we were wont to look upon it as the greatest Treasure, and
Jewel of our Religion, and he that should have told us he wished well to our
Religion, and yet would take away the Book of Common Prayer, would never have
gotten credit. I have been in all the parts of Christendom, and have conversed
with Christians in Turkey, why, in all the Reformed Churches there is not any
thing of more Reverence, then the English Liturgy, not our Royal Exchange, or
the name of Queen Elizabeth, so famous. In Geneva it self I have heard it
extolled to the Skies: I have been 3. Months together by Sea, not a day
without hearing it read twice. The honest Mariners then despised all the world
but the King and the Common Prayer Book, he that should have been suspected to
wish ill to either of them, would have made an ill Voyage. And let me tell you,
they are shrewd Youths those Seamen, if they once discern that the Person of
the King is in danger, or the true Protestant professed Religion, they will
show themselves mad bodies, before you are a ware of it; I would not be a
Brownist or an Anabaptist in their way for -- But we are told of an Army of
Papists, who will root out our Religion: for my part, I am sure I am not
suspected for any affection to Papists, yet I confess at this time, I have not
the least fear of danger from them, and the truth is, this Bugbeare is grown
less terrible to every body. We know from the beginning of this Parliament,
the continual discovery of Plotts by the Papists, and what those discoveries
have cost us, and yet to this day not the least probable charge objected
against them. When the King was at York, no discourse here, but of the Papists
being there in multitudes, when it is well known, His Majesty took all possible
care to prevent the resort of any Papists to the Court, and I have been assured
by very honest men, that in a Month there was scarce the face of one Papist
there. When he first raised His Army, did he not by Proclamation forbid any to
come to Him? -- But hark you Gentlemen, where would you have these Papists be?
can they live in the Air, or in the Water? Beyond Sea you will not suffer them
to pass; if they stay at their Houses, they are Plundered, it is a good
Justification for Plundring that they are Papists. Are they not the Kings
Subjects, and should they not fly to Him for Protection? Is there any Law that
says the Papists must not assist the King with Men, Arms, or Money, when He is
in distress, and when He conceives Himself to be in danger of His Life? Let us
look about us, if this world hold, not only all the Papists, but all the
Gentlemen of England will find it necessary to carry all they have to the
King, and venture it in that bottom.

But both Houses have declared that there have been no plundring by the
direction of Parliament. Here I think they would be willing to admit the King
to be a part of the Parliament, to save their honor, otherwise if plundring
signifies the coming with violence into ones house, and taking away his goods
against his consent, sure there has been much plundring, even by the direction
of the Houses; but have they ever punished plundring of the worst sort, if they
have not directed it? will a Declaration of both Houses repair the fine
Wane-scott, and the goodly Leads of honest George Binyons house? Let me tell
you, the time has been the loss of such a Citizen would have been talked of
in another way. -- I wonder what kind of Government is preparing for Us, when
they will not allow that the Imprisonment of our Person is the taking away our
Liberty, or the taking away the twentieth part of our Estates is the
destruction of our property; and did you mark what a notable reason was given
us for this; the same Law that does enable them to raise Forces, does likewise
enable them to require Contributions; it does indeed, yet one might be without
the other; but I would these Gentlemen had chose another Auditory to have
convinced with this Argument; the Country people will be no more couzened by
the City, when they hear what kind of Oratory prevails over us; we shall be
shortly told when they have a mind to our houses, that the same Law which gave
them Authority to take away our Money, gave them likewise Power to do the other
too.

The King tells us, if we shall hereafter contribute any thing for the
maintenance of the Army, which He says is in Rebellion against him, (He
pardon's what is past, mark that,) He will deny us the benefit of His
Protection with Foreign Princes, which He will signify to His foreign
Ministers; what remedy have the Lords and Commons found for this now,
sufficient to do the business? They declare That this is an excess of rigor,
and, injustice beyond example, and therefore they hope His Majesty will be
induced by better Counsel to forbear the execution. A very sovereign
Declaration, but it is ten to one if we do not obey His Majesty in the
Injunction he has laid upon us, He will use this excess of rigor. I know not
how little you, that trade only within the Kingdom, may think your selves
concerned in this, but I say whoever understands the Trade abroad, and the
benefit of being a Subject to the King of England, will not run this hazard;
for let him be assured in the instant the King disclaimes him, he is ruined,
and therefore you who have Estates abroad, look to it.

Gentlemen, I have troubled you very long, but in good faith, the manner and
the matter of the last days work has layen so heavy upon my heart, that I
should have thought I had forfeited this Gown, and this Chain if I had been
silent, and that I had betrayed the Liberty of that famous City, which I am
sworn to defend. One word I had forgotten to mention, the caution which was
given us of such Messengers as His Majesty should send, that we should observe
them, that they might be dealt with as Messengers of Sedition; God forbid we
should live to see any Messengers sent to us from our gracious King evilly
entreated, I would be loath my self to outlive such a dishonor; if His
Majesty shall vouchsafe us the Honor to send to us, let us use and defend His
Servants, as Persons sent to us for our good; if it shall be otherwise Fire
from Heaven will consume this City. Let us not be wrought upon by fair words,
to contribute or lend more money for the maintenance of this Civil, Bloody
dissension, or bring desolation and confusion upon this glorious City for the
support of four Men, who if Innocent will be safe, but let us remember the
happiness and flourishing Estate we enjoyed whilst we yielded obedience to
our Royal Sovereign. Let us not upon the general discourse of Evil
Counselors, rebel against a Prince, upon whose Person malice, and Treason
cannot lay the least blemish, but must confess His Religion, Justice, and
Charity to be so transcendent, that if He were a Subject would render Him most
amiable. Let us consider that if He be oppressed, there can be no end of these
troubles, but we and our children shall be perpetually weltring in a Sea of
blood; whereas if His Enemies be overthrown, the whole Kingdom will within a
Moment be restored to all the Calm, Pleasure, and Plenty of Peace. And
therefore if we intend to enjoy what we have, and that the younger men shall
grow up to the same estate we enjoy, if the memory of our forefather's, or the
hope of our Posterity can move any thing with us, let us lay hold on the Kings
Mercy, and submit to every Proposition in His Answer.

Whilst the Alderman was speaking this Speech, several great interruptions
were made with hissing, and other such noyses, some crying, No more, No more,
others as importunately Hear him, Hear him, Hear him; so that it was about
an hour after he began to speak, before he ended: when ever the clamor began
to stop him, he sat down, without show of any disturbance, and when that noise
was conquered, he began again, saying what he said last, and so proceeded;
only once when Alderman Bunce said, he spoke against the Honorable House of
Commons, and that it was not to be endured, the Alderman replied with a little
sharpness, that he had as much liberty to speak in that place, as any Memb^r
^f the House of Commons had in the House of Commons, and if other men were
content to lose their Privileges, it should be remembered that it was against
his will. At which there was a great shout and acclamation, we will not lose
our Privileges, and after that there was not the least interruption, but the
Alderman was heard with great patience and attention. As soon as the Speech was
done, and the great shout and hem ended (which some in the street apprehended
to be a consent to lend Money to the Parliament, and ran to Westminster and
acquainted the House of Commons with it, whereupon four Members were appointed
to draw up a Declaration of Thanks to the City) the Lord Major, trembling and
scarce able to speak, asked, what their resolution was concerning assisting
the Parliament with Money, for the payment of their Army, and recovering his
voice by degrees, offered them some reasons, and asked them whether they would
lose all their thanks for what they had done already; but the cry was so great,
no Money, no Money, Peace, Peace, that he could not be heard. One that stood
near the Major answered, that he doubted not whoever could make it appear he
had deserved thanks, might call for it, and have it, that the question was not,
upon losing of some, but forfeiting of all, and whether the City would perish,
or quit four Men, for whom they had no reason to care; The voice was so great,
one crying, that they who set them to work should defend them, another, that
since these troubles none but Bankrupts and Knaves had prospered, a third, that
if they had common honesty, they would rather run away, then endeavor to
save themselves by bringing destruction upon the whole City. Then the Court
rose and every man departed, so great a Company going before, and following
after Alderman Garroway to his house, that the Streets were as full as at my
Lord Majors show, some crying out, Where Is Ven and his Mirmidons, others, when
they should meet, to which a general shout answered Now, Now; one of good
credit with them, wished them to proceed with discretion, A Pox of Discretion
(said a Butcher,) we shall be undone with it, let us proceed as these People
have taught; when we asked them what we should have in the place of Bishops,
they told us Bishops were naught we all knew, and when they were gone we should
think of having somewhat that is better in their room; let us now take away
what we know is naught, and we shall do well enough after, I owe them a good
turn, for the honor they have done my Trade, say thou so (said a sturdy
Mariner) believe it, they who would persuade the honest Sailors to turn
Traitors to their good King, for all His favors to them, shall repent it. The
good Alderman being much troubled to hear the several expressions, besought
them to depart every man to his own home, telling them That if at this time
they should do any thing, it would be imputed to him, and he hoped they wished
him no harm, whereupon they were contented to part, promising one another that
when they next met, they would do something worth speaking of, and agreed that
the word should be (Gurney) in honor of their good Lord MAYOR.

FINIS.

