AN ANSWER TO Mr. George Walkers VINDICATION, OR RATHER FRESH ACCUSATION:

Wherein he charge Mr. Wotton (besides his former foul aspersions of Heresy
and Blasphemy) with Arianism; Mr. Gataker with Socinianism; Dr. Gouge, and Mr.
Downham, with a false Attestation; Dr. Baylie, and Mr. Stock, with
Self-condemnation; All the eight Ministers employed in the business between
himself and Mr. Wotton, with Partiality and Unjust judgment.

Upon occasion of a Relation concerning that business, written by the said
Thomas Gataker; and by him now again avowed.

Wherein the said M. Walkers Vindication is in many things showed to be An
Untrue Relation.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for F. Clifton, in New-fish-street. 1642.

Some few things to be supplied or amended.
Page 2. after line 13. ad, for words spoken of a dead man, himself being. p.
5. l. 16. read, has at any time ex. p. 6. l. 28. pressure. p. 14. l. 27. he
then did, p. 16. l. 28. wrote. p. 38. l. 18. crave leave of. p. 42. l. 14. put
in the margin against pointing. See Cameron Myrothec. p. 25. p. 53 marg put
out, * Ibid. p. 9^. l. 32. read have past. p 98. l. 26 sift q. p 115. l. 28.
Post script. p. 119. l. 3. he deemes.

HAd M. Walker either dealt more fairly at first, with his Christian brother
and fellow-Minister of Christ, M. A. Wotton; or upon second thoughts ( (...).
which are wont to be the wiser) better considered of what before he had
unadvisedly attempted; he had therein peradventure in part at least, either
saved or salved his own credit: sure I am, he had eased me of some labor,
that I had little lust unto. He traduced M. Wotton in the Pulpit as a vile
heretic, while he lived, what time he knew Master Wottons tongue, through the
iniquity of the times, to be so (...) Theophylact. ep. 34.
tied up, that he could not in public plead his own cause. Long after his
decease he renews his revilings of him, and brandeth him again for the like
in print; when being hence translated, he cannot now either in public or in
private personally appear for himself. A true relation of the carriage of the
maine matter in controversy between them, in a meeting of M. Walkers own
procuring, wherein M. Wotton was acquitted, being hereupon published; he
proceeds, after his wonted guise, in violent and virulent manner, not only
to charge him, as before, with heresy and blasphemy in the doctrine of
justification, but (yet further to express his extreme malice and rancor
against him) Vindica^. p. 34.
with the denial of the eternal Deity of Christ; how soundly, yea or
seemingly, for any show or shadow of reason, let any intelligent Reader judge.
And over and besides that, (hoping thereby to help himself, where he sticks
fast in the mire) he sticks not to (...). Nicet. in Andron. l. 1. c. 6.
cast foul aspersions upon all those that had any hand in that hearing, not
sparing them therein whom himself had made choice of.

His Vindication (as he terms it) he begins with a preamble, consisting
of two parts.

In the former whereof, he complains grievously of me, and Vindic. p. 1.
charge me with breach of piety and charity, and defect of humanity and
common honesty, in laboring to set upon him foul brands of the like nature,
being a Minister yet living in Gods Church; and in adding thereby affliction to
him, who has suffered persecution and bonds for the truths sake.

Which passage, when I read, minded me of the Italian professor of the
Civill-law at Oxford, who having in some things carried himself, neither so
religiously, nor so respectively toward diverse worthy Divines, as had been to
be wished; and being therefore by Doctor Rainolds in a private Letter freely
told of it, and withal admonished Ut in eis duarum rerum majorem babeas
rationem, pietatis and modestiae. 10. Rainold. ad Alb. Gentil. ep. 1.
to have more regard of piety and modesty in his writings for time to come,
then in some formerly he had showed; in way of answer to his Letter, takes on
and stormeth not a little against that mirror as well of modesty as of
learning, as Quod me modestiae laesae facis tu reum, -- non vides te cum eo fic
agere imperiose, qui Papae imperium contemp^it, and exulare patria potuit and
universo regno papali? Alb. Gentilis al (...). Rainold. ep. 2.
having done him no small wrong, in taking upon him so to check and control
him, who had left his own country for his conscience, and was for Religion
sake content to live as an exile: tho mean while, it may be, enjoying as
plentiful an estate here, as ever he had, or might have attained, had he
stayed still where before he was.

But to come more directly to M. Walkers exceptions against me, or
prescriptions rather for himself, as a sacred person, or a Sanctuary man; and
not therefore to be so dealt with, as I have herein dealt with him; and to
discuss them briefly apart. I suppose a little self-love, and selfe-respect
proceeding from it, had (...). Plut. de amie. and adul. and de util. ex inimic.
ex Platone de leg. lib. 5.
drawn a filme over M. Walkers eyesight, or cast a mist at least before his
eyes, when he entered these pleas; that kept him from considering what the
party was whom himself had so despightfully dealt with.

For first, is M. Walker a Minister of Gods Word? and was not M. Wotton the
same? and that peradventure nothing inferior to M. Walker in ought; however M.
Walker may please to esteem or deem of him. Romans 14. 4.
At whose doom yet, well it is that he neither stands nor falls.

Secondly, as concerning survivorship, I have ever held it, and so still shall,
having (...). Moschio. (...). Dionys. trag. (...). Archiloch. (...) Euripi^.
Antigon. (...). Idem Phaeniss. (...). Sophocl. Ajac. (...) Gregor. Stasim. in
carm. Schol. ad illud Aristoph. Paco. (...). Et Suidas. (...). Hinc diverbia
illa (...). Aristoph. Avib. (...). Soph. Ajac. (...). Laert. Menede^m. (...).
Lucian. de sect. Et vulgar illud, De mor^is nil nisi bonum. Quod (...) Solonis
lege tractum est, (...). Plut. Sol. e Demosth. in Leptin. et in Baeot. Et Chilo
Sparta. (...), Laert.
votes therein with me, I am sure, not a few, until M. Walker shall be able to
convince me of error in it; that it is a worse matter to traduce the dead,
then the living. Since that the one may, the other cannot now make apology for
himself. Besides that it is generally held an argument of (...). P ato
politic. l. 5 Ael^aao Sopb^stae, qui in lmp^ratorem defu^ctum Stylum strinxe*
rat, Phil^stratus, (...). Hinc Antholog. l. 1, c. 5. (...). Audet vel lepus
exanimi ^^sultare lconi. Hectorique jacenti insultat Danaum ignavissimus
quisque Iliad. (...). Et Quamlibet ignavi praecipitata premunt. Naso trist.
lib. 3. eleg. 11. Nec Plancus illepide, eum diceretur Asini^s Pollio orationes
in eum parare, quae post mortem P* anci ederentur, ne respondere posset, cum
mortuis non nisi larvas luctari: quo apud eruditos nihil impudentius judicatur.
Plin. praefat. Hist. not. Itaque Maro AEn. l. 11. Nullum cum victis certamen
and aethere cassis. Deest, esse oportet. Serve.
no ingenuous disposition, to insult over, or deale^ igorously with the
deceased. And it may well be questioned whether an injury done to a Saint in
Heaven, have not the greater guilt, in regard o^ his present estate. Sure I am,
that against those of the Romish party, See Pet. Moulins of the Eucharist.
chap. 13.
our Writers use it as an argument, and Hebr. 12. 25.
the Apostle may well seem to add strength thereunto, that it is a greater
wrong to offer any indignity to Christ's body now glorified in Heaven, then it
had been to do the like unto him then, when in the state of humiliation he
conversed with men here on earth. Nor see I ought, why it may not hold as well
in the other limbs, as in the head; that the greater sin it is to offer any
wrong or contumely to them, the more highly they are now honored and advanced
by God. And what greater wrong or contumely can be done to them, then to blast
their reputations, to charge them with inexpiable crimes, to damn them to Hell,
that now reign with God in Heaven? So Terra novissime complex^ gremio, tum
maxim ut matter operiens, nullo magis Sacramento, quam quod nos quoque sacros
facit. Pl^. Hist. Not. l. 2. c. 65. (...). Pl^t. de ^olon. leg.
sacred has the condition of the deceased been deemed, that it has been
accounted a point of Uhi corpus homi^is demortui co^aas, sacer esto. Numae lex.
Sep^^chrorum sanctitas in ipso solo est, quod null a vi mov^ri nequ^ dele^i
potest. C^c. Philip 9. Ebustis defurctorum lapidem movere, terram evertere,
cespitem evellere^proximum Sa^rilegio majore, nostri semper habu^runt. Julian.
Cod. l. 9. tit. 19. leg. 5. ^nde emen^andus Cod^x. Theodos l 9. tit. 17. l 4.
Defunctorum cineribus violentiam infer, sacrilega praesum^^^. Valent. novel,
tit. 5. Ne Sepu^^hra quidem dirip^r^ and ca^avera ^poliare illicitum ducebant
^a^rilegae v^pilatorum manus. Eu^eb. Hist. Lat. verse. l. 3. c. 4. Sacrilegae
bus^is abstinuere manus. Senec. epigr. 4.
sacrilege, to disturb their remains, or to meddle with the monuments
wherein their corpse lie enclosed. But the godly deceased, (...). Homer. Il.
(...). Plato Menex. (...). Isocr^ Euag. (...). Polyb* l 8. Siquis est sensus in
morte. Cic. Phil. 9. Siquis inferis sensus est Sen ad Po^yb. 6. 18. Siquis vit^
digressis est dolor. Ammian. l. 30.
had they sense and understanding of what is here done, (as they had wont to
speak, and Sic enim and nostri. (...). Greg. in Iul. 1. Idem in Cae^ar. (...).
Idem in Pasc^. (...).
we well may) would without all doubt, account it, as well they might, a far
greater wrong, to have their names tainted with foul aspersions, of this
nature especially, even of the highest and most heinous guilt against the
divine Majesty, then to have their Sepulchers defaced, their graves laid open,
their bodies dug up, their bones burnt, and their ashes either dispersed
into the air, or scattered upon the surface of the waters; or whatsoever other
indignity and insolency the vain rage and fond outrage, not of humane, but of
inhumane spite and malice has exercised upon their remains. Let not M. Walker
therefore deem his offense in this regard the less heinous, because the man
is dead, or Abiit, non obiit. Ambr. Theodos.
deceased rather, whom he thus deals with: wherein peradventure, as (...)
reliquias dissipari* jussit, acerbiore odio, quam si tam sapiens fuisset, quam
v^^emens fuit. Cio. de leg^ l. 2.
he said sometime of Sylla, he had dealt more wisely, had he been less eager.
Nor has he any just cause to complain, because he surviveth; if in the
necessary vindication of the deceased so wronged, his inconsiderate carriage
therein be discovered. If any blemish accrue to himself or his ministry
thereby, he may blame himself rather then any other, who by these violent and
outrageous courses much impeacheth and impaireth his own estimation in the
minds of all moderate men.

For his third plea, in regard whereof he claims an immunity from being thus
dealt with, to wit. Page 1.
His persecution and bonds sustained for the truth.

Of M. Walkers restraint for some time, I have heard. During which also I
sometime visited him at his brothers house. And that he suffered for the truth,
I hope also is true, though it be more then I know; because I know not for what
he suffered. Of his bonds, I never heard till now. If he were ever in bonds,
(God be thanked) he is now free. But however, he might do well to remember,
that M. Wotton, upon occasion of a passage used in his prayer, when the
settling of Church Matters with us was in agitation, (which as things now stand,
I suppose would not be so hainously taken) that His Majesty who then was, might
in that weighty business, not be swayed with prejudice of long or pretended
antiquity, but proceed according to the rule and direction of Gods Word, had
for some good space of time before been deprived of the exercise of his
ministry, and of the means thence arising for the maintenance of him and his;
his charge then depending upon him being greater, then I suppose M. VValkers
either then was, when he so suffered as he says, or now is. And that he lay
still at that very same time under that heavy presure, (which he was never
wholly quit of to his dying day) when M. Walker pursued (I may well say, Galat.
4. 29. with Genesis 21. 90
persecuted him) with those hideous imputations of teaching Letter to M. Wotton
Vindic. p. 15.
divellish heresy and Ibid. p. 16.
blasphemy, and Ibid. p. 10. and Relat. p. 4. 5.
the most pestilent opinions that ever Satan sowed among Christians. Now
whether this his demeanure toward M. Wotton in such times, were to Psalm. 69.
26.
add affliction unto affliction, or no, I leave to any man, not of (...).
Homer. O^ys. (...). and Il. (...). and (...) Odys* (...).
brass bowels, and iron entrals, to determine. This am I sure of, that if M.
VValkers troubles, past and overblown now, may aggravate ought here, the storm
still continuing might much more aggravate there. But this is the common guise
of humane weakness, that men are rather prone to tender (...). Pindar. N^m. 1.
Gr^gor. Stasim. in Iul. 1. and Greg. Pr^^b. in vit. Stas.
their own griefs, then the grievances of others; and to deny that privilege
of Res est sacr^, miscr. Sen. c. epigr. 4.
sanctuary to their adversaries, under which they require yet to find shelter
for themselves. Howsoever, a fond thing it is for any man to imagine, that his
sufferings for the truth, either should seal him a License to rave against,
and rail upon his Christian brethren at pleasure, whether surviving yet, or
deceased; or should protect him against all Apology upon such occasions, made
either by themselves or by others for them, in their behalf.

For as for all that, which in the next place Page 2.
he subjoyneth, in his declamatory way, concerning M. Wottons assertions; how
sincerely they are extracted from M. VVottons writings, or how depraved with M.
VValkers own glosses and fillings; as also how by M. Wotton himself in
writing answered, where they might seem to sound somewhat harshly by collating
place with place, and reducing them to the state of the point there in
question; and lastly, what was thereupon concluded, when these things were at
large long since debated, in a way that M. Walker himself pressed M. Wotton
unto; you have fully laid down in the Relation before mentioned: which M.
Walker also here refers himself unto; and to transcribe again therefore,
would be but lost labor, both to me and to my Reader. That which the rather
also I here wave, because I shall be constrained, treading M. VValkers wild
maze; as now I must do, to meet with them again more then once or twice, where
fitter occasion will be to consider further of them.

After this complaint commenced of me, M. Walker proceeds Page 3.
to lay down the occasion, by which he has provoked me to proclaim so bitterly
against him, and to brand him with breach of piety and charity, and defect of
humanity and common honesty; and to enquire what the cause of my so doing
should be.

Where, first, how I have proclaimed (as he speaks) against him, or what
bitterness I have used, either in my Preface or Postscript, I am well content
that others indifferently affected judge. Howbeit I see none forwarder to
complain of bitterness in others, then (...). Apud Suidam N. Q. (...). Sext.
Empir. Pyrrhon. l. 1. c. 29. Alex. Aphrod probi. l. 1. q 101. Alarcus lmper.
co^mert. l. 6. 57. Greg. Stas. desed* constant.
those that are most troubled with the overflowing of the gall themselves, and
who write ordinarily, as if their pens were dipped and steeped in no other
but that bitter liquor.

Secondly, I demand of M. Walker, where I have thus branded him. True it is,
that I do indeed directly and expressly charge him with Relat. P^st^c^. P. 40.
unequal dealing; and ^d. p. 55.
want of candor in his carriage toward M. Wotton. And this he returns never a
word unto, nor will be able ever to wash off. With those other defaults here
mentioned I do not my self charge him. I affirm only that such carriage as I
there describe, Relat p. 1. 3.
has been ever generally held a breach of piety and charity, and may well be
deemed to argue no small defect of humanity, not to add of common honesty. And
what I therein say, no man, I suppose, will deny; not M. Walker himself. But
whether M. Walker in his late dealing with M. Wotton have so carried himself,
as to contract such guilt, or no, I pronounce not; Relat. p. 3.
I say nothing, but leave it to be deemed and determined by others, upon that
which afterward is related, under the hands, either of M Walker himself, or of
those whom he himself chose, and by his own choice of them made competent
Judges in his cause.

The Proposition therefore there alone is mine; which M. Walker himself does
not, nor I assure my self, will deny.

The Assumption is, either his own or theirs. Yea in effect all his own,
because the verdict of those, whom he referred himself unto.

And the conclusion consequently (which Conclusio partem sequior^m sequitu^.
follows ever the weaker side) as it touches M. Walker, not mine, but
theirs; yea, in very truth, his own.

That he charged M. Wotton with heresy and blasphemy, he denies not: that he
referred himself for the truth of his charge to the hearing of eight grave
Ministers, his own Letter Relat. p. 5. and Vindic. p. 16.
relates: that he failed in his proofs, Relat. p. 38.
they testify under their own hands, whom he referred himself unto: that
notwithstanding that fail, he has now so long after that, since M. Wottons
decease, in print renewed that his charge, his book evidently shows.

The imputation therefore of such guilt, if all that has been related do not
prove M. Walker faulty in such carriage, he remains free enough still from,
for ought that I say. If it do evince him so to have carried himself; it is not
I, but his own carriage, and the verdict of his own Judges, that fast^eth the
imputation upon him.

For, what he here adds of Page 5.
my misrep^rts, he has not hitherto, nor shall ever be able to convince me of
misrelation in ought.

But come we to his enquiry. Where first he moves doubt, Page 5.
whether therefore ^be so offended, because he calls the error, that he
charge M. Wotton to have been the publisher of, herefie. And if that be the
matter he tells me, that howsoever I and my fellow-subscribers (that is the
scornful title that now he gives us) did not think fit (for some causes, of
which hereafter) to call any thing in his Exposition of his speeches by the
name of heresy and blasphemy: yet some of them cited in the Parallel, are by
his own confession manifestly heretical and blasphemous. And that he rather
assented to Beza, Pareus, and Lubbertus, who condemn some things in M. Wottons
expositions for heresy and blasphemy, then to me and my fellows (D. Bailey, M.
Balmford, M. Randall, M. Stock, M. Downhum, M. Gouge, and M. Hickes) who were
pleased to think otherwise. And he hops that therein he gives no offense;
especially having Gods Woudfor his warrant.

Where first, I wonder how the matter against M. Wotton comes so much to be
aba^ed, that from so many pretended heretical and blasphemous errors, whereof
seven horrible heads at least were represented in the Parallel, it should be
brought down now to one single error, to one heresy. M. Walkers heart here,
it may be, did misgive him; suspecting that some of them might be generally by
all votes acquired of heresy at least, if not of error. And he thought it
therefore the wisest and wariest course to pitch upon some one; and yet not to
tell us, which that one (...) ^eant, was, that so he might be free to fasten
where he should think fittest, if either his proofs concerning any of the
other should fail; or those, whom he calls in for Advocates in his own
behalf, and for witnesses to give evidence against M. Wotton, as condemning
his opinions for heretical and blasphemous, should be found voting in some of
them rather for him then against him.

2. Whereas he tells us, that there are somethings in M. Wottons Expositions
(of which term here more anon) which Beza, Pareus and Lubbertus condemn as
heretical and blasphemous; neither yet does he show what those things are, nor
where they so style them. Yea, if to avoid the former exception, he shall say,
that the error he meant and called heresy is this, that Socsnianisme
discovered, p. 1. 4.
Faith, and not Christ's righteousness is imputed for righteousness in the Act
of justification; because he says that his new adversary has so stated the
question; (with whom yet, or his stating the question, I have nothing here to
do) he must be minded, that in the proposition so conceived there are two
positions included; both which he condemns as two pestilent and blasphemous
heresies, and in Parall. Error. 1. and 3 Relat. p. 11. 14.
his Parallel points at either of them apart.

1. That faith is imputed for righteousness. 2. That Christ's righteousness is
not so imputed.
Now for the former, to wit, that Faith is imputed for righteousness; besides
the Apostle Romans 4. 3, 5, 9, 22, 23, 24.
S. Paul more then once averring it, (whom neither these men nor M. Walker, I
hope will so charge) two of them are express and peremptory for it. For so
Beza, writing on those words of the Apostle, Romans 4. 3.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Agitur hic
de eo, quod ipsi d De^ imputatum est, nempe de lpsius side. Beza in Romans 4. 3.
Here, says he, is entreated of that which was imputed to him by God, to wit
of his faith. And again, Paulus activam locutionem passive convertens,
praetermittit affixum Hebraeum, quod vertere potuit (...), ipsam videlicet s^m
Abrahami. Sed hoc ipsum p^stea diserte bis expri^it. nempe versu 5 and 9. Ibid.
Paul relating passively, what Moses spoke actively, omitteth the affix, which
he might have rendered, that thing, to wit, Abraham's faith it self: but he
afterward twice plainly expresses it in the fifth and ninth verses. And
Pareus reconciling the Greek with the Hebrew: Idem valent, Deus imputavit
fidem, and sides a Deo est imputata. Quantum ad sensum duo continet hoc
eloquium; Primo fidem Abrahae; Credidit A. Deo. deinde, fidei fructum, and
imputata est ei (fides) ad justitiam. Par. in Romans 4. 3.
These two are all one, God imputed faith, and faith by God was imputed. As for
the sense, this speech concerning Abraham contains two things: first, his
faith; Abraham believed God. Then the fruit of his Faith; And (faith) was
imputed to him for righteousness. And again, Et imputata est ei (fides) pro
justitia. Fructus fidei Abr. significatur, gratuita justificatio. Ibid.
And (faith) was imputed to him for righteousness. The fruit of Abraham's Faith
is hereby signified, even free justification. (...), non impersonaliter reddi
debere, imputatum est, sed passive, imputata est, nempe fides, ex Hebrae^
textu, and Apostoli declaratione. Verse. 5. and 9. manifestum est. quod ad
sensum Scripturae recte intelligendu^ refert observare. Ibid.
That the Verb should be rendered, not impersonally, but passively; that, to
wit, Faith was imputed; it is manifest, both by the Hebrew Text, and by the
Apostles declaration in the fifth and ninth verses. Which to observe is of much
moment for the right understanding of that Scripture.

And for the latter position, that Christ's righteousness is not imputed in the
act of justification; if by Christ's righteousness be understood his habitual
holiness, or his actual righteousness consisting in the perfect observation
of the Law moral: here also two of M. Walkers Authors must of necessity leave
him, unless they will condemn themselves for blasphemous heretics. For both
Pareus and Lubbe^tus, going Ursines and Piscators way, hold justification to
consist wholly in remission of sins. For so Pareus expressly (besides what out
of him Relat. Postscript. p. 58.
elsewhere) in his Commentaries before mentioned; Apostolus justificationem in
sola remissione peccatorum constituit. P^ran Romans 4. 7. Dub. 5.
The Apostle places justification in the Remission of sins alone. Nor does
Manifestum est, non imputar^ peccatum, poni pro justificare, Lub. ad Socin. l.
2. c. 2. p. 124. col. 2. Saepe ostendimus justificationem contineri gratuita
peccatorum remissione. Ibid. l. 4. c. 10. p. 551. col. 2.
Lubbertus herein depart from him. And both therefore also herein concur;
that they ground our justification, not upon the Righteousness of Christ, so
understood, as has been said; but on the merit of, and satisfaction made by
his sufferings. That which, as for Pareus, by a whole De justitia Christi
Activa, and Passiva Epist. ad Com. Lud. Witgen.
Treatise written of purpose by him about that Argument, does most evidently
appear; so for Lubbertus is also clear enough, by diverse In (...) est
justitia duplex, divina and humana. Humana est inhaerens, and acquisita, illam
vocant habitualem; hanc meritoriam. de illa loquitur Apus. Heb. 7. 26. and 1
Pet. 3. 18. de hac Romans 5. 9. per unam satisfactionem. v. 19. Lubb. c^ntr.
Socin. l. 3. c. 5. Sanguine, srve obedientia Christi justificamur formalite^;
fide instrumentaliter. Ibid. c. 2. p. 355. Duo ad justificationem reqiruntur;
unum, ut Christus pro peccatis nostris mortuus sit, atque ita pro eis
satisfaciat: alterum, ut nos hanc Christi solutionem five satisfactionem vera
fide recipiamus. Ibid. l. 4. c. 9 p. 547. Haec justitia, s^ve obedientia, iive
(...) Christi, sive denique sacrificium, sive sanguis Christi, sive solutio
pretii redemptionis nostrae a Christo sacta, absolvit nos (...) reatu,
constituit nos justos, justificat nos, etc. Ibid. c. 1. p. 445, 44^. Christi
enim obedientia, quam Patri in morte pro nobis praestitit, est vera illa
justitia, qua Patri reconciliamur. Ibid. c. 4. p 472.
passages, even in those works which were written by him professedly against
the errors of Socinus. Yea so far does Pareus proceed herein, that he sticks
not to avow that, Qui obedientiae activae, aut sanctitati nativae, meritum
justitiae ascribunt, mortem Christi sine dubio inanem reddunt. Par. de justit.
Christi activ. and pass. pofit. 5. p. 181.
Those that ascribe the merit of righteousness unto Christ's active obedience
or his native holiness, M^rti Christi justificationem contra Scripturas
derogant. Ibid. p 182.
do thereby derogate from the death of Christ, and do undoubtedly make it vain,
or superfluous. Now I would gladly understand from M. Walker what he thinks
of Pareus, and whether he count not him a blasphemous heretic, as well as M.
Wotton. As for me and my fellows, as in scorn now he calls them, (tho
peradventure as good men as M. Walker himself) I hold it no disgrace to me, to
be yoaked with such; and to have deemed rather as they, then as M. Walker
either then did, or now does. Mean while how little cause M. Walker has to
crake so much of these Authors, by what has been said, may easily be deemed;
and muchlesse to affirm, what so confidently Letter to M. Wotton. p. 15.
elsewhere he does, that he has all learned Divines agreeing with him in what
he holds: and that Page 6, 7.
the whole stream of learned Orthodox Divines hold the same Doctrine with him
concerning justification by Christ's righteousness imputed to believers. Which
in such sense and manner as he maintains it, he cannot but know to be most
untru^; unless he will expunge Pareus, Piscator, and I know not how many more,
generally so esteemed, on^ of the List of learned and Orthodox Divines.

3. Yea but M. Wotton* (...) M. W^lker, is Page 3, 4.
proved a blasphemous (...) by h^ ^onf^ssion. I answer in a word. How M. (...)
^th the denial of Christ's righteousness imp^ to be here^icall and
blasphemous; he plainly ex^resseth himself in his Answer to error 1. Relat.
p. 22.
defense; whence M. Walker produces it. To which therefore, and M. Bradshawes
Preface to his English Treatise of justification, I refer the Reader: yet so,
that of the one, and out of the other, somewhat hereafter also shall be said.

4. How far forth M. Walker has Gods Word for his warrant, in condemning M.
Wotton, not of error (for that neither was, nor is the question) but of
heresy and blasphemy (for that was the point in controversy, when time was)
he has not yet made to appear, no more then he did. For what here fondly and
ridiculously in that kind he presumes, by the sentence of his own delegates,
he was not then able to make good.

What else is Page 5.
here ferced in, concerning the carriage of the business at that meeting, shall
in its due place (by Gods assistance) be discussed.

The other doubt he moves concerning the cause of my proclaiming so bitterly
against him, and being so highly offended with him, is, Ibid.
Whether it be, because he calls M. Wotton by the name of Anthony Wotton. And
if that be the cause, he tells me, that Sic scil. bear solet ami^os.
therein he did him a favor. For that under that obscure t^^le, his person
might have been hid, and not made known to any but those, who are acquainted
with all the passages between him and M. Walker. But M. Gataker is the man,
that has exposed his person to much shame, and stained his name and memory
with the brand of heresy, etc.

Sure he must be some, not merry, but very sad person, not grave and sage
only, that can read this passage without laughing, or smiling at least.

Which to show, let me entreat M. Walker to make M. Wottons case a while here
his own. M. Walker, as by his Parallel plainly appears, Relat. Paral. error
2. p. 13.
denies Faith to be a condition on man's part required unto the attaining of
justification. Now suppose that some one of his own spirit should thereby take
occasion, in a Treatise of his published many years after M. Walkers decease,
to traduce him for the same, by the name of George Walker, as the first
publisher in this Land of a most pestil^^t heresy; and thereby charge him to
have made himself See Relat. p 54.
guilty of Paganism, Ind^is^ and Mahumetanism. Would it not be ridiculous, for
the party having so dealt with him, to demand of one that should write in his
defense, Why he is so highly offended with him, and whether it be for this
cause or no, because he calls him George Walker? etc. For were it not all o^,
as if some rude fellow, having c^st a shovell of du^t or two upon a man, as he
passes in the street, should ask the party so misused, contesting with him
about it, what he aileth to be so offended with him; and whether it be, because
he did not make him a leg, or give him, as we use to say, the time of the
day. He might as well have moved question, whether I were not so offended,
because he styles him barely Anthony Wotton, and not Mr. A. Wotton: Or whether
because he calls him Anthony and not Antonie, as he usually and rightly wrote
his name, save that by the Printers correction, or corruption rather, he found
it so also in my relation.

But that that follows, is yet more ridiculous, that herein he did M. Wotton
a singular favor. For under that obscure title he had lien hid and unknown to
any, but those alone that had been acquainted with all that had passed between
M. Walker and him.

Is the name of Antonie Wotton then so obscure a title? or are there so many of
note so named, that this our A Wotton may lie hid in the heap, among the
multitude of them, unless be be by some special notes and marks otherwise
deciphered? And yet any man, not utterly crackt-brained, would have thought,
that M. Walkers Socinianism discovered and confuted. p. 6.
Anthony Wotton, one that some 28. years ago lived in London, and there in
Manuscript Pamphlets and Printed books dispersed his opinions concerning
justification, and Ibid. Epist. p. 2.
by the fame and opinion, which men had of his great learning and no less
piety, drew many zealous professors into the liking of his errors; and
afterward Socin. disc. p. 7.
^rought a book De Reconciliati^e, in Latin, etc. Any man would think, I
say, unless he wanted his ^its that thus much were sufficient to discover, who
the man were, that M. Walker meant, though they that read him were not privy to
all M. Walkers either revilings of him in public, or baitings of him in
private. Suppose M. Walkers adversary before assigned him, had only styled
him, George Walker, one that so many years ago had in the City of London out
of the Pulpit inveighed and declamed often against M. Wottons writings and M.
Bradshaws works, as containing much heretical and blaspemous matter, etc. were
it not enough to let men know who the man were that be meant (notwithstanding I
suppose there be and have been about the City more Walkers then Wottons)
unless they had been acquainted with all things, that either at the solemn
meeting of Ministers, or in private otherwise, had passed between him and M.
Wotton.

But that, which herein exceeds all the rest; is, that Page 5.
M. Gataker by his relation of the business that passed between them, and
thereby blasoning his Arms, has exposed him to sh^me, and stained his name
with the brand of here^ie.

I never knew that I had any skill in Heraldry before; nor have heard of
staining with brands till now. Two new trades M. Walker has here put upon me,
both which I must needs profess my self utterly unskilful in. But to let
these things pass; whether of the two, stain a man's name, and expose him to
shame; he that publicly charge him with heresy and blasphemy; or he that
publishes his acquitall from such horrid imputations, by the verdict, and
under the hands of those, whom the same party appellant himself had made
therein his Judges; I am well content that any, not wholly in Nec saui esse ^is
non^nus jaret Orestes Pers. sat 3.
Orestes his mood, whatsoever else he be, determine.

After this Preamble thus premised, M. Walker proceeds to his Narration. Page
5 9.
The former part whereof is spent in such stories, as M. Walker is pleased to
entertain his Reader withal, of matters foregoing the Meeting of the Ministers
before mentioned, concerning Page 5, 6.
himself and his reading and preaching, Page 6.
M. Richardson and his approbation of M. Walkers censures passed upon M.
Wottons opinion; Page 6, 7.
M. Wottons dealing, and Page 8.
the carriage of some of his followers.

All which yet I suppose no man is bound to make any part of his Creed. Such of
them especially as are grounded upon other men's reports; as the frivolous and
ridiculous tale, that Page 8, 9.
his Clarke, he says, told him, concerning some of M. Wottons Disciples and
himself; and may the rather be questioned, because in the ensuing Discourse
are found some very palpable untruths; and such as were to be charged upon M.
Walker himself, were they not salved with a some say. And what he reports
Page 7.
of M. VVottons juggling repeated again Page 13.
in his Epistle, and Epist. before his discovery p. 5.
elsewhere, is by M. Wotton very confidently and peremptorily denied, as shall
hereafter be related.

As for that he relates of M. Richardsons censure, both Page 6.
here, and Page 25, 26.
hereafter, be it true or no; I say only thus much to it: that if M. Richardson
shall condemn all those for blasphemous heretics, who deny the imputation of
Christ's righteousness consisting in the perfect observation of the Law Moral
unto justification; and hold justification to consist wholly in remission of
sins: (which I conceive to be M. VVottons principal error, and wherein I
dissent both from him and them) he shall together with M. Wotton exclude from
life eternal Olevian, Piscator, Ursinus, Pareus, Scultetus, Altingius,
Cameron, and many other Worthies, who were as famons and bright lights in the
Church of God here, as ever M. Richardson was, while he lived; and (if the
Prophet Dan. 12. 3.
Daniel may be believed) do now shine as Stars in the Kingdom of heaven,
and so shall do for ever and ever; whatsoever doom M. Richardson, or M. Walker
shall pass on them. For my part I deem this their censure not unlike that
other conceit, that I remember to have heard M. Walker sometime maintain, and
is fathered likewise upon the same party, (concerning whom, I forbear to
speak my mind, lest I undergo the lash of M. Walkers tongue) that, The fall
of our first parents proceeded not from the mutability of their will: and that
all that hold it to have thence proceeded, by so holding, make God the Autour
of sin. By which censure all the Divines in the World (for ought I know, M.
Walker, and M. Richardson, if he at least so also held, only excepted) are
condemned of extreme impiety; yea of Atheism, or worse, (if See Vindicat. p.
34. 35.
M. Walkers manner of arguing by deduction may go for current) since that Quid
interest Deos neges, an infames? Senec. ^p. 133. (...) Plut. de. supers^it.
(...). Porphyr. de abstin. l. 2. (...). Epiphani aneor.. 9.
it is much at one, to hold God to be wicked, and to hold him no God at all.

But this former part of M. Walkers Narration, be it what it will, nothing at
all concerns me, who begin my Relation at M. Walkers Letter, and the meeting
that thereupon ensued.

Out of his Letter, wherewith he begins the latter part of it, I Relat. p.
4. 5.
relate only M. Walkers charge and his challenge. Which that they are there
found, among much other lavish and menacing language, in as many words as I
relate them; by M. Walkers own Vindic. p. 9. 18.
Transcript of it may evidently appear.

With the main substance whereof, (being such as sufficiently discovers by
what spirit it was endited) I shall not much meddle; but shall only relate what
I find written in the margent of a copy of it (testified to be a true copy by
the attestation of M. Stephen Egerton, and M William Gouge thereunto annexed)
with M. Wottons own hand.

Against those words, Vindic. p. 10.
If you had not refused to join with me in a Christian Conference, etc.

I never had any such offer made me from you.

Against those words, Page 12.
You in scorn sent me to one Spencer, etc.

The party will be deposed, that this is altogether false,

Against those words, Page 12.
This your doing when I complained to you of face to face, you excused as done
in ignorance of mine intent and desire.

This is most false.

Against those words, Page 13.
Did I not then show both patience, love, and all good affection?

How true the report of this conference is, they that were by can witness: and
to them I appeal.

Upon Page 13.
that passage, before Page 7.
also mentioned, and yet before that at large related and pressed, in his
Epistle prefixed before his Socinianisme discovered and confuted, concerning a
place of Luther, that M. Wotton should allege, covering with his fingers some
part of it in the same page, that made against him, against those words, Page
13.
If you deny this, God is my witness, and mine own conscience.

God is my witness against you, that this is most falsely reported by you.

Against those words, Page 14.
They and you were so far from amendment, that you made me amends with all
railing and reviling language.

If you speak of me, it is most untrue: for others I cannot answer.

Against those words, related as M. Wottons, concerning the Bishop of London,
Page 15.
You dare not co^it your self to him, because he is a wicked Judge, and will
respect persons in judgment: my friends are too potent with him.

The Lord let me find no mercy with him, if ever I said so, or thought so of
the Bishop of London.

Other notes I let pass, being less material, or concerning other men rather
then M. Wotton him self. But for the further and fuller clearing of this last
clause, I shall subjoyne out of a letter of M. Egertons written to M. Wotton,
dated May 23. 1614 under his own hand, the very words that M. Wotton used
concerning the Bishop.

M. Eg^rtons Letter to M. Wotton.
Among some other passages, you had this speech in effect, that you thought
that my Lord of London would not willingly do any thing, that might impeach M
Walker, because (as you had heard) his brother of Cheswick was very gracious
with my Lo^d. Thus much in effect, and not a jot more, did I signify to M.
Walker only by way of demand, etc. How soundly and charitably M. Walker
collected hereupon, that you either said or intimated, that you durst not
commit your self to the Bishop of London, because he is a wicked man, etc. I
leave it to others to determine. This I profess, that neither when I received
it from you, nor when I told it to his ear, I did so much as conceive or
imagine, that you had any such conceit of my Lord of London.

Thus that reverend Divine, now with the Lord: by whose testimony may appear,
how prone M. Walker is to tenter out men's words, beyond all, not charitable
only, but even reasonable, construction.

From his Letter, M. Walker proceeds to the Meeting or Conference therein
required; which he says is Vindic. p. 9.
the subject of mine invective against him.

In relating whereof yet I use no Invective at all. I report only what was
done and exhibited on both parts: and what resolved by the parties on either
side deputed to hear and decide. Neither of which M. Walker either does or can
deny.

But M. Walker must give me leave, to deal here a little more freely with him;
and to tell him in plainer terms, that many things delivered in this part of
his Narration, are either utterly untrue, or such as may justly be suspected of
untruth.

1. He makes his very entrance into it with a manifest untruth, tho a matter
of no great moment. He says, that Page 19.
Upon the receipt and reading of that his Letter, M. Wotton sent him a Letter of
defiance, and therein professed his scorn and disdain of his threatenings: but
the next day he sent him another, wherein he promised to yield to his motion.
Which, tho not much material, whether so or no, yet is not true. For M. Wotton
sent him but one Letter with a Postscript of diverse date added thereunto:
which must needs therefore come to M. Walkers hands both at once; and not the
one this day, and the other the next, as M. Walker here relates it. M. Wotton
had indeed begun and gone on a good way in a large Answer to M. Walkers whole
Letter; which is yet to be seen; and I could well have been content to afford
it room here, save that I found it unfinished, and withal was loath to make
this discourse overlong. But therein it seems he altered his mind, and sent him
this shorter. Which, if but to show the difference of these two men's spirits, I
have thought good here to insert.

To Mr. George Walker, peace of conscience, by true zeal with Sobriety and
Charity.
SIR, if you have any true desire of my good, especially testified by prayer to
God for me, the Lord requite your love, and uphold me in the continuance of the
like duty for you now and ever. But I must plainly profess, that I can hardly
be persuaded of the truth of your protestation: because I find your present
Letters, being the first that ever I received from you, so full of bitterness.
Yet could I have been contented to have made some Answer to them, but that I
see it would be to small or no purpose. For a great part of your vehement
accusation concerns other men, and not me: who am not (in any equity) to be
charged with their faults, (if any have so faulted) (...). The things, which
touch my self, are all, either utterly untrue, or misreported by you. And to
what purpose were it, for me to deny, and you to affirm; and so as it were
out-vy one another credit? Concerning the offer you make of putting the points
in question, whether first you do justly charge me with heresy and blasphemy;
and whether secondly, my writings do not show me to be a Socinian; I could
happily have yielded thereunto, without excepting against any one whom you
name, if you had not so violently sought it, by frighting me (as you imagined)
with complaining, to my L. of Canterbury his Grace and the Commission, of me,
if I refused. Good M Walker do not think me so childish or foolish, that I can
be scared with such terrors and menacings. I am so thoroughly resolved of the
truth I hold, differing immane quantum from Socinus blasphemy, and so well
persuaded of my Lords soundness in judgment, and the equal hearing I shall
have in that Court, that I am not afraid to put the matter there to trial.
Wherefore use your discretion, either in this, or in any other course, that
shall best please you: I will always be ready to maintain the truth I know,
and to acknowledge that, I yet know not, whenever it shall be discovered to
me by the Word of God. To whose gracious blessing I commend the pardoning and
reforming of this and all other wrongs you have done me, and rest,

Towerhill, May 5. 1614. Yours as it becomes a Christian to be ANTONY WOTTON.
Postscript.
Since the writing of this Letter, I have been persuaded by them, by whom I am
willing to be advised and ruled, to yield to your motion, which by this
Postscript I now signify unto you; Conditionally, that all things, wherewith
you charge me in your Letter may also be heard, and the Letter it self
scanned, as they, that shall be and are chosen, shall think meet. The manner
of this trial, with the time and pl^ce, must (in reason) be left to their
wisdoms and liking. Whom I will choose, you shall understand from me, upon
signification that you accept of this condition. The expectation of your former
Messenger, who said he would call for an Answer, has made me to put off the
writing of this till now.

May 12.



Thus have you M Wottons Letter of defiance, as M. Walker is pleased to style
it, so full of scorn and disdain; nothing suitable indeed to M. Walkers
Invective, nor savouring at all of his furious spirit. And you have withal in
the Postscript the reason of the delay of M. Wottons answer, returned thereunto
not without the Postscript because detained by him till then. That which also
is testified by M. Walkers own Letter written in answer hereunto; wherein he
professes himself to have been at the first sight of M. Wottons Letter much
troubled, as in some other respects, so in regard of the refusal of his
motion, and the defiance (as there also he terms it) of his threatenings;
until he found at last to his comfort, an acceptance of his motion, upon the
advice of his friends.

2. That which next follows, has as little truth in it as the former, being
a matter of more moment; to wit, that Vindic. p. 19.
M. Wotton, After that by Letter to M. Walker he had promised to yield to his
motion about a conference, did by M. Mason the Bishops Chaplen use means to
make it known to the Bishop, in hope that he would forbid the meeting. Whereas
M. Wotton had not yet written to M. Walker, that he would accept of that his
offer, (desirous rather of a public hearing, then a private conference) until
he had been with the Bishop, See Relat. p. 56.
whom he importuned for an open and judiciary trial; and being pressed by him
rather to condescend to the course by M. Walker propounded, had thereupon
consented and yielded thereunto; upon condition that the Bishop would assign
one of his Chaplens to be a party in the hearing; who to satisfy M. Wottons
request therein, appointed M. Mason then present, to M. Wotton otherwise a
mere stranger, to undertake that employment. After which therefore M. Wotton
added the Postscript above recited, to his Letter, lying yet by him, because
not yet called for by M. Walkers messenger, according to M. Wottons expectation
and his promise.

3. It is not true, that Vindic. p. 19.
M. Hicks and my self bare our selves at the meeting, toward M. Walker as an
Adversary, or as Advocates for M. Wotton: Unless to require the forbearance of
railing and reviling terms, and endeavoring to have the business fairly and
calmly carried, without Invectives and Declamations, which M. Walker, if let
alone, would never have made an end of, may bear such an interpretation. And
yet M. Hicks (a man whom to my knowledge I never saw before or since, nor know
I how M. Walker knows to be Ibid.
of M. Wottons mind in all points) spoke least in the business of the most
there present, being the youngest among us, and a man of very modest and
moderate carriage. But somewhat must be fastened on a man least known; because of
the better known it would not be so easily believed.

4 It is not true that Ibid.
D. Westfield was the only man there, with whom M. Walker had then any great
familiarity. For M. Stock and he, as they were next neighbors in their
charges, so were very familiar; tho for his kindness he have been but ill
rewarded by M. Walker in some Page 22, 23.
passages here ensuing. For I leave it to M. Walker to reconcile his own
relations; wherein he tells us, here, that Page 19.
he was but a stranger of two years residence in the City at the time of our
meeting Anno 1614. and yet before in the very entrance, that Page 1.
the controversy between M. Wotton and himself began Anno 1611. He was belike
very busy in the City, before he had any residence in the City. But this (...)
being in his own acts, himself, I hope, will some way assoll.

5. Nor is it true, that the parties designed, were Page 19.
all of them M. Wottons old familiar friends. What any of the rest might be, I
cannot certainly say; tho of few of them, I suppose, M. Walker is able to make
it good. But for my self, I was then but lately grown into acquaintance with
him by occasion of my removal from Lincolns-Inne to Rederith. Besides that
there had much strangeness grown before that time (as See of Pavl and Barnabas,
Acts 15. 39. Chryso^^ome and Ep^mus, S^crates Hist. Eccl. (...). 6 c. 13.
Hierome and Aug^stine in then Ep^stles to either Hierome and Ruffine, in
Hieromes Epistles and Invectives.
between the best and holiest sometime it falls out) between M. Stock and M.
Wotton, a thing too well known to, and much lamented by, many interressed in
either.

6. It is not true, that Page (...).
I derided him, when he gave in his charge of Socinian heresy and blasphemy
against M. Wotton. For I never so did. Tho I confess, I could not forbear
smiling at the reading of Relat p. 13.
the second point in his Parallel condemned as a blasphemous Socinian heresy.
And I suppose that scarce any sound and judicious Divine will be able to read
it sine risu aut stomacho.

7. Nor is it true, that Vindic. p. 19.
Dr. Baily came in amongst us, as by M. Walker designed to succeed in the room
of D. Westfield. For D. Westfield was expected that very day, that D. Baylie
intruded himself into our company, tho very likely indeed; not without M.
Walker^ privity and procurement, to disturb our proceedings. Yet not pretending
to appear in D. Westfields room, however afterward he supplied it, to make up
the number; but making bold forsooth to associate himself with us, See Relat.
p 8, 9.
because we met in his Church. The most of the rest misliking, and muttering at
it among themselves, as desirous rather of his room then his company. And
that, as for some other reasons not so fit to be here related; so the rather
for that no sooner almost he was set down among us, but he began to quarrel
with M. Wotton about his ap parrell, because he went not in a Ministerial
habit.

8. Whereas it is added, that Page 15.
D. Westfield refused after our first meeting, to meet any more, (which yet
unto the rest of us he never once intimated) because he perceived a general
inclination in us all to favor M. Wotton, as foreseeing and fearing what
followed. As therein M. Walker taxes not me alone, but the whole company of
open partiality: so it may rather justly be surmised, that D. Westfield being
of a mild and moderate disposition, forbear further to present himself among
us, being wearied out with M. Walkers furious and intemperate carriage,
sufficient to have tired us all: and this I suppose they will the more incline
to, that know the man's temper.

9. It is not true, that Page 19. 20.
M. Walker did at first desire of us, that having in writing paralleld M.
Wottons words with Socinus his, we would give our hands to his parallel, and
subscribe, that he had not charged M. Wotton with any opinions or words but his
own; or consuted under the name of Socinianisme any words of his, wherein he
con^urred not with Socinus. For See Relat. p. 9.
neither was there at first any mention of a Parallel; nor came the motion of
it, when it was afterward mentioned, from M. Walker; but was after some wast of
time spent to no purpose in clamorous declamations and invectives, by my self
propounded; that we might thereby the better discern, how the case stood
concerning the matters controverted, and bring the business to some good
issue: nor was any such subscription ever on M. Walkers part required; who as
he now seoffeth us by the name of Subscribers; so could not after due hearing
endure to hear of any subscribing; well wotting by the verdict of the whole
company, what the subscription was like to be.

10. He frames Page 19, 20.
his narration, as if his Parallels had been read alone without M. Wottons
Answer: and that Page 20.
upon the reading and examining of them, they appeared to some of them so
clear, and his cause so just, that the same day at dinner Dr. Baylie did
protest, that M. Walker had discovered M. Wotton to be as damned an heretic
as ever did tread on English ground: and after again, that Page 22.
the said Doctor upon the first reading of M. Wottons speeches so paralleld,
condemned M. Wotton for an heretic, and his errors for blasphemy. To wit, at
a private table, as before he had related. Now whether D. Baylie spoke thus or
no, I will not call in question; because M. Walker says he has sufficient
witnesses of it. But this I say:

1. That his Parallel was not delivered in before or without M. Wottons Answer.
For so See Relat. p. 10.
it was agreed. Nor were all the Parallels or points paralleld read over at
once; but severally related, considered of, and examined, together with M.
Wottons answer thereunto, and both withal debated, as they stood in order, and
came to hand, some one day, and some an other.

2. For the Doctors speech, (howsoever his judgment, I suppose, so rashly
given especially, will bear no great weight with those that thoroughly knew the
man and his manner) if it were such as M. Walker says; and were delivered, as
he implies, upon the very first hearing of M. Walkers charge only read,
before he had heard M. Wottons defense: it may seem, he was of that mind, that
Zeno Phocylidis dictum illud notabat, (...). Plut. de Stoic. contradict.. 4.
the Stoike sometime was, who held it a ridiculous thing to hear any defendant
or second party: tho most wise men have ever been John 7. 51. Act. 15. 16.
Neminem praedamnare incognita causa licet. Lactant l. 5. c. 1.
of a contrary judgment; requiring (...). Plut. Alex. (...), Anton. M^. (...).
c. 53.
the one ear at least to be reserved for the defendant; and condemning those
of Qui statuit aliquid. part i^audita aliera; AEquum licet fiatu^rit, ^aud
aequs fuit. Sense. Med. 1. 2. (...). Menand.
unjust and unequal dealing, albeit the sentence they pass be agreeable to
right, that condemn a man unheard.

But, if the Doctor then said, as M. Walker says he did; and yet afterward
did under his hand acquit M. Wotton of heresy and blasphemy, as it is
acknowledged that he did; one of the two must of necessity follow, either that
he altered his judgment therein upon the hearing of M. Wottons defense,
considering better of the business then before he had done; or that he gave
sentence and subscribed directly contrary to his own judgment, and so Iudex
damnatur, cum nocens absolvitur. P. Syrus.
in acquitting M. Wotton condemned himself. Of either whereof let M. Walker
choose which he please, and make the best use of it for his own advantage.

11. Howbeit to afford the Doctor a plaster, wherewith to salve his credit,
herein somewhat impeached, M. Walker brings in the party, at whose house
they dined, demanding, Page 20.
Why they did not then without more ado justify M. Walker, and censure M.
Wotton. M. Walker might much better himself rather have asked the Doctor, why
he said not so much openly at the meeting; or how it came to pass that he did
not there utter any one syllable or title tending thereunto; whenas at the
table now (whereby any man may deem of the Doctors discretion, if all that M.
Walker tells of him be true) he so freely and fully passed and published his
censure. Now to this question of his hoasts M. Walker shapeth this answer, (in
whose person uncertain; for M. Walker is nothing clear in these his
dramaticall discourses) Ibid.
They pretended, that they desired to convert, not to confound M. Wotton; that
they perceived him to be afraid of a storm like to fall on him: and that if I
would yield to let him expound himself, he would by a wrested exposition
gainsay and contradict his former words and opinions, and run from them: which
being gotten from him under his own hand, they would either hold him to it, or
shame him for ever, if he did fall back again.

Such a passage, as I know not, nor any man else, I think, what to make of.

For first, who be the They, that he speaks of? was it the Doctor alone, that
told all this fair tale, and pretended all this? how comes he then to say,
They? Or if M. Downham be included, who is related to have dined at the same
time with them; how does M. Walker, in his ensuing Discourse make him (...).
Muta persona.
a mute Actor in this Scene, one that Page 22.
by silence only assented to, what the Doctor then said? Again, where, think
we, means he, that all this was pretended? was it pretended at the Table? or
was it related only there; but pretended before at the meeting among our
selves? But I shall leave it to any man of ordinary understanding to conceive,
how likely it is; either that M. Wottons friends (for such M. Walker says they
were all) should thus conspire to ensnare him; or that such a consultation
should be had among us in the presence of M. Wotton himself. For we did
nothing at our meetings but in the presence of M. Wotton and M. Walker; who
were neither of them ever excluded, or required to withdraw themselves upon any
occasion, during the whole hearing. But M. Walker it may well seem, was
somewhat distracted in mind, when he writ this; studying how to bring in
handsomely what himself had invented, and uncertain whom to father and fasten
it upon. For mark, I pray you, what immediately follows.

12. Page 20.
This course, says he, being M. Gatakers device, I refused to yield unto:
because I had never opposed M. Wotton, but only in his opinions formerly
published, and and not in future Expositions: and because I had fully proved my
charge, I desired their verdict and just judgment. But after much importunity
I yielded; and so lost my cause, and was drawn into a new business; that was,
to contend with M. Wotton, not about his former opinions, but about new
expositions, which he would make in answer to my Parallel.

In which words are couched many gross falsehoods: nor was the former passage
so intricate, but this is much more untrue.

1. He affirmed before, that They pretended this and that; and thereupon
plotted to get I know not what under M. Wottons hand. Now he tells his
Reader, that This course was M. Gattakers device. Quo teneam vultus mutantem
Protea nodo?
Where at length shall we have him?

2. True it is indeed, I was the first mover, that M. Walker might be requested
to make such a parallel; as Relat. p. 9.
in my relation I acknowledge. But that I ever had any such pretense, as M.
Walker here talks of, or ever made any motion for ought under M. Wottons
hand, is most untrue. M. Wotton only himself moved, (as I Relat. p. 9, 10.
elsewhere relate) that he might have the Parallels sent him from M. Walker a
day or two before the next hearing, that he might subjoyn his answer and
defense thereunto.

3. That M. Walker refused to yield thereunto, and was by mere importunity
drawn to admit it, is likewise most false. For it was presently deemed most
equal on all sides: nor did M. Walker in the least manner make any show of
dislike.

4. It is a like true, that upon the giving in of his parallel, he required our
verdict; that course being not as yet condescended unto, which he terms my
device. When as the course mentioned, and by M. Wotton himself motioned, was
agreed upon before his parallel was composed, and much more then, before it was
exhibited. So that by M. Walkers relation a verdict should have been past by
his Judges, while the parallel, containing the evidence, was as yet, if as yet
at least, in the Actors brain only.

But to take the business, and discuss it a while, as M. Walker here relates
it.

First, I refer it to any indifferent man's judgment to determine, whether it
were agreeable to equity, for M Walker to require a verdict of his Judges, (as
he terms them) or for them to give it in his behalf, against M. Wotton, upon
a bare sight of some positions found as well in M. Wotton, as in Socinus,
(supposing it so to be) before M. Wottons defense were either exhibited or
heard. And here let me crave leave to show the unreasonablenesse of such a
request, and it be but by one instance. M Walker in his Parallel charge this
Position upon M. Wotton, as a point of Socinianism, an heretical and
blasphemous assertion, that Prallel. Er^or. 2. Relat. p. 13.
Faith is a condition appointed by God to be performed on our parts for
obtaining of justification. Now, it being granted, that the very same words
were by M. Walker exhibited, (which yet precisely they are not) as well out of
Socinus his works, as out of M. VVottons writings: had it not been, think we,
a very discreet part of them whom the business was committed unto, to have
without more ado, so censured it, as M Walker had charged it, and in so
censuring it, to have condemned themselves, (who openly to M. Walkers face
Relat. p. 36.
professed, that they had often taught it) and not themselves alone, but all
orthodox Divines (for ought I know) in the whole world; yea the Apostle S. Paul
himself to boot too, if some of them may be believed; for Socinians and
blasphemous heretics? For I would fain know of M Walker, how this differs
that he so charge, from what Pareus says, and avoweth to be S. Paul's, that
Fidem inserit, ut d^ccat Pidem esse conditi^m, sub qua Christus nobis datus est
propitiatorium. Pareus in Romans 3. 25.
Faith is the condition, under which Christ is given us for a propitiation. Or,
not to look out abroad, but to keep our selves at home; I should desire to
understand from him, what he thinks of these passages in some writers of our
own; and those men of no mean note neither.

First, that of M. Fox, Conditio, qua proprie justificamur, ea est, ut in
Christum credamus. Fox de Christ. great. justif. p. 244.
The condition whereby we are properly justified is this, that we believe in
Christ. And again, Promissio Evangelica nulla^ exigit conditionem aliam,
praeter fidem duntaxat, qua credimus in filium Dei. Ibid p. 240.
The Evangelicall promise requires no other condition to the attaining of
salvation, besides Faith only, whereby we believe on the Son of God.

Secondly, that of M. Perkins, in his Reformed Catholic; Reform. Cathol.
Point. 4. of Justificat. the manner, Differ. 2. Reason 1.
In the Covenant of Grace, two things must be considered: the substance
thereof, and the condition. The substance of the Covenant is, that Righteousness
and life everlasting is given to Gods Church and people by Christ. The
condition is, that we for our parts are by faith to receive the foresaid
benefits. And this condition is by grace as well as the substance.

Or if these men be not of that esteem with M. Walker, but that he can be
content to let them go for damned heretics, to bear M. Wotton company in the
same condemnation, I should crave to be informed, what he deemeth of M. Pemble,
M. Will. Pe^bles Uindiciae. Or, Plea for grace, that especially of faith.
some of whose works he has deigned to honor with a Dedicatory Epistle;
wherein he commends him, as M. G. Walker Epist. to the Christian Reader.
a righteous and faithful servant of Christ, excelling in grace and virtue,
abounding in all wisdom, and in all knowledge, lively sense and utterance of
heavenly and supernatural mysteries, far above all that could be expected
from, or is ordinarily found in one of his age and years. Ibid.
Nor doubts therefore, nor is afraid to say of him, that he is ascended up
into that supercelestiall glory, toward which he had ever bent all his studies
and desires. This M. Pemble then, whom M. Walker thus extolleth, and not
altogether undeservedly, in another of his works has these words: M. W.
Pemble, Vindiciae Fidei, or, Of justification by Faith, Sect. 2. chap. 1. p. 23.
There are two covenants that God has made with man: by one of which salvation
is to be obtained. The one is the Covenant of works, the tenor whereof is, Do
this, and thou shall live. The other is the Covenant of Grace, the tenor
whereof it, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. The condition
of this Covenant, Ibid. p. 22.
(required in them that shall be justified) is faith. The performance whereof
differs from the performance of the condition of that other Covenant. Do this
and live, is a compact of pure justice; wherein wages is given by debt; so that
he that does the work obeying the Law, may in strict justice for the work sake
claim the wages, eternal life, upon just desert. Believe this and live, is a
compact of freest and purest mercy; wherein the reward of eternal life is
given us in favor for that, which bears not the least proportion of worth
with it: so that he that performs the condition, cannot yet demand the wages,
as due unto him in severity of justice, but only by the grace of a free
promise, the fulfilling of which he may humbly sue for. And again, Ibid. p. 24.
Although the act of justification of a sinner be properly the only work of God,
for the only merit of Christ: yet is it rightly ascribed unto faith, and it
alone; for as much as faith is that main condition of the New Covenant; which,
as we must perform, if we will be justified; so by the performance whereof we
are said to obtain justification and life. Thus M. Pemble: in which passages
(tho I will not justify all therein contained) he fully and clearly
expresses M. Wottons meaning not as his own judgment only, but The Reformed
Churches thus explain themselves. Ibid. p. 23.
as the doctrine of the Reformed Churches by them so explained. Now I demand of
M. Walker, whether for this damnable and detestable position, we shall do
well, without further search or trial, (the rather since that the same, he
says, is found in Socinus) to condemn M. Pemble of heresy, and require, if
not his bones to be dug up again and committed to the fire, yet his books
at least containing such blasphemous stuff, to be burnt. Which if he shall
deem fit, sure Paul's Epistles, unless Pareus be much mistaken, must go the
same way. Or if he shall be of another mind concerning these blessed men,
whether it be not extreme partiality, to let that go for sound doctrine in M.
Fox, Perkins, Pareus and Pemble, that in M. Wottons writings without further
ado, upon M. Walkers bare relating of it, must be condemned for blasphemous
heresy.

Secondly, I desire to have it considered, whether it were equal to censure a
man for an heretic, upon bare positions or sayings extracted out of his
writings, without any regard had to, or notice taken of, his own Expositions of
them; or his Reasons alleged to prove his dissent in them from the errors of
those whom he is charged to concur with; confirmed by collation of place with
place in his writings, and by consideration of the maine scope and drift of the
dispute, course and tenor of the discourse, and the different sense and meaning
of the words and terms used by either. For example, M. Walker in his parallel
alleges a saying of Servetus, (and that is all that he has out of him
throughout his whole Parallel) that Parall. Error. 4.
For one act of Faith was Abraham righteous. And presuming that M. Wotton says
the very same, (though he allege not any one place at all out of M. Wotton,
where these words are found) from hence concludes, that M. Wotton and Servetus
do in the doctrine of justification hold one and the same opinion in all
points. Now suppose we that the very selfsame words were found in M. Wottons
wrirings: and again, that that saying in Servetus were condemned, yea and that
justly, for heretical: yet were it therefore agreeable to equity, without
further disquisition, to pass sentence thereupon, that M. Wotton and Serv^tus
do in all things hold the same opinion in the point of justification? yea or,
that in those very words they speak the same thing? when it may easily be made
evidently to appear, that Servetus speaks of justification in one sense, and
M. Wotton entreats of justification in another sense: and that neither the
Faith, nor the Righteousness, nor the manner of imputation of Righteousness,
that they speak of in their writings are the same. That which any may soon see,
that shall read Relat. Postsc^. p. 46.
the sum of Servetus his discourse, related out of Calvin in my postscript.
Surely by the same reason might M. Walker prove S. Paul and Servetus to be both
of them in all things of one mind concerning the doctrine of justification;
because Relat. postscr. p 46.
Servetus says, that Abraham's believing was imputed unto him for righteousness:
and S. Paul expressly in so many Romans 4 3. 9.
words says the same. Or that Musculus agrees with Servetus in all things for
the matter of justification; because he says in nearer terms to Servetus, then
any M. Walker alleges out of M. Wotton; that Ubi promittenti Deo f^miter
credidit, est illi ejusmodi si^^s loco justitiae imputata; hoc est, Ob ca^a
Fidem justu^ est a Deo reputatus. Muscal. in Genesis 16. 6.
Abraham for that faith of his was of God reputed just. Yea take away all
benefit of Exposition, and who almost may not be condemned of heresy and
blasphemy? For example: He that shall mention Gods Psalm. 8. 3. 6.
hands and Psalm. 74. 3.
feet; as concurring with the Audians, Epiphan. haer. 70.. 2. Aug. de haeres. c
49.
who held that God had the shape, limbs, and lineaments of a man: he that shall
affirm, with the Evangelist, or with Christ himself rather, that John 14. 28.
the Father is greater then he; as consenting to the Arians; Epiph. haer. 69..
17. Aug. de haeres. c. 49.
who maintained an inequality among the Persons in the Trinity. And here I
shall crave of M. Walker and my Reader to tell a story or two: it is the humor
of old men (such as M. Walker and my self) to be now and then telling of
tales. I remember, that, while I abode at Lincolns-Inne, the night before
Legate the Arian appeared in the Bishops Consistory at Paul's, (of whose being
in trouble I then knew nothing) there came to my chamber there, at a very
unseasonable hour, a Gentlemanlike man; who having knocked at the door, asked
to speak with me; and entrance afforded him, reached me a little scrole,
wherein were these words written, Whether was the Godhead of Christ begotten of
the Godhead of the Father from all eternity? and withal desired me to give
mine opinion, whether that were not an error? I required to know first what the
meaning of the party was, that held or affirmed it. He answered me, According
to that in the Creed, Creed of Constantinople, commonly called the Nicene Creed.
God of God, light of light. I told him, that these were not the words there
used: and that to speak properly, the Godhead was not said, either to beget,
or to be begotten. If the parties meaning were, that Christ being God was
begotten of the Father, who is likewise God from all eternity; the sense were
sound, but the speech improper. Then belike, as it is there written, quoth he,
it is an error. As the words sound, replied I, it is: yet it may be not, in his
sense that spoke it. He requested me to give him that under my hand. I craved
his name. He told me, I must excuse him for that. I told him, he should
likewise excuse me for this. And so we parted. But the next day, hearing Legate
in the Consistory, as I past through Paul's, I began to surmise, that this party
might be some friend of his; and that some Divine or other, in conference with
him having let some such speech slip from him, this party his friend might
beat about to get under some other Divines hands the censure of it as an
error. Whence I then gathered, that a man had need to be wary, how he condemn
a man of error, of heresy much more, upon a bare relation of words, before he
understand what his meaning is. Again, I remember, that a busy Separatist
being committed to Newgate, and there arrogantly challenging to dispute with
all comers, and scornfully playing upon and gibing at such as dealt with him;
M Bradshaw (whom we shall find M. Walker anon grinning at) was by some friends
brought to him; who perceiving the man's spirit, and having had some discourse
with him, the issue whereof he caused to be set down in writing under both
their hands, that he might not talk of this and that, after they were parted;
M. Bradshaw a little to repress his insolency, told him, that for all his
prating so much of the Constitution of a Church, (the common subject of such
men's disputes) yet his skill peradventure might be but mean in the maine
principles of religion. And being by him provoked to make trial, if he
pleased; he demanded of him, whether Christ's Deity assumed the Person of man or
no. To which question the bold bayard without stop or stay returning an
affirmative answer, that it did, M. Bradshaw told him, it was gross heresy.
And so left him. And indeed, if the words alone be regarded, so it is; even the
heresy of Nestorius, Isidar. Origin. l. 7. c. 5. Socrat. bistor. l. 7. c. 23.
Euagr. l. 1. c. 7.
who maintained two-persons in Christ, not two natures in one person. And yet
neither do I, nor did M. Bradshaw hold the silly fellow to be an heretik; no
more then Onuphr in vita Ius 3. Pp. Dr. Field of the Church, l. 2. c. 9. and l.
3. c. 1. Breerwood of Relig. and Langrug c. 25. p. 183.
those that bear the name of Nestorians in the Eastern parts, are deemed so to
be at this day. And indeed take men's words apa^t from their meaning, and how
many shall be ranked, though in judgment never so sound and orthodox, among
heretics, as concurring with such, because the same words and sentences are
found in either? To clear this a little, consider we an instance or two,
Salvian Bishop of Marseiles, a very pious and learned ancient Writer, says,
that Aio. Christian non solum egere came caeteru sed multo plus egere quam
caeteros. sunt enim quibus et si desiat multa, non desunt omnia. Chris^us
tantummodo solus est, cui nihil est, quod in emni humano g^n^re non desit.
Salvi an. ad Eccl. Cathol. l. 4.
Our Savior Christ is the greatest beggar in the World. Meaning it of the
poverty, which he sustaineth Non eget mi^^ria, sed eget misericorata; no eget
^eitate prose, sed eget pietate pro suis. Ibid.
not in himself, but in his, in the several members of his body mystical, or
spiritual rather, here upon earth. shall he be hold therefore to concur in
opinion with Pope Nicolas 3. and those other Sext Decretal. de verb. si^g
(...). exi^ t.
who maintained, that our Savior Christ was a very beggar indeed, and lived
here in the very lowest degree of beggary that can be; which Pope John 22.
Extr. de ve^ sign. c. Ad condi etc. Quia quorard^.
condemns for an heresy? Again Luther, in his Commentary upon the Epistle
to the Galatians, says, that Christus summus and maximus peccator. Luth. in
Gal. 3. 13. p. 459. quo nullus major in mun. do. Ib. p. 453.
Christ was the greatest sinner in the World; meaning it, in regard of Omnium
hominum peccata omnia in se suscep^. lbid. p. 458. and 453. P^rsonam (...)
^^ndam gerendam ^pit; ^que reus factus est peccaterum totius mu^di. (...). p.
4^6.
the sins of all the faithful, which he took upon himself, and were
reckoned as his. And we read of one Austen of Rome, Archbishop of Nazareth, who
maintained some assertions, not unlike that of Luther, to wit, that Christus
quatid^^ peccat: and ex quo fuit Christus, quotid^ p^ it. Aug. d. Romans de
sacram. Christ. and Eccles. l. 1.
Christ sins daily, and ever so did. Understanding what he sp^ke, Nod, ^e
capite, sed de membris, que cum Christo capite, sunt unus Christus. Idem.
of the body of the faithful, who being Romans 8. 1. and 16. 7.
in Christ, and 1 Cor. 6. 17. Omnes Sancti and fideles cum homine Christo sunt
unus Christus. Aug. de pecc. mer. and rem. l. 1. c. 31. Caput enim and corpus
unus est Christus. Idem de Trmit. l. 4. c. 9. and in Ps. 54. and de verb. Dom.
49. and 65. Bed. in Joan, 17. Bern. ^p. 190. Christus cum tota sua Ecclesia,
una persona est. Greg. in Ps. paen 5.
one with Christ, have the Name of Christ sometimes given them Gal. 3. 16. 1
Cor. 12. 12.
in Scripture. The speeches, I confess, are both overharsh; and the Archbishop
was for his taxed in the Conc. Basil. sess. 22.
Council of Basil. Yet were it no less harsh or hard, to condemn either of
them, as concurring in judgment with those blasphemous Pharisees, that John 9.
24.
said our Savior Christ was a sinner; tho the words were the same with either.
Yea to ad only one instance more: S. John himself faith, that 1 John 5. 18.
No regene rate man does sin; 1 John 3. 9
nor can sin. And yet who dares be so bold as to say, that S. John therefore
concurreth either with the old Epipban. her. 59. 6.
Cathari, or with the late Familists, who dreaming of an absolute perfection in
this life, do H. N. Terri Pacis c. 34. and 36. I. R. of Family of Love, D. 5, 6.
of their illuminate and regenerate ones say the same?

In regard hereof, a man may precisely relate an other man's words; and yet be a
slanderer, a false accuser, a false witness. For example; that I may refresh my
Reader a little with some matter of more abstruse learning, (yet other men's,
not mine own; lest M. Walkers tongue again lash me) and (...) Ex Platone Plut.
Symp^s. l. 7. c. 5. and 8. and de esu carn. l. 2. and Greg. Stas. de Ma^tyr.
and ad Iul. exact.
season therewith somewhat this not very savoury discourse. Suppose we, that
those persons, Math. 26. 61. Mark 14. 58.
that were deposed against our Savior, had given in his precise words, as he
himself spoke them, without addition, detraction or alteration of ought,
Dissolve this Temple, and within three days, I will reedifie it; understanding
and affirming it (as it seems they did, and as John 2. 10.
the Jews that heard him took it) to have been spoken not as he meant and
intended it (pointing in likelihood, when he spoke, to it) John 2. 21.
of the Temple of his body, John 1. 14. Col. 2. 9.
wherein John 2. 19.
his Deity dwelt; but of the Temple of Lime and Stone, built by Herod, of which
they spoke when they said, John 2. 20.
Forty and six years has this Temple been building, as the words may well be
translated: and Uideantar Ios. Scaliger de Emendat. Temp. l. 6. p. 534, 535.
Phil. Lansberg. Chronol. sacr. l. 3. c. 18. Tho. Lydiat. Emend. Temp. A. M.
3991, and 4037.
so long by just computation it is by some deemed, that it had then been in
building, and (...), Joseph. antiq. l. 20 c. 8. Gr. 17. Lat. ad Albinum
abitu^ntem, circiter quadriennium ante excidium.
the former. And indeed it may seem by Math. 24. 1. Mark 13. 1, 2. Ios^ph.
antiq. l. 15. c. 14. and belli 1. l. 7. c. 26, 27. Gr. Lat. 12. vide Ri^n. 45.
etc.
was not yet fully finished: and of which Hieron. in Hagg. 2. Chrysostom. in 1
Cor. orat. 34. Fr. Ribera in Hagg. (...). n. 37-52.
some understand, not without some good ground of probability, those words of
the Prophet, Hagg. 2. 8, 9.
Silver is mine, and Gold is mine; or, Of Silver and Gold I have store enough;
The glory of this latter house shall be greater than the glory of the relation
of those that saw it, that the (...).
second house, as the Jews term it, (which tho demolished by Herod, yet
still bare that name, because there was no interruption or intermission by
occasion thereof of (...) Dan. 8. 11, (...)*
the daily solemn sacrifice) was by that Ios. ant. l. 15. c. 14.
magnificent King built up again in more stately manner, then by Solomon it
was built at first. Now suppose, I say, these men, that were suborned to accuse
our Savior, had in their evidence to a syllable given in his own words, and
had agreed in their testimony, as Mark 14. 59.
they did not; had they been ever a whit the less false-witnesses therefore? I
trow, not. And here I cannot let pass, as notorious, and yet as gross and
palpable a calumny as ever I read or heard of, of that Romish sycophant, that
wrote against that acute and nimbleheaded defender of The safe way to salvation
by Protestants Religion; a work, which for the main substance of it, as it
opposes Popery, I look not to see answered by that side in have, however they
nibble at some passages here and there in it, and snarle at the Author. He
renders you the Authors words to an heir, not a word, not a syllable, not a
letter, not a point, not a title, detracted, added, altered, or displaced. No
man that reads the Jesuit, having not M. Chillingsworths book by him, but
would verily believe, he had uttered and meant, the thing spoken, of himself.
For thus they run in his Relation, I. H. Christianity maintained chap. 9. 3.
p. 66.
This man (to wit, M. G. C.) speaks so irreligiously sometimes, that it may
give just occasion for men to enquire what he believes concerning the Divinity
of our Savior Christ; as when he says, Preface n. 8.
that the doctrine of Transubstantiation may bring a great many others, as well
as himself to Averroes his resolution; Quandoquidem Christiani adorant quod
comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis; seeing Christians adore what they
eat, my soul be with the Philosophers. Which having recited, he begins to
debate the matter with the Author, as having said thus of himself. I H. Ibid.
p. 66
Is this matter of eating our Savior such a pill to your understanding, that
rather then digest it, you will turn Turk or Infidel? If you believed indeed
that our Savior Christ is truly God, you would not be scondalized, that
Christians adore him who would and could be eaten, no more then him who stood
in need of eating, and whom the Jews might have eaten, even in a
Capharnaiticall and savage manner if it had been his will to permit it: Ibid.
p. 67.
Perhaps for these reasons, having subjected Faith to reason, you wish with
Averroes a prosessed enemy of Christians, My soul be with the Philosophers.
Whereas let any man but lightly cast his eye upon the Authors own discourse;
and the knavery will at the very first sight, without further enquiry,
evidently discover it self. His words are these, G. C. P^eface to the Author
of Charity maintained, number. 8.
I should desire you to tell me ingenuously, whether it be not too probable,
that your portentous doctrine of Transubstantiation, joynd with your
forementioned persuasion of, No papists, no Christians, has brought a great
many others as well as himself to Averroes his resolution, Quandoquidem
Christiani adorant, quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis. You see the
Authors own words exactly retained, precisely reported; and yet that
resolution thence gathered, and therein fathered and fastened upon the Author,
then which he nothing less there either uttered or intended. Which the rather
I recite here, partly to show the desperate shamelesnes of those of that
faction, not regarding what lies and falsehoods they report as out of our
Writers, tho the books repaired to may presently convince them of gross
untruth; (of which their practice examples not a few might be produced) and
partly to manifest how exactly for words men may carry themselves in this kind,
and yet not escape the just censure of fals-witnesbearers, and unjust
slanderers of their brethren.

Lastly, to come full home to our selves; as he may be a false-witnes, who yet
relates a man's own words: so Jury and Judge may both be unjust, tho upon a
man's own words, the one cast him, and the other condemn him; excluding his
exposition, and either perverting or mistaking his meaning; witness (to go no
further, but content our selves therewith) those Io. Speed in Ed^. 4. 3.
that cast and condemned our poor Countreyman, a Citizen and Grocer of London,
one of M. Walkers name, in King Edward the fourths time, as guilty of no less
then high treason (for which also he was executed) for saying, he would make
his child, if he plied his book, heir to the Crown: thereby meaning no other
then his own dwelling house at the sign of the Crown in Cheapside, commonly
known and called by that name. Nor, I suppose, could we justly have escaped
that censure; should we, as M. Walker here would have us, upon his bare reading
of M. Wottons words to us, without all further examination of them, or hearing
of him, have proceeded to condemn him of heresy and blasphemy; that is, no
less, as I take it, then high Treason against the highest Majesty.

But thus much may suffice, if not more then sufficient, to evince the iniquity
and inequality of M. Walkers here pretended request. Which yet he was not so
unreasonable then as to motion or mention; much less to press upon us, being
then somewhat more reasonably minded, then (it seems) he now is: and which,
had he pressed upon us, as now he says that he did, had been most unequal and
unjust for us to have granted.

13. As far from truth as the former, are those things that in M. Walkers
narration next follow: to wit, that Vindicat. p. 20, 21.
at an other day M. Wotton brought his Expositions; whereas in truth his
Answers which he calls his Expositions (the same word for word that by his son
have since been published) were delivered in at the same time together with M.
Walkers Parallels, as at first was appointed, that Page 21.
he desiring to argue with M. Wotton face to face against them in strict
Syllogisms, he refused to answer him; and their Judges refused to hear him, or
to suffer him to have a Copy of them, as M. Wotton had of his Parallels. All
which is most untrue. For neither did M. Wotton ever refuse to answer M.
Walker, offering any orderly dispute: (which how well M. Walker is acquainted
with, those that have had dealings with him in this kind, or have read his
writings, may soon see) nor did their Judges (as he calls them, but very
partial and unjust ones, it seems, all of them; and it is well, that herein we
suffer all alike from him) refuse to hear him alleging ought, whereby he
might make his charge good. Nor was he by them ever denied a Copy of M.
VVottons answer; which neither we had our selves, no more then his Parallel,
nor was at any time by him demanded of us.

14. Yet what he adds here, I confess, is in part true; that when he saw he
could not have his own will, nor deter us from acknowledging under our
hands, that we found neither heresy, nor blasphemy, in ought, that he had
evinced M. Wotton to hold; Page ^1.
he went away in a rage; yet, not threatening (as here he reports) to bring
him and us before higher Judges; (he came not as yet to so high terms with us;
and is herein therefore not unlike some debauched persons, who to increase
their own shame, will Fingunt, que vera negarent, Dum credi, quod non contigit
esse, volunt.
vaunt many times of more evil then ever they did) but not without intimation,
that we did more then we could answer in taking upon us to determine heresy;
(or to tell, belike, what we thought to be, or not to be such) having
forgotten, it seems, his own motion at first, and what himself had requested
us to meet about: just as if a party appeaching his neighbor of wrong doing,
and having pressed him to refer the matter between them to Arbitrators
jointly agreed on; should, when he perceived them enclining to acquit his
neighbor of the pretended wrong, demand of them, whether they would take upon
them to decide right and wrong: and yet why might not we do as much as Walker
himself had done? for how did not he take upon him to determine what was
heresy, when he charged M. Wotton with it? Nor again, is it untrue, that
afterward he endeavored to have us called in question for our meeting, tho by
himself procured. Insomuch that the Bishop of London, in regard of his
importunate exclaiming against us, did at first pretend to doubt of, yea in a
manner deny his giving way to it; until being minded of the Relat. p. 6.
motion made for one of his Chaplens to be a party in the business, and his
condescending thereunto, he could not but agnize it.

But that which follows; and, if M. Walker in his Narration observe any due
order, should be done after his departure, and so in his absence; to wit; that
V^. p. 21.
M. Wotton should promise to make and publish a large Declaration, wherein he
would free himself from all Socinian errors; and in the mean space begged this
favor, that they would subscribe to his expositions, that they found no
heresy or blasphemy in them; and that upon this promise and entreaty they did
subscribe, as follows, etc. To which is a little after added, that Page 24.
M. Wotton begged this beggarly subscription; (which sticks shrewdly in his
stomach; as well it may) and that M. Gataker procuredit. All this, I say, has
little or no truth in it. Neither did M. Wotton make any such promise. Nor did
he beg our censure to be given under our hands, as a favor; but required it,
as a thing just and equal. Nor was it by me procured; unless giving my vote
among the rest for the grant of it, may be so construed. Nor was it upon any
such promise condescended unto, as is here pretended. And M. Walker certainly
had very long ears, if being absent at the doing of it, he could hear what
was then and there said: or a quicker ear then the rest of the company, if
being present, he heard that, that some, I am sure, and the rest, I verily
believe, never heard, and yet might have heard as well as he, had it been
spoken.

Howbeit I must here request the reader to take notice of one point of cunning
conveyance, in the relation of the form subscribed, whether committed by the
Doctor, from whom he says he had it, (tho he might have seen it, and had it
from us, if he had pleased to stay our subscribing) or by M Walker himself, I
know not; and I would be loath to charge him further then I have good ground:
He tells his Reader, that Page 21.
M. Wotton begged of us to subscribe to his Expositions, and the subscription
it self he thus lays down Ibid.
Howsoever we whose names are underwritten, do differ from M. Wotton in some
Point of the former Dectrine of justification contained in these his
Expositions; yet we hold not the difference to be so great and weighty, as they
are to he justly condemned of heresy and blasphemy. And again he subjoyneth,
Ibid.
The expositions thus subscribed. Whereas it is testified See Relat. p. 38.
under the hands of two of his own Delegates, that in the subscription given
under our hands, it was not Expositions but Positions. Howsoever Positions come
now to be turned into Expositions; by what or whose hand I wot not; and this
latter be now pressed, to give some sorry color to Vindic. p. 20.
M. Walkers late devised shift before mentioned, and there sufficiently
discussed, of dealing with M. Wottons Positions, and not his expositions.
Which, albeit it will little avail M. Walker, unles he can show, that his
Expositions are such, as either his words will not bear, or are not consonant
to the scope and tenor of his discourse; yet what was then subscribed, the
subscribers themselves witness. And as for the Copy, which Page 22.
he says, he has yet to show; unles he can produce the original, that their
own hands are too; I hope, this yet to be seen under the hands of some of them,
and those of M. Walkers own party, (the like whereunto also can be produced
under the hands of some of the other side) will with any man indifferently
affected carry the more credit: especially considering, that M. Walker would
make men believe that they did very unwillingly, what therein they did; and
were afterward ashamed of what they had done: and had reason therefore to mince
it all that possibly they might.

15. It is Damna^i ubi jam jure sese sense^t sontes, iniquos conqueruntur
judices. Sons nemo sese jure damn^tum volet.
the usual manner of delinquents, (for under that head may be comprehended, as
well those that unjustly appeal others, as those that by others are justly
appealed) when they fail and are found faulty, to complain of their Judges, and
exclaim against them, for their iniquity and partiality in the carriage of the
business; by impairing their credit, seeking to salve up their own. The very
same course does M. Walker take throughout this whole, not so much Vindication
of himself, as Crimination of those, whom himself had referred his cause unto.
He vilifies them in terms of scorn and reproach, Vindic. p. 4.
M. Gataker and his fellows, and his fellow subscribers. He accuses them of
iniquity, partiality, unjust and unequal carriage, against their own judgment,
and consequently against their own conscience. Or, if a man would speak in M.
Walkers wonted language, as G. W. Letter to A. W. Vind. p. 15.
wicked Judges, that have respect of persons in judgment; yea, worse then Luke
18. 2.
the unjust Judge in the Gospel, that neither feared God, nor regarded man: for
Luke 18. 5.
he by the poor widows importunity was drawn to do her right; whereas Page 21.
they by M. Wottons importunity were induced to do M. Walker wrong, and to
acquit him of heresy and blasphemy, whom M Walker had justly accused of
either; and that against their own knowledge, yea their own acknowledgement,
when they both knew and acknowledged him to be guilty of either.

Howbeit a little to wipe off these foul aspersions again, he says, Page 4.
they did it, out of their great love to M. Wottons person: and Page 22.
the better part of them, notwithstanding M. VVottons importunity, would never
have yielded thereunto, but upon his promise of reformation. Concerning which I
shall not need to repeat what I have formerly related. Tho what reformation M.
Walker here speaks of, I do not well understand. For, as for those points,
wherein M. Wotton and they differed, which they pronounce to be neither
heretical nor blasphemous; neither did they require M. Wotton to renounce and
revoke his opinion therein; nor did he promise so to do. And what else it was,
that he should promise to reform, I know not. This may well therefore go among
M. Walkers own fancies; and so let it pass. Only, for what he says of Page
4.
their great love to M. Wotton; I will presume, they did all bear a Christian
affection, as well to M. Wotton as to M. Walker, and to M. Walker as well as to
him. Nor is that any sufficient ground to induce any man to believe, that they
should therefore incline rather to the one then to the other. Howbeit M. Walker
must be remembered, that Dr. Baylie at the very first showed little good will to
M. Wotton, by his quarelling with him about his habit, as before was showed.
And much less, by his rash and overhasty ^ensure and sentence passed (if M.
Walker may be believed) upon him yet unheard. As also that there had been a
breach and interruption of friendly correspondence between M. Wotton and M.
Stock, as was before intimated; which grew upon occasion of some difference,
that rose first between them at a meeting of diverse London Ministers and some
others about the beginning of King James his Reign, and as yet continued; nor
indeed was ever well peeced up again: whereas between M. Walker and M. Stock, it
was then otherwise. Nor have I heard of any great familiarity, that ever was
between M. Wotton and M. Randall. Which then also the rather might be the
less: for that at the Conference abovementioned, that occasioned the breach
between M. Stock and M. Wotton, M. Wotton and M. Randal were likewise divided.
And little reason therefore there is to presume, that these men out of great
love to M. Wotton should be so partial in his cause: much less, that they
should therefore give a sentence in favor of him, directly against their own
judgments, and that either privately or publikly professed to the contrary.

16. But this is the salve for those, whom M. Walker would excuse. As for the
rest, it is not to be mervelled, if they were partial in the business. For Page
24.
M. Balmford was M. Wottons silenced brother. (a fit squib to fall from the pen
of him, that Page 1.
erewhile complained so of his own persecution) Page 24.
M Hicks was one of M. Wottons Disciples; one that would jurare in verba
magistri; that is in plain English, One that would swear whatsoever M. Wotton
his Master would say. (a most uncharitable censure, sure enough, for the latter
part; whither true or no, for the former) and Ibid.
M. Gataker did more angerly and peevishly speak against him, and snarl at
him, then his Adversary M. Wotton himself. So that he was forced to challenge
him as well as M. Wotton, and to offer to dispute against them both: that which
once Page 5.
before also he vaunted of, calling in some to witness it: (whom yet because he
doubted of, as well he might do, whether they would say with him somewhat more
then was true; he thought good by way of caution, to insert that exception, if
their memories fail them not; as belike in delivery of the Attestation they
did) and withal adding, that we both (daunted it seems, and dashed clean out
of countenance, as conscious of our own weakness and inability to encounter
such a Champion, either severally or jointly) did cowardly refuse it, not
without show of scornful disdain.

It is true indeed, that M Wotton (whom M. Walker is yet content in part to
acquit, so be he may thereby the deeper wound me, whom his spite, it seems, is
more eagerly bent at for the present) demeaned himself very moderately,
throughout the whole hearing; with great patience enduring much reproachful and
despiteful language, whereof M. Walker was no whit sparing. And, I suppose, it
was fit, that those whom that office was committed unto, should endeavor to
repress such clamorous ballings and barkings, as neither beseemed him that
used them; nor did any way further, but hinder rather the issue of that for
which we met. In which kind, not I alone, but the rest also, labored with M.
Walker what they could; tho to small purpose. But that I snarled at him
otherwise, is altogether untrue.

It is likewise true, that M. Walker challenged me once to dispute. (for, as
for dispute with M. Wotton, so he would keep to the point, it was never denied
him) upon this occasion. Some speech coming in the way, in discussion of the
first pretended error, concerning the imputation of Christ's Righteousness
consisting in obedience to the Law; and justification consisting wholly in
Remission of sins; Ibid.
M. Walker in his heat told me, that it was reported (for he builds much upon
reports) that I was wholly therein of Piscators mind: and if I would maintain
Piscators opinion, he would dispute it out with me. Whereunto I then answered,
that whether it were so, or no, was nothing to him; nor was it time for him and
me then to dispute; being met for an other end. And this is also all the
scornful disdain then used, or made show of. As for the report, I shall make
bold now to tell M. Walker, if he heard so, that he heard an untruth; as In
Elench^ disput. Fr. Gomari: and Disceptatione cum Lud. Lucio.
what I have published, may enform him. Against which, if he shall think good
to dispute, I hope I shall be as well able to answer him, as I have done some
others already.

Howbeit suppose we, that M. Walker ( (...). Aristot. Ethic. E^dem. l. 7. c.
12. Pausan. Phocic. Plut. These. Laert. Cleanth AElian. Hist. var. l. 12. c. 22.
Hephaest. nov. Hist. l. 5. apud Phot. cod. 190. Ephipp. Pelt. apud Athen. l. 7.
Zenob. adag. 548. Varro. satyr.
another Hercules, or one rather more valiaut then he, that durst not deal
(...). Ne Hercules quidem adversus duos. Zenob. adag. 549. Suid. 1116. (...).
Plat. Phaed. and Euthyd. (...). Idem. leg. 11. (...). Aristid de ^betor, 2.
Eccles. 4. 12.
with two at once) could by dint of Argument, wherein (it seems) he supposes
himself to excel; though some deem him, (as one sometime of another, whom M.
Walker would seem much to admire) Guil. Tilen. de Si^r. Lub.
a man more eager then argumentative, have been able to silence both M. Wotton
and my self; and to have proved against us both, not those Points alone that
he charged M. Wotton with, (which yet if he had done, he must have confuted us
all, and many more then us all) but all the Positions that ever he had
produced, or could produce out of M. Wottons writings, to be erroneous and not
agreeable to truth: yet would not all this have been sufficient to make good
his charge against M. Wotton, and to prove him a blasphemous heretic. How
many men's writings may more then seven times seven errors be found in, whom it
were yet most uncharitable therefore to censure for such?

17. But that diverse of the Subscribers subscribed against their own judgments
and consciences; and all of them were ashamed of what they had done; he
endeavors further to show: the former, by some relations that may justly be
questioned; the latter by avouchment of things altogether untrue.

The former concerns others not me, whereof some are deceased; some yet
survive: and is to this effect:

1. That Page 22.
D. Baylie, the first of the subscribers did upon the very first reading of M.
Wottons speeches in M. Walkers Parallel, condemn him (not at our meeting, but
at a private Table at dinner) for an heretic, and his errors for blaspemous.
Of which sufficient has been spoken already; and but for M. Walkers repetition
of it here, to descredit the subscription, or the subscriber himself rather,
had for me no more been mentioned.

2. That Ibid.
M. Downham, who heard this his censure uttered at the Table; did by his
silence assent thereunto. Of which somewhat also before.

3. That Ibid.
D. Gouge has publicly confuted M. Wottons opinions; (but which or what of
them he talleth us not: Parallel. Point. or Error 2. Relat. p. 13. 36.
one of them at least, I am sure, he professed to have taught.) and in the
Pulpit condemned them of Socinianism. These two latter survive; and I leave to
answer, as they shall see good and think fit, for themselves; the Attestation
for the Subscription to the contrary being under their own hands.

4. That Ibid.
M. Randal did argue very hotly against M. Wottons opinions that same day that
they subscribed, and told him before us all, that he had protested against them
often in private, and had dissuaded him from them; and that he for his part
abhorred them. All which men may, if they please, believe, upon the bare word
of him, who has told his Reader so many untruths here before. For my part I
believe no one tittle of it to be true, as it is by M. Walker here related;
that is, affirmed to have been then and there by M. Randal delivered; but a
mere fiction of M. Walkers own invention, (...). Plut. de Isid. and Osir.
spun like a spiders web out of the bowels of his own brain. Besides, I desire
to have it considered how probable it is, that M. Wotton should make choice of
one to be for him in this business, who had in private formerly professed unto
him, not a bare dissent from, or a simple distaste, but so deep a dislike of his
opinions. True it is, that there was that day a dispute among us about a nice
question mentioned in my Relat. p. 35, 36.
Relation, concerning the work of Redemption performed by Christ, and the
work of our Insition into Christ and our union with him, whether of the twain
has the precedence in the order of nature. Wherein some were with M. Wotton on
the one side for the precedence of the work of redemption; some were on the
other side (among whom M. Randal) for the precedence of the Insition of the
faithful into Christ and their union with him. But neither was the point argued
with any heat at all on either side; among our selves at least. Nor did either
M. Randal, or any other of the company, no not D. Baylie himself, (tho forward
enough, if M. Walker may be believed, to censure M. Wotton deep enough behind
his back, and over prone, as I have showed, to pick a quarrel to him
otherwise) at any time, that ever I can remember, during our whole meeting, use
any such distastful speeches unto M. Wotton, as M. Walker is here pleased to
attribute to M. Randal, being now gone, and not able to deny or avow, what he
fastneth thus upon him. The figure Fictio personae.
Prosopopaeia, it is to be feared, is with M Walker here too frequent.

5. That Page 22.
M. Stock did ever abhor M. Wottons opinions, as he often told M. Walker in
private.

That he did in diverse things dissent from him, I doubt not; that which I also
professed in private to him concerning my self; showing wherein I dissented
from M. Wotton, as well to him, as to M. Wotton himself, having sometime
required it of me in writing; which to M. Stock also I imparted. But such terms
of abhorring them, I never heard from him; tho being as intimate, I suppose, as
ever M. Walker was, with him. The phrase sure better suteth with M. Walkers own
spirit, then either with M. Randals or M. Stocks; both whom he makes here to
speak in the same tone with himself.

But Page 22, 23.
by a pretty stratagem (for so he slileth it) he brought M. Stock before other
witnesses to condemn M. Wottons opinions for heresy and blasphemy. For at a
supper time in a neighbors house, reading as out of some other paper
containing new and strange opinions, that assertion of M. VVottons, that in
this proposition, Faith is counted for Righteousness, the word Faith is to be
taken properly, not tropically; and demanding of M Stock what he thought of
it, M. Stock acknowledged it to be heresy and blasphemy; and that none but mad
men would subscribe that it was neither. Whereupon he showed him his own hand
to the subscription before mentioned.

Now whether M. Stock was thus overtaken or no, to make his tongue and his hand
jarre, I know not. If he were, it had been a more friendly part of M. Walker,
to have concealed his and my friends oversight. But Maro AE^. l. 1.
Tros Tyriusve, friend or foe; Advocate or Adversary; all is one with M.
Walker; another Aristides, one that has no respect of persons, as his partial
Judges had. how he disgraceth either any way to help himself, he little
regards. as if the discrediting of them either would suffice, or might well
serve to salve his own credit, when it lies bleeding, and is in danger not to
escape without some scar.

Howsoever, 1. I shall desire any indifferent reader to consider, whether ought
rather to sway, a censure drawn from one by a wile, and suddenly shot out,
before he were well aware, and well advised; or a judiciary sentence (for Page
21.
Judges M. Walker himself will have us) considerately signed; and that after
serious debate, and advice taken with other Page 2.
grave Ministers (as he is also pleased yet to style us) concurring with him
therein.

2. I would demand not of M. Stock, (for he is gone; nor is it certain to me,
whether he ever passed that censure so directly contrary to his own
subscription) but of M. Walker, what he thinks of these words, Faith is that
alone wherewith we are by it self and properly justified: whether they
contain heresy and blasphemy or no; and what difference he can find between
M. Wottons words, and these. Yet are they M. Bucers own Illo per se ac proprie
justificamur, quod dum adest nobis, and Deus and homines nos justos
pronunciant, dum abest, injustos. Fides illud unum est, quo si polleamus, Deus
and homines n^s inter justos numerant; sin minus, inter injustos. Ergo, etc.
Bucer. praefat. Enarrat. Epist. Paul. c. 7. 1. Syllog. 1.
which he ascribes also to Saint Paul; as a principal part of his main
Argument, concerning the doctrine of justification. And if those other upon the
bare recital appear to be manifestly heretical and blasphemous; then these
surely no less: and so M. Wotton yet shall have one other at least to go along
with him for an heretic, yea a blasphemous heretic: whom yet none I suppose,
other then rank Papists ever condemned for such.

Howbeit M. Walker should have done well, to have delivered M. Wottons
Exposition (as he terms it) all out. and not to have hackt it off (as he
has done) by the hams. For his words are entire thus, Ans. to Err. 3. Relat.
p. 27,
I never said, or thought, that Faith does justify us by it self. (and yet
had he so said, he had said no more then Bucer long before him had done) This
only I say, that in this Proposition, Faith is counted for Righteousness, the
word Faith is to be taken properly, not tropically; the question being in such
propositions, not of the meritorious or formal cause of justification, but of
the condition required on our part in stead of keeping the Law. To which I may
well ad out of his Animadversions, which I have by me, on the dispute between
Lubbertus and Bertius, these sayings of his to the same essect. Fides, tanquam
qualitas, habitualiter non justificat; ncque m^teria est justificati^onis
nostrae, neque forms: e^ sola ratione ad justificationem valet, quod in
Christum recumbat, ad veniam delictoru^ propter ipsius obedientiam adipiscendam
Ad dissert. 1. 9.
Faith does not justify us, as a quality, habitually; neither is it either the
matter, or the form of our Righteousness; in that regard alone it is to
justification available, as it relieth upon Christ, to the obtaining of
forgivenes of sins for his obedience. And again, Fides certe non justificat,
nisi tantum per and propter Christi obedientiam. Cum dicitur ad justitiam
imputari, quid nos praestare oporteat, ut per Christum justificemur,
significatur. Ibid.
Faith surely does not justify, but only by and for the obedience of Christ.
When it is said to be imputed unto righteousness, it is thereby signified what
we must perform, that we may be justified. And a little after, Fide justificari
dicimur, non tropica, sed propria l^cutione: qu^ significatur, fidem illud
esse, quod Deus a nobis flagitat, ad justificationem conseqendam propter
Christi ^bedientiam and sacrificium. Ibid.
By faith we are said to be justified, not in a tropicall, but in a proper
manner of speaking; whereby is signified, that Faith is that, which God
requires of us to the obtaining of justification for the obedience and
sacrifice of Christ. For as for those words that M. Walker puts into his
third Error, that he charge upon M. Wotton, Parall, Error. 3. Rela^ p. 14:
That Faith does not justify us, as it apprehends Christ and his
righteousness; they appear not in any passage at all by M. Walker out of M.
Wottons writings alleged. So that M. Walker makes M. Wotton speak, not what
he does, but what himself pleases; and then pronounces him an heretic, not
for what he says, but for what himself would have him say. To make this
evident to the meanest understanding. Should a man say, The word hand in this
proposition, my hand feeds my body; or in this, This child is fed by hand, is
taken properly not tropically; would it by any reasonable consequence thence be
inferred, that the party so saying should therefore affirm, that the hand does
not feed by putting meat into the mouth? And what M Calvin's judgment is of that
trope in the Apostles words of Faith, put for Christ, may appear by these
words of his in confuting of Osiander, the first man (for ought I can find)
that broached that Exposition of them, and brought in that strange trope: Neque
tamen interea tortuosas bujus Sophis^^ figurat admitto, quum dicit Eidem esse
Christum. Calvin, Iastitut. l. 3. c. 11. 7.
I admit not this Sophisters writhing or wrigling some figures, when he says,
that faith is Christ. Inscite sidem, que instrumentum est duntaxat p^rcipiendae
justitiae, dic^ misceri cum Christo; qui materiaris causa, tantique beneficii
author simul est and minister. Ibid.
Whereby Faith, which is the instrument only of obtaining righteousness, is
confounded with Christ, who is the material cause, and both the Author and
minister of so great a benefit. Iam expeditus est nodus quomodo intelligi
debeat vocabulum fide i, uhi de justificatione agitur. Ibid.
Thus is the knot also unknit, to wit, how the term of Faith ought to be taken
where the point of justification is handled. Howbeit as it would justly be
deemed unequal, to charge all that hold Faith there put for Christ, with
Osianders monstrous opinion, as Calvin well terms it, of I know not what
essential righteousness, by which Christian men are justified: so no less
unequal is it, to condemn all of Socinian heresy and blasphemy, that hold
Faith to be taken for Faith in those Romans 3. 28. and 5. 1. and. 4. 5, (...).
passages of S Paul. But of this and some other things concerning that
argument, I may peradventure being by diverse importuned thereunto, if God shall
please to afford life, liberty, ability and leisure, entreat further more
largely hereafter; unless I shall find my self prevented by some fuller
satisfaction given by others, whose labors either are abroad already, or may
before that time come abroad. for then my (...). Ma^c. Imp. l. 10. 13.
pains will be superfluous. and whether by my weak helps, or the more able
work of others, the truth of God either in this, or in any other point be
cleared, to me it shall be all one.

And thus much for the point, concerning which by M Walkers own relation, M.
Stock upon the very reading of it, should in direct contradiction to his own
subscription, pass such a censure. As for the Vindic. p. 23.
speech he frames in the words following, for M. Stock to excuse himself by:
and his inference thence, Ibid. p. 23, 24
how dangerous a thing it is, even for godly men to be Judges in a controversy
between a familiar friend, as M. Wotton was to these men, and a stranger, as
himself was to the most of them. As the latter intimates M. Stock, and M.
Wotton to have been at that time familiar friends, and so D. Baylie and the
rest; and on the other side M. Stock (for of him principally here the speech
is) with the most of the rest, and M. Walker to have been mere strangers
either to other: which is the one of them as true as the other: so it adds
little credit to the excuse pretended to be made then by him; which may well be
questioned, considering M. Walkers minting and dilating faculty See M. Egertons
Letter before produced: and his peicing up of M. Wottons assertions.
before showed, whether much, if not all, of it, came not out of his own forge.

And this shall suffice for the suggestions concerning some of M. Walkers
partial and unjust Judges as he deems them, to prove that they subscribed in
favor of M. Wotton against their own consciences and judgments elsewhere,
either in public or in private, delivered directly to the contrary of that
they then signed unto. Which I might well have leaft to be answered by those
whom they concern; save that some of them are now deceased: for me they touch
not at all, nor my Relation, who report only, what they subscribed to; and that
firmed with the Attestation of such of them as survive.

18. But for that, which concerns them all, and my self among the rest, to
prove, that Vindic. p. 21.
they durst not openly justify their Subscription; (which makes me the rather
now to believe what I have formerly been informed, that M. Walker often in his
Table-talk should not stick to give out, that we were all of us ashamed of what
we then did.) he says that Ibid.
the Expositions (for so we will now call them, since that M. Walker will have
them so styled) thus subscribed, were committed to D. Eaylie, with charge that
he should keep them close, and not suffer M. Walker or any other man to see or
read them, until M. Wotton had made a larger Exposition, and fully purged
himself from Socinianism. A strict charge, you see, as M. Walker delivers it,
of men wondrous cautious, and as may seem, no less timorous of displeasing M.
Walker; for what else the matter should be, I, for my part, am not able to
conceive. And I merveil why he does not add, that we conjured one another, to
tell no body what we had done. For that was as needful to prevent our fears,
as the keeping of our subscription from sight; and he might as well have said
or written the one as the other. For this also in truth is as far from truth,
as M. Walker is from fair dealing in the whole carriage of this business. And
here I would crave leave to demand of M. Walker, whether he were present at
the very act of our subscribing or no. If he were present, he might easily
hear, what that was, and in what manner it was conceived, that was agreed upon
to be subscribed unto; yea he might have seen our subscriptions to it. For it
was not done in any concealed way, but in the view of all then present. And to
what end then should such a charge be given to the Doctor, that M. Walker
should by no means be admitted to the sight of it? If he were absent, (as it is
likely enough that he was, wanting patience to endure any longer stay, after he
perceived once what was resolved upon) I would feign know of him, how or from
whence he knows, that it was with such caution committed to the Doctors
custody.

True it is, that it was indeed in some sort committed to his custody; or
rather detained by him, having once gotten it into his hands, in favor of M.
Walker, for ought else could be discerned. The delivery of it or a Copy of it
to M. Wotton, according to his just request, being not at present resolved on,
because it grew late; but put off to another day. On which meeting again, (but
now without M. Walker, who came no more at us) after long expectation the
Doctor at length presented himself to us; but could not be induced to deliver,
either the subscription, or any Copy of it to M. Wotton; upon pretense that he
held it not safe so to do; for that having been lately at Lambeth, at the High
Commission, some (I know not who) had cast out some words there to him
concerning our meeting, and that we might peradventure be questioned for it, as
a Conventicle; especially if our subscription should come abroad under our own
hands, and use made of it as an evidence against us. That therefore for the
present he durst not part with it: But yet withal promising, that after some
time, the noise of the business being once over-blown, it should be delivered to
M. Wotton, whenever it should be demanded of him by two of the parties, one
of either side, nominated in his behalf. And this I do the more confidently
avow, being helped therein for some particulars, by a memorial leaft in
writing under M. Balmfords hand and mine own, and made while the business was
yet fresh in memory; which I find in the same paper, in which the Attestation
formerly published is extant, being afterward (but how long after, I know not)
underwritten.

But return we to M. Walker, who having thus rather Poetically described, then
(...). Tim^us. (...). Polyh. l. 12.
Historically related our meeting and the manner of it, embelished with many
mere fictions of his own invention; (all which yet never will be of might or
weight enough either to take of, or bear down the truth of my Relation
concerning the issue of it, acknowledged in precise terms by men of his own
choice) he proceeds in the next place to tell us, that Vindic. p. 24.
Upon this it was bruited abroad in the City by M. Wotton and his Disciples
that M. Walker could prove nothing against him; (and like enough; of that he
charged him with, to wit, heresy and blasphemy) nor bring any thing out of his
books or writings to convince him of Socinianism: and that the eight learned
Ministers had justified him, and condemned M. Walker for a false Accuser. And
might they not justly so report, when in effect the Ministers under their hands
had all jointly so done? For sure it is, that he that acquitteth any man of
that wherewith he is charged, (be he faulty otherwise, or no) does by necessary
consequence condemn him as a false accuser, that so charged him.

As for what Ibid.
he adds, concerning M. Wottons Essays afterward written, wherein he says,
that M. Wotton denies the true, real, and spiritual union of the faithful
with Christ, and Christ's meriting of justification and salvation for them, etc.
(which collections of M. Walkers from M. Wottons words may well be as sound as
some other above recited) and his own Antithesis Wottonismi and Christianismi;
(a work in likelihood well suiting with the spirit of the Author) of M. Nids
neglecting to make report of it to the Archbishop; (who, it may be, would have
past the like censure upon him, that he did upon M. Broad, at the tender of his
book) his own neglect of calling upon him: because Ibid. p. 24, 25.
the tidings of it coming to M. Wottons ear, struck such a damp into him,
that for fear of afterclaps he silenced both himself and his Disciples. (and
yet to silence a man already silenced was no such great matter) so that now all
was hushed, and the fire quenched, and no man durst open his mouth to defend M.
Wottons opinions, tho he ceased not in the Pulpit still to confute and condemn
them. This all nothing concerns me, or any relation of mine. But howfarre forth
therein he discovers his own vanity, and his restles disposition, I leave it
to the judgment and censure of others.

As little concerns me that, that follows, Page 25.
concerning M. Wottons book De Reconciliatione, written in Latin; wherein he
says, that M. Wotton has vented so much poison, (for all is such, that M.
Walker himself does not relish) that the Professors at Leiden, would not suffer
it to be there printed; (which whence he has, or how he knows, or is able to
prove, I know not) yea that at Amsterdam also it could not get out; (which few
will believe, that know how free the Press there is) but was fain to be
printed farther off, at the charge of some of his Disciples.

As also what he Ibid.
adds of some others, who did privately oppose M. Wotton; as M. Woodcock of
Chessam, who in writing consuted him, and admonished him to forsake his errors.
I am not indeed ignorant, that between M. Woodcock M. Wottons ancient Colleague,
and M. Wotton, disputes passed in writing, with Objections and Answers, Replies
and Rejoynders, much whereof I have by me, in a fair friendly manner. As also
the like did between D. Brooks, then reader of Divinity in Gresham College,
(the place that M. Wotton also sometimes held) which I have seen sometime with
a friend; and gave occasion of writing the book in Latin above mentioned:
between M. Bradsh^w and M Wotton; and in part also between M. Wotton and my
self. But none of these that ever I saw or heard, tho dissenting from him in
opinion, did in any of their writings charge him with heresy or blasphemy, or
damn him to Hell; as M. Walker from M. Richardson here does, Nul'us reli^tus est
^edius locus, Nisi sit vita aeterna, extra r^gnum caelorum; qui^q^i^ ad regnum
Dei non pertinet, ad damnationem sine dubio pertinet. Aug. de verb. Ap. 14.
Credit mihi fratres. duo sunt loca; and tertius non est ullus. Idem. de temp.
232. Tertium penitas ignoramus: nec in Scripturis Sanctis inveniemus. Idem
hypognost. l. 5.
unless there be any medium between Heaven and Hell.

Neither does that fierce Thunderbolt, thrown out by M. Richardson, any whit
scare me; wherein, as by a Pop like Anathema, o^ a Rabinical Maranatha, he
peremptorily pronounces, upon his own certain knowledge, that whosoever lives
and dies in the belief of M. Wottons opinions shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, for so M. Walker, as Page 25.
from M. Barlows mouth, being M. Richardsons messenger Page 26.
here reports it. Tho, whether M. Richardson were in his sentence so
peremptory, or no, may be doubted; the rather because M. Walker in his
relations of it agrees not all out with himself. For whereas here he tells
us, that M. Richardson should in a more rigid manner ^ffirm, that he KNEW M.
Wottons opinions to be so pestilent and dangerous, that whosoever lives and
dies in the belief of them shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. In
his second letter to M. Wotton he relates it a remisser way, that he protested,
that he THOUGHT no man living and dying in his opinion should be saved. And you
know, what is wont to be said and thought of those that are taken in two tales.

But be M. Richardsons doom never so precise and peremptory, it nowhit
affrights me: since that neither I live, as I hope, in any such opinions of
his, muchlesse look to die in them, whatsoever else I may concur^ with him in,
nor do I conceive any whit the less hope of M. Wottons being in Heaven for
this his horrid and hideous doom. Only if M. Richardson did then pass such a
censure, when he was now at point of death, as On his deathbed, Page 25. a
dying man. p. 26.
M. Walker says he was, I could have wished more charity, and less presumption
concerning other men's estates, in a man so near to the giving up of an account
for himself. That M. Wotton lived and died in some errors I doubt not. Nor do
I make account, but that I do live, and look to die, in many my self. If M.
Walker deem, or hope, otherwise of himself; he presumes of, and promises
more to himself, then I suppose, ever befell any son of Adam, our blessed
Savior alone excepted. But that any opinion, which M. Wotton held was so
pestilent and pernicious, as to cut him wholly off from Christ, and all interest
in Christ, who so shall affirm, had need look to himself, lest he bring
thereby a greater guilt upon his own soul, then M. Wotton contracted by any
error that he held. Meanwhile, well it is, that the Keys of Heaven are not,
either in M. Richardsons hands, or at M. Walkers disposition. were they so, it
might well be deemed, that many an one should have been excluded, who I doubt
not but have found entrance; many should be shut out, who I hope, yet shall get
in, notwithstanding M. Walkers peremptory sentence past upon them for
heretics, and that blasphemous ones too; such as have no right in Christ here,
nor shall ever reign with him hereafter.

Howbeit this fiery Thunderbolt did so inflame M. Walker, as he tells us,
that Page 26.
it encouraged him to go on the more boldly in laying open M. Wottons
abominations, without all fear or regard of his factious and furious
Disciples, persons belike of the same stamp and temper with himself; if by his
writings he may be judged of.

From this he passes to M Godwins railing Libell; which he tells his Reader,
that Ibid.
some say, M. Gataker counseled him to write against M Walker; which if M.
Walker will avovch as a truth, I must tell him, that he tells a notorious
untruth; and such as he could not but know to be most untrue, unless I had
wittingly in my Postscript told a loud lie; where I professed, Relat. Postsc.
p. 50.
that till of late I had never to my knowledge heard or seen the man; and then
only but once; which was not only much later then the birth of M. Godwins
work, but even after M. Walkers own book was come abroad, at what time
hearing him named, whom else I had not known, I told him indeed smilingly, that
if he were such an one, he was an heretic in print; alluding to M Walkers
discovery, which I had not long before lighted on. But whether M. Godwins book
be a railing libell, or no; for my part, I know not, having never read two
lines of it, only seen the Title of it in the Stationers shop. But let this
go among the bundle of untruths, which M Walker has sluft this his Pamphlet
with; that M Gataker counseled one, whom he had never seen to his knowledge,
nor changed two words with, to write a railing libel against M. Walker. whereas
any reasonable man would rather imagine, that M Godwin wrote that, whatsoever
it be that he wrote, provoked by M Walkers own writing against him and railing
upon him; which, it seems, therein he returns answer unto, and is printed and
published by him together with it, and according to the truth, yea, or
likelihood of this report, I am very well content, that credit be given to his
other relations; those at least that Page 8.
he builds upon the credit of other mensreports; if not to more then a few,
that must rely upon his own.

With M. Godwins Libell he joyneth Page 24.
M. Gatakers Invective. for so he is pleased to style my relation, as Page 9.
before, so here again. which being abroad, I leave to others to judge, whether
it deserve that Title, or no; or, if M. Walker so please, whether of the two,
that my Relation, or this his Vindication, may lay better claim to such an
Inscription.

But there is another Invective, that he challenges me for. and it shall not
be amiss, by way of anticipation, hereto take it in, and consider of it, as
being a branch of the same general Enditement, that in this kind M. Walker
commenceth against me. He tells his Reader therefore in his ensuing discourse;
Page 30:
that he, the said M. Gattaker has publicly extolled and commended for
Orthodox the like Treatise (to those of M. Wottons; heretical belike and
blasphemous, as his) of M. William Bradshaw: and inveighed against some,
meaning me, (says M. Walker) who had opposed some errors and contradictions,
which are in that book, in his Funeral Sermon preached at M. Bradshaws
burial.

Wherein M. Walker shows himself no changeling, but still like himself. Nor
am I sorry, that M. Walker has thus mentioned M. Bradshaw, and thereby given me
occasion to speak somewhat of the man, and somewhat also of his work: that I
may thereby further vindicare him a little from M. Walkers obloquies; as I have
already in part, from the slanderous calumnies of an other foul mouthed railer,
a leader of Separatists at Amsterdam my Rejoinder to whom in defense of M.
Bradshaw, and his answer to M. Fr. Iohnsons reasons for separation from the
Church Assemblies in England, although it came abroad without my consent;
having been advertised by some wel-wishing friends, of somethings in M.
Bradshawes discourse, that seemed to trench upon the government then
established; and desiring therefore, for better security, to print mine own
apart without it; which might safely have been done here without more ado: yet
being by that railing and reviling Replier required to tell whether it were
mine, or not; I returned him by the messenger who delivered me his Letter, this
Answer, That I had sometime written a Defense of M. Bradshaw against him. which
if it were published according to my copy, I would not refuse to own. And
indeed published it was; but as without my privity, so exceeding corruptly,
whole lines in some passages left out, and the sense in many places perverted
and mar^ed; as by a large list of Errata, which I caused to be printed, and
annexed to it, so soon as some copies of it came to my hand, may appear. Since
which time I find the rest of that scurrilous work (for I dealt only with
the last Chapter, that concerned M Bradshaw,) very solidly and learnedly
refuted by one M. John Ball, a reverend and judicious Divine (who had formerly
written in defense of set forms of prayer) in Answer to two Treatises of M Io.
Can.
a Treatise since his decease published by M. Simon Ash Lecturer here in the
City.

But to return to M. Walker, and his charge here against me. True it is that I
preached at M. Bradshaws burial. The worth of the man, though not so commonly
known, in regard he lived in a mean and obscure estate, through the iniquity of
the times, having his chief dependence, and main means of maintenance from a
private family, and being naturally not prone to put himself forth; yet highly
valewed by those that thoroughly knew him, and inwardly conversed with him; and
the entire affection and streightest band of friendship, that held inviolably
firm unto the very last between us; deservedly challenging for him from me, not
that only, but much more then my weak ability was ever able to reach to. And
I did what I then did, with as much grief and regret of heart and mind, as
ever I performed any office in that kind. The loss of so worthy, and so
intimate a friend, (besides the common loss of one so qualified and endowed,
to Gods Church) inwardly piercing with me more deeply, then everyone was aware
of, or my self able easily or suddenly to shake off. But how in my Sermon then
made, I inveighed against M. Walker or any other, I shall leave to the equal
and indifferent consideration of others, when I shall have precisely related
what then I delivered, and subjoyned the occasion, whereupon I spoke it.

In a short speech, that I had, before I entered upon my Text, concerning the
occasion of mine appearance at that time in that place; and of the party
deceased, to whose remains that office of Christian sepulture was then to be
performed; having spoken somewhat, but very briefly, and over-scantly rather
than otherwise, concerning his singular dexterity, as in resolving cases of
conscience, so in clearing of controversed points in Divinity; (in either of
which kinds he did so excel, that I have seldom, if ever, known his match) I
added these words concerning the latter; Wherein his labors, tho uncharitably
taxed and traduced by some, yet have been, as myself can testify, not only
reverently esteemed by diverse of good note in both the Universities, professing
some of them in my hearing to have profited much by them, and to have been
thereby better informed in some particulars, which they conceived not so well
before; but even by some strangers of eminent place and profession beyond the
Seas, very highly extolled, as by some of their Letters to him is yet to be
seen. And this, (...) protest, is all that I then said; which M. Walker here,
(a man it seems, of a very tender ear, tho of too tart a tongue) terms
inveighing against him.

But, if it may not be over-troublesome, I shall request my Readers patience a
while, to receive from me some not overlong relation, concerning the occasion
of that short clause, consisting but of four words at most, that M. Walker
takes so much offense at; that he may thereby be the better enabled to judge
aright whether I spoke any more, then M. Walker had given over-just occasion to
speak.

M. Bradshaw had published, a succinct indeed, but very accurate, (if sundry
men of good parts may be believed) Treatise concerning the Justification of a
sinner before God. In the Preface whereunto, having given intimation of some
difference among our Divines in some particulars concerning this head of
Divinity; Whence, says he, many weak minds have been somewhat perplexed; and
some strong ones (at least in their own conceits) exceedingly distempered, as
the there were amongst us, which overturned foundations, teaching blasphemous
heresies about this matter; whereas all of us with one mouth profess this,
That a sinner is justified not by any formal inherent Righteousness in
himself, but only by the free and mere grace and mercy of God, through the
meritorious satisfaction of our Savior Christ, the only mediator between God
and a sinner. Wherein we all give all the glory of our justification and
salvation to God in Christ Jesus, and therein hold the main Foundation. We
differ only in certain circumstances; wherein nothing is derogated, either
from the mercy of God, or merits of Christ, or arrogated to our own works.

Now the former part of this speech M Walker taking to himself (as, tho not
named, yet conscious to himself of his own guilt, he well might) inveighed
fiercely and furiously (after his wonted guise) in a Serm^n preached in Paul,
Church, against the whole ^ffirming it to be a book full of centradictions and
heresies; of the same nature as he had before averred M. Wottons writings to
be, Page 30.
to which also he here likeneth it. And withal, by a Stationer, whose shop I
frequented, he sent me a challenge, that such a book be understood to be mine,
(as true as that Page 26.
I set M. Godwin on work to write a railing libell against him) tho it came
out in another man's name, (not unlike that of the Amsterdam railer, that Io.
Can of necessity of separation from non-conformists principles. p. 127. of
which see Preface to Rejoinder, p. 11.
he should father another man's work written against Johnson) and that, if I
would undertake the defense of it, he would prove it to consist of
contradictions and heresies. Unto which I returned him this answer, that M.
Bradshaw was able enough to defend his own work. That, if he had ought with
me, he knew where mine abode was; if I ought with him, I knew (I thought) where
he dwelt, but that I had no desire to have dealings with one of that spirit, of
which I perceived him to be.

Herewith not content, he wrote a book against M. Bradshaw so vile and so
virulent, that tendering it for allowance at London-house, he could not obtain
passage for it to the press. Howbeit a Copy of it came to M. Bradshaws hands,
who had also answered some good part of it in a modest manner; as among the
remains of his imperfect writings is yet to be seen. But M. VValkers Pamphlet
not coming abroad, it seems, he gave over.

The Title of M. Walkers work was this: A Woolfe in a Sheeps clothing.

And to give you some small taste of his manner of dealing in it; (for Ex
pauculis guttis dignoscitur maris (...) non ebibatur. (...). l. a. c. 34.
a few drops of Seawater tasted, will sufficiently show, what relish the whole
Ocean has) he thus begins his onset upon the main body of the Book.

Having before examined the Preface word by word, and discovered plainly and
largly the impudent calumnies, open lies, desperate errors, and gross
contradictions therein contained; I will now proceed to examine and censure the
Treatise it self: wherein he shows himself still one and the same man; to
w^t, one of a factious spirit, a desperate maintainer and justifier of our new
upstart Socinian Heretics, the blasphem^us disciples of Servetus Socinus and
Arminius, an horrible and prosane abuser of the Word of God, citing it contrary
to all sense; one speaking like the old Oracles of Apollo, sometimes without
any sense, sometimes so ambiguously, as that his words may bear diverse and
contrary senses, sometimes affirming boldly strange things, without rendering
any reason; as if he were a second peremptory Pythagoras, or a new purified
Pope, whose words or sayings must be received against all reason, as if they
were Oracles of God; and in a word, as in the Preface, so in the Treatise, he
does by his fruits, and his proofs contrary to his pretended Titles in every
Chapter, discover himself to be A Woolf in Sheeps clothing.

And that he may end in no better manner then he began, he thus enters upon the
last Chapter:

This Chapter, tho it treat only of things humane, such as we daily hear and
see, and have experience of, yet it has diverse errors: As if the Author had
vowed to err in all things; and to infect Heaven and Earth, and all things
sacred and profane, with his Treatise.

Now whether such a censure as this might not well bear out as much, if not
much more, then I then spoke, I am well content, that any man, not wholly
forestalled with extreme prejudice, be judge.

Yea but Mr. Bradshaws Treatise, it may be, well deserved such a censure.

I will not, for satisfaction herein, send you (tho I well might) to the work it
self. It may not be at hand; or you may suspect, if you have it, and shall be
pleased to peruse it, that some rank poison lies so closely couched in it,
that an ordinary sight is not able easily to descry it. And yet, as M. Bradshaw
well answers him concerning the Preface; If the calumnies be impudent, the
l^es open, the errors desperate, the contradictions gross, they are such as
sufficiently discover themselves; and M. Walkers discovery is therefore in
vain, being as tho he should say, he has discovered the Sun, when it shines
out in his brightness in every man's face: so that either M. Walker has
discovered no calumnies, lies, errors and contradictions at all; or they are
not open, grass, desperate and impudent. In like manner may I say of the
Treatise it self; if the errors in it be so Chap. 2. and Chap. 9.
gross, palpable, abominable, and contrary to all sense, that they do not
only discover, but even judge and condemn themselves, as M. Walker affirms
of them; surely any dim sight will suffi^^ to discern what the work is. Nor
will I offer to obtrude upon you mine own conceit of it. I might peradventure
be deemed partial, both in regard of mine own opinion; albeit I concur not
in all things with him; and in regard of mine entire affection to my friend;
(...). Psalm. ^^irac. c^^ib. (...). Greg. Naz. ep. 13 and 27. (...). Ide^.
apolog. Fallit enim affectus. Pli^. l. 4. ep. 44. and amantium caeca sunt
judicia. Hieron. ad Joan. Hierosol.
which I grant may sometime also somewhat oversway. But I shall inform you, as
before I intimated, how it has been censured by others, men no way engaged;
and that, far otherwise then M. Walker has been pleased to pronounce of it.

And here I might entertain you, with the judgment of Sir Edward Cook then
Lord chief Justice.
a great Lawyer and Councellor of State, one in his time reputed a man of some
judgment: who in regard of some near affinity visiting the Gentlewoman, whom
M Bradshaw made abode with, in the time of his sickness, and lighting
accidentally upon this short Treatise, after he had runover some good part of
it was very much taken with it; and demanding who was the Anthor of it,
professed, that he had seldom read a thing more pithily and pregnantly written.

But because it may be objected, that this was out of his element; and yet let
me tell you, that some See M. Prinnes p^eface to his Treatise of the perp^tuity
of Faith.
Lawyers have in Divinity dealt to good purpose; and that the term of
justification being ^orense vocabulum. Calviu. iustitut. l. 3. c. 11. 3.
Chemnit. exam. Conc. Trid. part. 1. de vocab. justif. Pet. Mart. in Romans 8. 33.
Bucer. praefat. in Epist. Paul. c. 8. Par. in Romans 3. 28. and resp. ad dub. 7.
Chamier. Pa^strat. tom. 3. l. 21. c 14. 10. Bellarm. de justif. l. 2. c. 3.
except. 1. and 2.
a Law term, (as our Divines, with good warrant from Deuteronomy. 25. 1. Psalm. 82. 3.
Prove. 17. 15. Esaias 5 23. and 43. 26.
Gods Word, constantly maintain) a discourse of that subject is to that
profession no stranger. I shall leave him, and in room of him present you with
the judgment of a Divine of special note M. Lodowik, or Lewis, Cappel, one of
the Professors of Divinity in the University of Salmure in France; a man among
the learned well known by his works. This M. Cappel, having received this
Treatise of M. Bradshaws, from M. Aaron Cappel his kinsman, one of the
Ministers of the French Church here in London, returned back to him many
thanks for it; requesting him withal to enquire after the Author, and either to
deliver, or convey to him his Letters enclosed: the superscription whereof was
this; Doctissimo atque ornatissimo clarissimoque viro,
Domino Guilielmo Bradshaw.
The Subscription: Tui, non studiosus modo sed cultor and admirator,
Ludovicus Cappellus.


I translate them not, because the English phrase in such forms, will not so
well fit them.

The contents are word for word in part thus:

Missus est ad me Londino a D. Capello, Ecclesiae Gallicanae quae Londini est
Pastore, mole quidem exiguus, sed doctrina atque ingenio and acumine grandis,
de justificatione libellus, Anglice conscriptus, autore G. Bradshaw. Is quia
perplacebat, and mihi cum D. Gomaro exemplar illud erat commune, statim a me in
privatum usum Gall^ce est redditus. Anglicanum exemplar D. Gomaro reliqi. Dicam
ingenue. Nihil in humanis scr^ptis dogmati^is hactenus a me lectum est, quod
tam vebementer mihi placuerit Ita docte, acute, press, solid, nervose, aperte
s^l and mira brevitate totum hoc argumentum plenissime a te est comprehensum
atque pertractatum. Verba attem quibus illud digne pro merito suo collaudem
atque extollam, mihi non suppe^unt. Saepius ille mihi lectus est; nec unqam
ejus satias me cepit. quin eo vehementius sui in me excitavit desiderium quo
frequentius repetitus atque relectus: tantus in eo doctrinae, artis atque
ingenii splendour and lumen refulget. That is in English.

There has been sent me from London by M. Cappel Pastor of the French Church
there, a little book of justification, small in bulk, but in learning, wit and
acuteness very great, written in English by William Bradshaw. This because it
much pleased me, and Gomarus and I had but one copy between us; I translated
out of hand for mine own use into French, and left the English copy to Gomarus.
I will speak ingenuously. I never hitherto read ought in any humane writing of
dogmaticall Divinity, that so exceedingly liked me. So learnedly, acutely,
closely, solidly, pithily, both plainly, and yet with ^dmirable brevity, is
this whole Argument most fully comprased, and thoroughly handled by you. I want
words, wherewith to commend and extol it according to its desert. I have often
read it over; and yet never had enough of it, but the oftener I repeat it and
read it over again, the more eagerly is mine appetite stirred up unto it so
great splendour and light of learning, of Art and wit shines forth in it. And
so forth. For the rest is a discourse concerning some particulars, wherein he
desired further satisfaction, treading wholly then in Piscators steps.




But thus he, a mere stranger, to a man, whom he had never seen or heard of
before; judging of him only by that vile, abominable, absurd, senseless
book, that M. Walker (I hope I may now be somewhat the bolder to speak it)
does so uncharitably tax and traduce.

Give me leave a little further to trespass upon thy patience, good Reader. To
give M. Cappel further satisfaction, and to save much writing at large to and
fro; M. Bradshaw resolved to review the work, and having a little better
cleared some things, to translate it into Latin. That which also he did, and
sent a copy of it to M. Cappel. who in a second Letter after the receipt of it,
wrote back to him in these words:

Scripsi jam antehaec, vir clarissime, me accepisse libellum tuum de
justificatione vere aureum, a te auctum Latinumque factum, eumque a me
extemplo, sed raptim, perlectum esse: ita vehemens me ejus ceperat desiderium,
ex prius lecta Anglicana ejus editione. Inde a me non semel, sed saepius, and
cum otio, perlectus est. quem quo saepius relego, eo magis mihi arridet
probaturque. ita ad unguem a te exactus est. Pacatis and moderatis ingeniis, ab
utralibet sint part, quique non nimio partium studio aguntur, spero probatum
iri istum tui ingenii partum atque faetum: licet non omnia utrisque concedas,
quae ipsi vellent. Ita medius inter utramque incedis sententiam, ut neutris
displicere debeas, si vere sint pacis and concordiae amantes. That is in
English:

Right worthy sir, I wrote before to you, that I had received your truly
golden little book of justification, enlarged by you, and turned into Latin;
and that presently, but hostily, I read it over, so eager an appetite had I to
it, by reading the other Edition of it in English before. Since that I have
read it over again, not once but often, and taking leisure thereunto. Which
the oftener I read over again, the more it pleases me, and is approved of by
me: so accurately and exactly is it composed by you. I hope this birth and
issue of your mind will find approbation with peaceable and moderate
dispositions, on whether side so ever they are; albeit you condescend not to
them in all things that they require. You pace so in the midst between either
opinion, that you ought not to displease either of them, if they truly love
peace and concord.




Now how this agrees with M. Walkers censure of M. Bradshaws book, that
thereby he has showed himself to be one of a factious spirit, and a desperate
maintainer and justifier of blasphemous heretics, he may easily soon see, that
either is not blind, or does not wilfully wink.

I might add, that if M. Walkers censure of M Bradshaws book be admitted, the
like must be past upon the writings of some others, publicly allowed, and
generally well esteemed of among us; and by name on M Pembles large Treatise of
justification beforementioned, and M. Torsels briefer discourse of the same
subject: both which build mainly on M Brad^ ^ounds, the latter precisely
treads in his

Thus much concerning my deservedly dear friend, who neither living, nor
deceased, could escape the scourge of M. Walkers tongue; which Page 26.
without fear or regard (to use his own words of himself) he lets fly both
at living, and at dead; and concerning that work of his, by other pious,
learned and judicious so praised and apprised; which shall (I doubt not)
survive with its due and deserved approbation from such; when M. Walkers
railing Pamphlet, wherein he so traduceth it, shall either lie buried in
perpetual oblivion; or, if ever it come to see open light, shall stink in the
nostrils both of God and good men.

But M. Walker has not so done with M. Gataker. For, If it were not vain
expense of precious time, Page 26, 27.
he could first of all produce Socinianism out of his works; and so make him a
party. And so I presume he could also out of Bucer, Pareus, Pemble, Piseator,
and I know not how many more, as well as out of M. Gataker, if he would set
himself to it. For M. Walker has a very singular dexterity herein; as in part
has already been showed. But I answer him briefly. That Dolosus vers^tur in
universalibus. Reg. Iur.
general charges are generally deemed deceitful; and will not hold either in
Law or in conscience. And again, that Ecquis innocens esse pote^j^^ si
acousasse sufficient? Julian. apud Ammian. l. 18.
if to accuse be sufficient, no man is sure to go guiltless, be his cause
never so good. And yet, what were this, could he prove it by M Gataker, to Dr.
Gouges and M. Downhams Attestation, which directly avoweth, that M. Walker
could not prove it by M. Wotton, when time was, and he had undertaken so to
do? unles this be a good argument; Socinianism may be produced now out of M.
Gatakers works: and therefore Dr. Gouge and M. Downham with the rest did not so
determine, as that they did, under their own hands they do witness.

Besides, Page 26.
he could prove M Gataker to be Thomas of all sides Sometimes holding that the
elect and faithful are clothed with the garment of Christ's righteousness;
and again disputing against their communion and imputation of Christ's
righteousness.

Whereunto I answer. 1. For that scurrilous term better beseeming some
scoffing jester, then a grave and sage Minister of Christ. It thal never
trouble me by M. Walker so to by styled; nor by any other either so to be
esteemed, if thereby be intimated, that I am such an one, as refuse not to
embrace all truth that I meet with on any side, be the side what it will: no
more then I would forbear, to take up a Pearl, wheresoever I should find it,
whether in the mother of Pearls shell, or with Esops cock, either Sicnt ex
Ennii stercore aurum V^rgilius.
on the dunghill, or in the dirt. Or if he intend thereby to note me for such a
one, as have in some particulars altered my judgment from what sometime
formerly I held; nor do I refuse in many things so to be deemed. I suppose,
that holds not in me alone, but in many others, which Math. M^inius.
a Divine, as well of good, as of great, note, is reported to have said in the
Council of Dort, when it was objected unto him, that something spoken by him
differed from some clause in the Catechism; Multa discimus p^eri, de quibus
dubitamus senes.
We are taught many things when we are young, that we make doubt of, when we are
old. Who is he, that is careful to make diligent enquiry into the truth of
things, who does not often alter his former opinion? For my part, I freely
profess, with that worthy ancient, that Fat^or me ex little rum^ro esse co^ari.
qui s^ribendo pr^fi eiunt and pro^fiendo scr^t. Aug ^p. 7.
my desire and endeavonr is to be one of those, who write as they profit, and
profit as they write. And I may peradventure, following Opuscula me^
retractanda suscepi, ut nee meipsum in o^ibus me secutum demonstrem. Aug. de
persever. c. 21.
that pious pattern, if God please to grant me longer life, with strength and
leisure, take some time and pains to review those weak works, that I have
sormerly sent abroad, to satisfy other men more then my self; and to amend
what therein I deem my self to have been mistaken in; to explain what I doubt
may be mistaken by others. Nor do I account it any Nullus mihi pudor est, ad
meliora transire. Ambr. Ep. 31. Turpe est n^tare are sententiam; sed veram and
recta^. nam stultam noxia^ve and laudabile and salubre est. Aug. ep. 210.
Optimi enim est propositi, laudandique consilii, facile ad veriora traduci.
Victor apud Aug. de orig. anim. l. 2. c. 16.
shame or stain to me, to alter in ought for the better. I hold it a point
rather of Non est levita^ ab errore jam cognitodiscedere. h^ec vero superbae
stultitiae persevera^tia est, Quod semel dixi, fixumratum sit. semel placita
semper maneant, nec ulla in libris meis litura fit. Sen. de benef. l. 4. c. 38.
and de beat. c. 8.
pride and solly (shameful enough either of them; both together much more) for
any man, to think his works blemished, by dashing out of ought in them, that
he finds he was deceived in; when as the standing of it still there is rather a
blemish to his books. I am, and shall ever be, of that famous, tho Heathen,
Emperors mind: (...). M. Anton. l. 6.
If any man, says he, can in ought better inform me, and discover to me mine
error, I shall readily yield to him. For I seek nothing but the truth, which
never wrongs him that finds it. True it is, that in this point of
Justification, I went sometime another way then now I do; the same that Gomarus
and some other still do, and before me did; until upon occasion of some
Lectures of Dr. Gray, who succeeded M. Wotton at Gresham-Colledge, I fell into
conference and disceptation with M. Bradshaw about it; and after many disputes,
that passed to and fro in writing between us, wherein I strove stiffely to
maintain what then I held; being at length by force of Argument beaten from my
hold, I yielded not so much to my friend, as to the truth; (as I was then, and
am still, certainly (...). Epictet. Stob. c. 5. n Est virtus summa veritati
cedere.
persuaded) which to be overborne by, I shall ever account the best valor,
(...). Phi^onid. A jure vinci praecluis victoria est. Grot. A veritate vinoi
res pulcherrima. A veritate ^in. ^i, lau^ est, baud probrum.
to be overcome by the fairest victory.

And yet thar phrase of being clothed with the robe of Christ's righteousness,
whether I used it before or since, is not material. For neither do I now
reject it, nor does it cross ought, that either I or they, with whom I now
concur, hold; being found frequently in their writings, and See Pareus de Ast.
and Pass. Chr. Ohed. Pofit. 1. p. 180.
acknowledged by them: since that I maintain still with them, as always I
did, See before M. Bradshaws Prefac.
no other righteousness, whereby we are justified, that is, discharged of the
guilt of our sins in Gods sight, but what accrueth unto us from Christ, and the
satisfaction made by him unto Gods justice for them: according to that of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Him that knew no sin, did God make sin for us; that we might become the
righteousness of God in him.

As for communion and imputation of Christ's righteousness, how far forth I
either maintain or deny either; (for M. Walker runs on still in generalities,
and after his blundering manner jumbles things together, as if communion and
imputation were either the same, or of equal extent, and the not
acknowledgment of the one therefore a denial of the other) my Elenchus Disput.
Fr. Gomari: and Disceptatio cum Lud. Lucio.
works show, that are extant: wherein if either M. Walker, or any other, shall
in friendly manner convince me of any mistake, Debere me multum profitebor,
amice decteque potior a suggerenti. Lud. Vr^es praefat. in Aug. de Civ. Dei. In
aere me ejus futurum profiteor, qui candide caftigarit. Zinzerlin. promiss.
erit.
he shall do me no small pleasure; as conceiving it (...). De^crit. and
Isocrat. Stob. c. 13. and Anton. (...). l. 1. ^78.
a greater benefit to my self, to have mine own errors by others discovered to
me, then to be an instrument of discovering other men's ^rrots to them; since
that, (as he said sometime of things amiss Vitium ^xoris aut tollendum, aut
f^rendum est. qni tollit vitium, uxorem commodioreet praestat. qui fert, sese
meliorem facit. Varro. Gel. l. n. c. 17.
between man and wise) (...). Plato Gorg. Method. apud Epithan. haeres. 84. 43.
Gregor. Naz. apud Max. c. 31.
by the one I may help to amend my brethren, but by the other I may be amended
my self.

Mean while, so far am I from being Thomas of all sides in some sense, that I
profess and shall desire rather in some kind, to be Thowas of no side. For I
love not siding in Gods Church; among Christ's Ministers especially. I love not,
I am for this man; and I am for that man: I am for this side, and I am for that
side. 1 Cor. 1. 12. Romans 16. 18.
The Apostle himself liked it not. I love not holding the faith of Christ with
respect of persons. Jam. 2. 1.
an other Apostle forbids it. I love not, that any be tied to follow any one
man, or any number of men whatsoever, in all things. 1 Cor. 11. 1.
The Apostles themselves required it not, in matter of fact; nor may any now
living in matter of faith. Hence proceed 1 Cor. 3. 3. and 11. 18, 19.
schisms and factions, and uncharitable censures, many times of those as
unsound, that are, it may be, more sincere, have at least as good a share in
Christ, as those that so censure them. And surely, if the words heresy and
heretic were rightly understood, or if they be so taken (as I suppose them to
be constantly used in Scripture; nor do I think that the contrary can be
easily evinced) the one for Act. 5. 17. and 15. 5. and 24. 5, 14. and 26. 5.
and 28, 22. 1 Cor. 11. 18; 19. Gal. 5. 20.
faction, the other for Tit. 3. 10.
a factious person; none, I fear, will be found more truly guilty of heresy,
or better to deserve the title of heretic, then those, who (therein
concurring with the Papists, whom yet they profess most to abhor) are so
prone to condemn all as heretics and tainted with heresy in their sense,
that is, as men cut off from Christ, and having no interest in him, who do not
in all matters of practice comply, or in all points of doctrine concur with
themselves. Of their side, Lord, let me never be: Genesis 49. 6.
let my soul never enter into their secret. Neither is it, nor shall ever be my
desire, either so to pin my faith upon the sleeve of any part or party, or to
engage my judgment to any mere man's or men's opinion, (the Pen men of holy writ
only excepted) as (...). Plato Gorg. Nullius addictus jurare in verba
magist^i. Flac. epist. 1.
to admit hand over head whatsoever he or they shall hold and maintain: nor
yet again to refuse or reject any truth, which by the light that God shall be
pleased to lend me, I shall be able to descry in the writings of any, tho
otherwise never so erroneous or unsound.

In the next passage yet M. Walker is somewhat more charitable. For though he
hold me an heretic, yet he will pray for me. He prays, that Page 27:
God will give me a more settled judgment in the truth; and a more charitable
heart to my laborious neighbors. And I willingly put mine Amen to his prayer.
for m^ne hearty desire and daily prayer to God is, to have mine heart daily
more and more 2 Pet. 1. 12.
established in the truth. Nor do I less desire, to carry a charitable
affection toward my Christian brethren, either laborious, or other; tho more
especially toward those, whom 1 These. 5. 13.
for their labors sake, I do deservedly the more love. Wherein yet, as in
other graces and offices, I doubt not but that I may many ways Charitas,
quandiu hic vivitur, augeri p^test. quamdiu autem augeri potest, profecto iilud
quod minus est quam d^bet, ex vitio est. ex quo vitio non est, qui non p^^cet.
Aug de perfect. just. c 15.
fail and fall short, during this state of imperfection and humane frailty:
and wherein had not M. Walker much failed toward a brother very laborious,
while he had liberty to labor in public; and no loiterer then, as by See a
list of them Relat. Posts^. p. 61.
his writings appears, when he was restrained from his ministerial
employments; but then also laboring, tho not in public, which was not
permitted him, yet for the public, what he might; this expense of precious
time, (which Page 26.
he would elsewhere seem so dainty of) of necessity now wasted in debating
these matters, might very well have been sp^red, and much more profitably been
spent otherwise.

Howbeit M. Walkers charity even in his prayer eould not keep it self from
discovery of some inward rancor mixed with a little tang at least of vainglory.
For Page 27.
his laborious neighbors, (says he, meaning himself; for I know no other that
complain of any defect or default in me in this kind toward them) who spend
their time in better studies, then writing of Treatises for unlawful gaming and
carding, and bedaubing margents with many quotations to small purpose, but only
for ostentation of much reading.

To either of which imputations, I shall severally and respectively return some
short answer.

For the former, 1. I doubt much, whether M. Walker spent his time b^ter in
this and the like railing and reviling Invectives against his laborious
brethren, then I did mine in writing of that Treatise See the Preface prefixed
to the Reader.
which yet had I not published, had not the iniquity of some, therein not wholly
unlike M. Walker, enforced me thereunto.

2. The Treatise is of the nature and use of lots in general: and the scope of
it, to remove, as well the superstitious practice of them in one kind, as the
superstitious conceit of them in another.

3. If any game therein defended, as not simply evil in regard of a Lot in it,
yea or otherwise, be by M. Walker deemed utterly unlawful, let him by evidence
of argument evince the same so to be; and he shall therein Legatur Antidiatribe
Ame^^o Voeti^que r^po^^ta: and Responsio Balmfordo reddit^.
do more then by any other, that I know, hitherto has been done. Mean while,
let M. Walker give me leave to tell him, that I do not believe him, nor believe
that he is able to make his word good. tho I am not ignorant, what he has
bragged of his abilities so to do.

For the latter, to wit, my course of quotation: 1. I may well, I presume,
defend my self, by the examples of many, of much more worth and esteem, as well
for godliness as for judgment, then either my self, or M. Walker; that (...).
ae Dionys. Longino Ennap. in P^rphyr. oui and in AEdes. Socrates. (...).
living Library of all good literature, Dr. Raynolds, among the rest: unless
M. Walker be able to prove the practice unlawful.

But 2. I say only, that howsoever for the use and end of it; he be pleased to
censure it; I hope, there will not want others, whose judgments may well weigh a
little more at least with me, that will approve of it as useful; and make a
better and more charitable construction of it, (if not thank me for it) then he
does. And 3. it may be, if some quoted the Authors they allege, and pointed
to the places they relate to in them, their evil usage of those they deal
with, would the more easily be discovered. Howsoever, I shall choose rather to
have my Margent so bedaubed, then my Text so stuffed as M. Walkers is, as well in
this as in some other his writings.

Lastly, I demand, what either this or the former is to the matter in hand, or
the carriage of the business between M. Walker and M. Wotton: or what occasion
M. Walker had to be girding here at either; unless it be that his fingers itch
to be picking of new quarrels, tho they nothing concern him or the present
occasion. Or that (...). Arifla. thet. l. 3. c. 14.
being conscious to himself of the badnesse of the cause he here deals in, he
is loath to keep close to it, and willing rather to run out into any other
thing, tho it have no relation at all thereunto.

Howbeit, notwithstanding M. Walkers laborious employments, he will yet, it
seems, filch a little time from them, to examine M. Gataker upon a few
interrogatories; Page 27.
which unles he can answer with credit, he must of necessity for ever hereafter
hold his peace, and blush as of^ as he thinks, how by his defense of M. Wotton,
he has accused and defamed himself.

But here M. Walker much mistakes his mark, and shoots at random. For my
Relation, which he pretends to refute, is not M. Gatakers Defense of M. Wotton,
but M. Wottons Defense of himself: nor did either I, or any of those that were
joined with me in the meeting related, undertake to defend M. Wotton as one
free from all error, but delivered only, what we thought of M. Wottons own
Defense of himself in regard of ought that M. Walker had laid to his charge.
Nor do I therefore conceive, either that I stand upon me credit engaged to
answer to all M: Walkers Interrogatories; or that M. Walker has any du power
thus to bind me over to silence and shame, upon my refusal so to do.

Yet let us see what they are.

The first is, Page 27.
Whether it be truth and honesty to say, that Relat. p. 36.
all the eight Ministers with unanimous consent generally resolved and
pronounced, that there appeared not to them either heresy or blasphemy in
ought that M. Wotton was by M. Walker convinced to have delivered or
maintained: when their subscription shows that they meddled only with his
Expositions, and not with his heretical and blasphomous speeches, in which he
paralleld him with Socinus the heretic,

To all which I shall easily answer in a word, that if that which he here
relates as mine, be the same in effect with what is Relat. p. 38.
testified under the hands of D. Gouge and M. Downham (as it is evident that it
is) the untruth and dishonesty must be charged upon them: who, I hope, will be
better able to acquit themselves in this business of either; then he that so
shamelesly charge them therewith.

As for that, which he adds, to disprove it, of Expositions; (which word how
it came into the subscription, I suppose, no man surviving, unles himself, now
knows;) and of speeches heretical and blasphemous, (words of course with M.
Walker) wherein he paralleld M. Wotton and Socinus; enough before has been
spoken to satisfy any reasonable Reader; tho not, it may be, M. Walker.

The second question is, Page 27.
Whether I think, that M. Wotton renouncing the Law of God and the righteousness
thereof performed by Christ in our steed for our justification; does not in so
doing deny Christ's ransom paid, and satisfaction made to Gods just law, for
our redemption and for remission of our sins.

To which I answer as briefly, as to the former; that it appeared not to the
eight Ministers by ought M. Walker produced, that M. Wotton held ought in this
particular, that did necessarily infer, what M. Walker thence concludes.

And let M. Walker give me leave here, if I may be so bold to minister a
cross interrogatorie to him; to wit, whether Pareus, Piscator, Ursine,
Olevian, and the rest of them, who deny Christ's righteousness in fulfilling the
Law moral to have been performed by him in our steed, for our justification,
do therefore deny all ransom paid and satisfaction made to Gods just Law for
our redemption and the ^emission of our sins, or no. and whether they be
therefore all of them blasphemous heretics. But more especially, what he
thinks of that speech of Pareus above mentioned, that De Act. and Pasio. Chr.
Obed. possit. 5. p. 181.
those that ascribe the merit of our righteousness thereunto, (that which
directly crosses what M. Walker here avoweth) do doubtlesly make Christ's
sufferings of no use or effect. Surely, if M. Wotton speak no more then Pareus,
(and he hardly speaks so much) Pareus must as well, if not much rather then M.
Wotton, pass with M. Walker for an heretic. And if those that hold as M.
Walker does, make Christ's sufferings of no use or effect, they, one would
think, should rather go for heretics, then M. Wotton, who, it seems, is of an
other mind.

The third question is, Page 27, 2^
Whether man's perfect fulfilling of the Law in his own person, under the
covenant of works, was not formal inherent righteousness; and would have made
man worthy of life. And if so, how he can excuse M. Wotton for making faith the
formal inherent righteousness of believers, in the covenant of grace, by which
they are worthy of justification and eternal life. Seeing he says, that faith
under the Gospel serves to all purposes for obtaining eternal life, as man's
perfect fulfilling of the Law did in the covenant of works.

Let me give you but M. Wottons own words, out of M. Walkers own Parallel; and
there shall need to this no further answer. Error. 4^ Relat. p. 15.
He that believes, (says M. Wotton) is accounted by God to all purposes
concerning eternal life, to have done according to the covenant of the Gospel,
as he should have been accounted to have done according to the covenant of the
Law, if he had perfectly fulfilled it. For not to stand upon strict terms
concerning the word Worthy: what does M. Wotton say more here, then that which
he says elsewhere? objected also to him by M. Walker, as an heretical and
blasphemous speech; Error. 2. Relat. p. 13.
The act of Faith, or believing brings justification and adoption, (which what
is it other then what the Apostle says, Romans 3. 28. and Gal. 3. 26.) Only and
merely by the place and office, which the Lord of his mercy has assigned it,
to be the condition required on our parts for the atchieving of these favors
and honors. thereby excluding all matter of worth in Faith. which yet,
whosoever is possessed of, believing in Christ, that is relying upon him for
justifycation and life eternal, may well be said to be accounted by God to all
purposes (to wit on our parts required, and therefore to be necessarily by us
performed) to have done as much according to the covenant of the Gospel, as he
should have been accounted to have done according to the covenant of the Law,
had he perfectly fulfilled it. But of this also enough before out of our own
Writers; and by name out of M. Pemble; whom M. Walker having so highly
commended, as one Epist. prefixed to M. Pembles Plea for grace.
by his writings most useful and powerful to confirm men's minds against the
Wolves af this age, the Disciples of blasphemous Servetus and Socinus; will not
now, I hope, condemn him for a Socinian and blasphemous heretic; and having
Ibid.
formerly made no doubt, but that he is ascended up into heaven, will not (I
presume) for M. Wottons sake now damn him, and throw him down, to send him
packing for company with M. Wetton, to hell.

The fourth question is in effect the same with the two next before going;
only, to make some show of variety, usherd in with a list of Page 28.
true and orthodox te^ets, wherein he says M. Wotton professes his dissent
from Socinus; and wherein indeed M. Walker manifests his extreme partiality,
and malignant disposition against M. Wotton; thereby showing too apparently,
that his pretended zeal is not so much against Socinus and Socinianism it
self, as against M. Wotton, and against the things taught by him, as coming
from him. This he has too too manifestly discovered in this interrogatory;
spite and malice so blinding him, that (...). Democrit. Sto^. c: 20. (...) De
Cyro Xenoph. instit. l. 1. Qua noceat, ira videt; qua caveat, non videt. Sen.
de ira. l. 2. c. 12.
he minded not what he did. For those tenets of Socinus, though unsound and
containing in them rank venom, as he means them, and manifests himself
so to do, wherein M. Wotton professes to dissent from him; these M. Walker,
setting a fair gloss on them, contrary to Socinus his own intendement in
them, allows and avoweth them for orthodox and true.

For example, the first of them is, Page 28.
that Faith is obedience to Christ's commandments; who commands us to believe
and repent. And it is true, that Socinus, as Relat. Poscr. p. 48.
elsewhere I cite him, De Christ. Servat l. 4. c. 11.
maintains as M. Walker here says that he does. But what says Lubbertus to
him for it? a man whom M. Walker would seem much to admire, and told us at our
meeting, that he was by I know not whom styled Orthodoxorum ocellus. Quod
dicit, Fidem esse ea sacere, quae Christus praecepit, falsum est. Lubb. ad l.
4. c. 11 p. 561. col. 2.
Whereas he (to wit Socinus) says (says Lubbertus) that Faith is to do those
things that Christ has enjoined, it is false: Dicere, fidem esse ea facere,
quae Christus praecepit, est idem quod, iasanire. Ibid.
to affirm it to be so, is to be stark mad. So by Lubbertus his censure, not
Socinus only, but M. Walker also should be no better. Again, Docet, Christo
ejusque verbis credere idem esse quod Christo obedire: negamus. Obedientia enim
est effectum sidei. errat igitur, qui contendit fidem and obedientiam idem
esse. Ibid. p. 582. col. 2.
He teaches, that to believe Christ and his words, is to obey him. We deny it.
For obedience is an effect of faith. he erreth therefore, that holds Faith and
Obedience to be all one. And yet again, Firmum est, quod Beza soribit, Fidem
non posse mandatorum obedientiam significare. Ib. p. 574. col. 2.
Firm stands that, which Beza writes, that Faith cannot signify Obedience to
the Commandments. Thus Lubbertus, one of M Walkers own Oracles. And indeed
what did Socinus hereby intend, but to cut off all relying by Faith on Christ,
as having paid a price to God for our sins, or satisfied for them by his
death? yet this is M. Walker pleased to blanch over; as if he conceived his
meaning to be nothing else, but that in believing and repenting, we obey
Christ's commandment, who Mark. 1. 15.
commands us to repent and believe. And so is content to let it pass for
current, as a true and orthodox tenet in Socinus, because M. Wotton dissented
therein from Socinus; though condemned by Lubbertus (yea by whom not?) for a
gross error, and in his intendement very dangerous.

The second point, wherein M. Walker affirms M. Wotton to depart from Socinus,
and which he affirms to be true and orthodox, is Page 28.
that Repentance, which comes not but by Faith, is the means to obtain
forgivenes of sins, which Christ has brought. But he deals here with
Socinus, to help him out, as he is wont to do with M. Wotton, to procure
prejudice to him. For he takes part out of one passage, and part out of an
other, (as M. Wotton has Answer to Error. 2. 4. Relat. p 34. and to Error 4 p.
28.
cited him, not expressing how far forth in every particular he concurs with
him, or dissents from him; but only showing, how in general he speaks not
that, that himself does) and so pieces up a proposition, which he would have
deemed sound; withal paring of, what might serve to discover Socinus his
gross error, wherein M. Wotton intended to imply his departure from him. For,
Manifestum est, in salute per Christum parta, Deum nihil aliud a nobis
requisivisse quam paenitentiam and vitae correctionem.
It is manifest, says he, that God requires nothing of us in the obtaining of
salvation procured by Christ, but repentance and amendment of life. And,
Poenitentiae addita alicubi est fides, non quia praeter ipsam poenitentiam
fides in Christu^, tanquam aliquid amplius, quod huc pertineat in nobis
efficiens, ad peccatorum remissionem consequendam requiratur, sed quia non nisi
per fidem in Christum ista poenitentia contingit. Socin. l. 3. c. 2. p. 321.
col. 1.
Whereas Faith is sometime added to repentance; it is not because Faith in
Christ is required to the obtaining of remission of sins, (directly contrary to
what the Apostle Romans 3. 25.
professes) as working somewhat more in us besides Repentance it self, that
does hereunto appertain; but because Repentance comes not but by Faith in
Christ. Thus he clips Socinus in favor to him; as he does M. Wotton els-where
to a contrary end. And yet further, because Lubbertus, Socinus his Antagonist,
in refuting him, beats every where upon this, that Peccatorum veniam conversio
naturae ordine sequitur, non praecedit. Lubb. ad l. 1. c. 5. p. 156. c. 2.
Naturae ordine justificatio est prior. Ib p. 157. c. 1.
Conversion and Repentance do not in order of nature go before, but follow
remission of sin, and justification; and Resipiscentia justificationis effectum
est. Ib. p. 58. c. 2.
are not causes, but effects of either; nor the cause of expiation, but a
consequent of it: and supposing Socinus his meaning to be, Paenitentia non est
causa expiationis, sed ejus consequens. Ib. ad l. 2. c. 12. p. 213. c. 2.
that our Repentance is the cause of the remission of our sins; Reprobamus hanc
sententiam, nam, ut jam millies osten sum est, remissio p^ccatorum, hoc est
justificatio nostri, est natura prior poenitentia. quam obrem hanc ejus causam
esse est simpliciter impossible. Ib. p. 216. c. 1. and l. 3. c. 2. p. 348. c.
2. and p. 349. c. 1, 2.
This, says he, we disallow, for, as has a thousand times been showed,
Remission of sins, that is justification, is in nature before repentance: and
it is impossible therefore to be the cause of it. Non nostra resipiscentia, sed
ipsius sacrificium est vera causa remissionis pee^aterum. Ib. l. 2. c. 1. p.
274. c. 2.
For it is not Repentance, but Christ's sacrifice, that is the true cause of the
remission of our sins: Deum promittere veniam resespiscenti non negamus: tantum
negamus resipiscentiam nostram esse causam, quare Deus nobis peccatorum veniam
largiatur. Ib. l. 3. c. 2. p. 338. c. 2.
God indeed promises pardon to the repentant; but we deny repentance to be the
cause for which God does pardon. Here M. Walker strikes in to help Socinus at a
dead lift, and tells us, contrary to his Text, sure without any warrant at
all from it, Page 28.
that by obtaining forgivenes of sins, Socinus means getting the sense and
assurance of forgiveness. a gloss wel-beseeming him, that professes such a
detestation of the very least sent or shadow of Socinianism in others.

The third point is, Ibid.
that faith is a believing of that which Christ taught, and an assurance of
obtaining that he promised upon our repentance and obedience. Which whether it
be a just definition of justifying Faith; (for of that here the question is) or
do fitly express the office of it in the work of justification, I leave to be
discussed by others. M. Wotton relates it, Answer to Error. 2. 5. Relat. p.
252, 6.
to show how that in laying down the nature and office of justifying faith, he
goes an other way then Socinus does; and further then Socinus either does, or
can, holding his own grounds, follow him. who indeed thus defines Faith, to
bring all home to Repentance and obed^enee, as in the former point; and to
exclude Christ's merit, and ought done or endured by him, as satisfactory for
man's sin: as appears plainly by the whole context of his discourse in that
Chapter, out of which these words are alleged. And I would demand of M.
Walker, how he can free himself from Socinianism, when he maintains such points
as these for sound and orthodox in Socinus: and what censure himself would hape
past upon an other, that should have thus blancht and vernisht over such
Assertions of Socinus. As also I would know of him, with what face he, that
condemns in M. Wotton as heretical and blasphemous positions, these
propositions, Parall. Error^ 5. Relat. p. 17.
To believe in Christ, is to trust in Christ, and to rest on him; to have his
heart settled, and to rely wholly and only on him; and, This trust is such a
faith as makes us rest upon God for the performance of his promise; does now
pronounce Socinus his definition of faith, such as you have heard, to be true,
Orthodox and sound. But hereby any party, not extremely partial, may easily
judge what spirit this man is carried with throughout this whole business.

For as for his twenty times sodden Coleworts, so often served in, of Page 28.
M. Wottons taking the word Faith in the Apostles words in a proper sense;
Christ's fulfilling the Law for us in our steed; Faith being the condition of
the Gospel, etc. taking out M. Walkers fillings and glosses set upon them,
which concern M. Wotton no more then himself; enough before has been said.
and, if M. Walker can prove them to be heretical opinions, many illustrious
stars, besides M. Wotton, will by a blast of M. VValkers breath, as by Apoc.
12. 4.
the Dragons tail in the vision, be thrown out of Heaven, and not struck down
to the ground only, but even hurld into Hell.

His first question is, Page 2^.
Whether M. Wotton deny not the free covenant of Grace, when he holds, that God
covenants not to justify and give life, but upon a condition performed on our
part, equivalent for all purposes to man's fulfilling of the Law in his own
person in the covenant of works.

To which briefly. 1. To covenant to give a thing upon some condition may
nothing impeach the freeness either of the covenant, or of the gift. as to
covenant with one to give him a shilling, that you have let fall, lying on the
ground, if he will but stoop and take it up. And here by the way to satisfy
some, who cannot endure to hear of any condition in the promises of the
Gospel; which yet are Mark 16. 16. John 3. 15, 16, 18. 26. Acts 16. 31. Romans
10. 9.
every where so propounded: let it be considered, that a gift or a promise may
be said to be free, or not free diverse ways and in diverse respects: 1. Free in
regard both of condition and of consideration. By consideration understanding
some valuable consideration, as in common speech we use to speak. and so it is
absolutely, every way free. as if I promise one to bestow a book upon him and
to send it home to him, and so do. Here being neither condition nor
consideration interposed. 2. Free in regard neither of condition, nor of
confideration, as if I promise one to give him such a book of mine, if he will
give me another of his in lieu of it. for here is both condition and
consideration; which both concurring destroy the freenes of it. 3. Free in
regard of consideration, tho not free in regard of condition. as if I promise
to give one such a book gratis, if he will but call to me at mine house for it;
supposing that I dwell at next door, or near to him. Nor does it derogate ought
from the freenes of a gift, if it have been promised upon such a condition; and
the promise made good upon the performance of it. no more then a Princes pardon
would be deemed less free, were it granted upon condition of taking it out,
and that free also for any to do, that will, of free cost, without fee. or his
alms, were they propounded and published to all, that would but repair to the
Court for them. Nor does M. Wotton therefore necessarily deny the freeness of
Gods gracious covenant, if he hold justification and life eternal not to be
promised therein but upon condition. So M. Fox answering those that might
object that to him, that M. Walker here to M. Wotton. Si ad certas conditiones
restring^ Dei promissio, quomodo gratuitam Dei miseri^ordiam cum Paul^
constituemus, qua gratis per gratiam justificat impium? De Christ. great.
Iustif. p. 237.
If Gods promise be restrained to certain conditions, how shall we maintain
with Paul the freenes of Gods mercy, whereby he freely justifyeth a sinner? Imo
vero quam maxim gratuitam Dei misericordiam in Christo and censeo and statuo.
cum tamen salus haec per Christi meritum, non nisi sub certa quadam condition
ad nos derivetur. Ibid.
Yes, says he, I deem and determine Goas mercy to be most free in Christ.
albeit this salvation by the merit of Christ be not derived unto us but upon a
certain condition. And M. Perkins before recited: Reform. Cathol. Point. 4. of
means of justif. Differ. 2. Reas. 1.
The condition of the covenant is by grace, as well as the substance. Whereunto
ad M. Pembles reason: that therefore Plea for grace Sect. 2. chap. 1. p. 22.
this covenant is a compact of freest mercy, because therein life eternal is
given to that, that bears not the least proportion of worth with it.

2. That this condition is Mark. 16. 16. Acts 16. 31.
Faith, the performance whereof is as availeable for our good, as perfect
obedience at first had been, if it be an heresy; why does not M. Walker
require M. Pembles, if not bones, yet books to be burnt, as containing in them
heretical and blasphemous doctrine? at least why does he not arraign and
condemn him for an heretic as well as M. Wotton? for he has, as has been
showed, the same.

As for the word Equivalent here, it is not M. Wottons, but M. Walkers term.
whose spite and rancor against M. Wotton is such, that nothing of his can
fairly pass through his fingers. To be equivalent, that is, equal in worth,
and value, is one thing; (and yet I might tell M. Walker that Videatur in
disceptatione cum Lud. Lucio part. 1. sect. 9. Luc. script. n. 2. p. 32, 33.
and T. G. Animadv. n. 7. p. 35.
Chrysostom sticks not to affirm, yea stiffly maintains, that Faith in Christ
is of it self a more excellent thing and of greater worth, then the keeping of
Gods Commandments; as I show, but disallowing, elsewhere; and yet is he not
therefore deemed or condemned for an heretic:) to be reckoned or counted by
God unto man in the Luke 20. 35. and 21. 36. 2 These. 1. 5, 11 which places the
papists abuse to build merit and worth of works upon. Bellarm, de justific. l.
5. c. 2. and Remists notes.
covenant of grace to all purposes, in regard of ought that God requires on his
part to be performed, for attaining of life eternal, as if he had in the other
covenant kept the whole law, is another thing. I suppose M. Walker is not to
learn a difference, and that a vast one too, between (...) and (...) in Greek.

The sixth question is, Page 28, 29.
Whether M. Wotton affirming, that, If we be freely pardoned, then our sins
were not punished in Christ our head and surety, does not deny Christ's
satisfaction for sin.

To this I answer. he must show first, where M. Wotton so says. For these
words out of M. Wotton he never yet produced. Read Relat. p. 19.
the Parallel Error 7. and out of M. Wotton what is there alleged; and Ibid.
p. 34.
M. Wottons Answer to what is there alleged by M. Walker out of him: and you
shall soon see how M. Walker here deals with M. Wotton.

His seventh question is, Page 29.
Whether M. Wotton be not guilty of heretical tergiversation and gross
contradiction in some passages.

The man, you see, can not speak of M. Wotton, but he must needs spit Fire and
Brimstone. Every thing is either heretical or blasphemous in him. But am I, or
is any man else bound to reconcile whatsoever contradictions are, if any be, or
may be found in M. VVottons writings? Or is every one that is taken in gross
contradictions, of necessity thereupon to be condemned for an heretic? But in
this also M. Walker may as well be believed, as In his Woolf in Sheeps clothing.
where he pronounces the like of M. Bradshaws book. Were M. Wotton alive, he
were best able to reconcile his own seeming differences. and indeed, for the
most of them, if not all, he then did it himself.

For the first, which Page 29:
he cites out of my Defense, as he terms it, though out of his own Parallel,
and M. VVottons own defense indeed. he might, if he had but put on his
spectacles, have found it Relat. p. 21, 22.
in the very same place assoiled; that his dispute being of the formal cause
of justification, or that whereby we are made formally righteous, Ib. p. 22. n.
2.
he denies any end or use of Christ's righteousness imputed to that purpose. but
Ib. p. 21. n. 1.
he denies not the imputation of it, as the meritorious cause thereof.

Whereunto, tho sufficient to take away the seeming contradiction, I ad yet
further what I touched upon out of Preface to Treat. of justif.
M. Bradshaw before, and I find in him elsewhere; that tho he deny Imputation of
Christ's righteousness taken in a stricter sense, as many in this argument would
have it; yet taken it in a larger sense, for that which is reckoned to a man
for his benefit, so far forth as it may in that kind be useful unto him, so he
denies not the Imputation of Christ's righteousness to man's justification. For
thus I find in certain Theses of his written in Latin of this subject.

1. Si justificationis efficientem dicat quis justitiam Christi per modum
meriti, ego plane cum eo sentio.
If any man hold Christ's Righteousness to be by way of merit the efficient cause
of justification, I am wholly of his mind.

2. Si qui^ Christi justitia^ nostram formalem esse justitiam non contendat,
nulla mihi cum illo de imputatione est controversia.
If any maintain not Christ's Righteousness to be our formal Righteousness, I have
no controversy with him.

3. Iustitiae Christi ad beneficium imputationem ego agnosco and prae me fero.
The imputation of Christ's Righteousness to our benefit, I acknowledge and
profess.

4. Non mihi unquam in mentem ne per somnium quidem, venit neg tree, nos propter
Christi justitiam justificari.
It never came into my mind, not so much as in dream, to deny, that we are
justified for the righteousness of Christ.

As for what M. Walker Page 29.
adds out of M. VVottons Essaies; they were written after our meeting, as Page
24.
himself acknowledges; and therefore nothing concern either us or our censure;
nor for my part did I ever see them, nor know what is in them. and yet what is
it, that M. Walker thence here alleges? That in Scripture there is no mention
of Christ's merit. Which if he speak of the word merit, who will, or can deny the
truth of it? yet it will not thence follow, that M. Wotton therefore denies
the thing thereby signified, (the rather since that he uses the term of
meritorious cause applied unto Christ and his Righteousness so frequently
himself) no more then, that Calvin denied the Doctrine of the T^init^, because
Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. c. 13. 3.
he acknowledges that term not to be found in Gods Word

To the next Page 29.
likewise he might have found the like solution, in the very place Answer to
Error. 3. Propos. 2. Relat. p 27.
whence he had it; if he had been pleased to deal but half so kindly with M.
Wotton, as he dealt with Socinus. For, why may not Faith, tho taken properly,
be said to justify, not per se, or of it self; (tho Bucer, as I have showed,
Prae sat. Comment. in Ep st. Paulin.
so also say) albeit the word Faith be there properly taken, where it is said
to be imputed for Righteousness? not for it self, as Ad di cept. Lub. cum Bert.
M Wotton himself expounds himself, but for Christ, on whom it relies; as
has formerly been at large related.

For, what Page 29.
is added of Imputation, is coincident to the former: but that M. Walker with
his Occ^ miseros crambe^ epe^ ^^acc. art.
cole so o^t new dressed and dished in again, tires out h^s Readers, and may
well overturn their stoi^ck^.

The Ibid.
third consists of the Page 27.
second and Page 18.
sixth Queres; (for M. Walker loves to turn round) wherein nothing is truly
alleged out of M. Wotton, that any way crosses Christ's satisfaction made, or
the price by him paid, for us: and shall thither therefore be returned again;
least by running round in a circle after M. Walker, we grow turn-sick with him.

The Page 30.
fourth is not so much a contradiction found in M Wottons writings to ought of
his own, as to the words of the Apostle, Romans 5. 19. which yet unles they be
understood of formal and inherent Righteousness, (however Woolf in sheeps
clothing. chap. 1. 23.
M. Walker tax M. Bradshaw for confounding these terms) M. VVottoh
contradicts not at all. And yet is it not sufficient to prove a man an
heretic, because he contradicts somewhat contained in Gods Word. since that
every error whatsoever in any point of Divinity must of necessity so do. and M.
Walker therefore, unless he dare profess himself free from all error, must by
the same ground withal granted confess himself to be an heretic.

But from his Contradictions return we to his Questions again.

His eighth question, wherein he thinks he has me now on the hip, is Page 3.
How M. Gataker with a good conscience can justify and proclaim M. Wotton
free from heresy, when he wilfully and perversely denies the very form,
essence, and being of justification, to wit, the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, first simply rejecting it, as being of no use; and afterward, as
the formal cause of justification; (where you have the same colie served you in
again) seeing he, the said M. Gataker has publicly extolled and commended
for Orthodox, the like Treatife of M. VV. Bradshaw in his funeral Sermon at
his burial, wherein he makes the imputation of Christ's Righteousness the form
of justification.

In which words, as ^ibus (...) (...). Democrates apud Stob. c. 22. s^^e, ut
Plut in m^nit. polit. (...).
he sometime said of the people of Athens, M. Walker blows and blusters much,
but does little.

For first, I might demand of him, where I so extolled M. Bradshaws book? What
I spoke of it in a short Speech before my Sermon at that time, I have formerly
word for word related. But in M. Walkers hyperbolical language, every mole-hil
is a mountain; every rivelet or drilling ril, a flood or a fair river; every
but scanty or slight commemoration or commendation, an extolling; every light
touch, an Invective; every error, at least an heresy.

Secondly, whether every one that commends a book in such manner as I there
did, must of necessity approve it as wholly free from all error. I was by a Sir
Maurice Bartlet.
worthy Knight sometime demanded mine opinion in a point concerning the seat of
conscience, wherein two Divines of special note, run two diverse and cross ways,
M. Rob. Harris in S. Paul's exercise.
the one denying it a place in any natural Faculty of the soul, usually
assigned; the other affording it a room in each of them: and professing my self
to dissent from either, it was objected to me, M Sam Ward, in Balm from Gilead.
that I had by an Epistle prefixed commended the work of the one, wherein that
opinion of his was found. to which I then answered that Gentleman, and so shall
now M. Walker, that a book may warrantably for the main substance of it be
commended as useful, yea as excellent; albeit the party so commending it
suppose the Author of it to have been mistaken in some things therein
contained. So did M. Cappel with the same M. Bradshaws book; albeit in some
things therein he dissented then from him, when so highly yet he indeed did
extol it, as you formerly have heard: and my self did somewhat the like
sometime with M. Eltons Catechetical work to my cost; though withal In that
Preface prefixed.
professing, that in diverse things contained in that part of it which I had
read, I was my self of another judgment.

Thirdly, what if M. Wotton and M. Bradshaw do not herein at all differ, or
cross either other? but may very well be reconciled? may not M. Gataker then
at least with a good conscience commend M. Bradshaws book, and yet pronounce
M. Wotton free from heresy, when he says herein nothing that contradicts
that, which M. Bradshaw is here said to affirm? And that it is so indeed, and
in M. Bradshaws own judgment was so, may be easily made to appear. For does
not M. Bradshaw in his Preface plainly show, that the word of Imputation is
overstrictly taken by some Divines, in which sense M. Wotton seems to him to
have denied it; whereas the word might well be understood in another, and a
larger sense, professing himself so to use it? So that the bare word rejected
by the one, and admitted by the other, does not necessarily imply any
contradiction between them. no more then S. Paul's words, that Romans 3. 28.
A man is justified by faith without works, does any way contradict what S.
James says, that Iam. 2. 24.
A man is justified by works, and not by faith only.

And here I shall again crave leave of my Reader, to insert a short passage out
of some writings enterchanged between these two Christian brethren; both, I
hope, now with God, and agreeing in all things; though in some particulars they
dissented, while they lived here.

M. Wotton in his Animadversions, which I have by me, on M. Bradshaws book,
thus excepts.

The third opinion denying all imputation of Christ's righteousness is said to be
somewhat erroneous. Yet the same opinion held only in that strict sense of
imputation, which the Author himself rejects, and that upon good ground, as
he acknowledges, is therefore cleared from all erroneousnes. For how can that
be erroneous, that is held on good ground?

To which M. Bradshaw thus answers:

Tho upon good ground, as to me seems, you deny imputation in that sense only;
yet your denial of all imputation may notwithstanding that be erroneous; being
grounded upon a supposal of that which I think is erroneous, that there is no
other kind of imputation but that, which is answerable to that strict sense
aforesaid.

By which words it appears, that the difference herein between them was rather
in words, then in points: and that M. Wottons error, as M Bradshaw apprehended
it, was only concerning the use of a word, not concerning any point of faith.

Fourthly, suppose the difference were not verbal, but real, not in words
only, but in sense and meaning too; yet would it not therefore necessarily
follow, that M. Wotton denies the very form, essence, and being of
justification, because he denies that, which M. Bradshaw affirms to be the
Formal cause of it; or that M. Gataker must therefore of necessity pronounce
M. Wotton an heretic; unles first it be proved that that is indeed and truth
the formal cause, of justification, which M. Bradshaw has assigned: (which
being found only in a short Summary annexed to his Treatise, Woolf. chap. 2.
Error. 8. on chap. 2. n. 11. The form is the pleading of the said righteousness
or innocence, etc.
M. Walker himself deems to contradict what is averred in the book; nor is it
at all in the Latin edition,) and that M. Gataker also is therein of the same
mind with M. Bradshaw, which for ought M. Walker knows, he may not be.

Fifthly, I should desire to know of M. Walker, whether he hold not the
imputation of Christ's active obedience to be the formal cause of our
justification: and if he so do; which, I suppose, he will not deny; whether he
can with a good conscience pronounce Pareus free from heresy; notwithstanding
that De activ. and pass* Chr. Obed. p. 181.
he denies the imputation of it unto justification, as derogatory from the
al-sufficiency of Christ's sufferings and his sacrifice; and consequently (by M.
Walkers inference) takes away the very form, essence and being of
justification. if he cannot, how comes it to pas, that he reckons him here so
often among his Orthodox Writers, that condemn M. Wottons opinions as heretical
and blasphemous? if he can, I see not, why M. Gataker may not do the like by M.
Wotton, forought here objected. the argument being as strong (if not stronger)
against the one as against the other.

Sixthly, suppose it were an error, and a dangerous one to, that M. Wotton
maintains; whence knows M. Walker? or how is he able to prove, that he holds it
Page 30.
wilfully, that is, against his own knowledge, (for that seems to be intimated)
and perversely, that is, as I conceive him, obstinately? to make him (...).
Titus 3. 11.
a damned heretic. For I suppose, he will not assume to himself any 1 Cor. 12.
10*
extraordinary gift in discerning of spirits. and if he will pretend, that he
discernes it by his deeds; which is hard to do in a point of mere Theorie; let
him take heed, what manner of spirit by his carriage in this business, being
matter of practice, he gives men ground, to suspect or conclude himself to be
led by.

Lastly, suppose M. Walker to be so sharpsighted, and that he can pierce and
peer so narrowly into M. Wottons conscience, as to discern that he does
wilfully and perversely maintain what he holds: yet unless that M. Gataker be
as quicksighted herein as M Walker, and that he be able to descry in M. Wotton
that wilfulnes and perverseness that M. Walker does, he may still with a good
Conscience justify M. Wotton, and pronounce him (for proclamations he makes
none) free from heresy; as well as the rest of his reverend brethren have done,
notwithstanding all M. Walkers evidence given in against him. since that Romans
14. 13. 1 Cor. 4. 5. and 13. 5. 7.
no man is bound to pronounce or deem of his Christian brother, on the wors
part especially, further then himself can see.

His ninth question (to cut it somewhat shorter, that the readers stomach may
be the les troubled in taking it) is this, Page 30.
How the faithful united to Christ, as their head, and made thereby partakers
of his righteousness and whole obedience to Gods Law, and thereby constituted
righteous before God, can without heretical pravity be denied to be formally
righteous by that righteousness.

To which I answer: that first he presumes some things here that are to be
proved; and are (as he well knows,) by Divines not a few of the best note not
acknowledged; as, that Christ's Righteousness consisting in his active obedience
is part of that whereby the faithful are made righteous.

Besides, that many things have the faithful interest in by virtue of their
union and communion with Christ; which yet are not imputed unto them for the
justifying of them, or for the making of them to stand righteous in Gods sight.
The Wife by virtue of her union and conjunction with her Husband, has a right
to, and interest in, all that he has, yea and in himself to. Yet is it not
necessary, that whatsoever she has joint interest in with him, should
therefore go to the payment of her debts formerly contracted: especially, if
sufficient be found in any part of it. And that without hereticall-pravity
therefore, that which M. Wotton is here charged with, may be held; especially,
unles we will question the sufficiency of Christ's death for the discharge of our
sins; Pareus Ex de Act. and Pass. Chr. Obed. p. 181.
his words (if he be at least of any credit with M. Walker) abovementioned
will intimate; yea the whole discourse, whence they are taken, will evidently
show.

For his tenth and last question, the contradiction is the very same concerning
Imputation, that was Page 29.
formerly propounded, the first in the seventh question. For M. Walker does but
roll ^ingens quod Sisyphus versat Saxum, sudans nitendo, neque p^^ficit hilum.
Ex Epico aliquo ^ic. Tuscul. l. 1.
Sisyphus his stone up and down here, until he tire, if not himself, yet his
Reader.

The question it self is, Page 31.
Whether M. Wotton be not possessed with the spirit of Socinian blindness and
giddines, when he derides Orthodox Divines, for making every believer justified
by imputation of Christ's satisfactory obedience, a Redeemer, Savior and
Satisfier for all the Elect and Faithful.

What by Socinian blindness and giddines M. Walker means, I wean not. We use to
ask, who are blinder then they that will not see? and in this kind M. Walker
has bewrayed too much blindness in this book. As for giddines, I know not, who
are more likely to be possessed of it, then such as run round, like an Horse in
a Mil.

But how, or where, does M. Wotton thus deride our Orthodox Divines? This
crime thus fastened upon M. Wotton, M. Walker thus makes good. Ibid.
For in one of his written papers thus he argues: If Christ's Righteousness and
Satisfaction be imputed to every believer, then must every believer be
accounted a Redeemer, Justifier, and Satisfier for all the Elect. But this is
absurd. Ergo, the Antecedent is false.

Where first, I might demand of M. Walker, whether a man must of necessity be
deemed to deride him, whom he disputes with, if he shall affirm something to
follow from that he holds, which he pronounces to be absurd,

2. Whether this speech of M. Wotton were given in to us at our meeting by M.
Walker, as part of his Evidence, to make good his Plea against M. Wotton.
which unles it were, as it was not, which may appear by his Parallel; albeit it
should contain rank heresy in it; yet concerns it not us, nor our sentence in
clee^ing M. Wotton. For Iudex procedere debet secundum allegata and probata.
Reg. Iur.
what Judge is bound to sentence any man upon evidence not produced?

3. As for the matter it self, if M. Wotton do not understand aright, what
those Orthodox Divines mean; as Ibid.
M. Walker affirms: sure the mistaking of another man's meaning, and thereupon
supposing therefore, or pretending, that some absurdity follows from what he
says, does not in my weak apprehension make a man guilty of heresy. or if it
be pre^umed that it does, I doubt much, whether M. Walker himself may not be
deemed one of the greatest heretics under the Sun.

Thus much for M. Walkers questio^^. whereunto he says Page 31.
he could ad diverse others. But if they be as little to the purpose as these;
(which howsoever, one only excepted, concerning mine extolling of M. Bradshaws
book, do no more concern me to answer, then any other of the eight) he may do
well to keep them where they are: unles he be desirous to acquaint the world
further with his restles spirit (which he has sufficiently done here already)
albeit he have neither new matter to enquire of, nor any matter of moment,
whereby to take of the truth of that, which under good hands and of oredit
sufficient; has been related. And the rather may he be advised to conceal
them, unles they be more savoury, then what here next ensues, of Page 32.
a stinking issue of running cankers in a most foul body, and rotten carcose,
that M. Gataker, like a sepulchers dog, has scratched and raked out of the
grave, in writing and publishing of his Relation: (in which passage also he
shows himself turn-sick again:) otherwise his Readers (to return his own words)
may well be forewarned, to stop their noses, ere they offer to read them.

Hence he proceeds to charge me; first, as Page 3^
profuse and prodigal of my reputation, in subscribing to M. Wottons positions,
that they contain neither heresy nor blasphemy. wherein if my reputation^ly at
the stake, theirs must lie together with mine, that subscribed together with me.

And secondly, with Ibid.
breach of piety and charity, virulency, defect of humanity and common honesty,
in falsely fathering that on those dead Saints, M. Randol, and M. Stock, and
those living pious men, D. Gouge and M. Downham, a subscription to those
errors, that they saw no heresy or blasphemy in them. All which foul
imputations, which herein he would make me guilty of, light full upon those,
whom he pretends to be wronged by me, rather then upon me, who relate but their
testimony under their own hands. For if ought be falsely fathered upon the
deceased, whither of the twain stand guilty of it, they that witness the thing
under their hands, or he that barely relates what they witness? Besides I would
fain know, what virulency is, or can be, in a precise relation of an other man's
words, if there be no virulent matter or manner of speech in them: or if ought
be in them of that nature, who ought to bear the burden of it, the Relater, or
the Author.

As for his old Cuckows song, I^g. 33.
of his blaming our subscription, protesting against it offer to dispute, and
mine interposing so, that he could not be heard, nor obtain a copy of M.
Wottons answers, with such other idle repetitions; they have been before heard
and answered: and do here serve only to raise the bulk of the book; but do no
whit help to prove, what M. Walker here intends, that I have falsely fathered
ought upon those Saints deceased. Yea they are of much weight to evince the
truth of that, which M. Walker here so eagerly opposes. For what needed M.
Walker to have kept all this coil, and have made all this ado if no such thing
had then been, or were about to ^e done?

As little to the same purpose, or to any purpose at all, is it, what he
tells (...).
of a consutation of so much as he could remember of M. VVottons answers, which
he showed to D. Gouge and M. Downham. who I hope, wanted no baiting by him, for
what they had done. and that afterward he obtained liberty by a friend to copy
them out, laboring for nothing ever more earnestly then to have them
published; which they may believe him that list: for who or what hindered him
from publishing of them, when he had them? and that he desired so much the
publishing of them, to free himself from those falls reports, that M. Gataker
would now lay and fasten upon him, p. 39. in which whole page there is nothing
but a short sum of what was before delivered; of M. Walkers charge and
challenge, and his evidence given in, all under his own hand; M. Wottons answer,
as himself penned it; the verdict and sentence of the persons appealed to,
testified under the survivours hands, and M. Walkers renewing of his charge in
print, which himself will not deny; and what falls reports of mine can there be
in all this? or if the publishing of M. VVottons answer will free M. Walker from
falls reports, I have therein done M. Walker, it seems, no small pleasure, and
fulfilled, if we may believe him, his earnest desire. So far, he says, he was
from pressing D. Bailey to conceal them, as M. Gataker would intimate, p. 37.
where I say no such matter, but say only of the Subscription, that the Doctor
refused to deliver it, whether pressed by M. Walker to detain it or no, I wot
not, M. Walker himself best knows. And indeed what was it to any of us,
whether M. Walker had had M. Wottons answers, or no? This is therefore all but
(...). Chrysostom. ad Olympiad ^p. 13.
smoke and dust, raised to dim or dasel men's eyes, that they may not see that,
that M. Walker would fain have concealed, and kept (were it possible) from
their sight.

Which having thus made some way to, as he supposed, (therein overflattering
himself; as (...) Dem^h. Olyath. 3.
what men earnestly desire, they are easily induced to believe) he falls now
again more directly upon it; and Page 33.
tells us upon what occasion, M. Wotton by a falls suggestion, drew D. Gouge and
M. Downham some years after to give a falls attestation: (for that is it, that
he labors throughout this whole Pamphlet, well knowing how nearly it concerns
him, to prove) Page 34.
which M. Stock and D. Bailey abhorred to do, repenting what favor they had
showed M. Wotton at first.

But here still Dicit ille multa quidem multis locis: sed aqua ^eret, ut aiunt.
Cic. Offic. l. 3. Et ad Q. fratr. l. 2. ep. 7. Quod dictum fuerat actum iri,
non vst actum: in hac causd mihi aqua heret. Quod Erasm. adag. 1300. male cepit
and accepit; cum in aqua haerere dictum voluit. quem nec H. Steph. expedivit.
Est Graecorum, (...). Suid
Aqua haeret, the water stays, and does not run clearly away. Nor is M. Walker
with all his shifts, able to wind himself out. For is the attestation by M.
Gataker related, and by M. Sam. Wotton published, truly related, or no? If it
be truly related, then M. Gataker in relating it, has delivered nothing but
what is true; to wit, that two such men have under their hands given such an
attestation. Again, is the attestation it self true, or no? they that gave it,
I hope, will maintain it to be true. and then have I averred nothing concerning
the issue of that meeting, but what is avowed by the testimony of two
witnesses, beyond all just exception, and whom M. Walker of all other Adversus
propri^ nulla est exceptio. Chamier. pa^sirat. tom. 3. l. 3. c. 3. 4.
cannot with any reason reject, being men chosen to hear and sentence the
cause by himself. Who therefore, if he shall still persist to affirm it to be
falls; I will say no more, but as that Noble Roman sometime accused by a mean
fellow of a very unlikely crime, Varius Sucro^e^sis AEmylium Scaurum regia
m^rcede corruptum imperium papuli Roma^i prodi^isse ^i^: AE^ylius Scauru^ huic
se affinem esse culpae negat. ^iri creditis? Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. ex. 8. Fab.
instit. l. 1. c. 11. (...). in Ci^. pro Scaur.
Varius affirms it; Scaurus denies it. Whether of the two do you credit? so I
here, M. Walker the party interressed says it; D. Gouge and M. Downham two of
his Judges (for Page 21, 24.
so himself terms them) men indifferent and unpartial (however M. Walker is
pleased to tax them) deny it: you may choose whether of the two you will be
pleased to believe.

Thus at length M. Walker has dispatched himself, as concerning our meeting,
by himself procured and the issue of it. wherein he has so labored to
vindicate himself, by many falsehoods inserted into his report of it; and, not
so much by recharging M. Wotton, as by traducing his Judges, as men partial
and unconscionable, and such as in favor of M. Wotton did what they were even
then ashamed of when they did it, and by all means therefore contended to have
it concealed and kept from the light and sight of others after they had done
it; and lastly by heaping on me a whole load of opprobrious terms, for having a
hand in the publishing of it; that in seeking thus to salve his credit, he may
well therein be deemed, to have done no more then to have (...). Zenob. ad. 648.
Diog. 750. (...). Theocr. idyl. 16. quod Erasm. ad. 1441. nigrum silicem, male
vertit, cum luteum laterem debuisset. Ter. pborm. 1. 4. Purgemme? laterem
lavem. Hier. ad. Pelag. l. 1. Nugaris, nec meministi illius Proverbii, in eo.
lem luto volutaris, imo laterem lavas. crudum scil. qui lavando fit lutulentior.
washed over a raw brick but, or to have Quod est plus, quam (...), ut Philostr.
Epist. Lutum lut* purgare.
covered miry dirt with reeking dung.

Howbeit, tho he have thus rid his hands of our meeting, yet his spite and
malice against M. Wotton and me is not yet at an end.

For, as for my Poscript, it is Page 34.
so frivolous, that a short answer will serve: Page 35.
one short breath is sufficient to blow it away. And yet let M. Walker who
thus here vaunteth himself, like an other Qui legiones difftat spiritu, ut
ventus for, au^ panniculam tectoriam. Plaut. Milit. 1. 1.
Pyr gopolinices, know, that with all his boisterous blusterings he has not
stirred it one jot, much les blown it away, as he brags; having not so much as
blown upon a good part of it; because, it seems, he was loath to spend so much
breath in vain, that might better be kept for some other use.

My Page 34.
main charge here against him, he says, is iniquity; and indeed so Relat. p.
19.
it is, for yoaking M. Wotton with Peter Abeilard, and with Servetus and
Socinus, as agreeing with them in such damnable and detestable dotages, as they
held and maintained, and for which they were condemned as blasphemous
heretics; and that upon such slight grounds, as has formerly been showed. But
Page 34.
the iniquity, M. Walker tells me, shall return upon mine own head.

And why so? first, for Abeilard, Ibid.
because S. Bernard (whose Saintship yet I suppose, need be no part of our
Creed; especially, if all be true that our Walter Mapes In Epistolis nondum
editis.
reports of him) says he held, that our sins are not punished in Christ, and
that it had been injustice in God to punish one for another, and to impute the
obedience of one to another.

I demand not of M. Walker, where Abeilard says ought of the imputing of the
obedience of one to another, or where Bernard charges him with the denial of
it, as a thing unjust. tho I suppose, he would not easily be able to show
either. But I ask, where M. Wotton ever said, what Abeilard is here reported
to have held, that our sins are not punished in Christ; or, that it were
injustice in God to punish one for another. If he cannot show this (as hitherto
he has not done) he is (and may be deservedly so censured) a malicious
slanderer of his brother. Howbeit, if these words of M. Wotton, which M.
Walker could not be ignorant of, do not speak the direct contrary; let some
part yet of this imputatiou be taken of, if you so please. Answer to Error. 7.
R^lat. p 34.
Christ, says M* Wotton, has been punished for us; we are pardoned for his
punishment, Esaias 53. 5 What can be spoken more plainly? M Walkers iniquity
therefore herein, is not wiped of, much less returned upon me. Besides I find
in his Latin Theses before mentioned this Assertion: Iilud (...), and Christi
p^rp^^siones no^is imp^t^^, and not p^opt^r illas ^^nia^u peccator^m and
absolution^m (...) reat d Deo ^sequi. quo uno (...) ^us, ni^il ad Script^r as
explicandas accommodatius, aut di^i, aut c^g tariposse conteu. (...) Th^s. 5.
This I believe, that Christ's sufferings are imputed to us; and we for them
obtain from God, pardon of our fins, and freedom from the guilt of them. Then
which I maintain, that nothing can be spoken or conceived more true, or more
apt for the unfolding of Scripture. Which how well it sorts with what M. Walker
charges on Abeilard, let any man judge.

But against M. Wotton Furore pestis p^ma in ^simo. Prad^nt. in Romans
the worst comes last. For M. Walker will prove him to conspire with Abeilard,
Servetus and Socinus in a wors matter than all this; and that is in the denial
of Christ's deity. For, Page 34, 35.
if they denied in plain words the eternal deity of Christ; so also M. Wotton
did in effect. For he held that Christ's obedience did serve only to justify
himself, and to bring him into high favor with God: so that God justifies us
by him as by a favorite, only upon condition of our trusting in him. Now where
is the infinite valor of his Deity, if he needed justification and favor for
himself.

Did ever man read a charge more malicious, or more slenderly backed?

For not to question again, whether Abeilard, ( Page 34.
which M. Walker expressly by name affirms apart of him) did ever deny, and that
in plain terms too, the eternal deity of Christ; or where Bernard, or any
other says, that he so did. Tho it be a sin (we say) even to belly the devil;
any man much more and so far is Peter Abeilard from denying it in plain terms,
that in precise and full words he affirms it; ( Credo filium per omni^ Patri
esse coaequalem; scil. aeternitate, potestate, etc. Petr. Abeilard. conses.
sid. ^d Hell.
I believe, says he, that the Son is in all things coequal with the Father;
to wit, in Eternity, Power, or Authority, etc. Nec audis Arium. Ibid.
condemning withal and detesting Arius (whom Bernard was pleased to say he had
some Sapit Arium. Bern. ep. 192.
smach of) as one Perverso ingenio actus, imo daemoniaco seductus spiritu.
Abeilard. ubi supr.
led by a perverse disposition, and led aside by a devilish spirit, for Gradus
facit in Trmitate: Patrem majorem, Fi^ium d^gmatizans min^rem. Idem ibid.
making degrees in the Trinity, and teaching the Father to be greater than the
Son, and the Son lesser than the Father. That, which it is true indeed, that
Ponit in Trinitate gradus, constituit Deum Patrem esse plen^m p^tiam: I i^^um,
quandam p^tiam: Sp. sa^ctum, n^ll^m potentiam. B. (...). ^p. 190.
Bernard charge Peter to have done; (and were it true, yet were not in plain
terms to deny the eternal Deity of Christ,) but Peter flatly denies to be
found in any writings of his; yea Hec verba per ma^tiam (...), (...) tam ^tica
quam di^ca, d^t^stor, (...): eaque cum autore suo p^rit^r (...). (...) in
Ap^l^g.
professing to abhor it, not as heretical only, but as devilish; nor refusing
to be pronounced, ^riat criptis, nen solu^ hereticum, verum etiam heresiarcham
(...).
not an heretic simply, but an Archheretick, if it could out of any work of
his be produced.

But to let this pass, I say; which little concerns us, howsoever it were with
Abeilard; save that Ibid. Iustitiae est, (...) cuiqu^ trib^ere Cicer^ Iuvent.
l. 2 Cornif. ad Heren. l. 3.
the rule of Justice and equity requires to do every one right; and Ma^h.
(...). 32. Qu^ri non vis, alterine ^is. Alex. Se^^r. Hicron. ad Algas. Bern. de
(...). l. 1.
that we deal with others as we would be de^lt with our selves.

First, suppose that a denial of Christ's deity might be necessarily deduced
from some Positions by M. Wotton maintained. would it thence follow that M.
Wotton denies the Deity of Christ? It is no good consequence. For some thing
may follow truly and necessarily from what a man holds; and yet he not hold it,
but deny it; yea strongly and stiffly not in dispute only, but even in judgment
oppose it, because he deems the consequence, whereby it is thence deduced,
unsound, For example: That which the Lutherans hold concerning the corporal
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, together with the bread, does by
necessary consequence overthrow the truth of Christ's humanity. Do any of our
Divines therefore charge them, (tho Legantur Alb. G^eri Abs^r^^rum
absurdissima, absurda Calvinistica. aliaque ejusmodi istorum scripta.
they walk along with M. Walker in the way he here takes, in their writings
against us) with the denial of Christ's humane nature? Or will M. Walker
therefore dare to pronounce Luther an heretic, as denying the truth of Christ's
humanity? albeit we know that every true, natural, and humane body is confined
to some one certain individual place or other, and limited with such
dimensions as all men we see are; which of Christ's cannot be truly said, if
that be admitted. Yea to turn the edge of M. Walkers argument the other way. By
the same reason, from some consequences of M. Richardsons, (whose authority M.
Walker I am sure, will not waive) a man may prove, that Turks, Jews and Pagans
hold a Trinity of Persons in the Deity, and the Evangelical doctrine of Christ's
Incarnation. For what Turk, Jew, or Pagan, of any but ordinary apprehension in
intellectuals, if he acknowledge a God, does not hold, that that God does most
perfectly understand himself? Now M. Richardson in some Essaies of his; wherein
(directly contrary, as I take it, to what 1 Cor. 2. 9.
the Apostle averres; and yet do I not therefore account him an heretic, no
more then that other Noble Phil. Mornaeus Dom. de P^essis lib. de verit. Re^^g.
Christian.
Lord of great note, that has labored in the like Argument) he endeavors to
prove, that men by the very light of nature and use of reason alone, may
attain to the knowledge of those two main mysteries of Faith and grounds of
the Gospel; and that they may thereby be demonstrated to those who never heard
of or knew them before; he does from this Position as generally granted and
agreed on, by a continued chain of consequences, as so many links or rundels
necessarily depending each on other, thus argu: God understands himself most
perfectly, ergo he is understood of himself most perfectly: ergo there is a
most perfect understander, and a most perfect understood; and both these are
one essence. Again, a most perfect understander, and a most perfect understood:
ergo a most perfect conceiver, and a most perfect conceived: ergo a most
perfect begetter, and a most perfect begotten: ergo a production of that which
is of the same kind: ergo of a most perfect Son: ergo by a most perfect
Father: which are the Father and the Son. Again, God understands himself
most perfectly: ergo to be the most perfect being: ergo he wills himself as
the most perfect good: ergo from the understander and the understood proceeds a
mutual desire of their essence: ergo a spirit or anhelitus to the same: which
is the holy Ghost proceeding from both. Again, what man is there Turk, Jew, or
Pagan, that has any regard of conscience to God ward, but holds that he has
at some time or other offended God by doing unjustly in some one kind or other?
now hence does the same Author by a Stoical Sorites, or heap of Ergoes, deduce a
necessity of our Savior Christ's Incarnation, for that man's salvation, on this
wise. Man's conscience tells him, that he has done unjustly: ergo
transgressed the rule of justice: ergo the eternal Law: ergo the Law of the
eternal God: ergo he is obnoxious to the eternal justice of God: ergo to an
infinite punishment: ergo he must be answerable to the same: ergo by suffering
eternally, if he answer it in himself, or by any other finite: ergo, he must
perish eternally, unles an infinite person undertake the same; who being
infinite can infinitely satisfy with finite sufferings: ergo he must perish
eternally, or believe an infinite person satisfying for him, as an infinite
person offended by him; and that (in conclusion) is Christ, God and Man. For to
avoid prolixity, I will cut off the residue of this train. Thus from M.
Richardsons grounds, by M. Walkers help, there is an incomparablo benefit
befaln the whole world, for by this means great part of it, though they never
heard of Christ, are suddenly become Christians. For they hold the main
Principles of the Gospel as certainly, nay more certainly then M. Wotton denies
Christ's Deity. Since that the one follows, you see, necessarily (unles M.
Richardson be much mistaken) from what they hold; whereas the other by M.
Walkers good leave, has not as yet been showed to follow so from ought by M.
Wotton maintained. and yet, I doubt much, that if trial be taken, we shall
scarce find them sound in the Christian faith for all this.

In the next place therefore, let us see, what it is, that M. Walker, here tells
us, that M. Wotton maintained, whereby he has brought upon himself so heavy a
guilt as the denial of the eternal deity of the Son of God. He held, says he,
that Christ's obedience did serve only to justify himself, and to bring him
into high favor with God: so that God justifies us by him as by a favorite,
only upon condition of our trusting in him.

Where M. Wotton says all this, M. Walker tells us not: and he that twits M.
Gataker for his frequent quotations, might justly be taxed both here and
elsewhere for a defect, if not default, herein; and that such, as renders him,
not without good cause, suspected of some juggling. For that Christ's obedience
serves to justify himself, I suppose, no man can deny. since that John 3. 21.
and 8. 46. 38. and 18. 23.
our Savior himself does thereby usually justify himself against the false
aspersions of his slanderous adversaries. Howbeit to give M. Walker herein the
more satisfaction, we will present him with two testimonies, the one a
strangers, the other our own Countreymans. Thus then Gomarus, one of the
greatest and eagerest Anti-arminian. Nifi perfecta ad fuisset obedientia,
ipsemet peccator esset, and pro se puniendus. Fr. Gomar. disput^ elenct. de
justif. mat. and form. these. 12.
Christ, had he not performed perfect Obedience, had himself been a sinner, and
to be punished for himself. And thus M. Dearing in his Lectures upon part of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, M. Edw. Dearing on Hebr. Le^^. 2. p. 26. in 8.
Our Savior Christ, being the eternal Son of God, through the work of the
holy Ghost, was made man of the Uirgin Mary, and born without original sin; and
by the same spirit filled still his manhood more and more with grace, til the
fulness of all righteousness was within him, that so his manhood might inherit
salvation, according to the promise, Do this, and thou shall live. but hitherto
as he is righteous, so he is righteous for himself; and only that man is
blessed, who was conceived by the holy Ghost, and born of the Uirgin Mary. What
more pregnant?

Again, that Christ for this his obedience was in grace and favor with God,
both the Evangelist witnesses, and himself professes. John 10. 17.
The Father loves me, says he, because I lay down my life; as John. 10. 18.
and 14. 31.
my Father has willed me to do. and why not also, John 8. 29.
because I do always those things, that are pleasing to him? And that Christ
(...) a favorite, helps to bring us into grace with God, I hope no true
Christian, either doubts or denies. Math. 3. 17. and 17. 5.
God himself so often implying and intimating the same, and the Apostle so
expressly telling us, that (...). Epes. 1. 6.
God has graciously accepted us in his beloved. For as for the condition of
trusting in Christ, enough has formerly been said: and he must needs wilfully
wink, that refuses to take notice of that which so John 1. 12. and 3. 15, 16,
18, 36. and 6. 35, 40, 47. and 7. 38, 39. and 9. 35, 36. and 11. 25, 26. and
12. 36. Acts 10. 43. and 13. 39. and 16. 31. Romans 4. 5, 24. and 9. 33. and 10.
11, etc.
frequently he must needs meet with in the Gospel, if he but superficially turn
over the Books of the New Testament. not to ad, that hence Christian Writers,
as well Origin. in Io^^. hom. 32. Gregor. Naz. ^rat. 37: Athanas. cont. Arian.
orat. 3. Cyril. de Trindial. 4.
ancient as Vrsin. Catech. explic. quaest. 33. 3. rat 5. Stegman. disput. 5.
quaest. 13.
modern, confirm the Deity of Christ, because we are John 12. 36. and 14. 1.
willed, and Romans 15. 12. 1 Timothy 4. 10.
said to believe in him, and pronounced Psalm 2. 12.
happy for so doing; the very Bellarm. de Christ. l. 1. c. 5. loc 1. Et
Catechism. Trident. Pii. 5. jussu editus. p. 107.
Papists themselves, tho against themselves, applying the same also to this
purpose.

But that M. Wotton any where has affirmed, that Christ's obedience serves for
this end ONLY to justify himself, (which comes short of what Socinus himself
acknowledges) or to bring him into favor with God; (as if he had not been in
favor with him before) is more, I believe then M. Wotton ever writ or said:
sure I am, more it is, then M. Walker gave in in Evidence against him, when he
laid as match in his charge as he was able to reach to, no les then Heresy and
Blasphemy. And I am the rather enduced to believe that herein he wrongs M.
Wotton, because no such restrictive particle is found in that passage of M.
Wotton, out of which M. Walker seems to have picked this vile calumny. His
words are in a Latin Discourse Parallel. Error. 6. n. 1. Relat. p. 18.
cited thence by M. Walker himself, these. All that good will, wherewith God
imbraceth us, proceeds from that favor that Christ is in with God. Now in
these things is that for the most part contained, that he is by nature the
Son of God; that he is perfectly holy; that he has performed obedience every
way perfect, both by fulfilling the Law, and by perfect performance of all
things belonging to the Office of a Mediator. Whence it follows, that those
that believe are gracious with God also for the Righteousness of Christ.
Whereunto I ad, what follows in the same Discourse a little after. Now Faith
is, as a mean, a condition, and, if you please, an instrument of partaking this
goodwil of God in Christ. So the part (or office) of Faith is no other, then by
believing in Christ and receiving of him, to perform that which God requires of
us to the reconciling, that is, the justifying and adopting of us; that we may
be partakers of the Redemption and life eternal procured for us by Christ. And
toward the end: Although I grant, that the justification of a sinner, that is,
the Remission of his sins, is to be fetched properly from Christ's Obedience in
the suffering of death: yet by his Righteousness also in fulfilling the Law, I
suppose that we obtain favor with God. Which words of M Wotton, how they suit
and agree, with what M. Walker would here fasten upon him, I leave to be deemed
by any one, that has not his eyes, either blood-shot, or gallshot, as it is to
be feared M. Walkers were, when he either read that, or wrote this.

Yea but, how does M. Walker, from what he either finds in M. Wotton, or
fathers on him, extract a denial of Christ's Deity? A man had need of a quick
fight indeed to discern that, as himself hereafter delivers himself of it.
Page (...).
Now where, says he, is the infinite value of Christ's Deity, if he have need
of justification and favor for himself?

And is not such a question as this, think ye, enough to stop any man's mouth,
or to open it rather, and enforce him to condemn M. Wotton without more ado for
an Arian? But let us put M. Walkers Argument into form and figure, that we may
the better descry and see the force of it. Thus then it must be.

Whosoever says; that Christ has need of justification and favor for
himself, denies his eternal Deity, for he denies the infinite value of his
Deity.

But M. Wotton holds, that Christ had need of justification and favor for
himself.

Therefore he denies Christ's eternal Deity.

The Proposition of this Syllogism may very well be questioned. For does not
the Word of God say expressly, that Math. 11. 19. Luke 7. 29, 35. 1* Tim. 3. 16.
Christ was, and is justified? does not the same word say, that Math. 3. 17.
he was in favor, yea that Luke 2. 52.
he grew in favor, both with God and man? or was not either of these for
himself?

Yea but, peradventure he had no need of either for himself.

Surely those things, without which Christ as man, could not be, either
accepted with God, or entirely happy; those it cannot be denied but that be had
need of, and need of for himself. But Christ as man, unless he had been in a
justifiable estate, could not have been accepted with God; nor could he have
been entirely happy, had he not been in favor with God. And what will hence
follow, M. Walker may easily conceive, if he be pleased so to do. Which if to
acknowledge be a denial of the infinite value of Christ's d^ity, I know not how
any sound divine, exactly herein treading in the track of Gods Word, can be
acquitted of Arianism. Nor could M. Walker do the Arians or Socinians a greater
pleasure, then if he were able to prove and make good what herein he affirms.
True it is indeed, that a man may be said to have need of a thing two ways:
first, when a man wants somewhat, that is requisite for him to have, when he
should have use of it. and so our Savior Christ had need of meat when he was,
Math 4. 2.
hungry; and of drink, when he was John 4. 6, 7. and 19. 28. (...)
athirst. but so he never needed any spiritual grace, or favor with God.
Secondly, when a man can not well be without somewhat, the continuance whereof
with him is useful and requisite for him. And so Christ, as man, may well be
said to have had need even for himself of such Righteousness as might justify
him; (else he must have been John 8. 46.
guilty of some sin, and Joh. 9. 16, 24.
such a sinner, as the Pharisees unjustly charged him to be;) and of such
favor with God, as should make him, and whatsoever he should do, acceptable
unto God.

But some question here may well be made, what should move M. Walker thus to
shape his Argument, when he comes to conclude it. For in his Proposition here,
wherein his Conclusion lies couched, he qualifieth that, which in his Charge
against M. Wotton that should make up his Assumption, with a note of
restriction there inserted, but here omitted, he had made to sound much more
harshly and hainously, then as here he repeats it. For there it was that M.
Wotton should hold, that Christ's Obedience served ONLY to justify himself:
whereas here the word only is wholly left out, as no part of his Argument. Was
it, think we, because his conscience gave him some after-check, and told him
that he had charged more upon M. Wotton then he was able to make good? Or was
it because his own heart suggested unto him, that this was too gros and
palpable a falsehood to fasten upon him, who every where professes his opinion
to the contrary, affirming the merit and benefit of Christ's obedience to
redound also unto us? so in the very same place, as M. Walker himself also
Parall. Error 6. n. 2. Relat. p. 18.
cites him, he says, If question be concerning the formal cause of
justification, I exclude from it either obedience of Christ. (to wit, both
active and passive.) If of the Efficient by way of merit, I maintain it to
depend upon both. And his false dealing therefore therein might by his own
allegations be easily discovered.

But whatsoever it was that made him thus to stagger, is not greatly material,
only it may not be unusefully observed, to disclose in M. Walker that,
wherewith Page 31.
formerly he taxed M. Wotton; to wit, such agiddines, procured by his so often
turning round, that he forgets the medium of his Argument, wherein the pith
of it should consist, tho laid down but two or three lines before, when he
comes to conclude it.

As for the charge it self, to clear M. Wotton of Arianism (that which the
devil himself, I suppose, would never have charged him with; but Page 34.
tho in words, says M. Walker he profess the contrary, yet in effect he
maintains;) I shall not need to say much: his Sermons extant, on the first of S.
John's Gospel will superaboundantly plead for him, and show it to be a most
shameless slander: unles that M. Walker, by his Chemical faculty, by which he is
able to extract every thing out of any thing, can pick Arianism out of those
Sermons 1, 2, 3.
Discourses, wherein the same is very eagerly opposed, and as substantially
refuted.

From this fresh Charge, which had it been given in, when time was, and that so
strongly backed, and clearly demonstrated, we could not possibly have avoided
it, but must of necessity have found M. Wotton an heretic, Socinian or Arian,
no great matter whether if not both: he proceeds to Page 35.
the poornes of M. G^takers defense; thinking to excuse M. Wotton, by naming
other heresies of Servetus and Socinus, that M. Wotton held not, nor did M.
Walker charge him with: and pleading, that, because they were condemned for
other heresies, therefore this was no heresy: which yet M. Walker knows to be
heresy and blasphemy; and other learned proclaim it so to be: yea M. Wottons
own conscience told him that his opinions were condemned for such; which for
fear of shame therefore he sometimes denied; and frequently contradicted
himself, saying and unsaying, as Socinus his Master often did.

To all which punctually in few words.
1. It would deservedly have been expected, that M. Walker having charged M.
Wotton, with Epist. to M. Wotton, Relat. p 4. and Vindic. p. 10.
maintaining, teaching, and infecting diverse, with the most pestilent and
dangerous errors and opinions of all that ever the devil sowed among Christian
people, the heresies of Servetus and Socinus, those most damnable and cursed
heretics, the greatest monsters that ever were born within the borders of
Christ's Church; I say, that having thus charged M. Wotton, he should have
proved him to consent with them in those monstrous and most pestilent errors of
all, that ever were by them held and taught: otherwise his evidence falls far
short of his Charge. And surely one of these two M. Walker by virtue of that
his charge stands bound to maintain and make good; either that those prodigious
^^tages and detestable blasphemies of Servetus related by Calvin, (to let pas
Socinus and his denial of Christ's deity) yea not those of him alone, but the
like of Of all which Epiphanius and Augustine, with others may be seen.
the Ophites, the Cainites, the Nicolaitans, the Basilidians, the Valentinians,
the Carpocratians, the Marcionites, the Manichees, and the whole rabble of
abominable old heretics, whose positions and practices were so hideous and
horrible, or so unclean and obscene, that they are not almost to be related;
yet are not so vile and pestilent as are those errors, that either M. Wotton
indeed held, or were by M. Walker (truly, or falsely, shall be all one) objected
unto him; or else, that, tho these are not so vile and pestilent as those; that
those were none of them by the devil sown among Christian people, but these
were. Otherwise, if he will be but judged by his own words, he must acknowledge
himself a most notorious sycophant; that charge so deeply, and so poorly and
slenderly makes his charge good. And this, unles he will eat his own words, how
he can avoid, I see not.

2. It is most falls, that I use any such plea, that therefore, what M. Wotton
held, concurring (as M Walker pretended) therein with them, was no heresy;
because they were condemned for other heresies. For which assertion, I here
charge M. Walker with a manifest and palpable untruth: which together with
diverse others herein avowed by him, until he disclaim and acknowledge, I shall
not desire to have further dealing with one that regards no more what he says.

Among other things indeed, which he glides by, I question Relat. Poscr. p. 55.
his candor, in charging M. Wotton to concur with Servetus in all points
concerning the doctrine of justification; when he produces Paral. Error. 4. n.
3. Relat. p. 15.
but one short saying of Servetus concerning Abraham's Faith: wherein yet M.
Wotton, neither in express terms, and in sense and meaning much les, (as I
have above showed) concurreth with him. and withal Relat. Posc. p. 56.
I show by an instance M. Walkers iniquity and unequal dealing therein; such as
himself would by no means admit, or endure in his own case. That which M.
Walker being altogether unable to wipe of, he slily slips away, and Tuus est
iste syllogismus, non m^us. Fingis enim me diccre, quod non dico: concludere,
quod non concludo. Aug ad. Julian. l. 3. c. 7.
instead thereof shifts in a supposititious absurdity, a brat of his own brain;
to delude his reader, and to make him believe, that M. Gataker so argues as
himself too often does.

3. Whereas he says, he knows this (I know not what, of M. Woitons) to be
heresy and blasphemy: what need I say more, but (as he sometime) that herein I
believe him not; no more then M. Richardson, if (as Alteri^s adversus ipsum
convicia rescrenti, Tudicas, me illi non credere.
Page 26.
before he told us) he affirmed on his knowledge, that whosoever lived and died
in it should be damned. What he knows, I know not. but what he was able to make
proof of, when time was, I know; and men of as good credit every inch (what if
I said, of as great knowledge to in matter of divinity?) as M. Walker, do give
testimony thereunto.

4. What he jangles, so much, and so Page 3, 4, 32.
often, of other Autors, I leave him to try it out with The Socinian John.
Socinianism discovered, p. 8.
him, whom he affirms Ibid. Epist. p. 9. Answ. to Pref. p. 8. and Vindic. p. 25.
to have renewed M. VVottons opinions, and to have filcht all out of his
writings. Only making bold to tell M. Walker, that, when he has read over a
few of Pareus his works, one of the Autors he so often mentions, and by name that
Epistola ad D. Lodovicum Witgensteinium. Oper. Tom. 2. and in Opuscul.
Catechet. V^sini Explic. Cat^ch. subjunctis.
of his concerning Christ's Active and Passive obedience, out of which I have
presented him with one or two small snips; I am half of the mind, that he will
pas the like censure on him also for an heretic, that he has done upon M.
Wotton. And it may not without good ground, of probability at least, be
conjectured, that therefore he waived meddling with the latter part of my
Postscript; because I therein Relat. Poser, p. 55, 60.
evidently show, that a man may hold not a few points held by Socinus, and yet
not be therefore a Socinian heretic. And I would but request of M. Walker, to
tell his mind plainly, what he thinks of those, who stiffly hold and maintain;
that justification consists wholly in Remission of sins; that Christ's
Righteousness in fulfilling the moral Law is not imputed unto us for
justification; and that God without breach of his justice might have pardoned
man's sin, requiring no satisfaction at all for the same; whether they be
Socinian heretics, as well as M. Wotton, or no. to which demand if he shall
return an affirmative answer, he may be pleased to take notice by Page 58, 60.
my Postscript, if at least he list so to do, what a large list of new
heretics, never before taken among us for such, must upon his doom now be
taken in and ranged in that rank.

5. For his peering so narrowly into M. VVottons conscience, as Page 38.
before, so here; I shall leave him to render an account unto him, who 1 Samuel
16. 7: Jerem. 17. 10. Apoc. 2. 23.
challenges unto himself that Prerogative, to see into men's souls; and whose 1
Kings 8. 39. Acts 1. 24. and 15. 9. Romans 1. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
power therefore M. Walker therein usurps.

6. For M. VVottons pretended contradictions, enough already has been
answered. tho neither is it my part to make them all good; nor does it either
make him an heretic, albeit they be not all made good; or prove him conscious
to himself, of what M. Walker would thence infer. Howbeit if M. Wottons fear
of shame, as M. Walker here says, induced him unto them; then had M. Wotton
that, which I fear M. Walker too much wants; since that otherwise he would
have been afraid to expose himself so to shame, as by his carriage in this very
Pam^hlet, besides what elsewhere he has done. As for Socinus M. Wottons master,
as he p^ here to call him: it is no new thing with (...). (...) to enlarge
Socinus his school, and to assigns him scholars, whom he lists, more then a
few, who yet abhor Socinus, it may be, as much as M Walker himself does.

For his close, wherein he tells me, thinking thereby to stop my mouth, that
Page 35.
if I will break forth into a further defense of M Wotton, he will be as ready to
resist me; taxes M. Wotton, Ibid.
for professing himself in some things concerning the point of justification,
to dissent from them all, whom he speaks of; wherein he compares, him to Peter
Abeilard, who in some things professed to dissent from all the Divines that
went before him; and lastly professes, in some general and ambiguous terms,
Page 36.
what his faith is. For all this a short answer (as himself Page 34.
elsewhere) will serve.

1. I never undertook, nor do undertake, any Defense of M. Wotton, as holding
no error: whom in my former Relation Relat. p. 7.
I professed in somethings to dissent from, that which himself also well knew;
and mine Animadversions upon his Book De Reconciliatione in some marginal notes
(wherewith, after my wonted manner, in reading of Autors, for mine own private
use, I have (to use M. Walkers Page 27.
words) be daubed my margent, and so marred my book) will easily and evidently
show the same. All that I have said, and do still say, is this; having witnesses
beyond exception to bear me out therein; that M. Walker was not able to
convince M. Wotton of heresy and blasphemy, much les (as he had charged him)
of the most ^estilent here sies that ever were sown by the devil, or had
sprung up in Gods Church, in that meeting, which he himself had procured for
that purpose. And this, let M. Walker shuffle and shift what he can, Ut^^e suum
(...) is, quos call^us (...) auc. ps, Crus ubi co^ (...) volucris, sensitque
t^ri, Plangitur, tc tr^pi^la^s assring it vincula motu, Externata fagam frustra
dum tentai. N^ fabul. l. ^1.
like a Foul in a snare, or Fish in a net, or a wild Bull in a toil; the more
he stirs, and strives and struggles, the more he may mash and entangle
himself, but he will never be able to expedite or wind himself out of. For as
for his Golias like menacing to resist me; I shall so Cui ^jax (...) Nasonem
fab. l. 13. Opposui molem clypei, texi (...) Et mox. Post clyp^umque late, and
mecum contend sub illo. quod and de Teucro Arist^les in Pana^hen. (...). ex
Homero, qui. Il. (...). Et mox. (...).
Ulysses* like shelter my self under their shield, whose attestation I have
delivered, that he must first bear them and their credit down before him,
(which I assure my self he will never do) ere he shall be able either to lay me
on my back, or to maintain his own ground, and keep himself standing in this
encounter.

2. For M. Wottons professing to dissent from them all; wherein he yoakes him
with Abeilard. who those all are, I wot not, for I have none of that writing,
out of which M. Walker relates this. nor do I find that of Abeilard, that
Bernard in this kind charges him with, in any writing of his now extant. that
work of his, wherein he had it, (if at least he had it in any, for some books
are by Haec Capitula partim in libro Theologiae magistri Petri partim in libro
sententiarum ejusdem reperta sunt. Bern. ep. 190.
Bernard cited as his, Nun^ qua^ liberaliquis, qui senteniiarum dicatur, a me
scriptus reperitur. Petr. Abeil in Apolog.
which he professes he never wrote) may be lost. Howsoever, I suppose it no
such heinous matter, in something to depart from all Writers known to us, that
have gone before us. Sure I am that Iunius and Tremellius, in translating and
expounding some passages of Scripture, departed from all known Interpreters
that had gone before them: as in that Mala. 2. 16.
place of Malachy; for which those of the weaker sex are beholden to them; that
in all, even the best, translations ever before ran; If thou hate her, put her
away. tho Ita enim Abraham Esdr^ silius in hunc vatis locum.
some indeed of the Jewish Rabbines directed to that, which those famous and
worthy men, never sufficiently commended, admitted, against all that had before
them taken pains in that kind. and they might well therefore have said, as
Bernard says that Peter Abeilard did; All Interpreters before us thus
translated this place: but we cannot therein concur with them. yet is not their
interpretation, that I know, therefore deemed the les sound Yea I suppose, that
if all M. Walkers own, either Sermons or Assertions were sifted, the like,
Omnes alii sic; Ego vero non sic; would be more then once found in them. He
that to prove, the Swedes to be the people designed by Gods word for the
destruction of the Romish Babylon, should affirm that that prophecy, wherein
people are willed to Jerem. 50. 26.
come from the utmost border, or end (understanding it, of the world; which yet
is not necessary) to destroy Babel; was never fulfilled in the destruction of
the Chaldean Babylon; should therein, I suppose, cross all Interpreters of holy
Writ that are commonly in hands. Which whither M. Walker, as some report, have
affirmed or no, is best known to himself. But sure I am, as I have formerly
touched, concerning the ground of man's fall, I have heard him profes himself to
dissent from all our Divines; laying withal a very foul aspersion upon all that
therein dissented from him. Howsoever since that in these latter times, it has
been by Gods Spirit foretold, that Da^. 12. 4.
knowledge should increase; yea reason it self, besides daily experience
tells us the self-same: for, notwithstanding the diligentest searches of all
foregoing ages. Ve^itas ((...) nondum est occupata: multuus ex illa futuris
relictum est. Sencc ep. 33.
truth much of it remains still undiscovered, and Crescit indies. and
inventuris inventa non obstant. Idem. ep. 79
it is an easier matter to ad to former discoveries, then to discover things at
first: they may see most, that come last: and we find it in all other learning
and knowledge, that those things have in these latter days been brought to
light, which in former ages, for ought that can be discryed, were utrerly
unknown; I suppose, under correction, that it ought e Vltimi conditio est
optima. Ibid.
not to be deemed any just cause of aspersion, if a man shall, with modesty,
rendering at least some reason f Videatur Guido Pancirola de Novis repertis.
of good probability for his so doing, profes himself compelled in some things
to depart from all those, that to his knowledge have dealt in some argument
before him: especially if he shall withal (as the same Peter in the very
entrance to his Introduction unto Divinity does) profes himself Paratus semper
ad satisfactionem de male dictis vel corrigendis vel delendis, cum quis me
fidelium vel virtute rationis, vel autoritate Scripturae correxerit.
ready to give satisfaction in ought said amiss by him to any man; who either
by force of reason, or by authority of Scripture, shall thereof convince him;
either by altering, or by expugning it. That so, says he, tho I be not free Vt
si nondum ignorantiae vitio caream, haeresis tamen crimen non incurram.
from the evil of ignor^ne; yet I may not incur the crime of heresy. Non enim
ignor antia haereticum facit, sed magis superbiae obstinatio.
For it is not a man's ignorance, but his proud obstinacy, that makes him an
heretic. Nor, may I well ad, were the bare profession of dissent in some
particulars from all other Orthodox Divines presumed in either, sufficient to
make, either M. Wotton, or Peter Abeilard an heretic.

Lastly, as concerning M. Walkers profession of Page 35, 36.
his Faith, that Page 26.
he purposes to live and die in, tho I know not what authority M. Walker has
to compose a Creed for every one to subscribe to: nor do I deem it necessary
unto salvation, that every one should in all things be of his belief. Yet this
his form, (like (...), ^^tharunus. (...). calceamentum pedi utrique aptum. tam
virisi quam and muliebri sexui usurpatum. Svid.
a Yragik buskin, that may be drawn on either leg) is in such general and
ambiguous terms conceived; (lest he should exclude from it some of those
Writers, whom he crakes so much of, as concurring with him in condemning M.
Wottons opinions for heretical and blasphemous) that M. Wotton himself, I
verily believe, were he alive, would not refuse to subscribe to it. And M.
Walker well knows, that, were he put to explain it, and to declare more
distinctly, what he means by Christ's righteousness, and the fulfilling of the n
Sib. Lubber^us: de quo sup. p. 13.
whole Law for him, one at least of those worthies, whom he has so often in his
mouth, (to say nothing of another of them, whom yet so highly he extols) would
not only refuse to subscribe to, but condemn some part of his Faith Hanc
distractionem justitiae nostrae coram Deo, quod ea vec sacris literis esset
consentanea ^adco odit, ut saepenumero commotior diceret, mera haec esse
inanium subtilitatum (...), quae puritatem doctrinae Orthodoxae imm^ne quant^
msiccrent. Phil. Par^us in vita Dav Parei patris sui.
as a vain refuse and subtilty, not agreeable to Scripture; but such as taints
the purity of Orthodox doctrine, rends in pieces that righteousness, whereby we
stand just hefore God, Morti Chris^i d^rogat. Dav. Pareus de ^ct. and Pass.
^hr. (...). Pr p. 5.
derogates from the death of Christ, and ^.
makes his Cross and his satisfaction by death for our sins, wholly needles and
superfluous. Which speeches of his (and Pareus his they are) if, to M. Walkers
ear they sound not as hereticol and blasphemous, I wonder how ought should in
M. Wottons writings. And so I shall take my leave of him; leaving him to
reconcile himself to Pareus, since that M. Wotton is now departed, who yet
herein jumpeth not wholly with him; and wishing him a little more sobriety and
modesty toward his Christian brethren, that have not so ill deserved, either of
him, or of Gods Church, as to be thus scandalously taxed, traduced, railed
upon, and reviled, as by him they are, both here and elsewhere.

FINIS.

