(...) OR, THE Dreadful Burning OF LONDON: Described in a POEM.

BY J. G. M. A.

(...)

Dionys. Halicarn. d: Romans Incend. lib. 5. p. 313. Licensed May 2. 1667. Roger
L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the
New-Exchange. 1667.

To the Right Worshipful Sir William Turner, Knight, and Alderman of the City
of LONDON.
SIR,
TO make your Name preliminary to so mean a Pamphlet, created in me as great a
doubt, as whether so inconsiderate a Pen should make an Essay upon so great a
Subject: Yet as the attempt upon the Subject, so the boldness in its Dedication
seems not without some reason; though I might rather have appeared like pious
AEneas, in carrying his Father from the Flames of Troy, than endeavor to
imitate lofty Maro in describing them. Yet might those Feet perhaps which
hastened from the Flames, at the same time run into Verses. I know not why the
instigation of some should be so very earnest in importuning me hereto, knowing
me to have trod more upon Vesuvius than Parnassus, unless they imagined, I
might thereupon write sensibly, though not elegantly, on such a Subject of
Fire. But the Pen to describe this unparalleled Fire, should be like its
Flames, to soar high, and be perspicuous too; mounting above its own smoke, and
not to wrap it self up in sheets of obscurity: and should be like that of the
Eagle, which fans the Clouds, and approaches the Sun. Your great Concern (Sir)
as to the subject of this ^^^m, and ^ur Rank, as one of the chiefs if that
Court, which represents out Metropolis, being sheriff thereof not long before
its deplorable Ruin, and now deligated as one of those, to order and direct in
its re-edifying, might partly occasion this address to your self, which might
not only affect you with the remembrance of its former State, but excite you
in the Contrivance of its future Glory. Now though this Description of so
severe a Providence, may be but as an imperfect Draught to you, having (I
suppose) seen the thing it self acted; (the aifference being as great, as
between painted and real Fire) yet mayit serve as a Remembrance to those, who
though they felt something of its Effects, yet never saw any thing of its
Tenrours. Who may hereby understand, how dreadful this Fire was which, though
at first stole upon the City in the deepest silence of the Night, yet did soon
discover it self by its own Splendor; whose Flames by their great Light, did
soon proclaim that Ruin they made by their destructive Heat, which seemed, as
'twere cheerful in devouring; but as soon as they ceased to leap and dance at
the destruction of others, they perished themselves. Whence of old the (...).
Herod. (...) lib. 3. p. 10.
Egyptians were persuaded that Fire was an animated Creature, made only to
destroy, and after satiated to dye with the thing devoured. But the (...) Id.
Persians proceed farther, and adore it as a God. Such indeed is the dread of
this devouring Element, that the Eternal Deity sometimes condescends to the
resemblance of a consuming Fire, and his teerrours to everlasting Burnings: and
how may we look upon this, as a display of his Justice; for whether or no this
Fire began by a malicious hand, yet must we look upon it as blown up by our
Sins. Such kind of malicious Practices may be traced back as far as Heathen
Rome, according to that of the Satyrist,

-- Conter
Conductum Latronem, Incendia Sulphur cepta,
Atquo dolo primos cum janua colligit ignes.
Juv. lib. 5. Sat. 13. Or as another observes:

-- Candelam apponere valvis
Non dubitet. --
This Fire seemed like that in the tails of Sampsons Foxes, which burned that
which should have become others bread: this made many wealthy Citizens become
poor Almes-men; whose mouths are as open now to ask, at their hands before were
to bestow Charity: whose Dwellings being burned, and their Trades wasted, are
reduced as the Psalmist speaks, to eat ashes like bread. But I hope the
singular Care of our Sovereign, and the earnest Endeavors of our Magistrates,
for the Re-building this famous City, and for the Restoring of our waste
Places, may at the same time raise London out of its Ashes, and poor Citizens
out of the Dust.

Having made a Poetical Attempt in describing the dismal Ruin of so Renowned a
City, I wish now I could so much farther play the Port, as to be like that
Thracian, whose strains could make confused Stones rally into order: Or as
Amphion, who allured them into the Walls of Thebes: however might I vatem
agere, may I rather sing its approaching Glory, than late Ruin. Especially if
the affair of its Re-building continue in part under Your most Prudent Care,
and I under Your former Favor; the acknowledgement of which, while it now
becomes like your Name, public, yet I hope if I have thereby offended, that
the same generous disposition that can so freely bestow a Favor, will as
freely pardon a Fault: and what I have do^e in this Address, that it may be
attributed rather to my Endeavor of becoming grateful, than offensive: for
hence it is, that I desired to publish how much I am, Honored Sir,

Your most Obliged and Humble Servant, J. G.

-- (...) OR The dreadful Burning of London.
While urgent -- Sopor fessos complectitur artus. Virg. Lib. 2.
Sleep our heavy Eyes did clole,
And wrapped our minds up in a soft Repose;
Some glowing Coal, silent, and dark as night,
Shakes its black Embers off, so shows its light.
Which through some narrow room, did gently creep
With a still foot, e're it abroad durst peep.
Which will no longer now confined be,
But steals forth with a kind of subtilty.
Though on its way, Night had her Poppy shed;
Yet is revealed by its own Light it spread:
And with a train at last in public goes,
And as it marches forward stronger grows.
Surprising all before it, as it burns;
And to itself all opposition turns.
Nor was its Rise more sudden by a blaste,
Than the Execution which it made in haste.
As an enraged Invader straight does spread
His bloody Banners, which still Menace dread,
Wasting where e're he comes, whose anger burns,
And into dreadful Flames the Country turns:
Which dismal ruin that he leaves behind,
Scarce satisfies the fury of his mind.
Thus does this raging Fire lift up its head,
And its (...) Flames abroad does spread*
Which as deep midnight no^^ disturbs ou^^ Peace,
And by our Ruin do themselves increase.
And as it marches, is it trackt alone
By the dire footsteps of destruction.
Weak at the first, it humbly crept along,
Till higher it aspired, as it grew strong:
And to exalted Pyramids does rise,
Before the clogs of sleep fall from our eyes.
How does the crackling noise first wound our ear,
E're that the dreadful sight does urge our fear,
No sooner some out of their Beds were gone,
But in bright Sheets of Flames their Houses shone:
And newly but awake, as now they gaze
Upon whole Streets in such a dismal Blaze:
They seem as still asleep, and what they see,
As some dire dream without reality.
Such dread makes them their own eyes scarce believe,
Or to their very Senses credit give.
So much amazed they stand, overcome with fear,
As but unmoving Statues they appear.
Thus once Lot's Wife did to a Pillar turn,
As soon as she beheld her Sodom burn.
And here, although whole Streets prove but a Prey
To hungry Flames, through which they eat their way:
How few among such multitudes engage,
To check their progress, or to quench their rage?
So wide they spread, and did so high aspire,
As if sank down the whole Element of Fire:
And did to us so great a Maze present,
As if were wrapped in Flames the Firmament. Tempus erat quo prima quies,
Mortalibus aegris Incipit. Virg. AEn. 2.

Some who this Fire would with resistance meet,
By others are Pars morans, pars festinans, cuncta impediebant. Tacit. de Romans
Incend
obstructed in the Street:
Who only striving to secure their Goods,
Justle down those who bring opposing Floods.
Who laden thus with water, and thrown down
Admidst the Flames, at once both burn and drown.
Others their Water-Engins full do bring,
Which on the Flames opposng showers fling:
Whose streams with such a force ascend so high,
As if they could therewith the Clouds supply.
The Pipe are cut, and all the Restringere fontibus ignes. Virg.
Conduits flow,
And on the Fire repeated Floods men throw.
Yet Pyramids of Flames invade the Skies,
Whose thirst the watery Clouds could scarce suffice:
But lick their moistures up, so make them dry,
That without water, (...) Jud. 12.
Clouds they seem thereby:
And none but clouds of smoke about us hover;
Whose sable wings do the whole Horizon cover.
As the destructive Fire does forward creep,
Its shining train whole Streets away does sweep.
Which wandering Flames, lose and destroy their way,
And having ruined all, themselves decay.
Such ranks of Flames, the chief fire forward leads,
Which Hydra-like lifts up a hundred heads.
They dance at the least Whistle of the Wind,
Leaving dire foot steps of their rage behind.
At last so boundless in their Progress, they
As uncontrolled, no limits scarce obey.
Which thirsty fire the flowing waters drank,
And made the very Thames shrink from its bank:
And was so hungry too, whole Streets became
As fuel but to feed this greedy Ignis edax summo ad vestigia vento
Volvitur. --
Virg.
: Flame.
But as it feeds, it still the more does crave,
Unsatisfied, like the devouring Grave.
Whole Parishes, its rage did but excite,
And not appease its wanton appetite.
Elijah's Victim on the Altar fumed,
And by his fire of zeal was soon consumed:
Whose rapid Flames, the waters in the trench,
Could not by all their swelling moistures quench;
Which could no more their raging thirst allay,
Than the Holocaust their hunger take away.
Our Altars fume, but not with their own fire;
And for a Sacrifice now burns the Quite.
Luxuriant Flames made beauteous Piles to be
The objects of their wanton cruelty.
But as those Flames in several ranks divide;
And as they march, stretch over from side to side.
'Twas as the Psalmist once sang to his Lyre,
The voice of God, divider the flames of fire.
The Blaze of two dire Comets did fore-run
This stream of Flames, which should out-blaze the Sun:
Which to the middle Region did aspire,
As if it would convert it to one fire;
Or only to a general Comet turn,
Which might be seen by the whole world to burn.
Then angry Heaven more direful thunders sent,
Which sturdy Oaks, and lofty Steeples rent.
So Rome before its dismal Fire, did see
Vulgantur prodigia, imminentiu^ malorum nuntia, vis fulgurum, non alias
crebrior, and sidus cometes. Tacit. 15. Annal.
Signs, which presaged an angry Deity.
Phoebus looked down, and blushed at such a sight
To be out-shone by an inferior Light:
Who seemed not only red, when first he rose;
But so remained, till he the day did close.
And at so great a Conflagration stood,
As at his Solstice, and seemed turned to blood:
While up and down the affrighted people run,
As if indeed Doomsday were now begun.
The Sun now fears a Peregaeum, while
Such clouds of smoke his purer light defile:
Which though all day, did but eclipse his light;
Yet flames supplied his absence in the night.
And does fair Cynthia shrink into her Wain,
Lest such black clouds, her beauty too should stain:
Draws in her horns, as if her force were spent,
While Fire o'recomes her liquid Element.
Doubting though in the Sea she dipped her horn,
So great a fire might all her moisturescorn.
Those flames so great a light did spread, that they
Seemed to recall the new departed day:
The lesser Stars within their sockets shrink,
As tender eyes before great light that wink.
Which eyes of Heaven, thus twinckle all the night,
While such vast flames cast a perstringent light.
Before the Sun, an Eastern Wind does rise,
Which made the flames shoot sparks up to the Skies:
Which shone so bright, as if indeed they strove
To add new lights unto the stars above.
Cold gusts of wind, these ardors more intend;
Which make the flames their Ruins forward send.
The brightest of them rush towered Lumbard Street,
And lick up all opposing streams they meet:
Where they the Jewels, and rich Stones outshine;
And do the Gold but once again refine.
This Fire which we not only forward trace,
Which Janus like presents a double face;
And does not only burn before the wind,
But backward shoots its flames as far behind.
As when a Serpent wreaths his head about,
And as he twines, does shoot his fork't sting out:
Whose wrigling tail though severed, yet does threat
Still Parthian like, to wound in his retreat.
Thus though this fiery Serpent cut in twain,
Yet scarce wounds with his head, more than his train.
While it does toward the Bridge now backward turn,
To tantalize the Waves, and over them burn.
Does Vulcan against Neptune seem to rage,
Who with his Waves could not his ardours swage:
And threatens too those Ships on the other side,
Which Nereus scarce could rescue with his tide.
Thus when renowned Aemelianus classem sub ipso ore urbis incendit.
Flor. lib. 2. c.15. -- Per mania clarior ignis.
Virg.
Auditur, propriusque aestus incendia volvunt.
Carthage once was fired,
By the same flames the Navy too expired.
The Bridge thus burning might some think the while,
'Twas to those traitorous heads a Funeral-pile:
Whose ashes yet like Traitors are denied
An Urn, while swallowed by the angry Tide.
Neptune looks up on this insulting Fire,
Which higher than his Surges does aspire:
Who with his swelling I ides could scarce out-roar,
Or drown the (...) Hom. II. (...).
noise they sent down to the shore.
The glittering Fish in mighty shoals now gaze
Upon the lightning of so great a Blaze:
To see those Flames of such a large extent,
-- (...). Hom.
Out shine themselves, and their own Element.
That fervor which they to the River cast,
Might cause its very Waves to (...). Id.
boil at last:
So make the Tides more estuate than before,
Though driven with such a force against the shore.
So -- (...).
Xanthus boiled, while the flames did destroy
The stately Palaces of ancient Troy.
The leading flames toward the Burse Royal haste,
Where all the Statues of our Kings were placed:
Which the black clouds of smoke did first infold,
E're the rude flames took off their burnisht Gold.
Nor could those Royal Statutes be like those,
Which from the Capitol repelled the foes:
When the bold Sabines did it once assail,
But could not over the Roman force prevail;
When the ancient Statues in the breach were placed,
They saved the Tower, but were themselves defaced.
A ruder flame does on those Statues prey,
Which them does in the common Ruin lay:
And while by unexpected flames they burn,
Their noble ashes seem to want an Urn.
Yet, burn those Statues not like other things,
Which represent no less than sacred Kings;
But a perfumed flame does from them rise,
Whose smoke sweet Odours sends up to the Skies:
For the Aromatic Cavern underneath,
Does all the while Sabaean Vapors breath.
As flames the Arabian Spices thus consume,
They all the circumambient air perfume.
Soon may we see from this burnt Sacrifice,
Or spicy bed of flames, a Phoenix rise.
Why should we from such ashes think it strange,
To see spring up, a more august Exchange.
Here did the wealthy Merchants use to meet,
And Foreign Nations did each other greet:
But these unruly flames rush in among
Those Foreigners, to speak their fiery tongue:
Which spoke not so obscurely, but we might
See flaming Sheets, their meaning bring to light;
Making those very marble Columns burn,
And only into fiery Pillars turn.
Yet they the generous Founder of the place,
Refuse with awe his Statue to deface:
To change his hue, they need not send before
Their Harbingers of Smoke, to black him more.
They hence to Bow-Church stretch themselves, where they
Its lofty Roof do in the ashes lay.
And having first destroyed the sacred Quire,
Up to the stately Tower they next aspire.
The Bells before rung backward, did thereby,
Some accidental Fire still signify.
But when the Churches and the Bellfries burn,
The Bells are dumb, and their black towers mouth.
What Fire is this, makes the Bells cease to chime?
Destroys the Clocks, so triumphs over time:
Vast Domus munimentis septae, Templa muris cincta, Delubra Deum, and Porticus
amaenitati dicatae, latius procidere. Tacit. 15. Anal.
Halls, nor Temples could these Flames repel,
Which ruined all, where e're their fury fell.
Rich Fabrics, once the Glory of our Isle,
Become but now the Cities Funeral Pile.
Guild Hall, where the grave Senators still sat,
When they the City business did debate;
Whose Purple Robes did such a splendour shed,
As filled those who approacht their Court with dread.
Yet the rude Fire does with its Scarlet Train,
Rush in among them, and their Robes disdain:
Whose flames a greater awe did with them bring,
While round about they naught but terror, fling.
But when this Fire, once to the (...) per Tabernas, quibus id mercimonium
inerat, quo flamma alitur. Tacit. de Romans Incend.
Taverns came,
They quenched it not, but it made them to flame.
And when abroad Torrents of burnt wine gush,
Incensed Bacchus does at Vulcan blush.
Cold gusts of wind these ardours more intend,
And make the flames their Ruins forward send.
As with a strong breath Boreas sometimes blow,
When to the Clouds he angry Surges throws:
And so makes Neptune, Heaven it self defy,
By spitting in the face of the azur'd Sky.
Thus here with such a breath, he seems to drive
Unruly flames, which toward the Heavens now strive,
Sion, where sacred Learning did increase,
While the Arts and Sciences dwelt there in peace:
And where the sacred Muses did inspire
The Sons of Learning, with diviner Fire;
Yet cannot with their Fountain Helicon,
Quench this unhallowed Conflagration:
But here the Critics burn with flames so bright,
As give the obscurer places clearer light.
When to St. Paul's among the Books it came,
Learned Authors, for to shun this dreadful flame,
To the magnifick Temple soon do fly
For Refuge, as their only Sanctuary:
Yet could not safety at the Altar find,
Though they had been like Saints themselves inshrin'd.
But those Divines, which in St. Faiths were pent,
Seemed as to Purgatory they were sent:
Where sometimes after, when the smothered Fire
Was thought in its own Ex obruto incendio, subita de cineribus flamma
prodibat. Flor. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Embers to expire;
Receiving air, revived and quickly fumed,
So blasted Faith, and all the Books consumed.
Paul's Temple reared on Faith, whose lofty Spire
Was once demolisht by Dugdal. Hist. ubi exhibetur Pyramid Ecclesiae Paulina,
qualis olim erat priusquam e caelo tacta conflagraverat.
Celestial Fire.
Like that once sacred unto Templum spei in fore Olitorio fulmiue tactum. Live.
lib. 23.
Hope in Rome,
Burnt by a fire, which did from Heaven come.
When to the Temple of Minerva came,
The Trojan Horse, it soon began to flame.
When Horses thus Paul's Temple once defile,
How soon becomes it then a flaming Pile?
For which Profaneness, well might heaven be urged,
To have it thus by Fire again be purged.
Once the Messiah in a Manger lay,
Where the Eastern Sages did him homage pay;
Whence some profane ones thought he might be found
Still in a Stable, though with Glory crowned.
Those wilder Beasts, to Ephesus once brought,
With which the Doctor of the Gentiles fought,
Did not Diana's Temple so defile,
(Though it became so soon a burning Pile)
As those beasts stain the Temple of his Name,
That now does perish by as great a Flame.
Which though the dismal Flames uncovered thus,
Like that once sacred unto Termino non nisi sub dio sacrificabaetur. Serve. in
Virg. AEn. 9. In Capitolio prona pars tecti paret, quae lapidem ipsum Termini
(sive Texminum) spectat. Dempst, in To. in. lib. 4. c. 6. Templum in quo
coliba^ur Terminus, desuper patens foramen habuit: Sic AEdes lovis Pulverii in
Attica semper sine tecto erigebatur. Alex. ab Alexand. lib. 2. c. 22.
Termimus:
Yet when they looked down, toward the awful Quire,
And on the Altar spied more Sacred Fire.
They feared as 'twere to spread unhallowed heat;
Over the Holy Altar, but with awe retreat.
So durst not touch those beauties, where Saints pray,
But stopped, and turned their course an other way.
To see which pile could not the Flames repel,
A shower of tears straight from the Kings eyes fell.
So Titus wept, as Salems Temple burned:
To see it is beauty thus to ashes turned.
Not once like Pervaserat rumor ipso tempore flagrantis urbis Neronem iuisse
domesticam scenam, and cecinisse Trojanum excidium. Tacit. 15. Anal.
Nero, who sang to his Lyre,
As he beheld Imperial Rome on fire;
Who singing, by his breath blew up the flame,
And made it more insult, where e're it came.
For as the City burning he surveyed,
The flames but friskt and danced to what he played.
Nor as when Pyrhus with a gust of joy,
Beheld the Ruin once of flaming Troy:
While -- Moestissimus Hector.
Visus adesse mihi, largosque effundere fletus.
Virg.
Hector wept, and old In coelo palmas cum voce tetendit,
Jupiter omn^potens praecibus si flecteris ullis,
Aspice nos.
Idem.
Anchises prayed,
As thus their burning City they surveyed.
While Troynovant thus burned, so prayed our King,
That God would succor to the City bring.
And may the Pious Tears of such an Eye
Well expiate, when dropped from Majesty.
Soon as they had a sacred Vial filled,
They (...).
quenched, as they upon the flames distilled.
Thus seemed he like that Royal Lyrick, whiles
He wept, till God at last upon him smiles.
Whose sacred tears were bottled up and kept
By Heaven it self, as moved when the King wept.
The injured Greeks to Temples used to fly,
And sacred Altars in Calamity.
But when this Fire, that from the Temple fumes,
Which the Altar, and the Temple too consumes.
Where shall we refuge seek, and pray? while thus,
Heaven takes the very House of Prayer from us.
The unwearied Flames, hence unto Christ-Church haste,
Which ample and religious Pile they waste.
Nor could the Buckets of its Sacred Quire,
Defend it now from this unhallowed Fire.
No sooner does this sacred Structure fall,
But the agil Fire preys on the Hospital:
Which as the Orphans Coats first burns as blew,
Then blusheth at the act it is to do:
Which checks it self, as if 'twere loath to be,
The Ruin of this Work of Charity:
For Charity was not more warm of old,
Than in this worser age it waxes cold.
This place yet's ruined by no less a Flame,
Than that of Love, which first bestowed the same.
The Flames, though merciless to the Orphans were,
To others after, yet more kind appear: Graci moris fuit ad injuriam arcendam
confugere ad Templa and aras. Lips. in Tacit. p. 160.

Reaching to Newgate, there they soon set free
The Prisoners by a Jail-delivery.
Themselves at first, in lesser room were pent,
Till growing strong, refused Imprisonment,
Next, Sepulchers they with more Ruins fill,
And yet unwearied, thence they climb Snow-Hill;
Whose unslackt ardors both despised its snow,
And colder Fountain at its foot below:
So burns Vesuvius, though the Sea its side
Does wash, and humid Clouds its head still hide.
Dire Vulcan his own Mansion scarce yet burns,
But to one Smithfield the whole City turns:
And ruins all but Chimneys, his right place,
Soon as he did his proper bounds once pass.
Priam's stout Son among the Grecians -- Jaculatus puppibus ignes.
cast
Such Flames, that did their Ships at Anchor waste:
Which seemed but to precede that fatal Fire,
In which soon after Ilium did expire.
Thus might those Flames prefage the like event,
Our English The burning of the Ships before Schelling.
Hector to the Dutch Fleet sent.
Which a more fatal Fire seemed to foreshow,
That should no less rich London overthrow.
The Head of three Kingdoms thus to Fate does bow,
Not covered with, but turned to ashes now:
Whose shattered Towers seem to the observing eye,
Like those of old Rome, which in Ruins lie.
Whose Ports yet standing, though defaced, appear
By some old Characters, what once they were.
Arches and rum'd Temples too are seen,
Whose Letters show, what they before have been.
Thus those Inscription^ on each standing Gate,
Spell Londons (...) Pomp, but later Fate.
That stately Ship, (...) the Cities Name,
And perished by an unexpected Flame;
Yet from her Ashes Phoenix-like did spring.
Another Loyal London to the King.
Thus from our Rum'd City may arise,
Another, whose high Towers may urge the Skies.
FINIS.

