THREE SERMONS PREACHED UPON SEVERAL PUBLIC OCCASIONS.

By JOHN GAUDEN, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

TO THE Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Warwick, Baron of Lees, one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My very honorable Lord,
THe many noble favors which I have received from your Lordship chiefly, and
from others of your noble Family, compel me (since these Sermons will needs
be public, beyond my intentions) to add to them the honor of your Lordships
name; and to set upon them this Seal of Gratitude, from a heart that unfainedly
prays for all those increases to your Lordship and yours, which may make both
your Lordship and them truly honorable in this, and ever happy in the other
world: For so I must profess to all the world, your Nobleness has abundantly
deserved of your Lordships most humble, and obliged Servant,

JOHN GAUDEN.

A SERMON preached before his MAJESTY
HEBR. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.


THough there needs a large Preface and Apology for the Speaker (as Elihu used
to Job and his friends) being a stranger to this place, and no way
proportionable to so great and sacred a presence; yet I am sure there needs no
Apology for the Text I have read unto you. The weight of the matter being of
greatest and highest concernment to every one of your souls may, by the favor
of your patience, piety, and wisdom, much supply the want of gravity and
sufficiency in the Speaker. The subject I have propounded being so necessary
and indispensible, that without it none that hear me this day, from the least
to the greatest, from the Cottage to the Palace, from the Mill to the Throne,
neither hearer nor speaker, shall ever be happy to see the face of God.

And certainly in this brokennesse and distraction of minds and times, every
one almost going a several way, full of fractions and divisions, crossing and
thwarting each other; if we could all be so happy as to learn this lesson, and
conspire to follow these two, Peace and Holiness, no doubt it would much abate
and compose our distances, while like lines we all tend to one Center, God; or
run parallel to that straight rule of his will: and This is the will of God, 2*
These. 4.3.
even your sanctification.

I should be too happy, and abundantly excusable for my boldness in speaking
to you this day, if, through Gods assistance, and your patience, I might be
able so to represent to you that smooth, safe, and beautiful way of Peace and
Holiness; that by the serious and conscientious following of them, all of us
might orderly and cheerfully go together, the Prince with the People; and the
People with the Prince; the hearts of each drawing nearer to other, and all to
God; to the sight and fruition of him in whose presence is fullness of joy, and
life for evermore.

The Text is a sacred and solemn exhortation, by which the Spirit of God
directs all men the next and only way to attain the most sovereign good, and
desirable end, the happy sight of God.

In it we have, 1 The precept or direction, Follow peace with all men, and
holiness.

2 The motive or inducement, Without which no man shall see God: not promissory
and affirmative, for in so doing you shall see God; but menacing and negative:
such being indeed the temper of men's hearts, that they are more terrified with
loss, than won and invited with the hopes of good; the misery of suffering
prevailing more with our hardness, than the happiness of enjoying. The horror
of being ever separated from the sight of God, the chiefest good of the soul,
which can import no less than hell and extreme misery, this happily may scare
many one to follow Peace and Holiness, whom neither the pleasantness of the
way, nor the amplenesse of the reward, would induce to forsake their pleasing,
but yet impure and dangerous courses.

In the Precept we have 1 the Object, which is double, Peace and Holiness. 2
The Act, or Duty, but one, and serves to both; Follow them. We will consider
the objects severally in their natures, and carry along the Act or Duty with
them.

1 Of Peace: Follow peace with all men.

Now although the beauty, sweetness, and usefulness of this subject (which is
so agreeable to my mind, and so necessary to our times, that I should be glad
to meet it in every Sermon I make or hear, and in every man with whom I deal)
though (I say) it might deserve and justify a large and renewed discourse upon
it; yet I may but sparingly now speak of it, and only sprinkle you with a few
drops of this pure and crystal stream, which makes all to flow with milk and
honey wheresoever it runs; in the Conscience, in the Church, or in the State,
and Civil Societies; because I have, not long ago, in a public, though far
inferior, Assembly, largely discoursed of it: And I would not seem to do what
I need not, that is, drive two Mills with one stream, since the plenty of the
other Branch of Holiness will afford matter sufficient, and worthy your
attention, my speech, and all our practices.

Only give me leave to point out briefly to you these three things: 1 What
this Peace is. 2 How and by whom to be followed. 3 Why.

1 For this general Peace, we can better tell what it is by the fruition, than
any description of it.

What health is to the body, and calmnesse to the Sea, and serenity to the day,
such is peace to the hearts and conversation of men: it is a kind of sweet,
divine, and heavenly concent, harmony, and beauty of minds and manners, of
affections and actions: it is one of the fairest and pleasantest fruits of that
which among Christians we call charity, by which each is endeared to other by
a mutual love, and study of one another good, welfare, and happiness, as
their own, both private and public, temporal and eternal.

This must be followed to the latitude and extension of the subject, with all
men, Romans 12.18. As much as in you lies (if it be possible) live peaceably
with all men. As far as the common bounds of our nature extend we are to
follow peace with all men, so far as men; Pax cum hominibus, bellum cum
vitiis. The more thou art an enemy to their enemies, their sins and vices, the
more faithful friend thou art to them. Peccata interficio homines amplector is
the Motto not only of every good Magistrate, but of every good man; hate and
slay their sins, but love and save their souls.

There is a double bond for it, 1 Commune vinculum naturae, the common tie of
our nature, being all of one metal, binds us to peace, by making us sociable;
God having sweetened our nature beyond the savagenesse and fierceness of other
creatures, which are prone and armed to offend: God has tempered our dust, and
softened our clay with a spring of tears, a fountain of pity, humanity, and
compassion above other creatures. Principio indulsit communis conditor illis
Tantum animam, nobis Animum quoque, mutuus ut nos
Affectus petere auxilium, and praestare juberet.
And again, -- Mollissima corda
Humano generi dare se natura fatetur,
Cum lachrymas dedit.


2 There is Commune vinculum Indigentiae: we are weak and wanting in many
things, if alone and at distance, which society and communion strengthens and
supplies us withal. So that nothing more agrees to the nature of man, nothing
more suits to his necessities, than to follow peace together, both public and
private.

2 How must we all follow Peace? As of pride and envy comes strife and
contention, Pro.
so this universal peacefulnesse proceeds from humility, self-denying, low and
moderate opinion of our selves, studying our own nothingnesse and
unworthiness, in honor preferring one another. This sweetens, plains and
polisheth the roughness and asperity of men's minds and manners, and fits them
to follow peace, 1 by avoiding to give offense. 2 By loathnesse to take
offense. 3 By a forwardness and easiness to be reconciled, though unjustly
offended. 4 By seeking for peace, and a fair understanding between our selves
and others; though at present, through humane infirmities, things cannot be so
well composed.

Thus all must follow Peace with all men, seriously, freely, cheerfully,
heartily, constantly, not to be damped or discouraged; we must prosequi till we
do assequi, follow till we overtake and obtain it.

But who? 1 Princes, and sovereign Magistrates, the great Arbitrators of war
and peace, they must follow Peace with all men, by equal and impartial
distributions of justice and righteousness, which makes Kingdoms to flourish
with peace. He that will be Melchisalem, King of peace, must be Melchisedec,
King of righteousness, as Christ was both. Heb.


Further, Peace deserves sometimes to be fomented by favorable moderation and
indulgence in Princes; Clemency being (...) (as Synesius) the most Regal
ornament, and in some sort a debt which is due to the weakness of humane
nature: and sometimes the malignity of times, minds, and affairs, may be such,
that peace is to be preserved rather by gracious remissions, than rigorous,
though just exactions. Wise Princes, that have the keys of Ianus his Temple,
will not easily open the gate to war, when they may with safety and honor
keep it shut to peace.

2 As Princes, so the People and Subjects must follow Peace with all men, but
especially with their Prince, the great and public Father of their Peace, and
the numerous blessings that issue from it; who ought to be in their esteem as
those loyal and valiant Hearts said of David, worth ten thousand of us. They
must follow it. 1 By an orderly and willing obedience and submission to
wholesome laws, which are but the interpreters of the mind of a just Prince. 2
By faithful and humble Councels of Peace. 3 By free, liberal, and seasonable
Aides and Subsidies to maintain Peace. 4 Those that contribute least to Peace,
yet may follow the King, the Church, the Commonweal, and all men, with their
daily and fervent prayers, that God who makes men to be of one mind in a house
and kingdom, would give to all the blessing of Peace.

3 Why should we follow Peace with all men? 1 God has commanded it, whose
commands will return upon accounts, and he will exact of us how we have kept
them: Certainly the conscience of obeying God, is the powerfullest motive, and
the noblest reward of our obedience.

2 Christ has deserved this of us, our great and ever-blessed Peacemaker, who
followed our Peace so far, that he seemed to have lost himself, and to have
been forsaken of his Father. He followed us with thoughts, and offers, and
promises of Peace, when we were at greater distance and defiance, than can be
between us and any man never so much our enemy. He made his own soul an
offering for Peace, Ephesians. 2.14.
rather than fail to procure our Peace.

O show we follow Christ by following of Peace.

3 Follow it for thy brothers sake; 1 as a man, that name bespeaks thee much.
2 as a Christian, more. 3 Thy Countryman, and thy Neighbor too. When all
these ties of nature, country, and vicinity; of Religion, of the same God and
Savior, of the same hopes, faith, and heaven; when (I say) all these do bind
thy heart and hands from breaking the Peace, should they not prevail more with
thee to follow it, than any poor mistakes and injuries should do to violate
or fly from it? 3 Consider thy brothers good in it. Every man should study to
be (...) as public, diffusive, and preventive in his goodness as may be. Now
distance, defiance, and dis-affections with men, do extremely harden and shut
up their hearts, that thou have not those opportunities and advantages to do
them that good, which love, and sweetness, and peacefulnesse, do put into thy
hands by softning and melting them.

4 For thy own sake follow peace with all men, 1 For thy own safety, and
sweetness of living: who but turbulent and inhumane dispositions, like
Salamanders, would willingly live in the fire of strife and dissension? which
as it cannot but be unpleasing, so it may be dangerous and unsafe: For no man's
anger is to be despised, much less the displeasure of many men, which may
embroile the public, and in that, thy private happiness. Even the tallest
Cedars, and mighty Oaks, which are as the Princes of the Forest, have their
share of safety and flourishing in Peace, as well as the lower shrubs and
bushes: nay, the violent blasts of war, like vehement winds, threaten them
more, and make greater impressions on their height, than on inferiors, whose
inferiority is a great point of their safety. Divide, and regnare desine. Peace
and union are the mutual preservation as well of head as members.

2 For thy own honor follow Peace, though it be through the bushes and
asperities of some injuries and offenses. Pro. 29.11.
It is the glory of a man to pass by offenses (says the wisest of Kings)
especially in the pursuit of Peace. The greater indeed the Person is, the
greater the offense; but the greater the offense, the greater glory in passing
by it, because it brings us nearest to the imitation of Gods infinite mercy,
patience, and forgiveness. One victory over a man's self is more glorious,
than many over an enemy. The triumphs of reason, virtue, morality and grace,
over our passions, are far more honorable than those of the sword, and power
of arms in the field, which are stained and deformed with the blood of men. Pax
una triumphis innumeris potior: One fair and spotless Lilly of preserved
Peace is a greater ornament to a Princes Diadem, than to have it beset round
with many Red Roses of bloody triumphs.

May his memory be ever blessed, and his precious name had in honor, who first
of Princes, next after Christ, gave that for his word, Beati Pacifici. And may
they be blessed, who being heirs to his Crown, are also heirs to his
Princely virtues, and peaceful disposition. And have we not all causes to
bless God, who has inclined their hearts; and to bless them who have
followed those inclinations, to re-establish our late dubious and endangered
peace, and lengthen out our tranquillity? May the great God of peace crown
their Persons, Posterity, and Kingdoms, with abundance of mercy and peace, so
long as the Sun and Moon endure.

3 Follow peace with all men, for thy own internal and eternal peace with
God. God is surely an enemy to those that are enemies to peace; since they are
contrary, 1 To his nature, which is happy in an unmoved and eternal
tranquillity. 2 To his word, which seeks, by the message of peace, to to bring
us nearer, and make us liker to himself. 3 A peacelesse and unquiet
disposition, like troubled waters, is less apt for the sweet and clear
reflections of Gods love to it, or the operations of his Spirit in it; which
creates that internal and unexpressible peace, which no man knows the price
of, but he that has it. 4 Lastly, they only shall rest with God in Peace, who
have followed after Peace, and in so doing, after God. They shall dye in Peace,
and lie in Peace, and rise in Peace, and reign in Peace with God for ever.
Iam. 3.18.
The fruit of righteousness is sown in Peace of them that make Peace.

But I have done with the first Object, and the Duty, Follow Peace with all
men: we come now to the second.

2. And Holiness.
Peaceablenesse and Holiness must go together, and indeed it is pity they
should be separated; yet they are oftentimes: for many are of sweet, soft, and
calm natures, not far from the kingdom of heaven; yet they rise not to the
height of holiness, which must exceed and amend the best of natures. Vae
optimae naturae, nisi superveniat gratia. Good natures, like small and shallow
brooks, may empty themselves, and carry us to that narrow lake of humane love,
honor, and approbation; but holiness only is that great and noble stream
which conveyes the soul to heaven, and loses it in the Ocean of Gods
infinite happiness.

O let us not content our selves with the study of Peace, and neglect
Holiness. Peace will soon corrupt and sour, to troubles inward and outward,
which is not preserved and eternized with Holiness. Isa. 57, 19.
There is no Peace to the wicked, says God; no true, inward, and durable
Peace: we must follow Peace as men, and Holiness as Christians. What is it to
have Peace with men, and war with God? Let us therefore see,

1 What Holiness is. 2 Who must follow it. 3 How we must follow it. 4
Wherefore.

1 What Holiness is.

Holiness is a word of various acceptance.

1 There is a Holiness transcendent, essential, and absolute, which is in
God, or rather which is God himself; who is the eternal, first, and only
rule to himself; by his immutable goodness, unerring wisdom, and
irresistible power; who is (...), thrice holy, as the Seraphins cry, Holy,
holy, holy Lord God of Hoasts, etc. Holy in his will, in his word, and in his
works; in his justice, mercy, and power: and therefore (...), infinitely great
and powerful, because infinitely good and holy. The Father is holy, and the
Son holy, and the Spirit holy; in their essence, in their relations, and in
their operations. This Holiness we must follow. Mat. 5.48. Be ye perfect, as
your heavenly Father is perfect. 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy, as he that has
called you is holy. Here is the rule, pattern, Idea, and Prototype of
Holiness; the fountain, Sun, and Sea of Holiness, from whence it derives it
self in the second place to reasonable creatures, Angels and men, who only
are capable of Holiness in a strict and proper sense.

2 All creatures have a goodness of nature and being by creation, only the
reasonable are vessels of Holiness; which properly is, or at least ought to be
in us, A full and exact conformity of the Soul in all its motions and
operations to the will and mind of God. In the blessed Angels it is, and was in
man at first a gift of creation, whereby they and we were made in the Image of
God, in righteousness and true Holiness. Since our fall Holiness is a gift
of free grace, a supernatural quality or habit infused into the Soul by the
Holy Spirit, which by degrees renews us to a conformity (or an unfeigned study
at least of conformity) to the will of God; doing all out of conscience to his
command, regulating all by to his word, and directing all to his glory.

This Holiness we must also follow, as the true and only beauty, honor,
riches, pleasure, and perfection of the soul. For, as much as men by reason
exceed beasts, so much do Christians by Holiness exceed mere men, in their
unholy and unregenerate state. By Holiness we recover our station and
neerenesse to Angels, our claim to heaven, our kindred and relation to God,
not only as his creatures, but as his Sons, regenerate by his holy Spirit.

3 There is yet a Holiness in a low and inferior sense, not of virtue or
grace, but of use and relation; which is in Scripture and common speech applied
to things unreasonable and inanimate too. This is a Holiness of dedication,
when things are devote and consecrated to the worship and service of the most
holy God, set apart from common and civil uses to sacred.

This likewise we must follow, not as conceiving any inherent quality of
Holiness to be in those things, whereby they are able to work on thy Spirit,
or recommend thee and thy service to a greater degree of acceptance, by
conferring a greater degree of Holiness (except in respect to Gods special
appointment and promise, as of old) but only so far we must follow this
relative Holiness, as to a decent use and reverentiall comportment; such as
becomes the gravity, majesty, and solemnity of Christian Religion; and those
outward services God requires of us: Sancta sancte, Holiness becomes the
house and worship of God for ever. Psalm.


But take heed that thy superstitious mind do not impute to, nor expect to
find any active or virtuall Holiness, in or from times, places, pictures,
relics, garments, or postures; when that must be, as it only can be, in thy
heart: There is that Sanctum Sanctorum, the immediate residence and operation
of Gods holy Spirit. It is preposterous and vain to imagine or seek it in
other things: if thou have it not there, thou may profane them; they cannot
sanctify thee, nor thy services.

Yet here it is that superstition is prone to dote and flatter it self in its
outward formalities of Holiness (as Lewis the eleventh did in his leaden gods
pardon, and the protection of an Hermit and his Relics, with which he had
fortified and barricadoed himself against the invasions of death, but all in
vain.)

Superstition, I say, which is the Ape and Mimick of Religion, having a Dream
and fancy of external Holiness, when indeed it is the moth and rust both of
true Religion, and proper Holiness; the paint and meretricious beauty of a
Church or Person; the Ivy which by secret and unsensible steps creeps upon and
overspreads its supporter, Religion; stealing away the sap of piety, which
should be in the heart and inward man (in spirit and truth) to the pleasing of
the senses and fancy only, by nourishing them with external and pompous
formalities.

It is indeed a heavy Incubus, when once it has seized upon a Church or
conscience, oppressing it with needless scruples, and ceremonious burdens,
which extremely abate, if not quite take away that beauty, vigor, and majesty
of true Religion and Holiness, which keeps the medium between superstition and
profaneness.

Yet must Holiness have an universal influence upon the whole man, all
faculties, motions, and actions, inward and outward; on the soul and body. In
the Soul there must be a Holiness of mind or understanding, by seeing and
believing the saving truth of God; of the will, by applying, embracing, and
subjecting to it; of the affections (fear, love, joy, anger, hope, sorrow,
zeal, etc.) when they are by Gods Spirit carried to their right objects, and
moderated in their measure to them; thus is truth, rectitude, and order, the
Holiness of the mind, will, and affections.

Further, Holiness must have an influence on the external expressions. Truth
and purity are the Holiness of speech; so chastity, temperance, meekness,
humility, modesty, etc. are the Holiness of our outward manners and
comportments. As Morality improves the affections, and regulates the motions of
the will to virtues, so Holiness beautifies and raises those virtues to
graces; and of the Philosophers Alchimy produces the Christians pure gold:
while it keeps all our actions, desires, and affections, within those bounds of
honor and moderation, which Reason and Religion do require.

Holiness is the Souls fitting for God, its union and tie to God, its
communion with him; in some sort deifying us, and making us partakers of the
divine nature. 2 Pet. 40
What light is to the Sun and day, what clearness to the fountain, what
fruitfulness to the earth, what beauty and health are to the body; that indeed
is Holiness to the soul, to the whole man, and all our actions.

Holiness is the supernatural and universal beauty of the reasonable
creature.

We are corruption, till Holiness make us sound; ruined, till Holiness
repair us; we are barrenness, till that make us fruitful; we are deformity,
till that make us beautiful; we are darkness, till Holiness enlighten us;
dead, till that enliven us; depraved, till that rectify us; we are sin, till
Holiness make us gracious; we are hell, till Holiness make us heavenly; we
are Devils, till Holiness make us Saints; we are damned wretches, till
Holiness sets us in a capacity of salvation, and seeing of God: whose enemies
we are, till Holiness have endeared us; from whom sin would separate us
forever, being filthy and abominable in his sight, till holiness wash and
cleanse us through faith in the blood of Christ.

In the sight of the most holy God, all beauty is deformity, all wisdom folly,
all honor baseness, all plenty poverty, all liberty bondage, all happiness
misery, all life but a death, all our splendid works but dead and damnable,
without holiness.

All words and humane notions are too gross to set forth to you this
spiritual beauty of holiness, like dead colors to paint the light and heat
of the Sun: one beam discovers it better than all the shadows of words or
Pencils could do; so the best knowledge of holiness is experimental in the
soul and conscience.

For it is not only in words, in notion, fancy, or speculation, or outward
shows, but in reality of effects; serious and solid without vanity or
ostentation, or affectation, settled upon indisputable principles, and unmovable
grounds, the revealed will of God: who since he is the author of our being,
nothing is more gratefully just, than that his will should prescribe a rule to
our actions: to which the more we study to apply and conform our selves in all
our actions, the more we follow holiness.

This, this is that frame and temper of our souls and lives, which God our
Father, and Christ our Savior, and the holy Spirit our Sanctifier, the Word
our Instructor, the Sacraments our confirmers, the Saints our forerunners, the
Angels our protectors: all with one voice recommend to us Follow holiness, O
ye sons of men, without which yet shall never see the face of God.

Our most holy faith and profession; the precepts, promises, and hopes
revealed; all our duties of preaching, hearing, reading, meditating, praying,
receiving, fasting, almsgiving, etc. all are to advance this quality of
holiness in us.

This is one great intent of Christ's coming, his living with us, and dying for
us, that he might sanctify, as well as justify us; save us from the power as
well as the punishment of sin; that he might give us a most perfect and
excellent example, and purchase to himself a holy people, Luke 1.74. That we
being delivered from our enemies, might serve him without fear, in
righteousness and holiness all the days of our life, So Titus 2.11. The
grace of God that brings salvation to all men has appeared, teaching us that
denying, etc. 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made to us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.

This is the fire that inflames, and the incense that perfumes all our duties,
sacrifices, and services to God, so as to make them accepted through Christ.

This sets a value on two mites, and a cup of cold water, and a handful of
meal, without which all external pomp and cost of services, is not only not
pleasing, but fulsome, nauseous, and abominable to God, Esaias 1.12 Offer no more
vain oblations; who has required these things at your hands? yet the Law did,
but not in such a manner, with unwashed hands, and unholy hearts, Prove. 21.27.
Even the prayers and sacrifices of the wicked are abomination to God.

The Heathen saw this well, and has admirably expressed it, -- Quin demus
superis --
Compositum jus, fasque animi, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto,
Haec cedo, ut admoveam templis and far litabo.


Holiness is the Ladder of heaven, whose lowest step is humility, and the
highest love, and devotion; by which the soul descends to men in charity, and
ascends to God in piety.

This is that which prepares and disposes the soul for Heaven; without which
Heaven it self would be no Heaven, or not pleasing to us: Better be holy in
hell, if possible than unholy in Heaven; though these two are unseparable,
Holiness and Happiness; differing only in degree, not in kind. For Holiness
is the spark of Happiness, and happiness the flame of holiness.

Holiness is the infancy of happiness, and happiness the complete stature of
holiness.

Holiness is the morning of happiness, and happiness the meridian or
noone-tide of holiness. Holiness is the seed-time, and happiness the full
harvest: For Heaven is not, as grosser minds imagine, only an impunity, or
freedom from punishment, and fruition of pleasures, etc. but rather it
consists in an immunity from sin, and a perfection of holiness.

This is that one thing necessary, and required of the Sons of men, as the
condition of seeing God; it is not without Riches no man shall see God; or
without Beauty, honor, strength, learning, wit, etc. No, but without
holiness: all other additaments thou may dispense with, and yet be happy;
but Holiness is indispensible.

By the paths of holiness only our wearied and wandering Souls may return to
paradise, that happy state and station, whence we fell, and were driven out:
all other ways are severely kept against us, by the flaming sword of Gods
irreconciliable anger and hatred against sin: No unholy thing shall enter
(much less remain) in the holy City; all such shall be cast out, Rev. 21.27.
Psalm. 5.4. Thou art the God that have no pleasure in wickedness, nor shall any
evil dwell with thee. God is of so pure eyes that he cannot behold iniquity,
no more than the Sun can behold darkness; for its appearing turns all
darkness into light; much less can darkness look upon light, or sinners on
God; this is hell neither to see, nor to be seen of God; whose favorable
presence is the life, his absence the death of the soul forever.

But I have done with the first particular, what holiness is.

The second thing is, who must follow it?

Every one that has a soul to save, or a mind to see God. The exclusion is
peremptory and universal; Without holiness no man shall see God: with this no
man need despair, though never so defective for other things; without this no
man may presume, God is no Accepter of persons. Not the rich, nor great, nor
noble, nor valiant, nor beautiful; not the morally civil, not the witty and
learned Scholars, not the deep Statesmen, and dark Politicians, not the
potent Princes and mighty Monarchs of the world; none of them may flatter
themselves to reach Heaven without holiness: God will cast deformity on all
your so much flattered and selfe-admiring beauty, which is deceitful to the
owner, and dangerous to others; unless the beauty of holiness be added to
thee, like Apples of Gold in pictures of silver, which makes thee lovely not
only to good minds on earth, but also to the Angels, and God himself in Heaven.

God will infatuate all your fallacious wisdom and selfe-destroying wit: he
will discover the shallowness of all your imaginary depths and counsels. He
will one day appear the only true wise man, who is wise for his soul to God
and to Eternity, which is none but the holy man.

God will make to vanish all the dreams and shadows of your imaginary
greatness, and flat the swelling sails of your titles of honor, filled only
with popular breath and opinion of men, your selves and others: He will be then
truly and only honorable who has sought Gods honor, more than his own,
whom God will admit to his sacred presence and favor: this is none but the
holy man.

Nay God will cast contempt upon Princes, as the Psalmist speaks, and in stead
of Robes of Majesty, they shall be covered with their own confusion as with a
cloak, unless they be sacred in heart as well as in title; consecrated to God
as well as exalted above men; except there be the inward anointing of Gods holy
Spirit, as well as the outward of the Prelate. As they are near to God in
greatness and place, so they must be in grace and holiness, if ever they hope
to attain to glory and happiness. Even in Princes God tells Samuel, 1 Samuel 16
He looks not at the outward appearance, but at the heart.

That, that indeed is truly Sacred Majesty in Princes, when being Gods
Vicegerents on earth, they do that which they are persuaded in their
conscience God himself or Christ would do, if they reigned visibly as King on
earth: when being Vmbratiles Dij, the back parts and shadows of God, they most
fully represent in a humane model, the divine perfections.

Certainly nothing sets forth Princes to a more divine honor, love and
veneration, than their exemplary virtues and holiness.

Hic animus, atque hae sunt generosi Principis arts. This even they, the
greatest of men, must follow, since they are but Mortales Dij, and must die
like men; unless they mean to come infinitely below the meanest of their good
Subjects in the other world, whom in this they so much exceed.

Indeed all of us, both great and small must follow holiness, since all have
relation to so holy a Creator, to so holy a Redeemer, and to so holy a
Comforter, being Subjects to the King of Saints.

Yea, we are, or should be the habitation and Temple wherein God will delight
to dwell, 1 Cor. 3.17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him will God
destroy.

Nay we are the Heaven where God resides: every Saint (says Saint Bernard) is
Gods Sanctuary, and every holy heart a Heaven; therefore that is called the
Heaven of Heavens where the Saints are; in every of whom God dwells more
gloriously than in any material Heaven.

In all callings and states of life holiness is necessary; every action should
be a step to arrive nearer to God: Holiness is the poor man's riches, the
mean man's honor, the weak man's strength, the banisheds home, the prisoners
freedom, the young man's glory, the old man's crown, the sick man's health, the
dying man's hope and life: In a word it is all in all to all men dying and
living. The weight of this text lies upon All, to move them to follow
holiness, and those especially who have most impediments and diversions, yet
their actions are most exemplary, whether they be good or bad.

O when power and piety, greatness and goodness, height and holiness meet
together, and make up one Magistrate, one Minister, one King, how divine, how
glorious, how attractive, and commanding all hearts to a love or fear, are
their lives and actions! Like a noble constellation which consists of many
stars, no less benign and propitious for their influence, than eminent and
conspicuous for their light.

And if I were to speak to men of my own calling, superiors or equals (as I
see I am likely to do to some) I should with all humble and respective
earnestness recommend Holiness to their hearts, thoughts, words, lives,
gestures, looks, and conversations. Etiam vultu laeditur sanctitas: Haughty
and supercilious looks, and insolent comportment, much more such speech and
actions mis-become the holiness and humility of our profession.

There are holy orders, and holy duties, to which we are admitted; and there is
a special ceremony of consecration used for Bishops. O let us make good the
holiness of our titles and function, by the hloinesse of our conversation.

Let not the world reproach us, as some do the vanity and arrogance of the
Popes, who challenge to themselves the title of his Holiness; by way of
eminency (or emphasis) when indeed it is (say they) by Antiphrasis, or
contrariety, being for the most part solecismes and contradictions to their
names, as he said of Probus, vir minime probus.

O let us never vainly imagine, that there is a nearer way to the Clergies
honor, than by the Clergies Holiness. Though Holiness even despised as a
Jewel under foot, has its true and internal honor and value still.

But O let not our preaching, our writing, our living any way decry, damp, and
discountenance Holiness, which is Gods honor, and the Churches honor, and
must be our both honor and happiness.

O let us not vainly contend for an imputed and relative Holiness in
Churches, and tables, and vestures, and gestures, and neglect it in our hearts
and lives. Our word must be that of Saint Paul, Phil. 3.17.
Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ, that is, of Holiness, which was
Christ's way.

This, not only the better world, which are extremely ashamed and grieved for
the contrary, but even the worser, dissolute, and debauched sort of people
exact of us, whom we harden extremely against our doctrines by our contrary
manners; and who are glad by the faults and scandalls of Ministers (holy men as
they should be) to justify or excuse their own vicious and unholy lives.

The higher our calling raises us, the nearer should it bring us to God, and
the more should the face of our lives like Moses his, shine with the beams of
holiness while we daily converse with God.

Nothing more justifies, and assures the truth of our faith and doctrine, than
the suitable holiness of our lives. (let not that be verified of us, which
Jeremy complained of in his time, Ier. 23.15.
From the Prophets is profaneness gone into all the Land. But rather let us
take Saint Paul's good advice to Timothy, Thou O man of God fly these things, 1 Timothy 6.11.
and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness,
etc.

3 We come now to the third particular, how we must follow Holiness.

1 For the measure how far, to the height, aim at perfection; anticipate thy
Heaven as much as may be here on earth; emulate and strive to equal thy
pattern for parts, though not for degrees; Be ye holy as your heavenly Father
is holy: he has nothing of true holiness, who thinks he has enough, or may
have too much. Nimietates and excessus affectuum Deo debentur: All the excess
of our vehement and unsatisfied desires should run this way after God and
Holiness.

2 For the manner how: I answer, 1 Follow it universally in all points; the
same tie lies upon thee in any one action which does in all: Holiness is the
salt which must season all, so far as humane infirmity can attain. Thou
would not have some sparks of Hell mixed with thy joys of Heaven: O strive
that no sin (if possible) may allay thy Holiness and integrity, Be ye holy in
all manner of conversation, and perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord.
1 Pet. 1.15. 2 Cor. 7.1.


2 Follow it earnestly, with vehement affections, not cold, languishing,
lukewarm and indifferent; content not thy self with a few posting and
perfunctory prayers; easy and lazy formalities of duties, obesae animae, like
fat and pursie souls that cannot follow either fast, or far: But rise to
that intensivenesse in following Holiness, with which the Covetous man
follows his gain, the Ambitious his honor, the Voluptuous his pleasure;
follow it with the same eagerness, wherewith thou have formerly followed sin,
the world, and the Devil; Follow Holiness with the same flagrancy and
contention, as wicked men do persecute and oppose it. They have their (...),
so must thou, but sancta and pia persecutio, a sacred and commendable
prosecution.

3 Follow it cheerfully, not in a tedious drooping and dejected manner which
brings an ill report on Gods ways; no man has more right to moderate mirth
(which is the only true) than he which is in the way of Holiness, and indeed
of happiness. O let not that be a burden to our Spirits here, which must be
the joy and crown and constant disposition of our souls in heaven.

The deadness and indispositions from within, which we are Subject unto, are
not to be imputed to the ways of holiness, but to the weakness of our
natures; as the lothnesse to use exercise proceeds from the ill humors, which
oppress the Spirits in a diseased body, and not from the inconvenience of
exercise, which is the way to dispel those ill humors, and to recover health
and agility. For the difficulties and discouragements from without, they are
not much to be considered by any, but those that know not what is the worth of
a Soul, the weight of Eternity, the comfort of a good conscience, and of the
hopes of Heaven, in the sight and fruition of God.

4 Follow it exactly and closely, not at large and at distances a far off, as
the Disciples followed Christ to be crucified, Ephesians. 5.15. walk ((...))
strictly and precisely in a sound and Apostolical sense. There will be
rimulae, leakes and flanes of infirmities, and daily incursions in all our
lives; but let there not be ( hiatus) wide breaches and gapings of presumption:
keep not willingly any distance or dissimilitude from Christ, be not ashamed or
discountenanced to come near to him and to be like to him in all points.

Follow holiness, not timide and pudibunde; it is pudendus pudor, a shame
infinitely to be ashamed of, that any Chistian should be ashamed to be, or to
be thought too holy; but that he must now and then dare to swear, and ly, and
talk obscenely and profanely, or live riotously, that he may not seem too
precise. Can thou be too fit for heaven, or too far from sin and hell?

5 Follow Holiness speedily, begin betimes: all life is lost that is not spent
in a holy course of living; it is a dead life, nay a damning life without
amendment. All our life is too little to live well; the Sun cannot rise too
early, except to a sluggard; nor can holiness be too soon begun in thy heart,
except thou love to sleep in thy sin: It were happy if with Jeremy and John
Baptist we were sanctified from the Womb and Font, from the dawning and
morning of our lives, but, O jam clarum mane fenestras intrat.
Romans 13.12. It is high time to rise from sin and follow Holiness, the day of
our short life is far spent in following vanity and things that cannot
profit: the night of death is at hand, o make haste to live, and to live
holily, that thou may not come short of dying happily. Breve sit quod
turpiter audes.


How many have thou known cut off in their youth and strength, and confidence
of living, and it may be in their purposes and essays of amendng.

Many of us have one foot in the grave, through the course of age, and
infirmities that attend it; nay, even of the strongest of us; we may say as
David said to Jonathan, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, there is
but a step between thee and death, yea, and hell too; and yet many of us not
yet gone one step of serious resolutions, to follow Holiness, and forsake our
old sins.

O dally not with thy life, with thy soul, with hell, and eternal death:
delays are extreme dangerous where the opportunity is short, and the omission
is irreparable: Remember on this moment depends eternity. Death follows us,
and sin follows us, and our own evil consciences, and hell, and the Devil
too will follow and overtake us, if we fly not from them by following Christ
where ever he goes in the ways of Holiness. O learn of David, Psalm 119.60
I made haste and prolonged not the time to turn my feet into thy ways.

6 Follow it sincerely, Simulata Sanctitas* duplex iniquitas. Hypocrisy is a
double and twisted impiety. Its not only a not serving God, but a mocking of
him, and it shall have a double condemnation for the want of holiness which
should be, and for the ly and pretension of what was not; nothing is more
contrary to the simplicity of Gods Nature, and the truth and integrity of his
Word and intentions to men, than simulation and hypocrisy. Nothing has more
clouded, ecclipsed and deformed the beauty of holiness, than the impudent
pretentions of some to it; who like Apes and Monkies are the more deformed and
ridiculous, because in some things they resemble the shape, and imitate the
actions of men, but want their reason, Galat. 6.7. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, what a man sowes that he shall reap: He that sowes only shadows, and
shows, and formalities of holiness, shall reap only shadows and shows and
dreams of peace, comfort, and happiness. The deceiver will at last be most
deceived. O be good in good earnest, or not at all; Lose not so much time and
pains to act a part of holiness, which will but improve thy misery: what is
it to be applauded of men, and abhorred of God? What is the hope of the
hypocrite (says he in Job) when God shall take away his soul?

7 And lastly, follow holiness constantly, not desultorie, lamely, brokenly,
and abruptly, by fits only; but with a steady and resolute course, as the Sun
moves, neither going back, nor standing still. Perseverance is the crown of
graces, and gets the crown of Glory: thou expectest God should make thee
incessantly happy in his Eternity; O be thou holy ( in tua aeternitate as Saint
Bernard) in thy limited and short eternity.

Consider how noble a pattern thou have in Christ thy Savior, who deferred
his own glory, till he had finished thy salvation. Consider how great
encouragements thou have, how sweet comforts for the present, how ample reward
and expectation for the future.

O let no difficulties take thee off, nor errors divert thee, let them rather
whet and exasperate thy resolutions and endeavors; let no superstition deceive
thee, nor persecution deter thee; having begun in the spirit, do not end
in the flesh.

Remember thou have always a viaticum, means of refreshing near thee; The
holy word and promises, and Sacraments to relieve thee; the holy Spirit to
assist thee, and help thy infirmities.

Thou have Gods holy day wherein to be specially vacant to holy duties, and the
souls improvement; by the careful sanctifying whereof, there is no doubt, but
the pious soul is better enabled to see God here, in his Word and works, and
hereafter in his glory and presence: we have also praeclara exempla, of holy
men and women, Saints in all ages, which have gone before us in the ways of
holiness to that state of happiness, through all the oppositions of men and
devils.

Heroic and invincible followers of holiness, now glorious and immortal
possessors of happiness. Praeclara spectantibus mediocria praestare pudori
esse debet: having so noble and inviting examples set before us, it is a shame
for us either to follow them not at all, or with weak and slender imitations.

4 Wherefore must we thus follow Holiness? This brings me to the last point,
the second general, the motive or inducement, without which no man shall see
God. Holiness is that alone which makes us capable of the beatifick vision.

But this is a point of so high speculation, of so serious consideration for
the obtaining or loosing of it, of so infinite comfort is the vision and
fruition of God; of so infinite honor, the separation from him, that it would
far exceed the time, and my speech, to set it forth to you as it deserves.

Only this short glimpse we may take of it, That there are many intervenient
fruits of holiness worth our ambition here, by which we see God, though dimly,
and at distance in his Word and promises, in his Sacraments, in his Son our
Savior, in his works, in his servants, in the motions of his Spirit, in the
ways of his providence, mercies and judgments. To all which Holiness only
cleares and enlightens and enables the soul so as to see God, to enjoy and
admire him. This makes oculatam animam, an eyed and seeing mind, which
otherways is blind and dead, Mat. 5. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
and they only do and shall see God. But O when we come to see not his
footsteps, or back parts, or shadow, or hands, but his face, by an immediate
intuition of his Majesty, how shall we be filled with glory and happiness? O
praeclarum and invidendum spectaculum!


In this life indeed (as God told Moses) no man can see his face and live;
Scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria. But in heaven, we shall live by the
sight and light of God. Sectator sanctitatis perficietur a gloria. If then it
be any comfort to see the light of the Sun, the beauty of Heaven and earth, or
the face of an indulgent Father, an excellent friend, or a gracious Prince, who
is as an Angel of God, what is it to see God himself?

O What a Sea and inundation of unspeakeable joy and happiness must flow in
upon the soul, to behold the brightness of Gods presence, the glory of his
Majesty, the beauty of his goodness, the treasures of his wisdom, the
immensity of his power, the amplitude of his mercy, the perfection of his
holiness and infinite happiness! And last of all, the eternal wonder of his
free and unchangeable love to us, so much below him, so as nothing in
comparison of him!

In thy light (says the Psalmist) we shall see light; the way is by the light
of grace, to come to the light of glory; by the beauty of holiness to come to
the perfection of happiness, which is the sight of God: which what it is we
shall best tell when we come to it. I must now leave it to the work of Gods
Spirit in your devouter hearts, to consider more largely and sublimely of this
point.

Only give me leave by way of conclusion to appeal to your piety, wisdom,
and experience, Whether the ways of holiness be not worth the following,
which end in such happiness, as is beyond expressing: Whether it be not a
vanity, folly, and extreme madness for men and women, that are built for
eternity, and capable of the highest good, so much to neglect their souls,
their God, and their happiness by following their sins, the worldly pleasures,
profits, and honors, with the neglect of holiness? The Devil, the evil
world, and a man's own corrupt heart, will allow him to be any thing, so he be
not holy: let him be rich, and fair, and strong, and great, and honorable,
and witty, and eloquent, and civil, and politic, and knowing even in divine
mysteries, any thing, so as he be not holy. All these things (as the Devil
said to Christ) will I give thee, if thou will be unholy still, and like my
self: Holiness is that alone the Devil wants, and despaires of himself, and
that he most envies us the sons of men; because he knows it sets us in a way
of happiness so infinitely above him.

But what our Savior said, Matthew. 8.22. to the young man that desired respite
to bury his dead Father, Let the dead bury the dead, but follow thou me. This
give me leave to say to all you that hear me this day; let dead hearts bury
themselves in dead comforts, dead honors, dead pleasures, dead hopes, etc. but
follow thou Christ, follow Holiness.

I further appeal to the justice of your piety, and goodness, Whether the
ways of holiness, and the followers of them deserve to be derided, despised,
discountenanced, and discouraged so much as they are by the proud, profane,
sensual, and superstitious minds of the world? whether they which despise
holiness do not withal despise their own souls, their God and Savior?
whether they forsake not their own mercies, who follow lying vanities? whether
this be not to glory in our shame, to be ashamed of that which is the glory of
God, and the reasonable creature?

Lastly, I appeal to your royal wisdom, and the rest of your Noble and
Christian Prudence and Piety, Whether those that follow peace and Holiness,
and are fitted to a capacity of seeing the great God and King of Heaven in his
Glory, be not also the worthiest and fittest to see the face and enjoy the
favors of Christian Kings on earth?

These, these are they that best know the duty, honor, and fidelity, they owe
to Majesty; and make a conscience to pay it, because it is a point of Holiness
so to do. These are the propugnacula and munimenta regni and Ecclesiae, as was
said of Saint Ambrose, the strength, honor, and security of the Church and
State, under God and his Majesty's care and pious providence. These are in some
sort, the ( tutelares Genii) protectors of his Majesty's person, health, life,
Crown, Queen, and posterity; while they daily lift up pure hands and holy
hearts to the God of Heaven, for his Majesty's safety, honor, and happiness.

These are like Moses and Elias, the Horsemen and Chariots of Israel; these
have power with God by their prayers, counsels, and good examples; they stand
in the gap, and hinder the inundation of sin and judgments. To these we owe
under God the enjoyment of our peace, plenty, safety, and Religion, and of the
blessing of blessings temporal, a pious and gracious Prince.

O then let not Holiness (I beseech you) be banished, as I believe it is not,
from your hearts, your words, your houses, your lives, from your favor and
good opinion, from your service; nor from your Court: Let there not be wanting
in this place Joseph's, and Mordecays, and Nehemiahs, and Daniels, men in whom
is the Spirit of the holy God, as that Heathen Prince said of Daniel.

There is a Book called The holy Court, which might be useful to Courtiers,
if it were not unsafe, being larded with many false and frivolous opinions, and
superstitious practices: It will be your honor and happiness to act what he
sought to write.

O follow not sin and vanity, or strife and contention, or lubricity and
impurity, or vainglory, etc. these will cast you out from the presence of
God, and betray you to utter darkness: And what considerate mind can with
patience think of being ever separated from the fountain of its being, life
and happiness? O what infinite darkness, necessity, and horror must for ever
oppress that soul! Holiness only is that divine magnetic power, which
draws the soul to God, and God to the soul, never quiet till it be united to
the fountain, its virtue.

I know your piety cannot but consider often and seriously, That the greatest of
you will be one day like Sampson (when his fatal hair was cut) weak, and
impotent and like other men; your eyes blinded, your great strength departed,
the chains of darkness will involve you, the worms will be your fetters, and
the grave your prison.

O while you live follow holiness, that when you die (as Sampson did) you may
quite destroy those enemies, which living you could not; that death may be an
end of your sin and mortality, but the beginning and consummation of your
endless happiness in the sight of God.

That when the eyes of your bodies shall be shut to this world, and all things
desirable here; the eye of your soul ( that rational and eternal eye) may be
opened to see and enjoy God, and reign with Christ for ever.

That you and we though in different degrees, may then receive that Crown of
immortal glory, which is free from cares and crosses, from fears and
jealousies, from sleep, and soule-breaking distractions, but full of a divine
and constant glory, serenity, joy, and eternal security. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE IVDGES AT CHELMSFORD.
ZECH. 8.16. These are the things ye shall do; speak ye every man the truth
to his Neighbor: execute the judgment of truth and peace in your Gates.


THE Customary solemnity of public Assise, and administration of Justice, has
not more of state and policy, than of safety and piety, in this; That not only
the gentry and commons, but your wisdom and gravity (Right Honorable and
Reverend) disdain not to receive advice from the Pulpit, before you go to the
Bench; and hear Gods charge to you, before you give your charge to others:
Hereby not so much to conciliate a greater reverence and authority to to your
persons and proceedings, by amusing the minds of the populacy, and awing their
consciences, with the pomp and formality of religion (as those Heathen
Lawgivers ( Solon, Lycurgus, Numa, and others) are said to have done) but
seriously and in the fear of God to ascend with Moses first to the Mount, and
talk with God, before you judge and teach the people.

Esaias 5.20.
To the Law and to the Testimony; these will inform you the will of God, which
is the highest law and perfectest rule to examine truth, to measure justice,
and to maintain peace; which though they flow from that pure and eternal
fountain of essential truth, justice, and peace, most clearly and plentifully
in the conduit of his Word; yet are ready to contract much soil and dregs in
the vessels of men's hearts, and course of humane actions; so that the best have
need often to refine and renew their minds, by a fresh information of their
judgments, concerning the will of God, and resolution of their wills to do it.

His Word, no doubt, teaches the best politics; his precept and example show
the happiest platform of government, whose almighty power is so tempered with
wisdom and goodness, That as he made at first the state and frame of all
things full of beauty, order, and harmony, by number, weight, and measure; so
he still preserves and governes the great Commonwealth of all creatures in
heaven and earth, with that just proportion of power and goodness, as keeps
the general peace of things; and keeps off that confusion to which the
variety and contrariety of particular natures seem to tend. So that who so
will judge and govern aright, shall not need to use those Machiavellian
engines, lying, fraud, simulation and injustice; mysteries indeed not of true
policy, but of iniquity, unreasonable reasons of state, which the impotency and
folly of wicked men pretend as necessary; when indeed ^^ey tend not to the
establishing but undermining of States, and ruin both of governors and
governed.

We need go no further than this Text, to see what God requires and teaches
us as best, and necessary for the well ordering of humane societies; both for
private and publi, ke or judiciary proceedings.

1 In private, that every one speak the truth to his neighbor; this would
stop many injuries and complaints with which the public courts are pestred.

2 In public and judiciary proceedings; every one promote the execution of
truth and peace in the gates.

1 The people and governed. By their presence, obedience, assistance, by their
testimony and evidence of word and oath for the search and finding out of
truth. By their hands and power for the maintaining of peace both in the safety
of the person of the Magistrate, and execution of that ^ust sentence which they
give.

2 The Magistrate and persons governing, 1 by their knowledge of what is
judgment and justice. 2. By their authority and power, to execute what they
know is just. 3. By their integrity in the execution, according to truth and
peace.

For these three things are (you know) necessary in Magistrates, and those
minores Dii, inferior mortal gods:

1. Skill to govern power. 2. Power to arm their skill. 3. Will ^^ actuate
both uprightly: That neither ignorance breed error, and so injustice: nor
weakness, contempt and opposition: nor corruptnesse, injury and oppression.

What is knowledge of truth and equity, if there be not courage and conscience
to speak it?

What is skill, courage, and conscience, if destitute of power, to execute what
they know, and decree?

Fundamentum pacis veritas, stabilimentum utriusque potestas; Truth is the
foundation of peace, and power the support of both truth, and peace, which
without authority grow feeble, and despised: as authority not grounded upon
equity, and guided by truth, proves violence, tyranny, and oppression; and
becomes not a file, sive, and schreene to separate the rust from the metal,
the bran from the flower, the chafe from the grain, the vile and refuse from
the choice and precious; but mola, and malleus plebis, the maul and mill, that
violently and promiscuously grindes and beats to pieces all that comes under
its rigor, and weight.

Your Honors and wisdoms I presume are provided with all three.

Power and authority, I am sure, you have the highest and amplest from the King
of Heaven, by the mediate appointment of our gracious King on earth.

Skill, and knowledge you have through Gods blessing by the study and
experience in the laws.

Uprightness and integrity, we charitably pray, and hope you have from the
grace of God, and the tenderness of your own consciences.

Indeed you have all from God; whose word has ordained your power, and
regulated this by just law, and exacts a conscience in executing these laws.

So that by attending to Gods word you may confirm your authority, increase
your knowledge, and incite your consciences.

The judgment in all points is the Lords: as power, justice* and truth in your
judgments flow from him; so will they, as rivers, return back to him in your
reckonings and accounts.

Happy is it when every one of these, as so many rivulets, contribute their
strength to the public current of justice; that so judgment may run down,
as a noble and mighty stream, and know no stop or resistance.

That every one being a lover of truth and peace, the first and severest
censurer and judge of himself, and his own actions; you may with the more
patience and cheerfulness attend to what I shall out of Gods word with all
modesty and due observance, but yet truth and faithfulness endeavor by the
discharge of my own conscience, to inform some, to reform others, and at
least to confirm yours, by stirring up your prudent minds by way of
remembrance of what is just and true, and tends to your own and others peace.

Which since you know, and have authority to do, happy are you if you do them.

These are the things you shall do, etc.

Two things are considerable in the words.

1. The form of the charge or command, These are the things ye shall do.

2. The duty or matter.

1. Private, personal, and universal to all men, speak every man the truth to
his neighbor.

2. Public, political, and special to Magistrates; Execute the judgment of
truth and peace in your gates.

We will begin with the duties themselves, and reserve the form of the command
to the last place, when we shall apply the duties to every one as they
concern them.

1. The first branch of the duty and command is private, personal, and
universal to all men,

Veriloquentia.] Speak ye the truth every man to his neighbor.

1. What we must do, speak the truth.

2. Who, every man.

3. To whom, to his neighbor.

1. Speak the truth:

Man is, (...), a sociable creature.

Speech is the means of society and commerce. The common change and coin. The
mine of truth is Gods, the mint and coynage of it. Speech must have his Image
and superscription, the stamp and impression of truth. It is capital offense
of the highest Majesty to counterfeit or falsify this by a lie.

By Reason we come near the Angels; by reason and speech both we exceed the
beasts; by truth speaking we come nearest to God, and get farthest from the
Devil, the father of lies.

Speech is the peculiar glory of men; and veracity of good men, and Christians:
It is the glory of God that his word is truth, agreeing with his eternal mind
and intention. The glory of man is to come nearest God.

Speech is the glass and reflection of our souls: words are the characters,
Ambassadors, and Interpreters of our minds, which must give by a true
reflection, a true information of our meaning to others.

The soul of words is truth, separated from that they are (...) cadaverosa
verba, rotten, corrupt, and unsavory words.

To commend Truth in knowing or speaking, is to commend the Sun; Sol est lux
mundi, veritas mentis.

As the Sun seated in the heaven, from thence derives his beams to all things:
so truth is placed in the heaven of man, the understanding, from thence it must
shine forth into our words. As light is to our eyes, for guiding our steps; so
is truth to our tongues, for ordering our speech. Solemn e mundo tollunt, qui
veritatem e verbis.

Lactant.
Veritas caeleste mentis pabulum; Truth is that pure, heavenly, and immortal
food of the reasonable soul. A Liar feeds on the dust, as the Serpents curse,
nay on the ashes of hell.

He that is in an error, is in an eclipse or mist, through the common
imbecility of humane understanding: but he that is in a way of lying, is in a
night of utter darkness, in the chains of everlasting darkness, with the
Devil and his Angels. He carries his Devil and lying spirit about him, as
Ahabs false Prophets, and his Hell within him in his conscience.

Giving the lie is, in point of honor, an offense of the highest nature to
ingenuous minds; because it reproacheth a man either of Athiesme, or extreme
baseness and cowardice; that either he ownes no God, or which is worse, fears
more to offend man than God, not daring to speak the truth.

Synesius de Regno most elegantly, (...), Truth is the honor and nobleness of
words, and it argues a generous mind to speak it: though alone, yet truth, as
the Sun is fair; though displeasing (and odium parit) though dangerous, and
grande praesagium mali (as Lactant.) though desperate, vitamque impendere vero;
Nec propter vitam vivendi perdere causam: It is folly to prefer life before
the end of life, which is the knowing, love, and manifesting of truth.

Speak it therefore, and fear not. Veritas nihil erubescit, nisi solum
abscondi: Truth is ashamed of nothing but to be hidden.

But let it be Verum, not verisimile, not probabile, but certum and compertum,
(...), a clear pregnant and well assured truth; not what is taken upon flying
rumors, suspicions, or envious disaffections. For to affirm as certain, what
is dubious, and only probable, is out of doubt a lie.

We must not, like Balaams Ass, speak what we understand not, nor affirm
what we know not.

Therefore our speech must not be rash, precipitant, tumultuary, and
passionate; but calm, and deliberate, issuing from a heart without prejudice,
partiality, or injust interests; as silver streams from a crystal fountain,
flowing without any mud or tincture of malice, or oblique and sinister designs.

Our minds also must be prudent, steady, and reserved, not (...), credulous,
like soft wax taking easily any impressions. That of Epicharmus is safe, (...).
Keep always the reins and curb of diffidence and sobriety in thy mind and
tongue.

(...), Basil.
the way to truth has many turnings, and needs a capacious mind to find out
the right. Speak not what the show and superficies, or skin presents; but what
the inside, substance, and marrow of things discover to our judgments.

There is veritas entis, quae est mentis quae videtur. The first we must
always seek to attain. The second we must not fail to affirm: else it is a
lie, Inst. lib. 6
which Lactant. defines, mendacium est cum linguae animi interpres a sensu and
cogitatione discordat. When the tongue agrees not with the thoughts.

Ep 95.
S. Austin tells us: and non vera fideliter, and vera infideliter dici possunt. A
man may speak what is truth, yet falsely; and what is false, yet truly: such a
one is not mendax, but temerarius; nec tam fallit quam fallitur: he is not a
liar, but a rash speaker.

August.
The rule is, Cum cogitare secundum veritatem semper non possumus, at loquamur
secundum cogitata: Our first happiness and care is to conform our thoughts to
the truth of things; our second, to conform our words to the truth of our
thoughts.

Octa.
Multi taedio investigandae veritatis ad proximos divertunt errores; Many out
of a lazy, or credulous disposition, think it tedious to search out the way of
truth, and so turn to the next and easiest path of error and probabilities:
(...), as Thucidides speaks; What we know uncertainly, speak not as certain:
what we know assuredly, speak not as dubious, and with suspense, and by halfes.

For, as we must speak truth only; so the whole truth, when expected and
required.

Quantum supprimitur quaesitae veritatis, supplet mendacium; As much as we
defalk, or smother, of an inquired Truth, which we pretend fully to discover,
we make up by a tacit Lie; Which is an interpretative denial of Truth.

When thou know and believe a truth, in swear the truth. Truth has
native strength sufficient, and needs not the volleys or barricadoes of oaths
and imprecations.

Swearing is more than God requires, or truth needs, or ingenuous minds will
exact; or will consist with thy peace and a good conscience.

Let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; Mat. 5.3^.
what is more than these is sin: That is the simplicity and plainness of our
Saviors prescripts, and bounds of speaking, even Truth it self.

Swear not at all; no not to the truth, in ordinary and familiar converse,
except in weighty matters of great concernment in private, or in public and
judiciary attestations, when called to it. August. ep. 224.
Ne jurandi facilitate in perjurium prolabamur, praeceptum est, ne juremus
omnino; He is in the confines and next step to false-swearing, and perjury,
who accustomes himself to swear, though truly, in trivial matters.

Bono viro constans vita loco juramenti est; The credit and faithfulness of an
honest man, has the force of an oath.

Liars only need to swear, and for the most part do; whose vanity or falsity
has bred them this just unhappiness, that when they speak the truth, they
think they shall not be believed, unless they swear it: Though he that
deserves to be disbelieved in his truth speaking, merits not belief, though
he swear; For, if he fear nor a lie, he will not an oath.

This customary swearing is not more vain and needless, than a spreading and
epidemicall evil, such as the Land mournes under; being grown to that which
Salvian complains of, in his time; Non criminis, sed sermonis genus per Deum,
per Christum jurare, consuetudine jurandi videtur: Swearing seems to most, not
a heinous and weighty sin, but a formality and complement of speech, through
the custom and commonnesse of swearing. Cl. Alex.
(...); Truth is of it self clear enough, and needs not the vehemence and
asseveration of an oath: Which renders it more suspected, and the hearer more
diffident, when he sees one fears not an oath, nor makes conscience of vain
swearing, which is a sin as well as lying.

As we need but speak it, so speak it plainly and clearly. Truth, like the
Sun, joys most in it self; its own opennesse, simplicity and cleerenesse: as
we ought not to swear it, so we must not with multitude of words clog and
cumber it; studying rather to cloud and involve it, than to clear and explain
it, which is the end of speech. The contrary is but the cunning and artifice of
many, who, though they dare not ((...)) flatly, and with open forehead fight
against Truth, yet with their ((...), as Socrates speaks) fetches, dresses,
ambages, circles, labarynths, perplexed and purposely intricate terms and
discourses, they obliquely fight against the Truth with its own arms,
Eloquence: studying to confound and lose the capacities of simpler minds, by
using a sea of words to a drop of truth.

Such tongues and men, like Ignes fatui, intend not to give light to a matter,
but only to amuse and lead out of the right way, ignorant and well meaning
minds: Which is indeed but a more subtle, fine, and sophistical way of lying:
An injury of justice and truth with applause and ostentation; which they hope
to steal away, in that mist and obscurity of words, which by their voluble and
juggling tongues they cast upon them.

The practice and fault not so much of private men, as of those Tertullusses,
many public Orators; whose profession calls them to the bar, and pleas, to be
Vindices veritatis, Advocates of truth and justice; whose unhappy tongues, and
pernicious eloquence, often times so darken and entangle truth and a just cause,
which they know to be such, that they gain it with as much injustice as
eloquence; whose mercenary and venall souls and tongues, count their greatest
fee and reward to come from the purses of their clyents, not from the
conscience of asserting a truth, and vindicating a just cause.

Certainly, it had been a blessing to these men, to have been dumb; better not
speak at all, than not the truth; or with applause and vain glory, to speak
nothing but specious and plausible lies. These are not Pleaders, but Seducers;
as Bernard, Bonorum ingeniorum insignis est indoles in verbis verum amare,
August.
non verba: It argues a mind not less ingenuous than pious, to make words
subservient to truth; not to subdue and captivate truth to words: To count the
clearing and prevailing of truth the noblest reward of speaking, not to make
truth the booty and prey of speech. Veritas saepe offuscatur eloquentia: Tertul.
That power and prevalency of speaking that some men have, should be as
bellows* (...), to blow up, and resuscitate to a flame and splendour, the
sparks of an obscured truth; not to damp and oppress them, by casting the
ashes and soot of dry and empty words upon them.

This then is our common duty, to speak the truth; a known, at least a
believed truth, freely and sully, without fear or partiality: Simply and
nakedly, without swearing and imprecations: Heartily and ingenuously without
artifice or studied obscurity.

2 Who? Every man: No man has a Patent or privilege to lie; or a dispensation
for truth speaking in any cause whatsoever.

Not for himself or any advantage may accrue to him: Mendacium semper inutile,
A liar is always a loser; for he sels the truth and his soul into the
bargain, when the whole world cannot countervaile either of them.

August.
Not for his friend, which is as his own soul: Nemo potest esse veraciter
amicus hominis, nisi qui fuerit primitus veritatis: He will easily prove a
false friend, that will falsify the truth for his friend. Magis amica veritas,
must be a good man's Maxim: He that is false to God, cannot be firm to me;
as Constantine the Great said. That friend that will be lost by truth
speaking, or not lying, is not worth the keeping. He values his friendship far
too dear, that will have me purchase it with the waste of my conscience, and
hazard of the love of God and loss of my soul.

Not for Parents or kindred: Our nearest alliance and cognation is to God;
(...), whose essence and will is Truth; His offspring we are; we must not
break our respects to Him, to pleasure any relations, which are infinitely
below Him.

Not for the Magistrate, or his Prince: A good Prince will not require it; an
evil does not deserve that a man should so far injure his soul, by rebelling
against the most High, whose Kingdom is over all, even Kings themselves.

Not for his Country: By lying to banish a man's self from heaven, which is a
Christian souls true, dearest, and eternal Country.

Not for his Religion: A lie cannot advance true religion, no more than water
inflame fire, or darkness illustrate light, or hell promote heaven. It is a
lame religion, or a halting heart at least, which professes it so, as to stand
in need of the crutches of lying and equivocation.

Not for God himself, and his glory; Whereof he is so vigilant and powerful
a maintainer; that he needs not the Devils aid. Will ye accept the person of
the Almighty, Job 13.9.
or lie for him? Do you think to serve him by sinning against him, or please
him by offering an abomination? This is as if one would pretend to secure a
Prince by treason; or defend him by striking at him: For every liar does strike
at the face of God, which is, Truth; by which he appears to us, and is seen
by us.

Nay not for Truth it self; which cannot be strengthened, but enfeebled and
hindered by the addition of a lie: as a strong and sound arm or leg, by
needless splinters and bands: or wholesome meat, by mixture and infusion of
poison. Mendaciorum natura est, Lact.
ut cohaerere non possunt; Lies cannot easily be so glued or sodered together,
but their flawes and gapings will be detected: much less Truth and Lies;
which are more heterogeneall, than iron and clay: old bottles and new wine: a
new piece and an old garment. What agreement has light and darkness, God and
Beliall? 2 Cor. 6.15.


So that it is every man's duty, in all the course and turnings of life, to
steer his speech by the Compass of Truth; which by a heavenly sympathy, tends
it self, and must always carry us to that Cynosure, the first and immovable
Pole of Truth, which is in God.

Lying and falsity is the rich and Noble man's shame and dishonor: Truth and
veracity is the meanest man's riches and glory. The greatness of the one will
not bear him out in lying; nor the necessity of the other excuse him.

Veritas animae sponsa: Every reasonable creature should be affianced and
wedded to truth, by so firm and indissoluble a band, as will suffer no
estrangement, much less divorce. It is the adultery of the soul to embrace an
error; and of the lips to speak a lie.

Every man must speak truth: So much as we lie, we are not men, that is, the
sons of God and Truth; but devils, the children of him, who is the father of
lies and liars.

3 To whom? To his Neighbor. But who is my Neighbor? Whomsoever the affairs
of life, and civil conversation do join us unto. Indeed we are all, Proximi
natura, near Neighbors by the proximity of common nature, of the same stock
and extraction. More nearly we are Neighbors, by the consent and fruition of
the same Laws, Country, Government, Commonwealth and public good. Many are
neighbors by a vicinity of place and cohabitation: many by community of
business and employment. As we are Christians, we are all Proximi Religione,
Fide, Numine, Redemptore; and should be affectu and charitate, we have a
neerenesse, nay samenesse of Religion, God, Savior, Faith, Hope, And affection
one to another.

These are obligations enough of neernesse and vicinity to tie us each to
other, under the relation of Neighbors; when the least of them may not be
violated with a lie, without a great sin and unworthiness. We may not lie to
a stranger, an enemy, a heathen, a Turk, an Infidel, a Liar, nor to the Devil
himself; we may not pay him in his own coin, no more than the Archangel
Michael durst give him railing accusation; Iu^e v. 9.
though he be (...), a rayler, and false accuser.

Certainly, nothing is less neighbourly than lying: for what trust, affiance
or security, can one have in another, if one cannot believe what another
promises, affirms, or denies.

Commune vinculum indigentia; The common tie of society is the mutual want of
each other; and, The common enterchange of good offices is in the way of
truth-speaking. Else every neighbor is Insidiator and hostis, an enemy; and
the more dangerous; because near and treacherous. Better dwell in a
Wilderness than such a vicinity.

The knot and sum, that folds up all the second Table, is this, To love thy
neighbor as thy self: Now, Aug. Ench. ad Lau.
nemo libenter dicipitur. Falli nolunt qui fallere amant; adeo rationalis
natura errorem refugit: Every man hates a lie in another, so much as he loves
himself. No man loves you should lie to him, though himself lies never so
frequently; no more than a thief will like you should steal from himself.

Do then as we would be done to; that is, well and justly: And, speak as you
would be spoken to; that is, Every man the truth to his neighbor. (...); ^s.
Pel. l. 1. ep. 9.
The Standard of equity and virtue God has set in every man's own reason and
conscience to measure by it to others, so as he would they should mete to him.
If but this one branch of it, (in truth speaking) were conscientiously
observed, we should not have so many contentions, which call for public
examination and execution of truth; for lying breeds injuries. He that fears
not to offend God by lying, will not fear to offend man by defrauding: whence
spring so many suits and quarrels. Every man, though he cannot judge what is
aequum, just, in mine, and thine; yet he may, of what is verum, in regard of
his own thoughts; which needs no other Court, Witness or Judge, than his own
conscience, for the speaking of it.

Neither private nor public good can flourish, if this commerce of
Truth-speaking to our neighbor fail and decay. Which if in daily and
domestic converse it must be maintained; how much more in public
attestations, when by word or oath, we are called forth as Witnesses or Jurors
to speak the truth, not only to our neighbor, but to the face of our Country;
to our Prince; to the law; to justice it self; and in a high degree to the
glory of God? as Joshua persuades Achan to give glory to God, by telling the
truth: by which the execution of the judgment of Truth and Peace may be
promoted; and the common good advanced by a just punishment of the wicked, and
absolving of the innocent.

Public lies are impudent and enormous lies: when death and life, Pro. 18.21.
justice and injustice are in the power of the tongue: But a lie upon oath, is
beyond expression abominable to God and man. Pro. 22.22.
In this if in any sin men exceed the devils; whom we read of, notorious for
lying, but not for perjury; as never having the honor to be called to
witness a truth, with the invocation of the Name and Majesty of God.

Perjurium est mendacium sacrilegum; That Is the definition of perjury; it is a
sacrilegious lie: Which besides the falsity, seeks to rob his neighbor of his
right and innocence; the law and justice of a due debt of punishment, which
every malefactor owes: robs the King, Country, and Commonweal of safety, and
God of his glory; who is justified in his providence, when sin is detected,
condemned and punished.

A sin out of measure sinful: while a man, openly, deliberately, solemnly,
upon the word of God, pretends to call God to witness of his truth speaking,
when he means nothing less. St. Augustine tells us, It is a less sin to
swear by a false God, Ep c. 34.
truly; than by the true God, falsely: He is nearer piety, who ownes and fears
a false God; than he that denies the only true, and so all Gods: yet he that
denies the true God, is less wicked than he that despises and blasphemeth
him; as a perjured person does, while he endeavors so much as lies in him, to
make the true God, his omniscience and power, an abettor and maintainer of his
lie and falsity. Quanto magis sanctum est per quod juratur, August.
tanto magis poenale perjurium. So that, as Truth speaking is required of every
man to his neighbor in private; so much more in public speaking; and most of
all in solemn and public swearing before the Magistrate: Where one false
witness and false swearer may so plunder a truth, and snarle a cause, that it
will be hard for the Judge to find the true method to unwinde it.

The truth and religion of an Oath is then fulfilled, when he that is lawfully
called to swear, does so swear, as is not only agreeable to his own
knowledge, without equivocation or reservation, and to the form of words in
which the Oath is administered; but also to the meaning and purpose of the
Magistrate that requires him to swear, so far as he does conceive it. Which
is S. Augustines determination, in his Epist. 224.

But I may not insist on this theme, of Swearing. I have done with the first
part of the duty, Veracity; so far as concerns all men in a private, or
public way, so as may further the execution of truth and peace in the gates;
to which we are in a good forwardness, if the first be learned and practiced.

2. The Magistrates duty in special; Execute the judgment of Truth and Peace,
etc.
THis, although it be for every man's good, yet is not every man's work; but
chosen men, appointed by lawful authority, as Moses at first did.

No man may arrogate this vice-gerency of God, except he be called by God
immediately, or his vicegerent Power on earth. That was Lucifer's pride,
forwardness and fall, that he would be similis Altissimo, exalt himself.
Christ refuses this employment, because he had no Commission from humane
power: Who made me a Judge? Luke 12.14
Absalom's ambition was not grown so violent, and past all bounds of modesty
and respect to his Parent, Prince and Country, as to assume this Office to
himself; but wishes, O that I were made a Judge! 2. Sam. 15.4*
In places of Ecclesiastical and Civil judicature, the forwardest are seldom
the fittest. Wise, grave, and conscientious men, who best understand the weight
and charge of public execution of Justice, are willing enough to wave it, as
seeing no less burden than honor in it. But Those that are called, must not
be wanting to God, the King, their Country, their own Consciences; but must
execute, etc.

1 It must be Judgment. Not what their own or others passion, will, power, or
pleasure suggests; but what Reason sees secundum normam legis, agreeable to the
rule of the Law: which is the common vote, and consent of men to Reason.

Iudex non jus dat, sed docet; Judges do not give Laws, but teach, declare,
and execute them. Plato says, That State will flourish, where Magistrates
serve the Laws, not Laws the turn of the Magisrate; who may not change licet
into libet. The Magistrate is but (...), Cl. Alex.
as he says of Moses, the mouth by which the Law does breath.

Iudicium a judicando: Judgment must proceed from a serious and deliberate
examining of matters, secundum allegata and probata: It is but the product, or
just account which arises from the witness of persons, presumption of
circumstances, and evidence of things, which must be weighed in the balance
of Justice: In the one scale whereof, is laid the weight of the Law ( pondus
legis;) in the other ( pondus causae) the merit of the case, fact, or person.

Though Justice must be coeca in exequendo, impartially blind in executing;
yet it must be oculata in dijudicando, most eagle-ey'd, and acute-sighted in
searching out a matter.

The matter I knew not, I searched out. Job 29.16.


As I hear I judge; and my judgment is just. Ioh. 5.30.


Descendam ut videam; God himself, Genesis 18.21
who is omniscient, and (...), teaches us by his flownesse, not to proceed to
execution till we have a manifest cognoisance of things, by a fair, free, and
calm hearing of matters on both sides: else (you know) Though a Judge may in
his sentence hit on the right, yet he merits the brand of an unrighteous
Judge: Though the decision be just, yet the Decider is not; Does our law
condemn any man before it hear him? Job. 7.51.
There must be (...) before (...); and (...) before (...): A hearing with
patience and judgment, before the executing of judgment.

Judges must be scrutatores, indagatores, viri decretorii, men of piercing,
judicious, and discerning spirits; for, Veritas in profundo, dicti, facti,
cordis: Truth does seldom swim and float in the surface; but is hidden and
sunk in the bottom of the words, actions, and hearts of men: They had need to
be urinatores, men of profound and diving minds, that get this Pearl. Judge
not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Ioh. 7.24.


Truth indeed, as God, is but One; yet falsities and pretentions (like
Penelopes suitors) are many, and shape themselves into diverse forms and
semblances of Truth. As, Omne malum fundatur in aliquo bono, so all falsity and
injustice pretends a show of truth, and pleads for the protection of justice;
and may easily impose upon a careless, drowsy, and oscitant Judge, that has
not his understanding and conscience vigilant and intentive.

Epist. 7 5.
A Judge (says Basil) must have (...) (...): needs be a Critic, of sharp and
exact understanding, to discern between man and man, cause and cause, just
and unjust, true and veresimilous, false and specious, between the confidence
of accusing or denying, and the truth or falsity of the accusation; between
the modesty or rudeness of the defendant, and the innocence of his cause;
between the weight of the complaint, and the malice or envy of the
plaintiff: For if it suffice to accuse boldly, who shall be innocent? If to
deny roundly, who shall be guilty? -- Aspice quanta Iuven.

Voce negat, quanta est ficti constantia vultus.


Often times the false confidence of the worser part, and that, ( prostitutae
vocis venalis audacia, as Cyprian,) hired impudence of voluble tongues, which
are ( Lenones injustitiae) the Bauds and Pandars to injustice, are ready to
carry it with a brazen forehead, and Stentorian voice.

On the other side, Right and Innocence is ready to betray it self, through a
rudeness, simplicity and diffidence of mind, carriage and expression. Quibus
honestior conscientia, iis plerumque frons imbecillior: Innocence is often
timorous, Jerome.
uneloquent, unexpert in terms and formalities to explain it self, when
Dishonesty, like Tamar, is often veiled with a mask of fair words; and a smooth
tongue gilds over a rotten cause.

A Judge, here, must be eyes to the blind, Job 29.15.
and show himself judicious, to have studied men as well as books; and like
Solomon, by his wisdom, repress the impudent guiltiness of the one part,
and relieve the diffident innocence of the other. He must not be ((...))
carried away with a stream of words; or like Pigmalion prefer an adorned
statue, before a naked, yet true and living man. A Judge must be, as Christ,
with his fan in his hand, thoroughly to purge his floor; Mat. 3.
where chafe and wheat, injury and innocence, justice and injustice, truth and
falsity, promiscuously lie before him: His just clemency must gather the wheat
to a safety; his just severity must scatter and consume the chafe, with
condign punishment.

Judgment thus carried, will have the Two qualities in the Text; of Truth and
Peace.

1 Of Truth: that is, a True and just Judgment; For Truth and Justice are
equivalent, and inseparably twisted together, in foro, in Courts and decisions
of right. What is false must needs be unjust; what is just must be true.
Truth is the foundation of Equity.

Truth in Judgment, is, The conformity or agreement of the sentence and
decision with the mind of the Law, understood by the Judge: (...). The intent
of the Law is, Suum cuique tribuere; a Judge must faithfully assign to every
one that portion which the Law does give them, in the true and literal sense
and meaning of it, without warping or straining the words by witty conceits,
and curiosity of interpretation, beyond the intent of the Law, or analogy of
Justice, which is, Reason: neither girding too strait by rigor, nor slackning
too loosly by indulgence, the words, which are but ( vestitus legis) the
clothing of the Law.

Pessima tyrannis lex in equuleo: Laws by the tyranny of wit, may be so racked
and tortured, to such forced constructions, that they may seem to speak that
which they never intended. Obscure and ambiguous Laws are the snares of a
people; and the dens or refuge of tyranny; like Ancipites gladii, two-edged
swords, that cut on both sides; having no back whereon Innocence may safely
rely. Therefore Enacters of Laws have endeavored in plain and perspicuous
words, to set down their meaning; according to which, Judgment must be
executed, if it be true Judgment.

The highest honor and most sovereign employment, and nearest to the supreme
glory and majesty of God ( the great King and universal Judge of the world) is
this, to give true Judgment; to search, find, declare, vindicate Truth;
though darkened, oppressed, prejudiced with injuries and calumnies: though
prescribed, and proscribed by power, will, time and custom. Tertul.
Nullum tempus satis longum est, quod possit aut debeat errori patrocinari, and
injustitiae; No might, should be, and no time or usage is sufficient to
patronize falsity and injustice against Truth and equity; which out of doubt
are most ancient, and should be most prevalent: for falsity and injury
presuppose them first, and are but the superstructure, a kind of moss and
accrescency to them. For this end (says our blessed Savior) was I born; Ioh.
18.3^.
to this end came I into the world, that I should bear witness of the Truth.
I can do nothing against the Truth. To this end, Judges have reason, learning,
experience, conscience, public authority and trust from the King and Country,
that their judgment may be true and just; not false and unjust; condemning
the righteous, or absolving the wicked; both which are an abomination to God.

It is the prerogative of divine and omnipotent mercy, to justify an
unrighteous person; yet still with the safety of truth, and integrity of
justice: for he does it not sine interventu mortis and meriti Christi. God so
loved mercy, that he would magnify it in justifying and saving of sinners;
yet so loves truth and justice, that he would not do it without the death of
his Son, that just One, to satisfy his justice: That so he might with
infinite Mercy and Justice apply his righteousness, to justify the
unrighteous.

By this means, Righteousness and Peace kiss each other: Your Judgment will
be not only just and true; but a Judgment of Peace, the second quality
required in the Text.

Cl. Alex. Strom. 4.
(...); Peace is the daughter of true Judgment: Truth and justice the mother
and nurse of Peace. The God of truth and justice is the Father of order and
peace; The Devil and father of lies is the author and fautor of disorder and
confusion. It was not the true mother that required the division of the child;
nor is it true and upright judgment that dissolveth peace.

1 It must be judgment of Private Peace, between a man and his neighbor;
which can never be maintained, except each party by the light of the Law,
clearly sees the truth of the judgment, for, or against them. Endless and
interminate suits and dissentions (like Hydra's heads) must needs grow up,
where the seeds of falsity and injustice are sown in Judgment.

Of this, great care must be had, that, though men lose their Cause, yet they
may not lose their Peace and charity. A man makes an ill bargain, that gains
his Process, and loses the love and good-wil of his neighbor; which is the
greatest Damages. Proximorum odia sunt acerbissima. Wine makes the sowrest
vinegar: The quarrels of neighbors and brethren, set their hearts at the
greatest distance and defiance.

2 Where the coals of private dissentions are scattered in every corner, the
whole house will soon be on fire; and Public Peace cannot long continue: For
where there are great divisions of hearts, and Private grievances arise like
swellings, and distemper of parts, to affect the whole body with the fever of
discontent, what can be expected but Public mutinies and combustions?

Lex est corporis politici nervus: The great bodies of States must needs be
paralitick, and vehemently shaken, if not dissolved, when the sinews of
justice fail.

An unjust Judge, like a Comet, portends wars and commotions; and scatters so
malignant an influence to men's minds, that they had rather venture the
injustice of war, than suffer the injustice of peace.

This Principle is in most men's minds, Pax est omni bello tristior, quae
justitiae and veritatis ruina constat; That peace is more deplorable than war
it self, which only maintains power to waste and oppress innocence and truth.

Isidore Pelusiot tells us truly; (...); It is but the name and shadow of a
false and lying peace, where is not true justice.

Iustitiae debetur, quod homo homini non sit lupus. It is true judgment only
that can secure peace, and hinder men from degenerating to wolves and tigers;
which they do, when by injustice some are exasperated, others are animated to
sin and injurious insolences. One untrue and unjust judgment, like the wind,
scatters and sheds the seeds of ill weeds and manners, about the whole field;
which should, by truth and justice, have been cut up by the root; and its
contagious spreading hindered.

Besides, nothing more slackens the reins of government, and the stability of
peace, which is upheld by the reverent awe and respect which the people and
subjects give to the Magistrate, than when by injustice and unworthiness, they
bring their persons and authority under contempt and dislike; that they seem
to them not as Gods but Idols, which have ears but hear not, eyes but see
not, mouths but speak not true judgment. Against such Magistrates, people are
prone to think it, not only just, but meritorious to rebel.

Psalm 99.4.
The Kings strength, or throne loves judgment, and by righteousness it shall
be eshablished with abundance of peace. Psalm. 72.
David, in his prayer and blessing to his son King Solomon, joins these two;
Give the King thy judgments, O Lord, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son;
and that, He shall rule the people with equity, and the poor with judgment.
Then the Mountains (subordinate Magistrates and Judges,) and the little Hills
(inferior Officers,) shall bring peace to the people, by righteousness. He
must be Melchisedec, King of righteousness, that will be Melchisalem, King
of peace.

3 There is a third Peace, that results from the judgment of Truth, as the
crown and greatest reward of the Judge; That is, the inward peace and serenity
of his own conscience, witnessing to him, that, as he is in the stead of God,
so he judges as God would judge; according to his will and law, which is the
rule of Truth and Justice, and the way of peace and happiness.

This Peace is so precious to a good man, that he will choose to lose all
rather than this, which is the souls immediate, and inward enjoyment of it
self and God.

The fruition of which, as it passes all understanding; so the loss of it
passes all the skill and favor of the world to repair or recompense it.

An Unjust Judge cannot but condemn himself. -- Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Iudice nemo nocens absolvitur; --


He becomes his own Accuser, Witness, Judge, and Executioner. For, where
Astraea (Justice) dwells not in the conscience, Nemesis (Revenge) will. Occultum
quatiente animo tortore flagellum: His soul must needs be filled with a
fearful expectation of vengeance and the judgment to come.

3 Execute it, when you have judiciously considered what is Truth, and tending
to Peace.

Declare it, pronounce it publicly. Magistratus est lex loquens. Judges are
ora and linguae publicae, Plebis, Regis, Legis, Dei; the public Oracles to
declare the will of the State, the Law, the King, and God.

To what purpose is finding out of true judgment, if you do not, dare not
speak out? or, speak otherwise than you judge in your selves? Procacius
peccant, qui maturius and quasi ex consilio: Knowing, and not declaring and
doing justice, is the aggravation of injustice.

It is a calamitous time, as Hezekiah said, When children are come to the
birth, and there is not strength to bring them forth. There must not be only a
Conception of what is true and just, and then ((...)) an abortive judgment,
smothered and stifled in the breast of the Judge, by silencing or suspending
the sentence; nor yet must it be strangled and oppressed unnaturally, (as the
Egyptian Tyrant did the Israelites infants) after it is pronounced, by
diverting or perverting the sentence; but there must be an execution of it:
which is the soul and life of Justice, and gives a quickening and animation to
the Laws.

Law (as our learned Hooker tells us,) is a directive rule to the goodness of
operation; both in nature, polity, and religion. What are Laws in your books
or breasts, if not put in execution?

The not executing the penalty of the Laws upon offenders, is the execution of
the Laws themselves; and renders them cadaverosae Leges, dead and breathless
carcases. It is the breath of the Judge, in a right and powerful sentence,
which must blast the wicked and unjust; and revive and renew the face and force
of the Laws, of Justice, and of good men.

Potentia est legis asylum, Law and Justice has its last recourse to Power for
the executing. Forcibly, as Ioh and David, Job 29.17.
pulling the prey out of the teeth of the lion, and breaking the jaws of the
oppressor: Restoring the oppressed and molested to his liberty, right, and
quiet: Commanding and inflicting condign punishment on the purse or person of
offenders.

If need be, and the public good require it, not only pruning and lopping off
the branches and arms of luxuriant and spreading wickedness, by restraining
the liberty, by withdrawing the sap and nutriment of estate and means; but
cutting off those noxious weeds and thorns from the land of the living; and
utter extirpation of those that are Telluris inutile pondus: Why cumber they
the ground? And this, ( ne pars sincera trabatur) not with more justice than
mercy and gentleness; lest connivence, remissness, and impunity spread the
contagion to parts, as yet found and untainted. Quid enim tam iniquum, quam ut
desertori boni been sit? August.
What is more unjust than that it should be well with him, who has left off
to do well? What more just than that evil of suffering should light on evil
doers?

But how must it be executed?

1 Courageously and resolutely: Iethro, in the character of a Judge, requires
this in the first place, Exodus 18.
That he be a man of Truth and Courage; That fears God and none besides: Not
the face of man, whose breath is in his nostrils. The fear of man is a snare.
Pro. 29.25.


Qui fortis non est facile ad injuste faciendum vincitur; qui justus non est
facile ad imbecillitatem cogitur: Justice and fortitude as Twins grow together.
A weak and timorous man will easily be unjust; and like a Kite scared from the
prey which the law has justly seized on. A just and generous minded Judge,
will no more remit his judgment, and the execution of it, where the Law has
laid hold on a malefactor, than the Lion which the Prophet speaks of, Isai. 30.
will quit his prey, or abase himself for the multitude of shepherds gathered
against him. For this would be as fatal to him, as Ahabs letting Benhadad go
in peace: or the Prophet not smiting, when he was commanded by the word of the
Lord. The blow and judgment, as well as the crime and offense, will light on
himself; for he becomes guilty of what he leaves unpunished. The malefactor
escapes, lives, continues to sin, at the charge and hazard of the Judges soul.

2 Freely: For love of justice, truth, God, and the public good. Bern. ad Eng.
Parum est justitiam facere nisi and diligas. The motions of Justice must be
like the Heavens, (...), by inward principles; not like mils and mechanic
Engines, that stir not, but by force of winds, waters, and weight, and hands;
by hopes, promises, or gifts.

In execution of justice, it must not be as in scenes of masks and pageants,
where things seem of themselves gently to slide from heaven, when indeed there
are secret devices and inventions of Art, that violently, though cunningly,
move them. The light of the Sun, the liberty of heaven, the day and air should
not be more cheap and free than justice. Though an Advocate may sell his
pleading, August.
and a Counselor his counsel; yet a Judge may not the execution of Judgment.
Justice is a debt they owe to men; He cannot be just that must be hired to
pay his debts. A purchased sentence, though just, is unjustly sold.

Gifts do blind the eyes of the wise. Exodus 23.8.
He that accustomes himself to gratuities for a just sentence, will soon
grow so dim-sighted, as to receive bribes in an unjust cause.

These must be kept off by all ways; directly, indirectly; nec per se, nec per
alium. It will not serve the turn, nor satisfy either God or the integrity of
a man's own conscience, to say, as Adam, The woman thou gave me; or the son,
or servant, He, or She received it; gave it me, and so I took it. Nor to say
as the Woman, I saw the offer was fair to the eye; a present to be desired to
make one rich, (I am sure not wise) and so I took it: No, that cursed Serpent
of Covetousness in thy own breast, beguiles thee: The devil tempts thee with
All these I will give thee, if thou will fall from thy integrity in judgment;
which God requires be neither corrupted by indulgence and favor, as David's to
Absalom; nor prejudice, as David's to Mephibosheth; nor hatred, as the Jews
against Christ; nor fear, as in Pilate; nor covetousness and popularity, as
in Felix, who failing of his money, yet to do the Jews a pleasure, left Paul
bound.

Nay* an upright Judge may not feoffe that as a favor, which is indeed but
justice and a duty: nor challenge and own the thanks for a happy issue, which
indeed belongs to the law and equity of the cause.

He does not know the price and value of a good conscience, who seeks for a
reward beyond that of doing virtuously.

3 Impartially: Naz. (...). As the beauty and influence of Heaven, and light of
the Sun equally and indifferently falls on the poor and rich, the palace and
cottage, the great and mean, the learned and idiots; without preferring one,
or disdaining the other; so should the execution of true Judgment.

Judges are married to the Law, to Justice, and to the Commonweal; and must
forsake father, mother, friends, and all relations, and adhere to Justice: as
Levi in the execution of justice, is commended, that he knew not father, or
brethren, Deuteronomy. 33.9.
or kindred.

The Magistrate must be as an upright bowl, that has no byas; as a true die,
falling square, what hand soever casts it. Not warping or propending any way;
but as a straight rule, or plumbline, indifferently showing the rectitude or
obliquity of what body soever it is applied to.

To have respect of persons is not good: (i. e. Pro. 28.21.
) it is very bad, and sordid beyond expression; so much debasing the soul,
that for a morsel of bread such a man will transgress.

With God is no respect of persons: 2 Samuel 14.14.
nor should be with those umbratiles dii, shadows and back-parts of God: who
in Judicature should forget they are men, and remember they are in the place of
God.

As favor must not, so nor personal offense may weigh in the balance of
executing true judgment. No particular distaste, or desire of revenge, may
sour and sharpen the execution or sentence: He that gladly sacrifices a
malefactor to his particular revenge and hatred, under or with the name of
public justice, may be a murderer while he is a just Judge; while he
satisfies his own revengefull mind together with the Law: This destroys the
sinner, but he the man and his neighbor.

4 Speedily: Qui tarde vult, non vult ut debeat velle. Judgment must be
executed in benigniore part, in the way of adjudication and restoring to
right, of compensation of wrongs, and of remuneration of merit. Demurs and
procrastination, beyond what is necessary, is so far an injustice, as it is a
hinderance; and so great, that oftentimes the Delay countervailes, if not
exceeds the benefit of the judgment.

St. Bernards counsel to Eugenius is good, and would be a great ease to
subjects, Frustratorias and vexatorias praecide dilationes, To circumcise the
superfluities of suits and pleas, and cut off all those tedious and expensefull
attendances of persons, adjournments of causes, when they are ripe for
judgment and execution.

Which unnecessary detentions are for the most part, but the stratagems and
windings of Underofficers; who, like dishonest Surgeons, will not cure their
Patients, till they have cured their Purses; though with the others molestation
and torment, no less than charge and expenses. Non missura cutem, nisi plena
cruoris hirudo,


You may know the Leeches are full, when they let go their hold.

But a noble and just Judge, that loves justice for it self, and tenders the
good and quiet of his poor countreym-en, will make a short work of it, and
hasten judgment, that he may add charity to equity: That it may appear not
evicta, but lata sententia; a Judgment, as true and just; so not extorted by
importunity, but easily obtained by the merit of the cause.

5 Yet leasurely, and full of caution should the execution of Judgment be, if
punitive; especially capital; Vltimo supplicio. Nulla unquam de morte hominis
cunctatio longa est.
Iuven.


Man is (...), a creature of greater value than to be rashly and precipitantly
cast away.

And tenderly too: There must be all the grains of allowance, of time, mercy,
and clemency, that justice and law will permit. Imple Christian Iudex pii
patris officium; sic succense iniquitati, August.
ut humanitati consulere memineris: Rigor of Justice is unjust, where
mitigation may be showed. Clemency is a debt Magistrates owe to our nature,
and the common infirmities of mankind.

6 Lastly, compassionately. Execute judgment, though severe, and such as
cannot justly or safely admit any further delay or remission, by reason of the
heinousness and atrocity of the fact; yet do it (as St. Basil speaks) (...),
with all meekness, and demonstration of pity, and sense of humanity. Not with
insolence and elation, (...); Nothing is less humane, and more barbarous, and
truculent, than for any man, much more the gravity of a Judge, to jest upon,
and make himself merry with poor men's misery, of the same mold and metal
with himself; or to triumph in their calamity and sufferings, by scornful and
contumelious language: Far from that of Joshua to Achan, My son give glory to
God, etc.

A noble and ingenuous heart, dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox, will discover,
that what he does severely, it is of necessity, not propensity; magis officii
compulsus necessitate, quam judicandi libidine; as St. Bernard advises the
Earl of Theobald. Per. ep. 37^


It is all the solace left to cast and condemned creatures, to see, their sin
has not yet deprived them of the pity and prayers of the Judge and Court,
though it has of their liberty or life. Peccata interficio, homines amplector,
Is the Magistrates Motto: A friend to men, an enemy to their sins.

In your gates.
We have seen the manner of the Execution; but where must this be done? In
your gates: That is, Those places that are appointed for public execution of
justice and judgment; which were anciently the Gates of Cities and Towns.

1 For the ease and convenience of the people; who might follow their actions
and suits, without going far out of the way of their other affairs.

2 To show the equality and indifferency of justice, from which none was
excluded, Tros Tyriusve fuat; but as the Gates of Cities are open and free to
all to go in and out, so was the course of Judgment.

3 To intimate, that the chiefest strength of Cities, and safety of States,
does consist in the due execution of the judgment of truth and peace; which is
as the gates and bars: the strongest batteries against sin and wickedness;
the firmest defense for virtue and peace.

Take away the free execution of Justice, and not gates of brass, nor bars of
iron will hold out either the dissolution of manners by vitiousnesse, or of the
Commonwealth by dissentions.

I have done with the substance and matter of the Charge.

I need no further weight to Christian minds, for the applying of what
concerns you jointly or severally, than the authority in the Text, which
enjoynes these duties Dominante stylo, in a sovereign and commanding style;
These things ye shall do.

It is the will and word of God.

Where the word of a King is, there is power; But this is the King of Kings.
Higher than the highest. Omne sub regno graviore regnum est. Whose Majesty is
above all to be adored, whose Law and will to be observed and done.

1 Because most wise and good; commanding nothing but what tends to his own
glory and our happiness.

2 Most precisely and immutably just, and not to be changed or swerved in his
will.

3 Most irresistibly and unavoydably powerful, in executing vengeance on them
that obey not his will and laws.

4 He is most graciously bountiful, in rewarding those that take heed to do
them. It is their life, peace and happiness, both here and hereafter.

On the otherside, The not doing them is a man's undoing. There is no dispensing
with the duties, or no avoiding of the punishment.

These things ye must do; cheerfully, resolutely, zealously, constantly,
necessarily: Nihil magis justum, gratum, necessarium.

The omission of them will be unexcusable to you, since the Law and Charge is
so plain, so short, so just and reasonable; no man can plead ignorance,
mistake, forgetfulness, or rigor and hardness, since every man's reason
dictates it to him; every man's heart desires it in his own particular cause
and interest; and every man's conscience will condemn him, if he do them not
to others in his degree and calling.

1 Speak every man the truth to his neighbor, in private converse; In public,
witnessing, swearing and pleading, so far as you are called to it.

It is indiscretion and folly to let all truth thou know flow from thy
tongue, when it is not expected or required. But where it is so, and thou
pretendest to reveal the truth, it is damnable not to do it, and to lie
against the truth. Liars are put among the damned crew. Rev. 22.15.
By thy words thou shall be justified or condemned. Account must be given for
idle words; Mat. 12.36
how much more for impious, lying and pernicious?

Let then thy speech be, neither rash and unadvised, nor profuse and
overflowing: from inconsiderate speaking we come to much, from much to vain,
from vain to false, from false-speaking to false-swearing; Exundans amnis
facile lutum contrahit, Ambr.
The stream that keeps not its banks, contracts soil and trash.

Lingua modicum membrum, ingens malum, in udo and lubrico posita, majori
cautela servanda; The tongue has a natural lubricity, and is set in a moist
and slippery place, and needs the greater staydnesse of mind, and strictness
of conscience, to direct and keep it in the ways of Truth and Peace.

2 For You (Honorable and Reverend) whom God and the King command to execute
the Judgment of Truth and Peace, I persuade my self, your piety and
conscience answers with the Psalmist, It is required of us to do thy will O
God: we are content to do it.

Else what need all this state, solemnity, expense and trouble? like Iezebels
fast, to do injustice? to decree unrighteous decrees? to pervert judgment,
and turn away the cause and right of the poor and innocent?

I know your wisdoms and piety consider, and need not to be reminded, That
it is a double and crying injustice which is committed under the sacred name
and protection of justice. Vbi inter ipsas leges delinquitur, and inter jura
peccatur, nec illic reservatur innocentia ubi defenditur.

Injustice in a Judge is like a pestilent fever, which seises the vitals and
spirits, and is deadly to the Commonweal.

A lie in judgment, is a loud lie; has a report that calls to heaven for
vengeance. Besides that, it is publicum perjurii exemplum, contrary to the oath
of integrity which is taken by Judges, when called to public judicature.

A Judge is, and should be the public Physician, to cure the distempers of
others. Iustitia imperii sanitas aequissimo libramine tuenda, Peace and
tranquillity, which is the health of the body politic, must be preserved by an
equal temper and proportion of justice. Salus populi suprema lex, is the great
and renowned Theoreme of just and good Magistrates.

A Judge, as every Magistrate, must be (...). A lover of God, his King, his
Country, of Truth, of Justice, Industrious, and Humane, a Candid and good man;
that is, a public and diffusive blessing, or universal good. Not (...), Not a
lover of himself, of his ease, of his honor, of filthy lucre. Far be it
from you and us, That the Judges circuiting should be like Satan's round, who
goes about seeking what and whom he may devour; but like Samuels course, or
the Suns constancy, which goes from one end of the heaven to the other, and
nothing is hid from the benign light, heat and influence of it: Looking upon
earthly and many sordid things, but contracting nothing of their natures and
qualities.

Is. P^l.
(...), A Judge and Magistrate must be higher in his mind and virtues, than
his place and office; above all fear, love, hatred, flattery, passion, gain,
preferment: One that esteems his own conscience, and Gods spirit there
witnessing his integrity, the only reward worthy the discharge of so great and
honorable a trust and employment.

Remember I beseech you, as I know you do, how far Peace depends on your
integrity.

1 The private peace between neighbors, one of the greatest sweetners of this
present life.

2 The public peace, wherein you are highly concerned; which is greatly shaken
for our sins, and needs pious, prudent, and faithful minds, as well as valiant
hands to re-establish it.

3 The inward peace of your own consciences with God: One unjust act at an
Assizes or Circuit, or in your life, will torment more than all the profit or
honor can content you; and like an unwholesome and undigested morsel, will
corrupt and taint all the comfort of your other good parts and deeds.

O let not that prove true by your means, that he complains of, (...), Is.
Pel.
The name, and thought, and desire of peace is everywhere, the endeavor for
it nowhere. Blessed are the peacemakers: Mat. 5.
O rob not your selves and us of so great and precious a blessing.

Last of all, (...), Basil.
Remember that exact, and unavoydable, and unappealeable Tribunal of the just
Judge of the whole world; For He comes, Psalm. 96.13.
for he comes to judge the earth righteously, and the nations with his
truth. He will try all things (as the Refiner) by fire: Which will discover
and make legible that (...), the blind and subtle characters of men's thoughts
and actions, which before could not be read or perceived.

A good and wise Judge will not ( sciens volens) wittingly give any sentence
that shall then be reversed, or judge any judgment that need to be rejudged;
much less, deserve to be condemned with him at that day.

Chrysostom.
Iudicandum se diffidit, qui injuste judicat, He believes not he shall be
judged, who executes unrighteous judgment: yet his very injustice is a strong
and sure argument, against him, of an after Judgment, which shall, which must
repeal his injurious sentence, and punish his impious practices; for the
goodness and justice of God and his providence do require this.

Bern.
Veniet, veniet dies qui male judicata rejudicabit: The day is coming, when
not astuta verba but pura corda, not plena marsupia but conscientiae probae
valebunt, as St. Bernard, not fair words but honest hearts; not full purses,
but upright consciences shall prevail; which day shall rejudge all you have
judged, and judge both you and me and us all, and all we have done or said.
For we must every man give account of himself at the judgment seat of God.
Romans 14.12


For which Accounts, fit and prepare us O Lord by thy infinite mercy, as thou will raise us by thy infinite power; that we may appear not in our own
unrighteousnes, which we abhor, but clothed and accepted in the righteousness
of Jesus Christ, in whom we believe; who is our Savior, and shall be our
Judge. To whom, etc.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, In S. Mary's, July 11. 1641.
Being Act-Sunday.
EPHESIANS. 4.23. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind.


THere is in our nature, (...).
I know not what (...), an importunate desire after, and delight in whatever
is presented to us under the Notion of New. Whether it be out of the
restlesnesse of our minds, and their infinite capacity; or out of the
emptiness and insufficiency of all things under the Sun, which rather satiate
than satisfy: which keeps our souls in a continual appetite and longing,
still expecting to find that content in what is New and unexperienced, which
they have hitherto failed of.

Thus daily deceiving the tediousness of our life, (which for the main is but
the Crambe, and repetition of yesterday) by the sweetness of variety, and a
taste of novelty, which are the sauce and seasoning of all things we enjoy. --
New fashions, New clothes, New houses, New Doctrines, New opinions, New
Country, New Teachers: Any thing New; though, as our Savior said of the
Wines, The elder be the better; Omne enim antiquius and verius and melius. In
manners and Doctrines, for the most part, it holds, The elder is the better and
truer.

Yea so studious are we of Newness, that our whole life is but a repairing
and continual renewing of what through age and infirmity is daily decaying in
us; seeking in vain to blot out the footsteps of old age, and with weak
endeavors to row against the stream of Time, which silently and insensibly
carries us, and all things, downward to the Gulf of death and destruction:
which as it has involved all, the most renowned men, Cities, States, and
Monuments, ( ut and ipsae periere ruinae) that the very ruins are now ruined;
so will it shortly swallow up us, and all that we magnify and esteem as ours.

Yet there is one thing in us, whose ruins, though they oppress us, they
grieve us not; and though they make us miserable they offend not; These are the
Impairings and Decays of our best and Divinest part, our spirits and minds.
These, we are patient, as we grow elder, they should grow worser; and though
they are pieces built for eternity, yet we suffer them, as much as in us lies,
to lapse and fall to eternal ruins; not only of their happiness, but of
their very Being: In quantum enim mali sumus, in tantum minus sumus, The more
we have of sin, Aquin.
the less we have of wel-Being, and deserve to have of simple Being; because
we frustrate that end, for which the wise and best Maker gave us our Being:
And by sin we go farther from the Fountain of our Being, and our Happiness,
his will; which is the rule of Goodness: And happiness is nothing else but a
perfection of Goodness.

Yet the power of God will perpetuate wicked men, by a necessity of being, to
all eternity, That since they would not be the Objects of his renewing Mercies
to happiness, They should be the Subjects of his revenging Justice to
everlasting miseries.

These ruins and decays then, which of all are most considerable, because
most dangerous, well merit our survey and care; especially if we seriously
weigh, how vast the decays are, how short the time is allotted for this work,
being magnae mentis and molis opus, a great design indeed; and which falls not
under the compass of low, narrow, and smaller spirits; but requires a raised,
enlarged, and ennobled mind, to begin, to persevere, and to perfect it.

Which that we may do with the more happy success, Let us look to this
Model of the blessed Apostle; who having in the 21. and 22. verses cast away
all that trash, and rubbish of the old man, which is not so much ruined, as
Ruin it self; In this verse lays the Foundation of this stately structure,
whose height must reach to Heaven, and whose pattern is the Beauty and Image of
that first, perfect, and divinest mind, which we call God. Be renewed in the
spirit of your mind.


In the words are two main things. 1. The Subject of our work: The spirit of
our mind. 2. The Nature of the work: Renewing. We will seek to comprehend them
both under these four Heads of Discourse.

1 What is this Spirit of our mind, and how worthy Renewing.

2 Wherein it is Impaired, and needs Renewing.

3 How, and by what means it is to be renewed.

4 The Idea, or Character of a renewed Mind.

Lastly, We will conclude so, as by Gods Grace may make the deepest
Impressions on your minds; and at once incite and enable you to so serious, so
sacred, so Christian, so divine, so necessary a work.

The first thing that requires your Attention is the Subject, The Spirit of
your mind. What it is.

Some Interpreters understand, that holy Spirit which is in the mind: Thus
Oecumenius, Gorran, A Lapide, and others: as if it were, Be renewed by that
Spirit of God which dwells and walks in your minds. But this seems to force the
words.

Therefore S. Augustine and others more pertinently thus. Though the words be
two, yet the Subject is but one; non duas res intelligi voluit, quasi aliud sit
men's, aliud Spiritus mentis; sed quia omnis men's Spiritus est, non autem omnis
Spiritus men's est, ideo dicere voluit, Spiritu mentis, i. e. in Spiritu qui
men's vocatur. It is no more, but be renewed in that Spirit which is your Mind.

This sense agrees with that parallel place: Be ye transformed by the
renewing of your minds. Romans 12.2.
Where the word is but one, the meaning the same.

The Acuteness of some put this difference; Men's est Spiritus remissus,
Spiritus est men's intensa, The Spirit is the Mind moved, the Mind is the Spirit
composed. Spiritus est mentis impetus, That the Spirit is the vigor,
liveliness and activity of the Mind; by which it is stirred up, applied to,
and exercised about its Object. That the substance of the Soul is as the Sun,
the Mind as the Light, The Spirit as the Heat.

But these may seem niceties, beyond the Apostolical intent, which by the
most and best is conceived to aim at that Princeps Animae facultas, The
highest, most excellent and divinest faculty of the humane Soul; which Plato
calls (...), The Flower of the Soul. S. Augustine, Vis Animae suprema,
extendens se ad Dei contemplationem, S. August.
honesta a turpibus decernens. Which we call men's, the Mind a metiendo;
because it weighs and measures all things. Hyspulensis, quasi eminens, because
it is the most eminent faculty in man, by which we reach the most excellent
objects, and excel all other creatures. As the Satyrist comparing beasts with
men, Principio indulsit communis Conditor illis
Tantum Animam, nobis Animum quoque --
And Ovid. Sanctius his animal mentisque capacius altae.

There is indeed a difference between Anima and Men's, the Soul and the Mind.
Anima est vitae, Men's consilii fons, The Soul is the Principle of life, the
Mind of reason and wisdom.

Beasts have Souls, men only Minds. The Mind improves by age and experience,
the Soul not. Souls are in all men and at all times equal, the Minds most
different.

Philosophers thought they could never sufficiently magnify the excellency of
this faculty in man. Mente nihil homini praestantius dedit Deus, Tully. They
styled it partem Animae nobilissimam; (...), The noblest part, the Queen and
Sovereign in the Soul, which is to rule all the inferior faculties. That
Ignea vis. That Divinae particula Aurae, which the Poets expressed under that
fiction of fire, which Prometheus stole from Heaven, and framed man withal.

Men's est Coelum hominis: Coelum.
The Mind is as the Heaven and Firmament seated above all. Nay it is Sol in
Coelo, as the Sun, Sol.
the most glorious and useful part of the Soul. Deus.
Nay it is Deus in nobis. As God is the Mind of the greater world; so the Mind
is as the God of the lesser world.

Plato in Timaeo affirms the Mind and rational excellency in man, to be
immediately derived from that divine Mind, which is God. By this chiefly it is
that we are (...) (as S. Act. 17.29.
Paul canonizeth that Hemistick of Aratus) near a kind to God, and allied to
the blessed Angels; which have neither Bodies nor Souls; but are pure Minds,
Spirits and Intelligences. In this was the Image of God first chiefly
imprinted; and there are the best lineaments, which remain since our decay and
fall, incorporeall, invisible, eternal in some sort, and infinite, as God;
wise, intelligent, provident and free, as God. By this God has fitted us to
have communion with himself; and commerce with his holy Spirit: by its union
to, and conformity with which, it may further partake of the divine nature,
perfection, and happiness.

This faculty then, which the wisest Philosophers of old esteemed (...), pure,
incorrupt, and unblemished, which above all things they prized, admired, and
sought to improve and advance, by abstracting it a sensuum contagione, from
things sensual and corruptible, retyring it to the study of its self, and its
Author, God; which retyring Plato in Phaedo calls (...), a wise man's first
death: defining his Philosophy (...), the divorcing of the Soul from the body,
so far as the necessities of life will permit.

This, by which they measured the true dignity of a man; (...), ( Socrates)
Such a man is to be valued, as his Mind is: by which they said truly that wise
men exceeded fools, and good men wicked, as much as heaven does earth, or
light darkness, or the herd and common rout of men the beasts.

Yet in this faculty it is, that the blessed Apostle vilifies and depreciates
man; pulling down the high Imaginations of those (...), pretenders to
wisdom; of whom he affirms, (...), They became darkened and blinded in their
understanding, vain and foolish in their Imaginations; (...), Men of perverse
and depraved Minds. Such as are the best and the ablest men in the state of
nature, so as to stand in need of renewing by Grace.

In this the blessed Apostle begins the work of repairing; The mind being that
prime-motor, the maine spring, the root and fountain of all our actions. As
the eye to the body, so is the Mind to the man; if it be darkened, how great is
that darkness? how confused, disorderly and dangerous must our motions be?

As that extravagancy and folly which appears in the actions of fools and mad
men, proceeding from a flaw and defect in the brain, and the indisposition of
those organs, which the soul uses for the exercise of its rational
faculties, is not to be mended by all the teaching, advice and example you can
use, till you cure the distemper of the brain: so all that we can teach men
of Graces and virtues, of God and his perfections, of Christ his mercy, love
and sufferings; of their souls, heaven, hell, eternity, etc. all the most
weighty and serious matters, will not change the folly, vanity, disorder and
wickedness of men's words, actions and converse, until the mind be first
renewed, and in some degree restored to its primitive state and integrity. Mat.
9.17.
Till then all we preach or learn is as new wine put into old bottels, whose
strength their weakness cannot contain: or as a new piece into an old
garment, it may help a little to patch up our lives and actions; but at length
it aggravates our sins, and makes the ruptures of our consciences the more
desperate and wide, by the increase of our knowledge.

Second Part.
So necessary is it in the second place, that we take a serious survey of the
decays, and see wherein they stand in need of renewing: which is the first
step to it. He is well onward his work of repairing, who has fully discovered
his defects.

We are here in no sort to imagine, that our souls, i. e. That invisible,
immortal, and spiritual Being, in its substance or essence is any whit
corrupted or impaired; which is made incorruptible. Nor are we to dream of a
gross and physical renewing; but in regard of those divine endowments, and
excellent abilities, with which the soul of man was at first chiefly
furnished, in its highest faculty, the Mind.

As the life of the body consists in its union with the soul; and its health
in that [(...)] fit temper and proportion of humors, whereby every part is
disposed to discharge the commands of the soul, which by excess or defect
becomes disabled, diseased, and indisposed: So the life, health, beauty, and
integrity of the Mind or Spirit consists in that union, harmony, and exact
correspondency to the divine Mind, and holy Spirit of God. And contra, its
decays, diseases, deformities and corruptions are from that dissonancy, and
estranging from the mind of God, that crossenesse and opposition against his
will, which has prescribed to us the rule of nature, reason, and of Religion,
his holy word and Gospel; from which the Mind swerves either by excess or
defect; applying it self too much to the creature, or too little to the
Creator.

As the defects and darkness of the Moon arise from its want of the Suns
light, through the earths interposing: So the Minds defects are from the
intervening of gross, worldly, and sensual objects, which hinder its aspect
of God, and intercept the light both of Reason and Grace: so that what before
was pure, holy, and lightsome, because still looking at God, as its only
perfective Object; summum verum, bonum and jucundum: Truth to the
understanding, Good to the will, and Pleasure to the affections; to the whole
man unum optimum maximum, that One thing necessary; the Sum and Center of all
desires, and delights; is now become dark, impure, disordered, diverted to
other objects, most unbeseeming its own original excellency, and that
relation it has to its Maker.

These decays of the mind of man I will not aggravate, (as I justly might) by
showing you the Ignorance, Error, Superstition, and unreasonablenesse of the
minds of Heathens and Infidels, in former, or these ages: Either in their
religion and esteem of God; or their manners and converse with men.

And these not only in the dregs of men, but even those who were counted the
Aquilae naturae, the Eagles of nature, both Greeks and Romans; whose minds were
much improved above the refuse of men, by philosophy and moral discourses: Who
notwithstanding the glorious works of the creatures, their vastness,
multitude, order, beauty, use and constancy; which are as loud, daily, and
visible Heralds to proclaim to man the invisible Power, Wisdom, and
perfection of their Maker, which must needs be but one, and the best. Yet as
the Apostle says, (...), they grew vain in their Imaginations, and their
foolish minds were darkened. They cared not to know God, so far as they might,
nor to honor him so far as they knew.

How many Gods did they invent? Ludibria Numinis, and hominis opprobria, the
scorn of the divine, and the shame of humane nature; at the best, but making
God like themselves, nay much below themselves, both for nature and manners.
Adeo ut facinora in homine plectuntur quae in Deo adorantur: as S. Augustine,
Lactantius, and others have convinced.

And as in the Nature of God, so in his Worship they discovered minds so
blind, sensual and devilish, ut non tam sacra, quam sacrilegia, their
services and sacrifices were not only not divine, but many of them most
inhumane. How many things ridiculous, and to be laughed at? how many impious,
and to be pitied? Nihil deo dignum; multa homine indigna: most of them below
the dignity of the humane nature; none of them beseeming the Majesty and
excellence of that first, best, and infinite Being, which we call God.

But these I may not insist upon.

The Subject to which I must confine my self, with the Apostle, is, your
minds, Christians; such as profess true Religion, which is (...), the raising
and improving of the Mind. The ruins and blemishes of these we are to
discover.

Now although we cannot see the minds of men, by an immediate Intuition; yet
as the light through the lantern, so our minds appear through our manners. As
He measured the Pyramids, by their shadows, so may we, minds: (...), our
words are the shadows of our actions, and actions, of our minds.

For our mind is as the womb of all our actions, which conceives, forms, and
brings them forth, as its incarnate brood. That as we guess at the Parent, by
the lines of the issue; and judge of the inward motion of the wheels, by the
hand or Index; or of the height of the Sun, by the light or shadow it makes on
inferior Bodies; so may we likewise of minds.

The mind of man, as it is of heavenly extraction, so it is of a restless
nature, and in perpetual motion, especially being out of its sphere, and
native place; this inferior world; as that culinary fire here below it
requires some fuel to fasten and feed upon.

And although, Veritas mentis pabulum, the proper sustenance of the mind be
truth; both in the streams of the creatures, and especially in that Fountain
of eternal Truth, God and his Will: yet missing of this, it snatcheth at any
thing; and for want of care, or ability to apply to better matter, like Jet it
draws to it self trash, stubble, straw, leaves, i. e. things of the vilest
and most unproportionable Natures. And as an ill stomach, at once it pleases
and corrupts it self; till by sanctified Reason and Religion it be set on
higher and better Objects, and become more choice and delicate.

Men's est omnia, The mind is all things: as a raw piece of cloth, capable of
any die or tincture; or as a glass, of any Image and reflection: According as
it minds any Object is applied to it, and delights in it, it takes its
quality and denomination from it. For the filth and contagion of sin, and
sinful Objects, does taint and infect the mind it self: and whilst it does
not, by reason and grace, command the inferior and sensual appetites, it
serves them, and by vicious customs is enslaved and conformed to them.

1 Thus we justly esteem and term those minds (...), gross, grovelling,
dejected, worldly and earthly; who so mind earthly things, as if they were
(...), only made of earth, (...), mixed with blood; and had no spark of heaven
in them: Men whose minds are never nearer heaven, than their feet lift their
heads: Who are so intent on the things of this world, ut divinae particulam
aurae humi detrudunt: their souls cleave to the dust; they rake up that
heavenly spark of the mind in ashes; loading themselves with thick clay, Hab.
2.6.
never considering their souls original, end, capacity, necessity, nor that
viaticum aeternitatis, the provision to be made for it unto eternity.

2 In like manner we judge brutish, excessive and intemperate minds to be in
those men, who are carried with the same Spirit, as the Gadarens cattle were;
whose minds are choked and drowned by luxurious eating and drinking: who live
tanquam poeniteret non pecudes natos, as repining they were not made beasts;
whose Reason is their burden, and the light of mind their offense, by its
secret checks and damps, taking off from that full pleasure, they seek to enjoy
in their riot and excess. Men of such minds, do they not deserve the fate of
that proud King, Dan 5.25.
to have the hearts of beasts given them, and to be driven from the society of
all civil men and Christians?

3 Thus likewise we account sensual and carnal minds, unclean spirits to
possess those, whose souls are (...), as a Jewel in a dunghill, who live
(...), Basil.
to the shame and reproach of the humane nature; so wholly given up to their
lusts and sensual desires, as if they were all flesh, and had no diviner part,
whose Reason should set bounds of honor and moderation to inferior desires.

Veneranda est non erubescenda natura; Tert.
We ought not to shame and dishonor our natures, by abusing those
Inclinations to unlawful pleasures, which are planted in us to a noble, good,
and excellent end; i. e. Ne desi^t d^is ^u^tores.
the preservation of our nature and kind. Nihil aeque deprimit mentem ac
libido (Aquin.) Nothing does more debase and brutise the spirit, and cast the
mind from its station and dignity, than those sordid and sensual pleasures.
Octavius thus vindicates the honor of Christian minds: libidinem aut nullam,
aut unicam generandi agnoscimus, either we do wholly deny all lusts and
fleshly desires, or we keep them from excess and inordination, by prescribing
those bounds and ends, for which Nature, and the God of Nature has intended
them.

I might be infinite by the symptoms of men's lives, and the pulse of their
actions, to discover the disorder, distempers and diseases of their minds. If
men had fenestrata pectora, a window to see into their souls, should we not
discover in many either stramineas mentes, minds full of vanity, levity and
inconstancy; or elatas, full of Ignorance and its daughters, Pride and
Ambition; or pusillas and angustas, weak, small, narrow and impotent minds,
neither fitted to do nor suffer like a Christian? Full of discontent,
impatience, unquietude; of rashness, confusion and destraction; in a
continual hurry and selfe-vexation, through the tumult and disorder of
passions and affections.

Minds for the most part filled with small, vile, and perishing Objects, even
when they most please themselves and are applauded by others. Spirits let out
to the creature beyond all reason, equity, need, or use. Which measure the
goodness of things by the pleasure they take in them, and not take pleasure by
the goodness that is in things. Naz.
(...), Minds enslaved to things present, and led only by sense and
imagination; which extremely bribe and corrupt our Judgments. Saint Paul tells
us of men (...), 1 Timothy 6.5.
of corrupt minds: Corruption est vilioris naturae mixtura (S. Tho.) then a
thing is corrupted, when it admits a baser nature to it. Corruption.
As Gold with Copper, Silver with Tin, is allayed, and loses of its purity,
worth and use; So our minds which are of an higher nature than any thing under
the Sun, when they are joined to these things of base and inferior kind, are
infinitely diminished and debased by them.

There can be no match so unproportionable as this, for the mind of man to be
enamoured of, and wedded to the creature; If we did but well know its native
beauty, vigor, and excellency; its noble extraction, descent, and capacity.
Vastum and infinitum aliquid humanus spirat animus, says Tully, The mind of
man aspires after an immense and eternal Good; nor can it be satisfied or
happy with any thing less.

On the other side compare the emptiness, vanity, deformity, corruption,
uncertainty, and nothingnesse of all things under the Sun; Col. 2.22.
which perish in the very use of them; of which a man can have no more
certainty, than if he should take a map of this days clouds, and compare them
with to morrow. (...). More heterogeneall and undecent is this match of the
Mind with the Creature, than if the rose and flower, of youth and beauty,
should be buried with the ashes and wrinkles of old age.

By this it comes to pass, that the minds of men, by a spiritual adultery,
are divorced from that Object which is best, in it self and to us, which above
all we should seek to enjoy. They become (...), Lovers of pleasures, 2 Timothy
3.4.
or the the world, or themselves, more than of God.

At length the coldness of affection grows such, and the distance of men's
minds from God so great, the intercourse by meditation and prayer so seldom,
that in stead of contemplation of him, and delighting in him, as the only
adaequate Object of the mind, it begins above all things to be estranged from
him, and to live, (...), without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.12.
Willingly shutting its eye that it may not see him; and so far as light does
break in, and convince of a God, it only, as flashes of lightning, breeds fear
in a vile and servile sort; looking at God, only as a Being, armed with
irresistible power to hurt and punish.

Et quem timet odit: It becomes (...). What it thus fears it grows to hate,
and seeks to oppose; and in the most high and desperate Atheism, non tam
credit quam cupit non esse Deum, not so much believes there is not, as secretly
wishes there were no God, to take notice of, and revenge its disorders and
wickedness.

And what the mind earnestly desires, and often seeks to persuade it self is
not, it begins at length to think it not indeed; and by an affectated and
resolved Atheism, willingly neglects to know, to fear, to love, to serve, to
enjoy him, whom to know is life eternal, to fear is security, to love is the
divinest comfort, to serve is the truest liberty, to enjoy is the only
happiness and content of the mind.

At last they grow devilish and reprobate minds, such as sin with greediness,
mock God, Romans 1.28.
and contemn what ever is sacred; Job. 3.19.
loving darkness more than light; Heb. 10.29.
despising the blood of the Covenant; and wilfully forsaking their own mercies
and happiness.

Thus you see how the Mind of man becomes degraded from the highest pitch and
object God; and miserably decayed, in respect of its noblest capacity and
operations; That as a weak brain it cannot now look to so great an height; as
a bleare eye, is offended with so glorious a Light: either Atheising, ( i. e.)
has not, or desires no God at all: or Idolizing, and erects false gods: or its
luxuriancy and wantonness runs out to superstitious and vain worshipping of
the true God: hardly containing it self in those bounds, which right reason,
the word of God, the majesty, purity, and sobriety of true Religion does permit
or prescribe.

And not thus only are our minds decayed in their chiefest excellency, and
immediate respects to God, which we call Religion; But farther, in the whole
tenor of men's lives and actions, you may discover minds full of baseness,
disorder and unreasonablenesse. (...), says Chrysostom. 2 These 3.2.
Wicked men are unreasonable men. Psalm. 14.14. Are they not without
understanding that work wickedness? Adeo omnis inordinatus animus sibi poena,
In this is every inordinate mind its own first and severest punisher;
lessening and loosing that honor of right reason, whereby we are men and
excel the beasts.

Do but trace men's actions, and in them you shall see the print and Idea of
their minds. Insani esse animi non sanus juret Orestes,
No man so mad, but will protest they are the effects of unreasonable minds.

1 Is any thing more unreasonable than so far to fear the face of man, and
to be awed by his sight, as not to do any thing shameful and undecent before
him; (except there be attrita frons, brazen or no foreheads?) and yet neither
to reverence our selves, and the witness of our own consciences, nor the
presence and all-seeing eye of God; who, we think, sees not our secret and
shameful actions; and so upon the point we deny him to be God, because not
omniscient; or if we do, then add we to our sin a most notorious impudence.

2 Is any thing more unreasonable, than of a short, precious, and uncertain
life, to expend the prime and morn of our time, the flower of our wit and
strength, to serve sin and the Devil? reserving only the dregs and bran of our
age, for repentance and devotion; whereas indeed nothing should be done with
more vigor and vivacity, than virtuous and pious actions: Besides all this, we
run a desperate hazard of our souls, and their eternal salvation; venturing
so great a treasure in so frail a bark; whereas indeed as David said to
Jonathan, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, even the strongest,
youngest, and most confident of us all, there is but a step between us and
death.

3 Is any thing more unreasonable than in old age, when our Sun is almost set,
when we have little time to live, and need least, yet then to mind and covet
the world most; so much studying the body, as to neglect the souls provision;
to value a moment, and slight eternity?

4 Is any thing more unreasonable, than to receive many, great, and daily
blessings from the almost prodigal hand of God; and yet to be so far from
being thankful for them, that we are more offensive to the Giver by them?
dishonouring him by his very blessings of peace, health, plenty, beauty,
strength, parts, wit, and learning, etc. abusing all to pride, vanity, excess,
etc. Because God is constantly Good, we are confidently evil.

5 Is any thing more unreasonable, than for a man to swear gratis? i. e.
tempted neither by profit nor pleasure; and either out of a proud affectation
of Gallantry, or out of passion against another folly, to blaspheme the name
of that God and Savior, by which man pretends to hope for salvation. If there
be a God above us, how can they be guiltless that take his name in vain;
making that cheap and profanely obvious, which all wise and good men have
esteemeed and used, as most sacred and reverend? If there be no God, how vain
then are their violent expressions, their frequent and passionate swearings?

6 Is any thing more unreasonable, than to disobey his commands, who needs not
our Service, Ierom.
but we need his commands; who therefore honors us with his commands, ut
habeat causas remunerandi, that he may have occasion to reward our obedience;
by violating whose precepts and laws, we at once, in effect, deny all his
Attributes, As if he were neither wise nor good, in enacting such laws; nor
powerful nor just in vindicating them.

7 We cannot endure a man that has a heart and a heart, that is, none at all;
whose mind and expressions are always two, and at variance. We rather
entertain such with jealousy and suspicion, than confidence and affection;
because we know all is but outside, a show, and simulation only for their own
ends: And is not that Hypocrisy of those S. James calls (...), double-minded
men, most impudent and unreasonable; which they fear not to offer to God?
while they desire only ((...)) to appear, not to be seriously and solidly
religious; whose Affections are but Affectations; whose profession branches
beyond the root of their knowledge; whose religion is but the part they act to
please some spectators; the paint of their actions, and the cloak they assume,
to palliate and compass their poor and small designs of favor, or profit,
etc. Forgetting that nothing becomes the simplicity of Gods being, and his
serious intentions of good to man, more than that (...), sincerity and
soundness of mind to Him and his service. 2 Timothy 1.7.
Nor is a man ever more unfaithful to his own soul, than when he doubles
and falsifies with God: Job 27.8.
What is the hope of the Hypocrite, when God shall take away his soul? Nothing
leaves a man more hardened and desperate than Hypocrisy.

8 We are impatient that our words and promises should be disbeleeved, and
returned upon us with the reproach of a lie: And is it not most unreasonable,
that we should doubt, or not believe at all, or utterly deny the word, the
Gospel, the promises and truth of God; 1 Ioh. 5.16.
making him a liar who is the first, most necessary and eternal truth, who
never did, and its impossible he should, either err or deceive?

9 We think it just that whosoever offends our meannesse, and expects to
reingratiate himself to our favor, should at least ingenuously acknowledge
his fault, and promise amends, upon suit of our pardon: And is it not most
unreasonable that when our consciences tell us, we have often and highly
offended the God of heaven, yet never to be touched with remorse and sorrow
for our sins, but persist with dry eyes to add sin unto sin: Abusing that
long-suffering of God, which should lead us to repentance: hardening our hearts
by what should melt them, Romans ^.40
the patience and longanimity of God; which is so great and excessive, being
provoked every day, That if we had no other Argument to convince there is a
God immensly good, this were enough; for no finite patience could forbear so
long.

We daily pray for, and expect forgiveness from the Majesty of God, for our
numberless and heinous offenses, which if we obtain not, it had been good
for us that we had never been borne. And is it not most unreasonable, that we
should be so sensible of the least injury offered to our vileness; so short
spirited, that like powder we kindle upon the least spark of offense, and
instantly flame to revenge. That like Esau, or that evil servant in the
Gospel, Mat. 18.28. We feed our minds with such black and desperate thoughts,
as to count nothing sufficient to redeem our honors, or repair our wrongs,
but the very blood and life of our brother. That being mortal, we should
meditate such immortal displeasure; and to expiate in point of honor some
small neglect or affront (which a great and noble mind would pass over,
quippe minuti semper and exigui est animi minimique voluptas, ultio; and a
Christian mind for Christ's sake would forgive:) so as to adventure at once the
sacrificing two souls to the Devil and eternal death: So that what event
soever a Duel has, we do our souls a greater injury, than is in any man's
power to do us. If God had been thus speedy and implacable to thee, thou
had not lived to have stood so much upon thy terms, to set a higher value on
that Idol, thy Reputation, than upon thy God, thy Savior, thy brothers and
thine own souls salvation.

Hic animus atque hae sunt generosi Principis Arts? Are these the expressions
of reasonable minds? of generous and great spirits? As Lactantius said of
Jupiter, whom they styled Opt. Max. Maximus sit, certe Optimus non est; so may
I say of these, How great minds they are I know not, but I am sure they are not
very good; having little of reason or religion, which are the only raisers and
enlargers of the mind.

Thus true it is, That ((...)) All wickedness is for want of wisdom; all sin
the defect and sign of an unreasonable Mind: And though it be set off with
never so many shows of wit, and countenanced by greatness; yet it draws deep
of folly and extreme sottishness; such as a Christian mind should count most
unworthy of it self, and its Author, God; since it blemisheth its chiefest
ornament, Reason; and the beauty of reason, which is Religion.

Thus we may see, and seeing I cannot but stand a while and deplore the
miserable ruins and decays of this excellent creature, man, and his
excellency, the mind: which the hand of the best and wisest Maker, had at first
framed to so goodly a frame and beauty, that it seemed a fit Type and Model to
represent its Makers skill and perfections.

Naturae imperio gemimus, we are naturally prone to grieve, and pity to see
the ruins of a stately building, whose height might have shook hands with
heaven; or to see an elegant piece or statue, where in the Art and curiosity of
the Workman had contended with Nature and the life it self, now everywhere
flawed and deformed: only such lineaments left as serve to show, how well it
deserves our pity, and if it were possible, our Repair.

How much more worthy of our serious consideration and sorrow, are the Decays
and Dilapidations of these goodly structures, our selves? not only the
base-Court, and out-walls of our bodies, nor that inward of our sensitive
appetite and fantasies; but that Sacrarium, that Holy of Holies, our Spirits
and Minds; spoiled of all those rich divine Ornaments they were once adorned
withal. And this not by the Injury of Time, but our own voluntary sin; and
which is most deplorable, of our selves we daily sink and moulder to an utter
vastation and eternal ruin. For though we had power to impair and waste our
selves, yet have we neither skill nor will of our selves to renew and repair;
till that (...), the first, wise, and powerful Builder enable us with power
from above, to renew that by his grace and Spirit, which we have wasted by our
own sin and folly.

Nor did that (...), the great worker, God, show more power, wisdom, and
goodness in our first framing, than he does Grace, Mercy, and pity in our
reforming. While we (alas) please our selves in our rubbish, and dance in our
ashes and ruins, our sins and follies, His truth discovers our decays and
danger; his Spirit stirs us up to consider them, to grieve for them, to be
ashamed of them; and enables us to set to the work of renewing: having set
before us a pattern, the express Image of himself in our nature, His Son our
Savior Jesus Christ, to whose beauty and perfections a Christian mind ought
daily to aspire; who as he requires this work of us, so he enables us to it;
and that he may the more encourage us, he does in some sort count it ours, and
will reward us for it, by crowning his graces in us.

The third Part.
Thus having seen (Reverend, Honorable, and beloved) the many great and
universal ruins, and decays of our minds, both in reason and Religion, and
so how great need we have of renewing, It is now time we look to the third
particular, The manner of the Work, as it is here recommended to us by the
Spirit of God. Be renewed, etc.

This we will consider in two things answerable to the Decays.

1 In point of Reason, which is the natural excellency of the mind, so far
as it looks to this present life.

2 In point of Religion and Grace, which is the supernatural excellency, as it
looks to the life to come.

1 Reason is the Manifestation of the divine will in the creature. It is as a
right line or thread of wisdom which runs through all things, by which every
thing is fitted and tied together, by a suitableness and proportion of their
forms and ends; and all of them as lines in a Circle, diverse in their
circumference, but meeting in one Center, the glory of God their Maker.

God has endewed the soul of man with an ability which we call the mind or
rational faculty, to find out this rule and law both in himself and all
creatures by discourse: and having found it, his conscience ties him to follow
and observe it, both toward himself and all things without him.

This tie and relation of reason is most constant and unchangeable in all
things which work and are moved by instinct and necessity ad unum; only the
reasonable creatures which have (...), a free will and liberty of working, do
often swerve from this rule of Reason; which whosoever most observes, we count a
wise and prudent man; whosoever by sensuality and passion violates, we count him
(...), foolish, disorderly, and unreasonable.

God is the most rational Agent, doing all to a right end, and by fitting
means; having wisdom to dispose, and power to effect beyond all possibility
of power, or resistance.

Man's best improvement of reason is, to find out and propound to himself the
right end, which is Gods, and must be good; and to use fitting means, which
must be honest, in all his Actions to himself and others.

(...), (Arist.) Reason still enformes us best. This Rule, Iuxta rationem
vivere, to live by Reason, Philosophers and wise men of the world thought the
highest, best, and sufficient Rule to live by, which would bring a man to the
best end, in the fruition of which consisted Happiness, or that Summum bonum.

By this Rule [ Reason] they did and said many things very noble, and
commendable, wel-becomming the dignity of the mind of man; at least for the
materiality of their actions, civil and moral: as the enacting of just and
wholesome laws, the constituting of forms of Government, and well-ordering of
Commonweals, for administration of Justice in both kinds, for moderating the
sensual Appetites, for composing the passions, etc.

Though they seem to have failed in the main end, which chiefly forms and
qualifies both Actions and Agents, to wit, the glory of the great Creator;
while they did things not out of Conscience, and obedience to his will, but out
of respect and love they had to their Country or themselves, out of an
insatiable desire of Glory and immortality of Fame. Hence their minds grew
vain and proud, which blemished both themselves, and the most specious of
their doings or sufferings. For although these men went far in renewing their
minds by the light of Reason, to a restrained and civilized temper, above the
most of men; yet they came far short of that highest and divinest pitch of
Renovation, which is in respect of true piety and Religion, which is The minds
conformity to the will of God, for what concerns a better and eternal life;
which is the special effect of Christian faith; and this is the Grace of God.

In respect of this last and great end, the Glory of God in the saving of our
souls, I need not tell you, how blind Reason is and ever was, in the wisest
of natural men. You know how confused and uncertain all was that they guessed
or discoursed of the Souls immortality and after-happinesse, which so far as
they did expect, it was only grounded on a man's own Righteousness, and good
works, not upon another, applied by Faith, which is only the Christians light.

For bare Reason will never suffice to find out its own defects, the nature of
sin, and misery by it, nor the fall of man, which no Philosophers dreamed of;
Much less of the way of repairing by the free love and mercy of God through
Jesus Christ our great Redeemer. For this, the mind needs a supernatural light
of the word of God and his Spirit: Which only can raise the soul to see its
own misery, and accept of Gods mercy.

So that what the mind is not able, in this great mystery of our salvation, by
Reason to invent or comprehend, for the uniting of two at so infinite distance,
as a most holy and just God and a sinful man; Its narrowness and incapacity
is supplied by the Grace of faith; trusting in, adhaering to, and relying upon
the truth, Act. ^.11.
mercy, and power of the Promiser and Revealer of these (...), great things of
God; as also for the effecting of them.

2 So that Christian faith is the greatest improving and raising of the mind,
bringing the soul back to that first and best object, God; from whom by sin it
was alienated and diverted to the creature. And the nearer the mind approaches
by faith to God, the more it partakes of his light and grace; the more is the
divine Image renewed in the mind and whole man, which we call Holiness; which
is a study of conformity to the will of God, arising from the apprehension and
belief of his goodness in himself, and his love to us in Christ.

For until a man believes this truth of God in the Gospel, and sees those
better things offered to him in Christ, he cannot mind the things of God, with
any delight or comfort; as being either incredible, or impertinent and
unprofitable unto him; The mysteries of God being, as that of regeneration to
Nicodemus, Ioh. 3.
hidden and strange Paradoxes, rather than saving truths and gracious promises.

And certainly, till we believe that God has loved us freely in Christ, our
minds cannot be carried with that filial love to him as a Father. Tantum
amamus quantum credimus, As far as we believe we love, as we love we live.

Till we believe God will save us, as he has promised, upon our turning from
sin to Christ, we cannot serve him with that free and faithful service, as
he requires.

Till we believe in some measure, that God has chosen us in Christ to be his
for ever, we cannot quit our minds of other things, and choose him for our
highest good and only happiness. Therefore we see the low and narrow minds of
men out of Christ, seek only to supply their wants and please themselves with
these small, temporary, and appearing good things which this life affords.
Their desires and fears, their shadows of content, their dreams of honor,
of happiness how mean and poor! how false and deluding! how much to be
pitied! having nothing in their aim, which is worthy the minds dignity, or
answerable to the souls infinite capacity and duration.

Only true Christians, that is, Believers, above all sects and professions,
have given great proof of the true magnanimity of their noble and generous
minds, both in doing and suffering; having minds by faith renewed, and so
raised, that they were able to despise all that the world esteemed, to contemn
all they threatened or inflicted, to deny themselves unto death; their minds
being fixed on that life, treasure, and happiness, which God has offered to
mankind in Jesus Christ.

So then, Jesus Christ, we see, is that first, great, and sovereign object,
whom whilst our minds by faith look upon, they are renewed, raised, beautified,
ennobled, and transformed: the mind of Christ being that excellent pattern and
type by which ours must be renewed, Romans 12.2.
as the Apostle prescribes. Phil. 2.5.
Let the same mind be in you, which was also in Jesus Christ; so holy, so pure,
so heavenly, so composed: whose spirit in and with your spirits effects this
great and happy work of renewing. For Christ is not, as other paternes, dead
and unactive, but operative, and assimilating those to himself, Col. 3.10.
who strive to imitate his virtues and perfections. Therefore the Apostle Paul,
a learned and judicious man, determined to know nothing (as his maine) but
Jesus Christ and him crucified. 1 Cor. 2.2.


Other learning and Philosophy may free us from barbarism in manners, and
ignorance of the creatures; but faith in Christ crucified only is able to
redeem us from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
to mortify our sins, to raise up our souls to consider themselves, their
great and last end, and highest eternal good, which is God, considered in the
face of Jesus Christ.

That Rapsody of humane knowledge, 1 Timothy 6.20
or rather opinion (indeed but (...)) with which men so stuff and cramb their
minds, of things that need not be known, or ought not, or cannot fully be
known, (whose ignorance were safe and commendable) what does it but (as the
Apostle tells us) puff up? 1 Cor. 8.7.
as a false conception breeds only ((...)) a swelling and abortion of pride,
and self-conceit; but brings forth nothing of those ((...)) noble and generous
effects in their lives, which become the divine nature of the soul.

Certainly, though a man had devoured all the learning of Philosophers,
Historians, Poets, Divines, and Humanists, yet (as Pharaohs lean Kine) the mind
would be never the fatter or fairer; but still empty and unsatisfied in it
self, and ill-favored in the sight of God: as that poor man that dreamed he
eat and drank and was filled, Isai. 29.8.
but when the soul awakes, in that morning of eternity (death or the
resurrection) it will find all without the knowledge of Christ to be but vanity
of mind, and vexation of spirit.

In all other learning, the mind does but pick up a few strawes, leaves and
feathers, the notions and scatterings of a dark, confused, and defective
knowledge, to make it self a small nest of temporary content; which will be
soon cast down, when death, as a whirlwind, overtakes us; the mind will be
left dubious, wandering, and distracted, not having been truly wise to get by
faith a sure mansion for it self in that Rock Christ Jesus.

Now this renewing of the mind, is not a work of wit and parts, but of grace
and devotion; It is not strength of reason, nor depth of judgment, nor
acuteness of invention, nor faithfulness of memory, nor vastness of reading,
nor subtilty of dispute, nor height of speculation, that renewes the carnal
and natural mind: all these abilities do often want most renewing, to take
off that pride and vanity of mind, which commonly attends them; to purge out
that leaven, which puffes them up to vainglory and selfe-seeking; to bring
them, as the Wise men of the East, in all humility and devotion to seek Christ,
and offer up those treasures of wit and learning, to the Honor of God, the
Giver.

Believe it, Small and moderate minds for wit, capacity, and secular learning,
yet if sanctified by faith, are often raised to more eminent expressions of
love, joy, zeal, patience, constancy, and all good affections; for though they
cannot formally dispute, yet they can suffer, dye for Christ; and though they
be not learned in humane Arts and Sciences, yet they have learned the first
and hardest lesson in Christianity, which is, to deny themselves in point of
pleasures, profits, honors, and outward contents, more than many of the wise
and learned; whose learning, while they nourish proud, sensual, and
Atheistical minds, is but their crime and burden; serving only to die their
sins to a deeper tincture of folly; and is as a millstone about their necks,
that sinks their souls to a farther degree of condemnation.

And do we not often see, men of great wits and noble endowments for nature
and industry, who have no cause to disbeleeve the word of God, since he never
yet failed of his promise; and has confirmed the truth of the Gospel, by so
many infallible witnesses, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, by
Miracles, by Sacraments, and what ever might induce men (morally) to accept of
his mercy in Christ, and live accordingly. Yet these men, not having minds
renewed by faith, count all but, as the Athenians, Act. 17.13.
babbling and foolishness of preaching; continuing to please themselves with
momentary and perishing Objects; mean time, with extreme sin and folly (which
will be their misery at last) they neglect that great salvation, which God
has offered to mankind in Jesus Christ; greater than which neither the soul
can desire, nor God can give, since the Author, Means, and End is God himself.

We see in the Gospel, till the Prodigal came to himself ( peregrinatur enim
omnis inordinatus animus, Chrysol. for wicked and inordinate minds are always
from home, busied about all but themselves;) till he returned ad saniorem
mentem, to consider seriously the necessitous way into which he was fallen, and
wherein he maintained himself, only so far as to be sensible of his sordid
misery; and till he thought of the plenty both of his fathers affection and
provision, he was not resolved to quit his husks and brutish company.

Sen.
Primum est compositae mentis argumentum secum consistere, it is the first step
or sign of a renewed mind, to be composed, to tarry at home, to be with and
reflect on it self: which faith alone makes it to do, bringing the mind back
from the former vanity and extravagancy, and making it seriously retire to it
self and its Author, God, its Savior, Christ, what he is, and what he has
done for us, revealed to us, and requires of us; All which the mind by faith
considering of, assenting to, and relying, upon, is in some degree renewed
daily, to its primitive beauty and integrity; new light in the understanding;
new objects to the will; new motions to the affections; new actions in our
conversation, which are all but earnest and pledges of that fullness and
perfection, which the soul shall at last receive in the vision and fruition of
God and Christ in the life to come, when both soul and body shall be renewed
to an undecayable perfection.

The Fourth Part.
Thus have we seen the nature, the ruins, and way of renewing the mind. Give
me leave now in the fourth place, to present to you the Idea or Character of a
renewed mind; which (as he said of virtue) if we could discern with our
bodily eyes, it would strangely win upon and ravish our affections.

There are three Regions of minds, as of air of heavens.

1 The first is of low, earthly, and debased to senses and the things of this
world, which covet much more, and yet nothing more, than this life and the body
needs.

2 The second is a higher and middle Region of minds; which are raised above
the vulgar, in desire of knowledge, honor and renown; (...). These are (...),
rather high-minded than heavenly; (...), as Comets raised up and more lightsome
than others, but still of gross and earthly qualities, and will soon vanish.

3 The third and highest Region is of minds, that are as the Stars in the
Firmament; pure, holy, heavenly; as heaven full of light, beauty, order,
tranquillity, and constancy of motion; (...), out of the reach of inferior
things; not subject to mutation or corruption; of a sweet and happy influence
to all inferior faculties, which are as the earth, or lower world of the man.
It is men's vicina Deo; as the highest heaven, so the renewed mind is near to
God himself; above all things looking to him, filled with him; adores,
admires, delights, converseth with God. Good thoughts as good Angels,
descending in all humble acknowledgement of its own distance and
unworthiness; yet ascending by faith to the contemplation of the infinite
perfections of God himself, and his merciful communicating of himself to us
through Jesus Christ.

This makes a renewed mind never alone; a good man's solitude more to be envied
than all the company in the world: For as God has made us bodies fit to
converse with things corporal; so minds and spirits for a mental and
spiritual communion with himself, by meditation and prayer, which are the
fruits of faith.

The renewed mind alone sees God upon earth, and discernes his ways, which are
hidden from the eyes of the world. In Wars and tumults, it looks upon the
anger of Princes, the injuries of men and their rebellious spirits; and
considers the just judgment of God upon sinful men, corrupted with long
peace, whose spirits are stirred up to punish each other: And through all times
and mutations of humane affairs, it still marks and expects Gods care and
faithfulness, for the preservation of the Ark his Church, amidst the
inundation of war and barbarism; The Church being Gods great design in this
world, to which all States, Monarchs, Princes, the great men, and great things
of this world are subservient.

Next to God, a renewed mind reflects upon, and reverenceth it self; studies
books, men, creatures, all things, but chiefly it self; counts it self as the
Jewel of the man, precious and portable; all things without as the lumber,
which may be lost, and must be left. It turns the current of affections
another way, and improves them by grace, to better objects; love, joy, desire,
delight to God and Christ, and the doing of good; fear, hatred, grief, anger,
etc. against sin, and the doing of evil. It considers sin as the greatest
deformity and evil that can befall, and which only can hurt the soul. It had
rather have Gods grace, than his temporal gifts: It esteems heaven not so
much for the impunity as the immunity from sin: The happiness it desires is a
perfection of Holiness; and its glory a fullness of Grace.

In it self it is men's tranquilla, full of composedness, tranquillity, and
sweet harmony; which it counts so divine a happiness, as no occurrence in the
world is worthy to disorder it. It keeps a symmetry of actions, and uniformity
of life; making passions and affections subject to reason, reason to faith, and
faith to the truth and will of God revealed.

In respect of men, the renewed mind studies to be (...), as public, diffusive
and universal a good as may be; not (...), pragmatick and censorious, out of a
pharisaicall vanity; but in a serious, solid and primitive way of piety,
discreetly reserved, yet ingenuously communicative; counting it a half and
defective happiness to save it self only; (...).

Is. Pel.
For all other things in the world, it is men's sapiens, i. e. cui res sapiunt ut
sunt; The renewed mind relisheth and judges aright of things, and accordingly
lets out its affections unto them; (...), it loves earthly things, as things of
a brittle temper, and when they are broke it is not much troubled.

It is men's quadrata, square and fitted for all the casts of that the world
calls fortune, this counts Providence: ready to entertain any occurrence of
life, as becomes one whom God loves; no condition befalls in which it finds not
occasion to improve some grace or virtue by exercising of it.

It is men's immota; as a Rock so is the renewed mind* in the storms and
inquietudes of the sea of this world; wherein others are tossed and
overwhelmed, its firmness and constancy the more appears: Ponderibus librata
suis: so balanced and settled upon its weighty and serious intentions, and hopes
for eternity, ut si fractus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae.

It expects the greatest troubles and comforts from within; for all without the
renewed mind, as Noah's Ark, when the old world, men of old, gross, and earthly
minds sink to despair, and are drowned in a deluge of their own fears, This
is then raised higher, and by faith and prayer makes nearer approaches unto
heaven. The pulls and stresses of worldly calamities do but fasten the anchor
of its hope, that it gets the better hold; for the worse things it finds in
this life, the more confidently it expects better in the life to come.

It is men's defaecata; shake and stir it never so much, yet as a clear and
living spring it soon recovers its settled purity, and discovers nothing
faeculent or unsavory. Angry, but not sowred to malice; cheerful, but not
vain; provident, but not distrusting; industrious, but not covetous, liberal,
but not profuse; abounding, but not proud; advanced, but not insolent; learned,
but yet humble; poor, but yet content, and rerum Dominus nil cupiendo;
supplies its wants from it self, but cutting off its desires.

Its joys and comforts are not that ((...)) superfluity and torrent of
sensual and worldly joys, which as a winter-streame soon abate, spending
themselves apace, and besides leaves a squallor, and filth after them upon the
conscience: But as a modest spring, its joys rise and run in a secret, clear,
and silent stream; but yet fidelibus aquis, constant and perennant, such as
the greatest drought of affliction cannot overcome.

In a word, the renewed mind as a noble stream passes clear by all those
pleasant things which worldly minds admire, and are detained with in the
circular eddy of their own fancies: This keeps its desires within the banks of
moderation and content; being impatient of resistance still hastens its course
toward its great Sire, the Ocean. August.
Irrequieta est anima nostra, donec ad te redeat, Domine; never quiet till it
has attained to God, the first and great Mind: There it diffuseth and loses
it self in the vision and contemplation of his immensity and perfection; where
being united, it enjoyes God, Christ, and it self in an eternal fullness and
novelty.

It is now time that we look toward a Conclusion. Although the weight and
beauty of this Subject be such, as might well save me the labor of stirring up
your affections; presuming that I speak to an Audience, for the most part,
piously learned, and judiciously devout: Who, I hope, hear your selves rather
commended, for what you have already begun to do, than either taught what to
do, or taxed for being wanting in a business so well-worthy your selves, and
your best endeavors; as this is, the Renewing of your minds.

And indeed I think my self happy, (Reverend and the rest learned Auditors)
that, by your favor, I have this opportunity offered me (which my own
weakness might not have aspired unto) that is, To recommend so serious,
sublime, and necessary an Argument, as this of the Renewing our minds, to so
noble, so learned, so choice, and considerable an Assembly, consisting of Minds
and Spirits more elevated, enlarged and ennobled than ordinary.

And certainly, this duty of renewing our minds, as it concerns all men, so it
challenges the practice of it, from none more than from you: To whom it will
be an extreme shame to be exceeded by others in piety and holiness, as much
as you exceed them in learning and knowledge.

O Let not that of S. Augustine be verefied of us: Indocti rapiunt coelum, nos
cum doctrinis nostris perimus. Poor and simple minded men crowd into heaven,
and we with all our learning coldly and scarcely creep thitherward.

It will be little comfort at last to dye with those words, Quantus Artifex
pereo? The fall of Angels, you know, was the most desperate and irreparable:
the cleerer the light, against which we sin, the straiter and heavier will the
chains of everlasting darknessely upon us.

It is not learning, but renewed, that is, sanctified learning that will
comfort us, that will save us, that will secure us, while we preach to others
the way of life, our selves shall not be cast-awayes. The newfangled and
fantastic mind indeed despises learning,; but the renewed mind prizeth it,
seeks it, and uses it aright, with humility, with modesty, with industry, with
the love of truth, with obedience to it, with a care and tenderness to the
souls of poor people, with conscience to dispense its talents to the glory of
God, and good of mankind.

Never did any times (indeed) require and exact more of learned men and
Scholars, than these now do, in point of renewing our minds, our lives, our
manners, to the pattern in the Mount, the example of Christ and his holy
Apostles. The faults you see of some, are made the reproaches of all, by the
rash, unjust, and ignorant censures of many, who offended with some drone or
waspe will be revenged by overthrowing the whole Hive of Bees. O let us
confute their errors, repress their insolences, disarme their malice, and if
it be possible occasion their envy, rather than their contumelious pity, by a
serious, speedy, and conscientious following this precept, and the example too;
which is most noble and imitable in this great Apostle S. Paul; whose renewed
mind had learned in all estates to be content, to count Godliness great
gain, to determine to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified, to
glory in the cross of Christ, to esteem all worldly wisdom vain, and
foolishness, without the knowledge of God in Christ, to live with all good
conscience before God and men.

This, this method of renewing our minds and lives to piety, holiness,
humility and contentedness, will undoubtedly renew upon us, the love and
favor, the honor and integrity of learning.

It is certain the world cannot want us, except they will be wanting to
themselves, in the most sordid, supine and brutish negligence that can be. It
defends upon us what opinion and esteem men shall have of us.

We shall easily overcome all the difficulties and indignities of these times,
if we can but overcome our hearts to this sacred renovation, which will render
us accepted and honored both of God, and of all wise, learned and good men;
whose wisdom and justice, no doubt, will as they ought discern between the
just punishment of some, and the noble encouragement of others; nor suffer the
displeasure against some men's abuse of things to swallow up the lawful, just,
and commendable use of them.

For the ignorant, brutish and impertinent clamours of others, your only way is
to let them weary themselves, with their own oblatrations; while you, as the
clear moon in a sphere above them, neither alter the constancy of your
course in learned studies, nor abate ought of the splendour of your manners, in
a renewed, that is, a sanctified life and conversation.

You know (...), the mind is the man of the man; how much more of a Christian,
who should far exceed all other men, having relation to a Savior, that is
God as well as man?

By our bodies we live beasts, by our minds men, by renewed minds Christians,
by perfected minds Saints. The minds improvement is the maine, which God,
Christ, and Religion intend in us; and shall we be incurious? ut animam
serves nonne expergisceris?

All other things in the world, God so little considers, that he will one day
destroy them, but he will make up his Jewels. There is nothing God esteems
but man, nor in man but the mind, nor the mind till renewed to holiness.

Ps. 147 10.
The Lord delights not in any man's legs, no nor in any man's strength, beauty,
hair or outside, which are the leaven which puffes up vain and small minds;
no, nor in thy wit, learning, acuteness, eloquence, etc. but he looks at the
ornaments of a renewed, a holy and humble mind; this he requires as a gift
worthy of his prizing and acceptance. S. Ambrose advises, quod habes
pretiosissimum, mentem Deo deputes. The Satyrist divinely, Demus superis jus
fasque animi sanctosque recessus Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto.
Hac cedo, etc.
It matters not how mean thy drop or mite be which thou offerest to God,
provided thou present it with an honest, upright and generous mind, whose most
secret and retired motions are always digested to so holy and just a temper,
as becomes God the Receiver.

The renewed mind is no other but Bethel, the house and temple wherein God will
dwell, even the high and holy One that inhabits eternity. Isai. 57.15.
S. Chrysostom hence inferres, (...), what we do to our decayed houses, do
we to our minds: Vestium and domorum sordes erubescimus, and animorum
patiemur? Our minds must be fitted to entertain Christ and his holy Spirit;
which pure Dove will not dwell with sordid, deformed, and unrenewed minds.
(...), says Plato. And S. Paul, 2 Cor. 6.14.
What fellowship has light with darkness? Consider, the maine comfort of a
Christians life is the commerce with pure Minds, Spirits, and Intelligences, as
God, the Angels, and Saints.

And not only have we to do with good spirits, but also with evil, which we
call devils; which are impure and discontented minds, whose endeavor is to
continue our minds and spirits perverse, blind, and depraved: It being their
envy, that mankind, which is of an inferior make to them, should have means
of renewing, which are denied them.

As God and Christ's Kingdom is chiefly that in the spirits and minds of men,
which he secretly, but most sweetly and effectually, governes in those that
are his; so the Devils chief usurpation and tyranny is there; secret and
unseene, but most violently ruling in the minds of the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. seeking by infinite stratagems and methods to corrupt
the best and ablest minds to the same desperate state, to which he is
irrecoverably fallen. Therefore we pray that Gods Spirit would be with our
spirits; for there is no such judgment and misery, as to be left to a man's
own mind, to be led by his own spirit, which will certainly mis-lead him.

Men commonly pretend to magnanimity, to generous minds and great spirits. O
consider it is not a great spirit, in the worlds sense, but a good one God
esteems. The meek, lowly, and quiet spirit is greatest in Gods account, and
next to his advancing. That mind is truly great, which is more impatient of a
sin in it self, than of an injury from another; and takes the severest revenge
of it self.

There is a greatness the world applauds, which infinitely lessens a Christian
mind: Dum magnitudinem animi peccandi licentia metiuntur, while men measure the
greatness of their minds, by their boldness and daring to sin. Such minds, as
Comets (which are portenta irae Dei) the higher and greater they are, the more
malignant influence they diffuse on the inferior world, by the contagion of
their example.

We esteem breeding, learning, and civility, whereby the natural rudeness
of a man's mind and manners is pared off, and he becomes tild and polished for
the best society: Certainly those are the best bred and most adorned minds, who
know to pay due respects, not to men so much as, to their own souls, and
above all to God, to whom we owe the greatest obligations; wherein to be
wanting is extreme rudeness, and not so much incivility, as brutishness; for
nothing is more humane than piety.

S^n.
Incipiat ergo tandem aliqua tui dignatio esse apud te: mentem suspice: O begin
at length to reverence thy sefe, to respect thy mind above all things under
heaven.

We are prone to admire stately buildings, elegant pictures, elaborate pieces
of art and humane invention; In these we magnify the skill and ingenuity of
the worker; and here our low and narrow thoughts are stopped and bounded. O rise
higher; go beyond all these, to the Maker of these makers, that (...), God.
Consider those unparalled pieces of heaven, of earth, of the sea, the Sun,
etc. above all, thy self; in thee, thy soul; in thy soul thy mind; which is
(...); caput operis; Gods Masterpiece; in respect of which all creatures are
inconsiderable to God and the renewed mind.

In other things we seek to content our senses and appetites, with the best
objects they are capable of: curious pictures for the eye; ravishing music for
the ear; exquisite tastes for the palate; fragrant sents for the smell. And
shall our minds only be found to fasten upon small, vile, and inferior
objects, below their original and capacity, which our very outward form and
stature points unto? ad majora nati, immo renati.

Animus excellens omnia tanquam minora transit, Sen.
diis cognatus, omni mundo and aevo par, ipse sacer and divinus: The most if
not all things in this world are impertinent to the mind, and far inferior
to it; and one day, as He brings in Pompey's soul ( ridetque sui ludibria
trunci,) we shall wonder with disdain to think how much our minds stooped to
our bodies, and undervalued themselves.

Not but that a renewed mind may consider of all things below it, as well as
the divine mind did when he first made them, and still preserves them; but yet
at a distance and in subordination; let none be in chief, or Rival to God and
thy Savior, or thy soul. The more the mind truly knows these sublunary
things, the less it will seek or prize them.

Sen.
Magnus animus, ut solis radii terram contingunt, at interim non amittunt, nec
sordes contrahunt: The Renewed mind, as the Sun, may look at all things below,
but not to be affected much with them, less infected by them: As Solomon did,
whose wisdom remained with him, sublimitatem suam servans, still keeping its
distance, from them; thinking none adaequate or fit company for it self, but
God, good Angels, and good men, who are or have minds eternal as it self.

Sacer and nobilis animus, naturae suae memor, nihil seipso minus amare potest:
a renewed, i. e. a holy, and truly ennobled mind should much forget it self,
if it should love any thing that is less than it self.

O! It were wisdom to begin this work of renewing betimes. They live longest
and best whose minds are renewed soonest. Vitae perit quantum peccatis vivimus,
so much life is lost as is spent before, because it is misspent: while the
mind neither knows nor enjoyes its self, nor its Creator, nor its end and
happiness, but lives in a dubious, vain, unquiet, disorderly way.

It is miserable to think how much of our short and precious time is raveled
out in the vanity of our minds, about things that will not profit us in the
end, before we consider to what end God has sent us into this world; before
we resolve to break off our sins by repentance, which is (...), the change
and renewing of the mind. Hos. 7 9.
O brepit non intellecta senectus: gray hairs are here and there and we
consider it not.

S. Chrysostomes advice is good: (...): have thou sinned? thou have wasted and
impaired thy soul: O make speed with tears and repentance to renew it: As
David prays, Psalm. 51. Create, O Lord, a new heart, and renew a right spirit
within me.

Delays are dangerous, where the opportunity is short, and the omission
irreparable. How many young men are cut off in their proffers and essays to
amend their minds and manners? How many renewed years, and days, and mercies
shall upbraid our unrenewed hearts, and minds, and lives?

The want of this makes the thoughts of old age and death full of bitterness
and terror; while men are conscious to such minds still in them, as are in no
sort fitted for the society of pure spirits, Saints and Angels, much less for
the presence of God and Christ in heaven.

We should do well to consider, that the sins of our bodies and senses, such
as are lust, voluptuousness, intemperance, sensuality, etc. will wither with
time, and decay in us of themselves, when the days come in which we shall
have no pleasure. But those sinful habits, that spiritual wickedness which
vitiates and corrupts the mind, except by grace they be put off in this life,
will continue to infect and oppress our souls to eternity: Such as are pride
and unbelief, profaneness, impenitency, hardness, want of love and fear of
God, delight in sin, despising of goodness, and the like; these follow and
increase upon the soul, to age, to death, and after death to hell, where is no
possibility of renewing.

This Vestis animae (as Tertullian calls it,) our body, the clothing of our
souls, is daily veterascent and mouldring away; notwithstanding all the art
we use to patch up our obsolete faces and withered carcasses. O let our minds,
that inward man, as the Eagle, be renewed daily: Nothing will more disarme
death, and wel-come old age, than when the mind is such, that the less
pleasure the senses have, the more it does vacare sibi and Deo, enjoy God and
it self. The more infirm the body, the more lively the mind grows, as
looking at its liberty and enlargement, which now approaches: when it shall be
quit of these (...), chains of mortal and sinful flesh, which have a long
time detained and depressed it, below its sphere; and as a mighty Eagle got out
of its cage or coop, it shall instantly surpass the clouds, soar up to
heaven, and make its nest in the Sun of Righteousness.

I will add no more to persuade you to this duty, but what the Apostle in his
patheticall preface to this does: I beseech you, Brethren, by the mercies of
God, Romans 12.^
that you be not conformed to this World, but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your minds.

Salus ipsa supplicat ut salvi esse velimus: Salvation and our Savior entreat
us to be saved by being renewed. Quanta pietas, quae quod potuit imperare
exorare mallet! how great condiscending is it for the Spirit of God to entreat
that which he might command!

Generosi animi facilius ducuntur quam trahuntur; Let us give testimony of
ennobled and generous minds, that are easier melted by entreaties, than urged
by commands.

It must needs condemn us of obstinate spirits, of base, ungrateful minds, if
we refuse, when conjured by those many rich, free, full, preventing and
eternal mercies of God. They that refuse to hear and obey when mercy charms
and entreats, what voice can they expect, but that of Justice, threatening and
revenging?

But O thou first, great, and eternal Mind, the Father of our spirits and
souls, enable us to do what thou requirest of us; Thou that best see our
decays renew right spirits in us; and by thy word and Spirit work our minds to
a conformity with thy most holy, pure, and perfect Mind. Raise up these divine
and immortal souls, which thou have made capable of thy self, above the
vanity and emptiness of the things of this world, and settle them on thy
self, and those great things which thou have offered us in Jesus Christ.

As our bodies daily decay, so let our minds be renewed daily; that instead of
darkened, proud, vain, worldly, carnal, depraved and corrupted minds, we may
have enlightened, humble, serious, heavenly pure, holy and sound minds; That
may know thee, and love thee, and delight in thee, and be united unto thee by
faith here, and filled with thee by fruition hereafter, of thine own immensity
and perfection, in that happy vision of Eternity.

Amen.
FINIS.
The errors of the Press, in words or points, (as some no doubt there are) I
must leave uncorrected, to try the candor and discretlon of the Reader.


