Causa Dei: Gods pleading his own Cause Set forth in Two SERMONS PREACHED At
the TEMPLE in November, 1659.

BY Dr. Gauden, Bishop of Excester.

LONDON, Printed by John Best for Andrew Crook at the Green Dragon in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

TO THE Honorable Societies OF THE TEMPLES.
IN order to adorn my departure from you ( worthy and honored Gentlemen) with a
Beno decessit such grateful respects and civility as becomes me, to your
eminent and worthy Societies, I have formerly prepared, and now dedicated this
following Treatise, as my farewell Present to you, or a second monument of
mine, yea and of your Honor, after that, which was by me the last year of
Englands captivity, consecrated to the memory of my reverend and renowned
Predecessor Bishop Brownrig, under the patrocinie of your Name; that was as the
Urn or Conservatory of his and your reciprocal kindness, and mutual merits,
with whose mortal remains your piety has adorned your Temple: This second
piece is the substance of those two Sermons which I first preached among you,
after I was invited (...) in those dark and dangerous times to bestow my pains
with you in the Term time.

The main subject of this is, the The true Cause of God, and the right pleading
of it. Which Theme I then chose to preach on, because I observed in the whole
course of our English traged^^, that every party still pretended, to act their
factious confusions upon their several stages, in these three Kingdoms, under
the specious dress, color, title and pretense of Gods Cause, and the high zeal
they had to plead it.

This, this was always inscribed on the most bloody banners; with this their
tongues and pens were whetted who sought to build their Counter-Babels on the
foundations and ruins of Zion: With this Mark of the Lamb were those ravening
wolves marked, who drank the blood, and eat the flesh of their Fathers and
Mothers, of Kings and Clergy of Church and Country, with this Motto, The Cause
of God and Christ, their false tongues, their crazie heads, their cruel hands
and impudent faces were to be set off to popular reputation; when nothing
indeed was further from their hearts or works.

O the Cause of God, the Cause of God, the Cause of Jesus Christ cries every
tatling and teeming faction, when prostitute to, and impregnated by the Incubus
of some novel lust and new fancy, as if it were now in travel, and ready to be
delivered of some holy birth, or sacred prodigy. This language or fallacy non
causa procausa, of urging the Cause where no Cause of God was, the rigid
Presbyterian learned in Scotland; this the puny Independent brought from
Arnheim or New England: This of old the Anabaptists cried up at Munster, when
to increase their Faction they multiplied wives: This the silly Quaker now
peeps and mutters in every corner: This the more bloody Papists boasted of in
Ireland* and other Bigots of that persuasion do every where magnify the Romish
cause, as the only Christian Catholic Cause.

Mean while all these parties jointly and severally labor to overthrow the
true Cause, and excellent constitution of this Church and Monarchy of England:
That is the truth, peace, honor and order both of these British Kingdoms and
of our Reformed Religion, as it is conform to the Word of God, to our ancient
good Laws, and to the customs of the true Catholic Church: In which, the
learned, loyal and Religious Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and Commons of this
nation, with their Kings, have ever judged that the true Cause of God, as to
justice and Religion, holiness and peace, the divine glory and welfare of
mankind, was and is most eminently contained.

I confess I was then weary and ashamed of the counterpleas and counterscufles
of those bold and divided harlots, who did each pretend with great zeal the
Cause of God against the other, in order to oppose Gods righteous cause, which
certainly ever was and will be but one and the same for ever, as to the main of
truth and peace, of faith and good works, of justice and holiness; I evidently
saw by many years sad experience, that these rude rivals already had, and ever
would first divide, then destroy the true cause of God, and the public
interest of this Church and Kingdom only to advance their private and partial
causes, which were evidently leavened with most illegal extravagancies, with
sacrilegious covetousness, with immoderate ambitions, with inhumane revenges,
with implacable cruelties, and with impudent exorbitancies, and with most
^eigned necessities.

Hence it was that I adventured in so great and illustrious an Auditory (even
before the day of our redemption dawned, or that day star of the North
appeared, which afterward ushered in our Sun of Righteousness) I say I then
adventured truly and fully to set forth my sense of Gods Cause, with such a
resolution as our learned Bradwardin Archbp. of Canterbury sometime took up,
when he set forth his large and elaborate Volume De Causa Dei, of which he thus
says in his Preface, De Causa Dei Scripturus sciens manum in ignem terribilem
mitto, etc. That he well knew into what flaming fires (with Scoevola) he put
his hand; how many enemies he should contract and exasperate, by his honest
stating and asserting the Cause of Gods grace and glory, against the Pelagian
pride and presumption, who sought to advance the impotent power of nature, the
cloudie twilight beams of Reason, and the maimed liberty of man's will (which is
clogged, corrupted, and hampered with many sensual lusts) above the necessity
and against the only sufficiency of Gods grace in order to his glory, and a
sinners salvation* yet that good Prelate did both proceed and speed: he did his
work and had his reward, both in a good conscience and in great successes, as
to his repressing that petulancy of poor worms, exalting themselves against the
great God, without whom they can do nothing but sin against him, and damn their
own souls.

In like manner have I lived to see in a few months, after that bold essay of
mine among you, the wonderful revolutions of Gods providence, pleading at once
his own, the Kings, this Churches, and this Kingdoms cause; the Cause of our
Laws, Liberties, Lives and Religion; the cause of all honest men, for their
souls and bodies, for themselves and their posterities, in their temporal and
eternal great concernments: All these great and good Causes are at once pleaded
by our wise, just and merciful God, against those strong delusions, those
false pretensions, those rebellious usurpations, and those novel intrusions,
which under the lie and hypocrisy of setting up Gods Cause, and the Cause of
Jesus Christ, made profane men abhor the very name, and godly men to pity the
reality of Gods holy cause, which they saw so miserably mistaken by some, and
by others so shamefully deformed, so sordidly defiled, so impudently blasphemed
through the wicked policies, and horrid practices of some monsters of men, most
unsanctified Saints, who were so diametrally contrary to the Word of God, to
the laws of this Land, and to the example of Jesus Christ, and all ^rue Saints*
and so no more capable to set up or promote Gods righteous cause (except that
of his punitive Justice for our sins, to which the Devils themselves may serve
as Executioners) then the sparks of hell can add to the light of heaven, or the
falling Stars and Meteors contribute to the luster of the Sun, or the crooked
winding of the Dragons ^ail could give protection to the Woman and her child,
against whom his mouth vomited those black floods* and Stygian eructations,
which by Heretical or ^ch^^matical, or Heathenish, or Atheistical persecutions
seek to overwhelm them.

The great and blessed God has taken the matter into his own hand; what you
then faithfully heard, and devoutly prayed, for with me, as to Gods pleading of
his own Cause, you have lived to see fulfilled, as it was then by me discoursed
and foretold, while the poor people of England were halting between man^
opinions, all eagerly pretending to be for Gods Cause: one for Aristocracy, the
other for Democracy, one for Presbyter^^, the other for Independency; one for
their Antiepiscopal Covenant, another for their Anti-regal Engagement; one for
ab^uration of Kings, the other for extirpation of Bishops, a third for setting
up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, in which they might rule instead of both King
and Bishops (and all this (forsooth) in order to advance the Cause of God,
though in ways quite contrary to the eternal rules of charity, justice and
religion, the Laws of God and this Nation) amidst this confusion, the Lord from
heaven has on the sudden convicted, confuted and confounded all those
specious, but spurious pretenders to Gods Cause, which is not to be begun or
carried on (as I after declare) by any means but such as are pure and
peaceable, just and ^oly, either by an orderly doing good in our places, or by
a patient and humble suffering of evil inflicted on us, though it be for well
doing.

It is most evident, that as in natural, so in civil and Ecclesiastical
motions, all things magnetically move, as they are moved by their chief cause*
or grand concern, which by a circular kind of influence studies to unite the
final to the efficient cause, that the power of the one may enjoy the good of
the other.

This Cause is the first and last mover of every knowing agent* it is the
weight and spring of all rational activity; it is a pulse ever importuning the
spirit, and beating upon the heart, the one thing necessary, to which men seek
to make all other things subservient, or at least subordinate, the center from
which and to which all lines are drawn.

The better to compass their respective designs, every Agitator for Faction did
cunningly entitle God to their Cause (as some that are cautious of the cracked
titles of their estates resign the Fee to the Crown, and take from them a Lease
of a thousand years) ^o did the counterfeit and contrariant Causes (larely so
scu^^sing in England, for place and power) set themselves up under the name of
Gods Cause, while they were indeed the causeless corrupters of our Laws, the
Nations heavy curse, the Churches moth and corrosive, and confounders of all;
yet each of their pretended causes were impudently pleaded by ^ome men* in
Churches and Courts of Justice as Gods Cause, y^^ and by ^ome suppositi^ious
Par^^aments they were voted for, till they had run themselves and all of us
(like S. Paul's ship in the storm) upon such rocks of Anarchy and confusion, as
were past humane hopes of recovery, if God himself had not arose by a
providence (scarce ever paralleld in any age or instance of the world) to plead
by a still voice, after all our foregoing earthquakes, fires and tempests, the
Cause of his own great Name, and the honor of our blessed Savior, with the
sanctity of our Reformed Religion, and the Loyalty of our English Nation, the
rights also of the Crown, with the double honor of our Church, and in sum the
just restablishment of all our long shaken and overthrown foundations; the
cause of all which was pleaded more effectually in a few calm Months, when the
voice of Law and Reason, of Loyalty and true Religion, came to be heard in our
streets, then they had been, or ever could have been in many years, by
plunderings and sequestrings, by killing and slaying, by illegal covenanting,
and perjurious engaging, by devouring and destroying both Church and Kingdom.

I am piously ambitious (though my station be now removed from you, and made
(without my seeking) much uneasier, though somewhat higher, then it was before)
to deposite thi^ work with you, O worthy and honorable Gentlemen, among whom
it had its first productions of whose love and favor, as you know, I never made
any mercenary gain, or pecuniary advantag^ (as that wretched Libeller, (...)
Creticus Borborites enviously suggests, my charge of attending your service
being beyond any benefit I ever received,) so I mus^ own this, as the greatest
rewar^ and only satisfaction, which I ever had, or expected for my pains among
you, that I had thereby an happy opportunity, in so noble an Assembly, and in
so desperate paroxysms of our distempered times, to set forth with my wonted
freedom, the great concern of all good men, which is the true Cause of God,
which must be pleaded against our own and others lusts; and to discover those
potent epidemical cheats which under that name had so long abused these British
Nations and Churches.

I well remember, that some of my more touchy and guilty hearers (men of name
at that time) were at once scared and scandalized to hear me preach so freely
and smartly of that subject; they feared their practice and craft would soon
fail, if once the true Cause of God were rightly stated and pleaded: yea some
men of the long robe, and of large consciences protested after the hearing of
the first Sermon they durst not hear me preach again on that subject, least
their silence should make them guilty of High Treason, by their no^ complaining
of me to the Traytor^ then tyrannizing over us: Indeed they were justly jealou^
that the true Cause of God, like Moses Serpent, would eat up al^ those of the
Magicians: That the Cause of Christ, of the tru^ heavenly Jerusalem, would
either batter down or undermine those bloody Babels of their Common^ wealths,
which were indeed the common woe, though it made for some men's private wealth
by the prices of blood and wages of iniquity which they greedily received.

I thank God, I never feared the frowns nor affected the smiles of such servile
Sycophants, who durst plead any Cause but what was truly Gods, the Kings and
the Churches. I had then sufficient encouragement from the love and approbation
of the most and best of their Society (without which, yet I ought and should
have done my duty, upon the account of conscience and inward comfort) Hence is
this my confidence of inviting you again to review the Cause of God, which has
been now mightily pleaded beyond what we could ask or think, God himself
conquering the monsters of our sins and miseries, by the miracles of his
mercies*

My aim is to retain and engage as Counselors, Advocates, and Servients to
this righteous cause (yet without any other Fee then that of a good conscience
in this world) not only men of my own profession, as Divines and Ministers, but
you ^s o that are either the Sages and Judges, or the Students and Practisers
in the Laws; because I look upon you as Masters of great Reason, and no less
careful (I hope) of true Religion, best acquainted with the constitutions of
this Church and Kingdom; persons generally adorned with ingenuous education and
good literature, yea and, which is more in vulgar eyes and esteem, with good
estates; Gentlemen related by birth, or alliance; or clients or acquaintance to
the best Families and greatest affairs of the Nation; you either fill the one
or attend the other house of Parliament (while no Bishop or other Clergie-man
never so worthy is admitted to come there, unless as a Supplicant or
Delinquent) your counsels and examples are not only influentiall in your
country retirements, but also efficacious in all the Cities and Courts of
England.

It is your custom, and no less your wisdom and honor to keep to, and plead for
the (...), the Magna Charta, fundamental Laws and ancient and excellent
constitutions of this Church and Kingdom (not therefore good because ancient,
but therefore ancient because they were judged and experimentally found by our
wise and pious Progenitors to be very good, yea best for this Church and
State:) It becomes the freedom of your spirits and estates, as Lawyers and
Gentlemen (however the poor Clergy are often compelled to popular dependancie,
yea and some of them (like leeches) thrive best when they hang most upon the
skins of people) I say it becomes you to be the furthest of any men living from
flattering or abetting any factius novelties, or Fanatic Novellers in Church
or State, which you cannot do without greater sin and shame then other men,
because you have more knowledge of good and evil, of Law and Justice, of Reason
and Religion; the guilt and burden of other men's sins, which are lead and
deluded by your counsel or example must needs lie heavy upon your souls (as
well as ours of the Clergy) when being their guides, lights and oracles, you
or we prove their deceivers and seaucers.

Certainly if the poison of some Lawyers teeth had not venomed the wounds which
some Preachers tongues first gave to the life and welfare of this Church and
Kingdom, we had not run to such horrid ulcers, such in veterate and incurable
gangreens of disloyalty and irreligion of faction and confusion, nor endured so
various, ridiculous, and superfluous Tragedies; which then began when Pulpits
rang Aarons bells backward, as to the Cause of God; and Courts of judicature
meanly conformed to the vilest lusts of men, such as have given horror and
astonishment to the modest part of mankind; and which threatened (except the
Lord had been merciful to us) to have tormented Kings and Parliaments and
people of all degrees in the hell fire or Tophet of everlasting fewds, factions
and confusions, under the specious name, but most putid fallacy of Gods Cause,
the good cause, and at last the good old cause: though nothing was more vile
and novel, less ancient or more arrantly wicked, for perjury, perfidy,
Sacrilege and Regicide, void of all fear of God, or reverence of man* contrary
to the Word of God and Laws of that Nation: A Cause, the zealous Martyrs for
which are only fit to be put in the Devil^ Diptych or Calendar, or in God Black
book, not in the Book of lif^

Against all which presumptuo(...) imposures in Church and State You (O worthy
professors of the La(...) and of our reformed Religion, a^ well as we Preachers
of the Gospel^ have now all honorable and saf^ encouragement to oppose ou^
selves under the protection of God and the King, that both you a(...) Judges
and Justices by the civil sword, and we as Bishops and Presbyters, by the
spiritual sword* may be as valiant for the honor and order of the established
Religion and Laws of England, for the ancient and excellent Government Regal
and Episcopal of this Church and Kingdom, as others have been impudently
pragmatick to broach those novel errors, most illegal injuries and high
indignities which they brought upon us, more by our own cowardice perhaps then
their courage. Let us dare as much to be Loyal and religious, honest and
orderly, as others have dared to be false and base, insolent and irregular,
injurious and sacrilegious.

They wanted not many black mouths, vile tongues, and libellous pens to plead
for the Baalims which they set up (mere Idols and Teraphims in Church and
State) which are now (blessed be God cast out to the moles and bats. O let not
us, for I would have no difference between your learned Tribe and ours, let
none of us who are most versed in God or man's Laws, be wanting to the true
Cause of our God and Savior, of our rightful King, of our reformed Religion,
and of our famous Church, in its Doctrine, devotion, discipline and Government,
In the cause of which, all your and your posterities happiness are included.
Since then by the goodness of God the monstrous and many-shapen Dagons of our
late Philistines and oppressors, are now fallen to the ground and broken off head,
hands, and feet, a mere fanatic stump; let us turn Israelites unanimously set
our selves, as we have done, to the welcome reception of his Majesty, so to
bring home with truth and peace, honor and order, joy and jubilation the Ark of
God, the Church of England, restoring it to its place, and adorning it with all
the beauties of holiness, worthy of the wisdom and piety, munificence* courage
and honor of our Ancestors who were famous both for their loyalty and
Religion; the fruits of whose care and constancy we enjoyed heretofore, as men
and Christians, in a wel-reformed, united and settled National Church, till some
men lost their wits and hearts, their credits and consciences, their sense of
duty to their God and their King, yea and their first love of our reformed
Church and Religion, for which our famous Forefathers had so notably pleaded,
not only in the Pulpits and at the Bars, but in prison also, and at stakes,
when they were able to say with truth and comfort, as the royal Martyr of
admired memory, did now dying That they thanked God they had a good Cause and a
gracious God.

Certainly it is better thus to suffer for God cause (inpietie, justice patience
and charity) then to prosper in the Devils with sacrilegious usurpation and
injury; this as a fire of thorns may blaze for a time, but it will soon be
extinguished, the other carries the lawrells and crowns of eternal victory; for
though we die for it, yet we shall live by it; the greatest trophies of Gods
cause are in another world; there our Lord Jesus Christ with the Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and all the true Professors set up their
victorious banners, and rest in eternal Triumphs* O let us all cast anchor in
Gods Cause, and we shall have no cause to fear the tossings of this world,
which was and ever will be a restless Sea. Let us keep Faith and a good
conscience from shipwreck by preservation of our Laws and reformed Religion, so
shall we and our posterity, Kings and Subjects be most safe on earth, however
we shall be sure to gain our main cause and process at last in heaven, tho in
other things we be less advantaged as to this world, for all our care and pains
in pleading Gods, the Kings, and the Churches Cause. In which I hope I have not
been wholly wanting to my duty in the worst of times; nor shall I be now
discouraged in these more Halcyon days, however my sun may seem to be in its
Western decline, where I find my self preferred as to much more love, civility
and honor from the Gentry, sober Clergy and ingenuous people of that Diocese
then I can well deserve, so I am exposed to much more business and fatigue of
life, sweet^ed with far less worldly comfort and t^anquillity then formerly I
enjoyed, when I had the happiness of a more conv^nient as well as a more
private and retired condition, but Iow my self more to the public cause of God
and his Church, of my King and Country then to my own ease or private interest,
for those we must be willing to do, suffer, and deny our selves in any thing
short of heaven, sin and hell; faithful service of them is our greatest
freedom, highest honor, and will be at last our greatest reward, if we can but
have patience to wait a few years till we pass to another world, where the
crown of eternal glory shall be set on the head of that virtue which envy
here may depress: That you with my self may persevere in sincerely pleading and
promoting Gods blessed Cause (which is our own) is the earnest prayer of, Your
very humble Servant

John Gauden, Bp. of Exeter.
E^ueter Feb. 20. 1660.
ERRATA.
Page 66. line 26. r. which, l. 27. r. of, l. 28* dele them (). p. 61 l. 16. r.
(...), l. 18. r. Hinges or ^xes. l. 19. r. polar, p. 89. l. 15. r. pleaded, p.
150. l. 19. r. l, p. 153 ^ 8. r. pursue.

Causa Dei: Gods pleading his own Cause.
Set forth in two SERMONS Preached at the Temple in November. 1659. Upon

PSALM. 74. 22 Arise, O God, Plead thine own Cause: Remember how the foolish man
reproacheth thee daily.
THis Psalm is a most Pathetick The scope of the psalm.
Lamentation for the deplorable state of the Church of God among the Jews in
the Babylonish captivity; after the Justice and Wrath of God had let in the
power and malice of enemies, as a mighty flood, which swept away not only the
civil peace, liberty, plenty, safety and honor, with the Majesty and
Government of the State, but also the very face and form of the Church; The
public profession, order, decency and solemnity of Religion, the Worship and
Service of God, moral and ceremonial, as to sacrifices and oblations, Prayers
and praises in the Temple.

. A matter of the greatest consideration The sad eclipse of true Religion in
any Nation.
to every pious and devout soul, who cannot but be grieved to see Religion (as
the light of the sun) put under a bushel, confined to closets and corners,
driven to private and precarious Conventicles, to be forced to thin and
scattered Congregations; or which is worse, to affect separate Conventicles*
where the ta(...)d ra^^ of verity will never be able to ^^ep charity warm, or
cover the (...) of Schism and Faction.

(...) i^ the^ time to cry out with old Eli Ichabod; The glory is departed 1 Samuel 4. 1.
from Israel; the beauty of holiness is turned into sackeloth ashes and;
public joys sink into mourning, and solemn Halelujahs into sad lamentations,
full of sighs and tears.

There is no cause to triumph, or Observe.
joy upon any civil and secular accounts in any Nation, never so prospe^^^s
when true Religion is eclipsed, or the true Church and its Ministry
discountenanced, debased, persecuted, plundered, destroyed, reproached: Then if
ever, as the Mariners cried to Jonah in the storm, Every man should cry
mightily to his God, apply his hands to the ore; that is, to such means, as
being pious and prudent, are only proper to be used in Gods Cause.

This Psalm bear the name of Asaph* The Author of this Psalm.
that famous Master in David's time of Church-musick, both Vocal and Organical;
in which there is so much of humane, yea divine sweetness, composure and
rapture, that nothing but savage Barbarity, and rude hypocrisy, can envy or
deny the Church of Christ, both Christian and Judaick, the blessing of holy
harmony, in singing to God, and setting forth his high praises in the greatest
perfections of melody that man can attain unto, and the Churches gravity enjoy.
Not that it is like to have bin then penned by Asaph, as if by the spirit of
prophecy he had foreseen, foretold and forewarned the captivity four hundred
years before it came to pass; but either some other of that name wrote it in
the time of the captivity; or some man of another name might then write this
doleful Psalm or Threnody, to the composure, method or tune of Asaphs excellent
melody, who was one of the chief Singers, leaving to after ages further
monuments, not only of devout compassion of the Churches affliction, but also
of those heavenly comforts, which may in all cases be used and enjoined in such
holy forms, as do set forth the exemplary passions of devout men; either as to
joy or sorrow, complacenc(...) compassion, prayer or praise, in public or
private concernments; so that, not only (as St. James speaks) If any man
rejoice, James 5. 13.
he may sing Psalms of praise and thanksgiving; But if he be afflicted, he may
read, pray and weep over such divine Ditties as are most suitable to the sense
and sorrow of his soul, or the state of the Church, yea, and of any private
friend.

This holy Penman (whoever he His Sympathy with the Church.
were) having an heart full of zeal for Gods glory, no less then eyes full of
tears, and lips full of complaints for the Churches calamities, suffers himself
to boil over to all the Topics of pathetick Oratory, and devout importunity,
sometime deploring in general the sad state of things, other while complaining
to God in particular instances; yea in one place he seems to complain of God
himself, as if he were regardless and negligent of his own interests; Tanquam
coecum and surdum numen; as if he needed a Monitor and Remembrancer to mind his
own cause: one while he deplores Gods fierce anger against his Church; Then he
tells him of the near relation Verse 1.
he had to that suffering Cause. Verse 2.
After he shows God the ^ad and shameful prospect of his Churches Verse 3.
ruins: what havoc the enemies insolent and unbridled rage had made; First,
of his public Worship, then of the very places which his name had consecrated,
and pious gratitude had both dedicated and adorned with politure and art, to be
Temples or Synagogues, that is Houses of God in the Land: Then he quarrels and
almost chides (as it were) by an humble expostulation, and pious impatience
Gods long silence Verse 9.
and great reservedness.

. At last, to take off any seeming stupor (which is not incident to the Divine
omniscience, and most vigilant clemency) he applies the most sharp spur and
pickquant goad in the world; namely, the reproaches of Gods fear of mant
reproaches.
God's and his Churches enemies; which the Lord professed long ago so much to
fear (speaking after the manner of men) and thereupon more than once disarmed
his Justice* now brandished against his own people when they had sinned, and
highly provoked him not only to punish them, but to purpose and threaten the
utterly destroying them; yet he made gracious retractation, that he might avoid
the Versa 1^.
dint and impression of his enemies poisoned darts and venomed arrows, Psalm.
64. 2.
even bitter words, petulant scorns, and arrogant reproaches, which Moses
represents to him, as a notable allay or cooling to the over-boylings of his
wrath: And it wrought so effectually in the highest paroxysms of Gods anger,
that the Lord chose rather to use the shield of his patience, longsuffering,
great goodness and indulgence toward his Church grievously apostatising (that
he might thereby defend himself from the sarcasms of his enemies, as if he were
either ignorant or impotent, or malicious or mutable) then by using the sword
of his Justice too rigorously against his Church, to wound both it and himself,
to the most odious joy, and insolent triumph of their common enemies, who hated
and opposed the Church, not as smning and swerving sometime against God, but as
serving of him, and adhering to him in some measure at least, beyond all other
men. (...) 13, 14, 15,


. The Psalmist further urges the former experiments of Gods power and
providence, as in the general course of nature, which is Verse 16.
regular and constant; so in the special exigents of his Church; endeared Verse
19.
to him, as the Turtle to its harmless and loving Mate, from which to be
separate is as death; Gods covenant with the Church is firmly alleged; also
his faithfulness is pleaded; his lasting philanthropy or tender regard to all
that are oppressed, is inculcated; and nothing omitted that pious passion can
suggest, or compassionate Oratory can express in so few words.

. After all these lively colors brought forth with no less skill then plenty
and vehemence, to set forth what he either deplores or deprecates, or
supplicates; he adds at last this notable Ingemination, to rowse and excite
God, to consider, if not his poor Churches calamity, yet his own great concern.
The pathetick Penman is resolved not to let God alone, to give him no rest
till he had some answer worthy of his love, pity, jealousy and zeal; yea
worthy of so merciful a God, who ambitiously delights in the titles of the
Father of pity, and God of all consolation; Therefore he adds this Epiphonema,
or close, as the ultimi conatus, and n^vissimi ejaculatus ecclesiae;

Arise O God, plead thine own cause, etc. As to the partition of the words, The
division or parts of the Text.
we may easily discern these particulars in them;

First, The excitation, Arise.

Secondly, The Invocation, O God.

Thirdly, The declaration, To plead.

Fourthly, The Appropriation, Thy own cause.

Fifthly, The grand Motive or

Incitation, Thine enemies reproach thee daily.

Sixthly, The Solicitor or promotor of the process, action or plea; The pious
and pathetick penman of this Psalm, who had rather seem rude and importune,
then irreligious to God, or uncompassionate to the Church, by being either
silent, or so cool, as if he were indifferent, and thereby taught God to deny
him, by the faintness of his asking; he asks, and seeks, and knocks; he prays,
and cries, and roars for the disquietness of his soul; his bowels are turned
within him, and his soul poured out like water, impatient of a repulse in such
a Cause as was Gods own Cause.

The word Cause is not here taken Of the word Cause.
in a Physical or Metaphysical sense, nor in a natural or logical notion; but (
sensu forensi and politico) in a politic sense, as a term used in Courts of
Judicature ( in foro vel Senatu) to show the rational and just foundation upon
which civil Pleas, or legal actions are grounded; and from which, as to the
point of right or wrong, all controversies derive the force and efficacy, as
all activity and effects do from natural causes.

So the Hebrew (...), denotes a contest, by way of complaint, Exodus 17
rebuke and repair, whence the waters of Meribah, or strife had their name,
where God pleaded with the murmuring people. So Gideon is nicknamed Jerubbaal,
for pleading against Baal, Judges 6. 31. And the LXXII. (...). And the Latin,
Litiga litem tuam Domine; do all import a quarrel or controversy, an action of
the Case in point of Trespass, injury, or indignity, wherein Gods honor was 2 Samuel 15. 4^
concerned, which was not to be put up in silence, but a just reparation to be
made.

In this sense both the Greeks use (...), and (...); Also the Latins, Causa, or
Caussa, as Tully often, and other ancient Orators, no less then the later
pleaders, according to our common, or the Imperial and Canon Laws.

Thus the word Cause denotes, Id Its sense or import here.
quod est (ut in vita and voto) sic in lite causalissimum; that which is the
(...), the (...), or optatissimum, the (...), the (...); the main center,
Hinge, Butt, or Design; the chief end and motive, that grand concern and
interess which men are most fearful to forfeit or to be frustrated of, and to
lose, or miscarry in.

Some Etymoligists in their ((...)) The Etymology of Cause.
Grammatick curiosity are pleased to derive the word Causa, either from Cautio,
because men are most wary not to fail of it, (which is Causa cadere) or from
(...), heat, and burning, indicating the fervor and zeal with which men
prosecute their main cause, and their indignation against those that oppose, or
obstruct them in it, or lastly, from Chaos, as that which contained in it all
primitive, natural, and elementary causes.

This last notation does very unhappily The many pretonded causes which men
plead as Gods.
fit our sad condition in England, when under pretense of several causes, which
the eager, partial, and inordin^te prosecution of them (pleading them ( Art
and Mart) by arguments and arms too, by word and sword, by fraud and force, by
faction and fury) we have run our selves in ( Chaos antiquum) almost to a very
chaos or confusion, both in things civil and religious; as if we were (...),
Terrae filii, gigantum fratreculi) a company of Mushroom men and Christians
sprung out of the earth but yesterday, a nation in its infancy or minority,
which is now to learn its A. B. C. of Religion and civil government, being set
back by a most sad and horrible fate, from Homers Iliads, to our Primmer or
Pueriles, by I know nor what new Teachers, and many Masters.

. So that it is high time seriously to meditate, conscientiously to preach,
freely to write, and fervently to pray upon this subject: The Cause and the
Cause of God, since every party pretends a Cause, and Gods Cause too, which
they are most eager and ambitious not only to plead fairly (but to) obtrude for
o^bly on all others: Thus from the great Pretenders ^^ the Cath(...) Cause (of
which the Romanis^^ would seem the chief Patrons) to all other Sects and
Subsection^ either in civil or religious factions. All parties are divided by
their Causes, and the whole is destroyed by their divisions: Ask any side why
they thus shuffle and out, why they thus divide and destroy? why they do things
so different from solid Reason and true Religion, contrary to all Laws of God
and man contrary to the duty they owe ^^ God, their Country, their King their
Posterity, the Church and the State, as to Justice, Veracity Peace and Charity?
Ask why, like Ixicons wheel, or Sysiphus his stone* they overturn, ouerturn,
overturn all things eivil and sacred by their end less ver^igoes and rotations?
then answer is short, as that of David to his brother Eliab, Is there not ^ 1 Samuel 17. 29.
Cause?

It will not be amiss therefore Trial of Causes. 1 John 4.
(as St. John advises Christians to try the spirits whether they be of God or
^o, of Christ or of Antichrist; to examine the several pretended and pleaded
Causes, whether they be Gods Cause (which is indeed (...), Causarum causa, the
Cause of Causes: The Cause and interest of all the blessed Angels, and all true
Saints; worthy of Princes and Peers, of Gown-men and Swordmen, of all honest
and good men; or whether they be not the Cause of the Devil, and of men's own
evil ^usts, disguised with this larva or vizard on them, which may not
uncharitably be suspected of some of them; Since it is most certain, they
cannot all be Gods Causes, they are so many, so multiform, so mutable, so
divided, so destructive to each other; they must needs fail either of the main
end and ground, or matter and method of Godr pleading his own Cause.

. Of which I shall (by Gods Address to the Auditors ^n behalf of Gods Cause.
help) endeavor to give this honorable and Christian Auditory such an account,
as may either inform, or at least confirm your judgments in the true Cause of
God (that you may not be tossed too and fr^^ with every wind of causeless
Causes, which blow as men's passions and secular interests do arise.) And
further, I hope to excite your judie^ous abilities, and eloquent attentions
(who are persons of so great learning, experience, and publi^^ influence) to be
ever zealous in that good Cause which is Gods as ( bon^ Causidici) honest and
able Lawyers to show your skill and will in the great concerns of God, his
Church and your Country; which are no^ so eagerly pleaded and counter pleaded
among us. Appeals being as it were made to every one o^ us, to judge in our
selves which ^^ the righteous Cause of God, tp which we ought cheerfully to
give our suffrages and assistance, as most undoubtedly conducing to our public
happiness both in Church and State, in civil and religious concernments; let
not this be (...) a desolate and forsaken Cause, in which no men of parts and
estate will appear.

. And cartainly, if I had less experience then I have of the favor of the
Court (I mean of this Christian Assembly) which is met in Gods Courts and
presence, yet I may justly have great confidence, as to the merit of that
Cause, which I shall seek to present to you, and plead before you this day in
Gods behalf; As Jotham therefore said to his Countrymen, Hearken to me, Judges
9. 7.
that God may hearken to you: Attend diligently to the pleading of God alone
ca^ plead our cause. 1 John 2.
his cause, who alone can plead yours; yea and has given us an Advocate with
the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, whose blood speaks better things for us;
whose wounds are so many eloquent mouths, whose cross was laden with strong
cries for us; Heb. 12. 24.
whose merits are undeniable mediators; whose Spirit continually makes
intercession in us and for us, even then when we know not what to say, or how
to pray; either unable to plead, or ashamed to speak for our selves: Gods Cause
may sometimes seem to want our pleading for it before men; but our cause does
really and ever need the pleadings of Gods mercy and Christ's merits before the
Tribunal of his Justice, that there may be a prohibition granted at the humble
motion of believing and penitent sinners, to remove the suit or action from the
Bar of Divine Justice, to the Throne Heb. 4. 16.
of the heavenly Grace, where we may find mercy to relieve us in all our
distresses, despairs and deaths.

. Before I set before you the main fruits with which I intend to entertain you
out of the Text; i^ will not be amiss to gather an handful of those fair
flowers which offer themselves at the first view of the words, as so many
short, but sweet and excellent observations.

1. We may observe. That God 1. Obs. God has his cause in this world.
has his Cause too in this world, his great design, concern and interest as
well as the wise Statists and great Politicians, as well as the strong, and the
rich, and the learned, and the ambitious, and the malicious, and the
voluptuous, and the covetous men of the world; who so eagerly plead and pursue
their, own projects and Causes, that they not only many times forget Gods, but
generally cross, contradict and oppose it, as with their sin and folly, so to
their shame and ruin; for as the counsel, so the Cause of God shall Psalm. 33
11.
stand: Nor is it to be baffled by any either force or fraud, strengtl^ or
sophistry: It is as truth ( Magna and praevalebat) a great Cause, and will
prevail, by the help of a wise and strong God; though for a time it may be
unjustly condemned and crucified by unjust men (as Christ was) yet it will at
last be raised again in power and glory; yea and justified before men and
Angels; It will, as Aarons rod or serpent, devour all those of the worlds
Magicians Exodus 7. 12.
and Politicians. It is a Cause which will be (as fire) consumptive of all
other, and consummative of it self.

2. Observe. As God has his Cause 1. Obs. God ever did and will plead his own
cause in his due time.
in this world, so it becomes him to own it: It is opus Dei; the work of a God
to plead his own Cause, as Gideon speaks of Baal. Idols were ^dges ^. ^^
convicted to be no Gods, because they could not plead for themselves by
speaking or doing good or evil, as the Prophet tells Idolaters. Therefore the
Psalmist here so earnestly urges it upon God; who he believed ever did and
would own his own Cause, so as to plead it himself, in his own way and time; 1
King. 8. 59.
Both as to the Majesty, truth, justice, holiness and honor of it; also as to
the indignities which are by evil men cast upon it; Summus Deus summas patitur
injurias; none is more a sufferer, as to the malice and insolence of wicked
men, then the most blessed God; who yet is as impassible, as the suns light is
uninfectible with the filthy exhalations of dunghils. Plato puts this true
saying into the mouth of Socrates dying under the malice of his persecutors,
Anytus and Melitus; (...), etc. It is impossible for evil to make any
impression of affliction upon that which is good; and which can (as a jewel) so
preserve its native goodness and firmness, that sufferings shall make it not
only no way diminished, but (as in the wheel and file) more illustrious and
meritorious; such were the sufferings of Christ properly, and of all good men
(in an Evangelical sense) being for a good Cause, and on Gods account; till God
cease to be just, and good, and true, and faithful, vigilant and zealous for
his own glory, his cause cannot utterly miscarry.

3. Observe. The Cause of God may 3 O^s. Gods cause may be in a very deplored
state.
be, as to the eye of the world, and to the sense of the best men, in a most
sad, dejected, deplored, despised and desperate estate; so sunck and oppressed,
that there is no outward 1 Kings 19. 10.
sign of its being ever boyed up and recovered; thus it was represented to
Elias, as if he only were left to plead a lost Cause: So the Disciples
expressed their sorrow and despondency; We verily trusted this had been he who
should Luke 24. 31.
have redeemed Israel.

So Mary weeping to the Angels, answers their questioning of her tears; They
have taken away my Lord, John 20. 13.
and I know not where they have laid him: many times the foundation of Church
and State, of Justice and Religion, are so out of course, that Psalm. 11. 3.
the righteous know not what to do or say; all things so unhinged by violent,
wicked, and unreasonable men, that nothing moves by any order or written Law of
God or Man, but by the power and impulse of men's own lusts; who from Gods
silence, permission and patience, are prone foolishly to conclude his
approbation and liking of their cause and ways, yea and to say God is such an
one as themselves: and 50. 21.
the distress of Gods Cause may be such, that the whole Church may be ready to
cry out, as the Psalmist, Help Lord, for vain is the help of man; It is time
for thee O Lord, to put to thy hand, for they have and 60. 11.
made thy Law of none effect. and 119. 126.


. So did the Heathenish persecution, and the latter Romish superstition
tyrannically triumph a long time over the slain Witnesses, the Law and Gospel,
the Scriptures ^v. 21. 4.
and Catholic Traditions, the Preachers and Professors of that true Religion,
which has been testified, both as to moralities and mysteries, faith and
manners, not only by the two Testaments, but also by the confessions and
conversations of all ancient and modern Christians, conform to Gods Word, and
the best Churches customs. The vapor of numbers, pomp, prosperity and
prevalency, are no demonstrations, either to approve the cause of Arius or
Antichrist; or to prejudice the cause of Christ and of Gods true Church: But as
Lucan speaks of the cause of Pompey and Cesae, in which the justice of the
first was overborn by the successes of the second, Victrix causa Diis placuit
sed victa Catoni; the gods abetted Caesar by victories, but Cato's constancy
adhered to Pompey's and the Senates conquered cause, because it was most just.

4. Obser. The Cause of the true ^. Obs. The cause of the Church is signally
Gods cause.
Church is Gods cause, most signally and peculiarly in this world; his
interests and concernments are so linked with its, that they are insep^trable;
as Jacobs soul was bound up in Benjamins, as the Husbands Genesis ^^. 30.
honor in the Wives, as a friends happiness in a friends, so is the relation
between God and his Church; if that be black, God is eclipsed, as to the most
visible eradiations of his glory to this world; if that be bright and
conspicuous; as a City on a hill, in truth and holiness, in charity and
prosperity, Gods great name, praise and renown are most glorious and
illustrious; Then his Wisdom, and Truth, and Justice, and Power, and Mercy, and
Patience, and Goodness and Faithfulness are in their meridian strength, as the
Sun at noon day. If the Church be hidden, it is as the moon turned into blood;
or the Sun of Righteousness into sackcloth, as Joel speaks; as Joshua
(astonished Josh. 7. 9.
when Israel turned its back upon its enemies) said to God, And what will thou
do O Lord to thy great Name? So do holy men, they are prone to despond and
deplore Gods own condition and Cause, when they see the Church of God, or any
part of it, as to its veracity, sanctity, order, peace, prosperity and unity,
decline and decay, under error, profaneness, persecution, disorder, distraction,
division, or any uncomfortable condition; Tunc periclitatur coelum, and Dei res
agitur; then Gods Cause is at stake; then, as in the Giants assault, his heaven
is in hazard, as if he were in danger to be ( numen infelix) a miserable God;
Then is Christ tossed in the storms; then do true Believers cry out, as the
Disciples, Lord save us, we perish; Mark 8. 25.
Help Lord, and do it, for thy own name sake, which is called upon by us: God
has no considerable design in the world, but that of his Church; when this is
consummated, the world, as the scaffold, or stage, or shell, or chaff, is to be
destroyed. The Church cannot be undone, until God is undone and bankrupt.

5. Obser. No Church has ever 5 Obs. The most flourishing Church may be under
great depressions.
been so famous and flourishing in outward piety, plenty, peace and prosperity,
but it may fall under persecution and great oppression; sometimes indeed (as
God said to Satan, Job 2. 3.
in the case of Jobs trials) without a cause; that is, as to any predominant
and unrepented sin, at present provoking God against him; but only as Christ
said of the man born blind, That the work of Gods Ioh. 9. 3.
grace and Spirit might be manifest in the trials and tribulations of his
Church: So in the first ages of the Church, when Religion was purest, and love
warmest, yet was the fire and furnace of persecution hottest. Sometimes indeed,
as a Psalm. 107. 34.
fruitful land is made barren for the wickedness of them that dwell therein; so
the lukewarmness and corruptions of a Church, the Apostasies and falling of
Christians from their first Faith, loyalty, patience, love and good works, may
cause God to hide his face, to withdraw his protection, to remove his
candlestick, as he threatens, and to give over his Turtle to the will of its
adversaries; who shall set up their banners, and roar in the Sanctuaries, and
break down all her carved works, and strip her of all her pleasant things* as
it is, and has been for some years in England; the wild Psalm. 80. 3.
Bore and the Fox shall then do their pleasure by force and fraud against her;
this is the variable state of the Church Militant, mutable as the Moon; though
it be clothed with the light of the Sun, yet it may be so eclipsed and turned
into blo^d that there is no help for her but in her God. Perfect and perpetual
felicity is a state only expectable in heaven; till there is no sin or spot in
the Church and soul, there can be no security against sorrow, shame and
sufferings, which are our physic in our valetudinary constitution, to which
this life is subject; yea Christ himself the Son of God and Savior of the
Church though without ^in, yet was not without suffering, while he was found in
the form of sinful flesh, and bare by way of susception, imputation, and
satisfaction, all our sins.

6. Obser. Times may be so bad `Obs. Times may be such that none but God can
plead his Cause.
and on such a desperate pin, that none can either safely or effectually plead
Gods cause or his Churches, but himself; who only can create Psalm. 78. 60. 70
and 80.
deliverances and mercies, who alone commands the winds and seas to obey him,
who can restrain the fury of man, and turn the remainder of wrath to his
praise; who can change the heart of Esa^, and stir up the spirit of Princes, as
he did Cyrus Ezra 1. 1.
and Darius to build his Temple, and restore his captives; who can either
conquer Pharaoh by main force and dint of judgments, or change the decree of
Ahasuerosh by gentler operations; who can level great mountains Zach. 4. 7.
before Joshua and Josedeck, and exalt the lower valleys, the day of small
things, and of a despised Isa. 49. 23.
Cause to bring forth his salvation; who gives nursing Fathers and Mothers Isa.
40. 11.
to his flock and family; and such shepherds as shall seek the strayed, carry
in their bosom the weary, feed the hungry, and cure the diseased, not with
rigor, and austerity, but with love and tenderness: Thus after the sharpest
persecution of Dioclesian (when Christian Religion (as Monarchy and Episcopacy
has been by some in our days.) was triumphed over, as extirpated) God raised
up Constantine the Great, and other Christian Emperors after him, who restored
life, liberty, honor, and support to the Church; after the Church was seemingly
dead, as St. Paul when he was stoned, yet it rose up again; when Isreal's
burdens were heaviest in Egypt, then was their redemption nearest, because
their devotion was warmest, and Gods* compassions tenderest to them. After the
Marian bonefires and but cheries of so many carbonaded Christians in England
(filling all things with earthquake, fire, tempest and horror) in what a still
voice for many years did God* plead by a wonderful and unexpected providence
the Cause of his Church and the Reformation of Religion here in England for an
hundred years; as I pray he will do again for us in mercy; because he has not
forgotten to be gracious, nor do his compassions fail, but his mercy endures
for ever!

7. Obser. Gods cause must never be 7 Obs. Gods cause is (^^t) never desperate.
given for lost or desperate while God remains, (who is both able and willing
to plead it*) or while any good man, as Moses, or Samuel, or Eliah, or Daniel
remain; who by fervent prayers can and will put God in mind of it, and excite
him to it. As David and Jehosapha^ encouraged 2 Samuel 30. 6
themselves in the Lord then God; so must good men in bad times, when the best
cause goes by the worst: A man would even willingly die such a death as our
late Martyr King did, on condition that he could with faith and truth dye with
that divine sentence in his mouth (as he did) I thank God I have a good Cause,
and a gracious God.

This supported the Martyrs and Confessors so of old, that when they were s^ain
for Gods cause all the day long, yet (as Sulpitius Severus says of them) they
then hastened more ambitiously to Martyrdoms, then afterward in times of peace,
others did to the greatest preferments in Church or State.

Though figtree, and olive, and Hab. 3. 1^.
flock, and field, and all fail, yet (the Prophet tells us) he will rejoice in
the Lord, even in the God of his salvation: The Lord will arise Psalm. 78. 65.
as a Giant refreshed with wine, to plead the cause of Sion, and to vindicate
the honor of his great name, which is graven on his true Church, as on the
signet of his right hand; in the highest storms we may cast this anchor, God
can and will appear for his cause in the midst of the fiery furnace never so
hot, no Dan. 3.
less then in the cool of the day.

8. Obser. When all means fail, 8 Obs. When all means fail, prayer must be
applied to Gods Cause.
yet the prayer of the faithful must not be wanting to Gods cause: This is ( in
naufragio Tabula) the rafter left the Church in the greatest shipwreck; when
neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars appear; yet if this Angel Acts 27. 24.
the spirit of prayer appear in our agony, we may be of good cheer, as St. Paul
was; A good Christian as Moses and the Syrophenician woman, must not give over
its pious importunity, though God seems angry, and Christ averse. God cannot
deny the fervent prayers of James 5. 16.
the righteous; they will be effectual in time, even to open prison doors, as
they did in St. Peter's case, when the Church prayed incessantly for him* Acts
12. 5. As the vapors that ascend from earth to heaven, are after returned in
sweet showers that have in them vital and celestial influences, being
impregnated with etherial or heavenly spirits; so are prayers of the faithful.
Devout souls that lay to heart the cause of God; cannot be more bold then
welcome to him in such cases; God is as well pleased with their excitation or
solicitation of him, even to a kind of imperious commanding of him (which the
Prophet expresses) as a Isa. 5 11.
man is with that ruder importunity by which he is awaked out of sleep, to
quench his house on fire, or to save his son from drowning. There is more
efficacy in praying for the Psalm. 123. 6.
Peace of Jerusalem then in fighting. The fiery chariots and horses that are in
the breast of zealous and devout Orators will do more good then armed legions of
Soldiers.

9. Obser. There is not a greater 6 Obs. It is a sure sign of a gracious heart
to lay to heart Gods cause.
sign of a good and gracious heart, then to lay to heart the Cause of God; even
then most passionately, and earnestly, when it is most deserted, most
deploring, most despairing; a good Christian must make good what St. Peter said
well to Christ, but performed ill, Though all men Match. 26. 33.
forsake thee, yet will not I; Is God touched with our concerns, and afflicted
in our afflictions, and zealous Isa. 63 9.
to plead our righteous cause; to contend with those that contend with his
servants, Isa. 49. 25. when we are molested or oppressed in any kind, by sin,
temptation, weakness, darkness, dejection, diffidence, persecution, or
desertion? and shall we* be as Gallio in Gods cause, or as Nabal to David's, not
caring or concerned?

The Cause of God and his Church are (as I said) inseparable; no man is
affected with one, who is neglective of the other; this example we have here
added to others of Noah, Lot, Moses, Phineas, Samuel, Eliah, Micaiah, Jeremiah,
Nehemiah, Daniel, Mordecai and others, whose vigilance and pertinacy was such
in the cause of God and his Church, that they were resolved to give God no
rest, till he did arise and plead his own cause; Nothing is Isa. 6^. 7*
more imitable, nothing more commendable, nothing more practicable, nothing
more comfortable* provided we rightly understand what the Cause of God is, and
apply to it, as becomes God, his cause and our duties; then it is heroic to say
with Esther, If I perish, I perish: This is Angelick with Esther 4. 16.
Moses ((...)) to put God Exodus 32. 32.
to the blush and silence, If not, blo^ me out of thy book; and it is super Romans
9. 3.
Angelical to say with St. Paul, I would wish to be accursed from Christ for
the Churches sake, and Gods cause our duty in which we shall the^ best
understand and perform, when we have duly considered these four things.

1. What the Cause of God is. The four main subjects of the Discourse.
2. What need we may have of his pleading it. 3. How God does plead it.
1. Immediately by himself. 2. Mediately by such instruments and means as he is
pleased to use among men.
In the fourth place is to be showed What is the true method or manner to be
observed by all good men in pleading Gods cause with him and for him.

When these are finished, and such Patheticks applied by way of use, as may
cast your wills in the mold of your judgments, and make your affections to
keep pace, at least to follow your understandings; I shall (I hope) not only
discharge in some tolerable measure my own duty and undertaking, which is
great, but answer your favorable and Christian expectation, which I see is not
little; for I abhor nothing more then the ostentation of so ample a text, to so
ample an Auditory, in such exigents of times, even agonies of Gods cause in
Church and State, in Justice and Religion, and to do nothing worthy or
proportionable to them; which defect in me, and neglect in you God forbid,
whose assistance, as I humbly implore, so I may not despair, since it is in his
own Cause; which must needs be the best, and may modestly hope for his gracious
help in my pleading and preaching for it, against all frivolous, fallacious and
impertinent pretenders to it; the rather because it is not only my particular
cause, as a Christian and a Minister, but all yours, together with your
posterities as men, as Englishmen, as Christians, and as Protestants: We know
that of the Orator, In propriacausa unusquisque sibi videtur and potens and
eloquens: if in our own, much more in Gods Cause (which is our own too) we
ought to do our best on all hands.

First, What this Cause of God is. 1 General, What this cause of God is.


I take it for granted, what I first observed, That God has his cause in this
world, who made all things by his wisdom and power for his glory, and is, as a
wise Agent, highly concerned, as to do nothing in vain, so not to fail of his
main design: It is no other then Atheistical blasphemy to deny that God has
any concern or causeon earth, or that he regards them that does, and will ever
plead for them; God has not left himself without Acts 14. 17.
witness in the world, that he is, and that he looks to the managery of all
things; specially of mankind, and peculiarly of his own Cause: It is not (
natura volvente vices and lucis and anni) that all things are fatal and
necessary, confining God as well as man to inevitable events; which is the
fancy of those ( Qui nullo credunt mundum rectore moveri) who have either no
Faith in God, or no thought worthy of a God.

Gods silence and patience are the Gods silence and patience in his own cause.
prejudices which men have taken against his Providence, and that special care
of things, which runs (as spiritus intus agens) in all permissions and events,
which are not, as to God, either contingent, or by constraint, but under the
free, and sovereign disposition, which is every way worthy of a most wise
disposer, and almighty worker; hence mockers, as S. Peter observes, are prone 2
Pet* 3. 3.
to ask, Where is Gods cause, where the promise of his coming? Where are his
prophesies, what he would do for the good in mercy, and against the wicked in
justice? even thus of old the Gnostick pride and presumption jested, when
vengeance was at the door, and judgment overtook them to an utter desolation
of the Jewish Polity. They are such as live without God in the world, that say
he will do nor good nor evil.

Many are willingly ignorant that God has any cause in this world; and many
are mistaken in the true Cause, and in their pleadings for it; without right
understanding the heart Prove. 19. 2.
cannot be good; since the pregnant Eccles. 7. ^9.
inventions of men in all times, especially in ours, have found out many
Causes, and every one is cried up for Gods. The first foundationstone to be
laid in this building is to know what the true Cause of God is, of which every
one boasts, as his peculiar, Prove. 18. 17.
till another comes and finds out the fallacy.

This I shall show, first, by giving general characters of Gods Cause; such as
are (...) and (...), proper, essential, and intrinsic marks of it.

Secondly, I shall by way of Induction show you the particuliar parts or
branches by which it spreads it self in the world.

First, The Cause of God is The marks and pr^peri^es o^ Gods cause.
known by these marks, or essential properties.

1 It is Causa optima, not only a ^. The best cause.
good cause, but the very best; yea, the only good one in the world; the
measure or standard of all others, as the first and best of all Causes, which
are only so far good, as they are conform to, and concurrent with the cause of
God; whose internal rule is the moral will of God, its end the glory of God; It
is good in its principles and in its practices, every way vera, pura, justa,
divina.

2. It is true, according to Scriptural 2 most true according to Scriptural
verity.
verity, which is revealed in the holy Word of God, fixed and infallible, not
depending on uncertainties, which are skeptical, conjectural, and opinionative;
much less upon fantastical and enthusiastical notions, according to the
fancies, dreams, and inventions of men, that are rather heady and giddy, then
hearty and godly.

. Gods Cause is never to be carried on by fictions or lies, by fables or
legends, which are but man's devises Psalm. 5. 4.
and the Devils stratagems, as impertinent to advance Gods Cause, as blackness
is to augment light: as with God, so with his Cause no iniquity dwells.

3. It is an holy, pure and just 3 It is a most hol^, pure and just cause.
Cause, in all points, as it regards 1. God in religious adoration, inward
reverence, and outward veneration. 2. Our selves in chastity and sobriety. 3.
Others, in justice, humanity and charity, in all things that are morally and
evangelically commanded us as men and as Christians, in civil and religious
societies.

4. It is Causa unica and catholica, 4 It is an entire and catholic cause.
as to its integrality or completion, but one and the same, as to its main ends
and proportions, confined to the love of God and our neighbor, uniform in all
moral, spiritual and essential forms of righteousness and true holiness,
however it has had some different dispensations as to outward forms, and
variable ministrations, which are still concentred Ephesians. 1. 6.
in one true God, in one Lord Jesus Christ, in one Spirit, and in one true
faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude 2.

5. It is a constant Cause, not any 5 Constant to it self.
admitting variations, as to the main end, means and measures of it: It is
indeed causa antiquissima, the eldest (as it is the concern of the Ancient of
days) affecting no novelty, and abhorring all inconstancy, as to the main and
essentials of it: change of circumstances, customs and ceremonies in Religion,
which like leaves grow up and fall with time, is nothing to the body and life
of the tree, which is still the same, as the man is the same man though he may
change his clothes; circumstances of Religion fall under providence and
prudence of men; but the substance of it arises from an eternal fountain of
divine Wisdom, Power and goodness, carrying on all things to the infinite ocean
of Gods glory; by the various streams or derivations of his providence to
mankind, and specially to the Church of God, in Truth, in Justice, and in
Mercy, as men either sincerely adhere to, or maliciously oppose the Cause of
God.

6. It is every way causa amplissima, 6 The most a^^le and august cause*
nobilissima and augustissima, the most noble and ample cause, containing in it
the greatest concernments of Men, Angels and God himself, yea it is accurate in
the least things, essentially belonging to it; as having nothing indeed small
in it^ nature* yea and aggrandising all things, even circumstantial, which it
contains in its large circumference of piety, charity and decency; even to the
least ceremonious actions and words, yea secret desires and thoughts; as every
little point in a great circle, has its great relations, aspects, and
dimensions, in reference to the center, sphere, and circumference whereto it
stands related.

. Although this magnificence be Yet the cause of Go^ consists not in minute
matters.
true of the Cause of God in its mystical and moral grandeur, yet its name and
honor is not to be fixed or confined to, much less inscribed on every partial
and covenanting pretention, every small Ceremony, outward circumstances, and
petty opinion, which are mutable, dubious, dark, and disputable, of which men
may be ignorant, or doubt, or deny, or differ without danger of salvation, as
to any unbelief or immorality, with which weak Christians Romans 14. 1.
must not be perplexed nor entertained. In these, many times prejudices and
presumptions of men do much mistake and run on the fallacy of Non causa pro
causa; crying things up or down, either for or against the cause of God (just
as they interpret Prophesies in Scripture) according to their own presumptions
and passions, which like Optic glasses, do multiply or magnify them in their
fancies, agreeable to their factions and interests; wherein once engaged, they
may have such a pride, obstinacy and ambition as affects to do and suffer much
for their cause, as they truly call it, which is not Gods, but their own; There
that old Maxim of Martyrdom is true, Non poena* sed causa facit martyrem; No
sufferings can transmute an ill Cause to the honor of martyrdom: Men's private
and petty causes, like the small by as of a bowl, do too often seek to over
sway the great Cause of the great God, which consists (...), But in grand and
clear case^ of faith and manners. Romans 1^. 1^^
not in meats and drinks, or any minute business and observation, but in
Righteousness, Truth, Peace and Holiness. Outward ceremonies of Religion, are
but at sring* or lace, or pins, or clothes Of ornamentals and essentials in
Religion.
to the body or being of a man* ornamental, not essential; accidental and
occasional, not substantial and necessary; they may be changed without 1 Cor.
14. 40.
detriment, according to that wisdom, liberty, charity and order which becomes
the Church of Christ 1 Cor. 14. 40.
and the Cause of God; they must not be cumbersom and uncomly; as pins that
scratch or run into the skin; or as garments too strait-laced, heavy and
uneasy; there must neither be such a nakedness and deformity, nor such an
affected pomp and variety, as exposes the Cause of God and true Religion to
laughter and contempt, as a matter of pageantry or penury.

. It argues men have less sight of the suns greater light, when they much
magnify Nebulous stars, or their own farthing candles, or every glo-worm under
a hedge; yea the circumstances and ceremonies of Religion most fall off as the
mantle from men's eager disputes, and concerns for or against them, by how much
men's spirits, with Eliah, ascend highest, to heaven.

. The Cause of God, as to the majesty of its verity, morality and charity, has
in some ages suffered much eclipse, as to its true luster and grandeure, by
these films or clouds, these motes or mists which have risen in men eyes,
otherways not bad or blind. They are commonly The cobwebs of small
controversies catch fli^^.
but as flies, of weak and buzzing Christians, who are so easily catched, and
so long held in the cobwebs of ceremonious controversies, which reach no
further than the ski^^^ and suburbs, that is, the circumstantials of Religion;
yet from these sparks (good God) how great fires have been kindled and
continued in this Church? As of old in that one dispute, which was so eagerly
in the Church, about the time of celebrating Easter; whether the fourteenth day
of the month, as the Easter Churches used, or on the next Lords Day after:
Holy Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, when he came to Rome, conformed to the custom
of that Church, in the first Century: yet afterward Pope Victors passion
excommunicated all the Eastern Churches upon that point; which precipitancy
Ir^ne^^ so justly reproved.

There are some innocent varieties Of varieties ^ among good Christians.
(in things indifferent) which are admittable among Christians, as among the
Evangelists in the History of Christ, who all adhere to the true cause of God,
serving not only to exercise their charity, and to show the world that unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Truth, which Ephesians. 4. 3.
they yet constantly hold, but further to manifest to the world, That Christian
Religion is not a matter of policy and humane conspiracy, but of divine verity
in unity, as to the main, to which some variety in lesser matters is no
prejudice, but rather a confirmation; as that resemblance which proclaims
kindred in the different features of brethren, who had one Father and Mother.
Certainly it had been happy as for all Christian Churches, so for England, if
we had on all sides more minded the great things of Gods Cause, and less
troubled our selves about the nails and hairs of Religion; they are commonly
but small minds who make much ado about little matters, which administer much
strife and little edification in truth or love; Christians may and must (...),
keep the truth in love, Ephesians. 4. though they do (...), differ in things
indifferent; the substance of Gods Cause should have more influence to unite
hearts, than the ceremonies to divide them.

7. Yet the cause of God is Causa 7 The cause of God is orderly and comely i^
all things.
ordinata (...), very regular and orderly in all its motions, full of harmony
and beauty, abhorring any ways that are preposterous, desultory, violent,
uncomely, disorderly, tumultuary, confused: It needs none of these devilish
engines to carry on the Cause of him, who is the God of order, decency and
peace, 1 Cor. 1^. 33.
not of division, confusion and contention. James* 1^. 16.
Extravagant and excentric^ spirits easily lose the Cause of God, while they
follow it in a preposterous and wrong way, as men may easily miss the center of
the circle, who lay their rule in the least degree awry from the diameter; the
passions of men, and their popular po(...)es never work out the righteousness
of Gods Cause, but trouble, foil, James ^. 20.
blemish and blaspheme it. Not fire, and earthquakes and whirlwinds, but the
still voice and calm ^ Kings 19. 12.
spirit do best bring forth and set 2 Timothy 2. 25.
up by meekness of wisdom the true Cause of God, and Christ, and the James 3.
13.
Church; especially as to the concerns of Religion: Nor may that cause of civil
Justice which some pretend to, be promoted by any unjust and illegal ways, of
tumult, sedition, and rebellion; these mar all, and instead of repairing or
purging the Temple, with Josiah, Ezra, Josedeck and the blessed Jesus, they set
both Church and State, Temple and City on fire, as did Nebuzaradan and his
Master Nebuchadnezzar.

^. These (...), or genuine characters are the surest and safest tokens by
which to discern Gods Cause, both in its own merits or temper, and in the minds
of those that undertake to manage it.

Other novel popular and politic Of populer and false marks put on the Cause
of God.
pretensions, as to outward providence, prosperities, successes, multitudes,
prevalencies of brutal and irregular power, vulgar flatteries, and factious
adherencies; or as to the respect of men's parts, learning, eloquence, seeming
zeal, and cried up devotion, they are all spurious, partial and fallacious.

1. The Sunshine of ordinary providence and success, of prosperity and power,
may fall upon Causes that are evil and unjust, no less then on the just and
good. Mahomet has ^t. 5. 45.
had great and long successions of successive power to assert his cause, and
multitudes do follow even that Beast as well as the Lamb or the Messiah:
Outward prosperity is the idol of fools, who care not how little the Cause of
God prosper and prevail in their souls, if it thrive as to their purses and
estates. Successes are pursued by silly and easy people, as gay Butterflies
are by children: Gods Cause is seldom seen in crowds, or rabbles, and throngs
of people, which Christ abhorred and avoided: As its course is strict, so its
path is narrow.

2. As for the decoys of personal Of men's rare gifts, great endowments, and
severe Professions
gifts and endowments, of zeal and seeming or real severities in some things.
King Saul had (as his height) so his heats above other Jews, against the
Gibeonites and Witches; so Jehu had his zeal against the house of Ahab and
Baal; Paul once breathed threatenings against the way of Christ, with equal
ignorance, imperiousness and confidence; Novatus wanted not his zelotry and
preciser passions; nor Manes and Montanus their spiritual and seraphick
pretensions, with rigid fastings; Origin and Tertullian had their excellent
abilities, which Vincentius Liri*^ensis calls ( Magnae tentationes magnorum
ingeniorum) their temptations to extravagancies; they were like fair flowers
and fruit, which are too big for themselves, and so crack or break; nor did
Donatus want his devotion, nor Pelagius wit and learning; nor Faustus Socinus
of late his severity and strictness, with his sophistry; nor any Heretic or
Schismatic ever failed to have some lure, either of sensual liberty, or
special sanctity to take people withal: So the Anabaptists in Germany, as
Sleiden and others tells us, cried most vehemently for Justice, Mercy and
Repentance; other Enthusiasts had their rare visions; and the very Idiot
Quakers boast of their inward illuminations; so the most pu^id Friars, and
politic Monks, had their forged miracles, and forced celibacies, set off with
great austerities, to cover over their fedities. Satan has many masks and
vizards of an Angel of light; yet he is never further off from Gods ^atan a
pretender to Gods Cause.
Cause* then when he most sets men awork to cry it up, and carry it on, in ways
that are no less unjust, violent and extravagant, then perhaps for a time
successful, as was the Arrian perfidy; which seemed so zealous for the unity of
the Deity, that they sought to overthrow the sacred Trinity, and the grand
foundation of the Christian Faith, honor and comfort, the (...), the Word made
flesh, the Theanthropy, and Philanthropy of God to mankind, in the Incarnation
of the Son of God. Their disputes, as St. Cyrill tells us, were not more
sophistical and perverse, then specious and plausible, insomuch that the pest
infested in a few years the most part of the Christian world, both in Court,
Cities, and Countries; which was (as St. Jerome says) amazed to see it self in a
short time so be witched with the Arrian enchantments; which set up a new
Savior and another Gospel then was primitively believed in all Churches. So
the Novatians and Donatists, or ^ntient Catharists (which were the Christian
Pharisees, or Puritans) pretended, as Optatus and others tells us, so to
promote the Cause of the Churches purity, that they destroyed its unity and
charity. And the Pelagians so stickled for the power and liberty of man's will,
that they derogated from Gods grace and glory, as St. Augustine speaks.

8. Causa crucisixi, saepius crucisixa; Gods Cause most what a crucisied Cause.
as Christ, so his cause (which is Gods) is often not only circumcised but
crucisied with him, yea it may seem dead and buried too for a time to the
judgment of sense; we must not look for the true Church always clothed with
the sun, but rather flying into the wilderness, and covered with sackcloth: The
prosperities Reve. 12.
and crowns of Gods Cause are reserved for another world; here the cross, and
thorns, and buffettings, and spittings, and blood, and spears, and nails do not
mis-become it, but conform it to its head.

. It Is certain the Cause of God was then purest as to faith and manners, when it
was (like gold in the furnace and fiery trial) under the first ten
persecutions, which lasted, with some lucid intervals, three hundred years. In
vain do those that seem high zealots for the Cause of God, dream and speak big
of houses, and lands, and liberties, and victories, and kingdoms, and crowns*
and Judicatures, and reigning with Christ after secular methods and policies of
blood and fraud; these are figs in this world: The honor, riches, crowns and
comforts of true Christians are figs, and grapes, and olives that are not to be
gathered from the briars and thorns of the Phil. 1. 29.
present world; in which, whoever will live godly, must expect, and patiently 2 Timothy* 3. 12.
suffer, but not deserve, persecution. A good Cause must not think it strange
to find bad entertainment on earth, where it is a pilgrim and stranger: Times
are seldom so good, as really to favor Gods Cause; however the policies and
lusts of men, their pride, licentiousness, covetousness and ambition may seem
to flatter it so far as suits with their present interests; which are most
what, (...), self-seeking, partial and inordinate, ut in vitis sic in causis
homines spes improbas alunt: as in other things so in religion, men have their
impipious ambitions, and perverse hopes.

. Whereas the Cause of God is a Tit* ^. 12.
self denying cause, as to all ungodliness and worldly lusts; teaching us to
live contentedly, righteously, soberly and godly in all things.

. So that these large flags and streamers, which some men of the Roman, or
other factions of later editions hang out to the vulgar, as to the potency and
prosperity of their Cause, argue no more Gods cause to be with them, or they
with it, then the fine feathers in fools caps argue them to have wit or wisdom
in their heads; coppar may be thus stamped and gilded, which will not endure
the fiery trial as true gold will; and such is the Cause of God, ever pure, and
precious, just and holy, though it be oppressed and persecuted; as a jewel it
loses not its native luster and worth, though it be ill set, or cast into the
dirt.

To conclude this general description An Emblem of Gods Cause
of Gods Cause; this may be its Emblem; It is as the tree of life in the
Pardise of God; the root of it is the Truth of God in his word the sap is
holiness or true sanctity, the leaf is charity without dissimulation, the rind
or bark is order and good discipline in the Church; also Equity and civil
Justice in the State; the lesser and lower fruit is every grace and good work
growing in us or from us; the (...), prime and topmost cluster is Gods glory
and the salvation of sinful souls, through his free grace in Jesus Christ.

Having showed the general tokens 2. Particular, wherein the cause of God
cheifely consists.
or marks of Gods Cause, I now proceed by way of Induction and instance to set
forth the particulars in which it consists.

1. The grand Cause of God is 1. That his Glory as God be owned in the world.
his own glory; this is the first mover, great conservator, and last
consummator of all things, which the divine Wisdom contrives, or his Patience
permits, or his Power performs, or his Justice, Goodness and Mercy moderates,
or his Word commands. For this cause he has made and manageth all things in
heaven and earth, that the glory of his being may appear to men and Angels, who
are with all humility, gratitude, adoration, service and admiration, to return
the just recognition and praises due to the divine Majesty, for all his
essential excellencies, and his gracious emanations: every Attribute and
Perfection of God is by them to be owned, with due respect of Faith, Fear,
Love, Duty, Adoration and Admiration; thus his Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy,
Immensity, Eternity, Veracity, Immutability, etc. are to be considered by men
and Angels, with suitable affections reflecting from them to God. And among
Christians the unity of the Divine Nature, together with the Trinity of the
sacred Persons or relations, distinguished by the names of Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, must be ever owned, celebrated and adored, according to the wonted
Doxology, or (...), used in the Orthodox Churches.

This Cause, God has in all ages Gods plea against Atheists.
pleaded, as his own royal concern, against Atheists, Polytheists, Idolaters,
Antitrinitarians, Anthropomorphites; against profane and proud livers, who
live as if there were no God above them; also against vain and false swearers,
who blaspheme the name of God, and bring a curse on their souls, families and
countries; against presumptuous wicked doers, who are their own gods and
worshippers, both self-Idols and self-Idolaters. This is the first, most
immediate cause or concern of the Divine Nature and Glory, that God be owned,
and none beside him, or comparable to him: This will be made good against
wicked men and Devils; by the pleas and principles of right Reason, by the
sensible beauty, order, harmony, proportion, usefulness and constancy of Gods
Works in the world; by his signal providence in judgment or mercy; by his
preservation of the Scriptures and the Church with true Religion; by the
predictions fulfilled; and lastly by the terrors, convictions and presages of
men's consciences, which are that (...), the little God in our own breasts* as
Mar. Aurelius calls it.

2. The next great concern or 2. The cause of Jesus Christ is Gods Cause.
Cause of God is that of the Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Word, and
coessential Son of God, the blessed Messiah, the brightness of the divine
glory, and express image of the Father. It is not enough now to believe in God,
as Creator, and Preserver of men, but we must also believe John. 14. 1.
in the Lord Jesus Christ, as Redeemer of beleiving penitent and obedient
sinners, by the mercy, love and free grace of God; This is the beloved Son of
God, whom we Luke 6. 35.
must hear; the only name under heaven Acts. 4. 12.
by which we may be saved; he that does not obediently believe the testimony of
Prophets and Apostles, of Miracles and Angels, of Martyrs and Confessors, of
the Church Catholic and an enlightened conscience, in this great Cause of the
Messiah, even the crucified Jesus, 1 John. 3.
is under peremptory condemnation, while such.

. Of this great and mysterious Cause, God gave the world an account of old,
under types, figures, sacrifices and many ceremonies, as shadows and
resemblances under the Law; but now the Substance, and Son of Righteousness is
come, and has fully taught his Church the will of God, and the work such
sinners have to do, which is to repent John. 17. 3
and believe in him, whom the John. 14. 1.
Father has sent; who so beleiveth not, makes God a liar, and is already 1
John. 5. 10.
condemned, to which must 1 John. 5. 7.
be added to complete the cause of the sacred Trinity, the belief and adoration
of the Holy Ghost as God; one with the Father, and the Son in the Divine
essence and glory, though a distinct person as to the emanation from, and
relation to both.

^. The Cause of God, extends to 3 The Cause of the Church is Gods Cause.
the true Church of God, as an holy corporation or society of such as do truly
believe inwardly, or outwardly, and profess with Order and Charity, the word,
worship and service of the true God, with our Lord Jesus, and the blessed
Spirit, according to the rule of the Scripture.

^. God owns himself in Jesus Christ, as the Father, friend, head and Husband
of the Church; such as fight against that, fight against God, and afflict the
apple of his Zack. 2. 8.
eye; God is concerned, that the foundation of his Church, which is The
Scripture is the tate of Gods Cause.
Scripture, (written by the Prophets and Apostles) be preserved free from
Apocryphal additions, Fabulous traditions, Humane inventions* and Phanatick
inspirations.

That the Ministers of it by The Ministry Gods Cause.
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, as to its Authority, Order and supports, be
maintained, agreeable to the primitive pattern instituted by Christ, in the
Twelve Apostles 2 Cor. 5. 2.
and the Seventy Disciples, with their attendants in holy offices; this is the
cause of God, as that of Mat. 10. 40.
Ambassadors, and their followers, in the cause of those Princes that send them
so Commissionated and instructed; they that receive them, receive Christ; and
they that reject them, reject him; and they that defraud or rob, divide and
destroy the Church and Ministry of Christ, are Robbers of God, Sacrilegious
Felons, from the blessed Son of God, who is Heir of all, and to whom we owe all
we have, as redeemer of is, and all blessings we enjoy.

The great Seals of the Church The Sacraments, Gods Cause.
also; the two Sacraments are the Cause of God, not to be profaned, or
neglected; For which cause God sharply punished the Corinthians with sickness
and death: Much less may they be changed or diminished, or added to in point of
duty and necessity, beyond the stamp and inscription of Divine institution, and
that Catholic practice or use of them, which was ever owned by the Church;
whose veracity or fidelity is not to be questioned, in things of universal
observance, such as were those of the Lords day for the Christian Sabbath; of
the books of Canonical Scriptures; of the Baptizing of Christians Infants;
whose cause is the cause of God, and of his Covenant with the faithful and
their seed; so of the giving of the cup, as well as the consecrated bread, to
all Communicants, as well Lay as Clergy; and lastly as to The Churches
government, Gods cause.
the constant Order and Government of the Church, in its several distributions
by many Presbyters, subordinate and assistant to some one paternal, yet
authoratative Bishop, as sons to a presidential Father; This Government by
Episcopacy is Gods Cause, as the God of order, and the Apostles cause as
settled and sealed by their wisdom, and the Churches consent's, as a primitive
Catholic custom, the veracity and antiquity of which is asserted by the
Churches testimony, both as to all Histories, and in its practice, not to be
doubted, desparaged denied or abolished without great in solency and
peevishness, either to gratify Presbytery, or Independency, both which are
novel ties, of yesterday, and so cannot be Gods Cause, which is verissi^^a and
antiquissima, as old as it is true and good.

. The Cause of Gods Church, as to its Honor, Order, Fidelity, support^, rule
and government, is so far Gods Cause, as he has made his Church the Pillar and
ground of truth, and as himself is the God of Order and Polity, yea^ and the
The Churches liberties is Gods Cause.
Churches cause is Gods as to that prudential liberty and variety, which his
wisdom has granted and indulged to it in the several parts or distributions
of it, under the Gospel, as to the circumstantial or ceremonial rites of
Religion, incident or annexed to the outward decency of 1 Cor. 14. 40.
worship and profession, in several ages and places, so as may most conduce to
the planting, propagating, preserving, and reforming of true Religion among all
Nations

Lastly the unity of the Church The Churches unity Gods cause.
belongs to Gods cause, who is but one, and his Son one, and his Spouse one.
Such as cause Schism and divisions in the true Church, by giving or taking
unnecessary, and ^om. 16. 17.
so unjust scandals, and thereby raising uncharitable separations, these are
injurious to the God of peace, and the Prince of peace; Nostrum laceratur in
arbore corpus: Christians tear God and rend the body of Christ in their
Schisms, which divide them from the love of Christ, and for his sake of one
another, which is the great Character of Christ's Disciples. Joh. 13. 35.

. Therefore all the Methods of Primitive Churches care to keep unity and
charity among Christians.
Ecclesiastical Polity, which were used in primitive times, by which to keep
the Catholic Church in an holy unity, and brotherly correspondency, by
Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, yea and in
latter ages when Christians were multiplied, by Archdeacons, Suffragans or
Chorepiscopacy, (i. e.) rural Deans, and the like, were so far from being
Antichristian projects and evil policies, that they were the Counsels and
results of Christ's spirit, as helps in Government, for the Order and Unity,
Polity and Authority, meet to be observed in his Church.

. Nor is it of any weight which some urge odiously and enviously against these
subordinations, and degrees, fitted for the unity of the Church, (which
capacitated them to meet and correspond as by general and lesser Councils, in
several places, so by Letters communicatory in all the world) that hence the
Papal arragancy and Pride, did get footing, and his prescripts became decrees.

For if all things of piety or prudence, Of abolishing things once abused.
must be abolished with the policy or superstition, (if man lists to abuse
them) we shall leave very little to true Religion; So far Popes, and Bishops,
and Presbyters, and People too have showed themselves in many things to be but
men, subject to prejudices, and passions; yet are they no way capable to
destroy or deprave the true principles or practices of Christian wisdom, much
less of Divine and Apostolic institution, either binding and perpetual, or
prudential and occasional, which lawfully may be used, and are not rashly to be
abolished.

4. Next the Churches cause, which 4. The good of mankind is Gods Cause.
is eminently contained in Gods, comes that of all mankind, as God is (...),
and (...), the lover and preserver of men, in the way of civil societies, the
Hings or Axis, and popular points of which, are Justice commutative and
distributive, In civil justice. Isa. 59. 1. Micah 6. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 8. Col. 3. 25.
private and public; the just God is concerned, that justice be done to all,
and by all, according to their place and station.

The rule and measure of all civil and Politic Justice, for matter and
manner, for what is to be done, and by whom, for the equity of retribution, and
authority of dispensation, is that custom and law, In settled Laws.
which is prevalent by public consent in every Nation* not contrary to the
Law of God; what ever is, done contrary to this, is, in Deiinjuriam, and makes
the actors ( reolaesae Majestatis divinae* as well as humanae) guilty of doing
injury to the justice and Majesty, not only of men but of God, whose are the
laws and Polities, the Princes, Kings, In Polity and Magistracy.
and lawful Magistrates of every state, Kingdom and Commonwealth, which are
Gods Ordinances, not to be resisted by tumult or Romans 13. 1.
armed force, by sedition, or Treason, without an high sin, which subjects 1
Pet. 2. 13.
men to damnation, as Rebels to God, as enemies to the good of their Country,
to the duty they ow^ to parents, and indeed to the good of all mankind, who
would soon be as miserable as beasts, and Devils, if they were not restrained
from private extravagancie, preserved in their honest enjoyments by the
public laws, and that Sovereign power which is in Gods name and stead to
enact and execute them.

Hence as the just cause of every 8. Every private just cause is Gods.
man is Gods, who may say with David and others, Psalm. 35. 1. Plead my cause, O
Lord, etc. Though never so poor, mean and helpless, yet their cause must not be
despised, or wronged and oppressed. God will avenge the meanest Subjects
injuries against the greatest Princes or Potentates: so the cause of even
subordinate Magistrates is Gods The cause of Magistrates is eminently Gods.
cause: But (above all) their cause is Gods, whom God has placed as Supreme
above all, in Empires, and Kingdoms, for the good of all: Certainly that of I
have said ye are Gods, and, Thou shall not curse Exodus 22. 28. Psalm. 105. 15.
the Gods, or Rulers of thy people, and that of Touch not mine anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm. That of David's tenderness to King Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 6.
and 26. 11.
of all good men's subjection in all ages, Jewish and Christian, to their
princes, though evil, persecutive and oppressive; those orders of Christ to
give to Caesar the things Mat. 22. 21.
that are Cesars; and so the Canons 1 Pet. 2. 13. Romans 13. 1. 2.
of the two great Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul. to obey, to be subject, by
all means in all things, actively or passively, to Kings and all in authority,
by whose safety the whole state is safe, if they be resisted or injured and
destroyed, Iliades of miseries like torrents of blood, usually break in on all
sorts of people.

Those divine Oracles besides the No friends to Gods cause who are enemies to
lawful Magistracy.
Catholic constant and eminent practice of the primitive Christians (the best
commentary on Scripture) when they wanted not numbers and arms, as Tertullian
and others tell us, yet they never used other weapons then patience, prayers
and tears, petitions and Apologies to the persecuting Princes; all those put
together do shrewdly evince, that those men are no friends to, or assertors of
the true cause of God, who are not so, of settled laws and Government, of
Magistratick power, and civil justice, of which not the will and power of man,
but the Law of God in general, and the particular Laws, customs, and
constitution of every Nation and Polity, are Arbitrators and Judges; What ever
^ done or taught by Prince or People, contrary to these, under any splendid
form, and novel names of Arbitrary prerogative, or popular liberty, or high
Justice, is the highest Injustice, and done with an high hand ( in Dei
contumeliam) in affront to Gods Ordinances, and of Law, Order, Peace and
Government for the good of mankind.

. Nor may any Subjects here fly by Of common principles of reason and liberty
urged as Gods cause against Magistracy and secled Laws.
way of appeal to the common Dictates of reason, and loose principles of
natural liberty, or I know not what necessity, after once by public consent,
they are limited and confined to the enclosures of laws and rules of obedience,
either active or passive; To which God and man's Laws, oblige all men; otherwise
there will be no quiet or settling in any State; for there will never want some
whose discontentments or ambition, think the Laws themselves too strict and
injurious, as to the liberties which are necessary to attain their designs, and
fulfill their lusts.

. All true Christians will rest either content or patient, being never so
concerned in any worldly momentary business, as to sin upon the account of
either getting or preserving it: They have enough while they can in
Righteousness and peaceful ways possess their own soul Luke 21. 19.
in good consciences, which enjoy God and Christ, and the holy Spirit.
Christians must be very insatiable, not to be content with such society and
liberty, which will not suffer them to want what is necessary for life and
godliness.

After the cause of public Justice and peace, which are a branch of 6* Gods
cause is in every man's conscience.
Gods cause, every private man's cause as to sin and grace, vice and virtue,
good or evil, trouble or comfort, is Gods, so far as they are on Gods side and
take his part against the evil of World, Flesh, and Devil; his word and spirit
will plead for them, against Satan accusing, and conscience condemning: against
their fear and jealousies of God or themselves, against doubts, dejections and
despaires.

The cause also of the poor, the fatherless and the Widows is peculiarly The
cause of the poor and fatherless and widows is Gods.
Gods cause, which he is patron to, and promises to protect them, if they
trust in him, as he threatens their oppressors and despisers, Pro. 3^. 9. ^ob
29. 12.
that he will plead their cause against them, Pro. 22. 23.

Yea the cause not only of good The just cause of a wicked and unholy man is
Gods.
men but of wicked men, is so far Gods, as they have reason and justice or
right on their side; they may not be wronged or robbed because they are wicked
or Idolaters; God pleads the cause of Nebuchadnezzer, though an heathen, a
persecutor and oppressor, against King Zedekiah; Ezekiel. 17. 19.
because of the Oath and Covenant, which was in Gods name passed between them;
So he did that of Amurath that great Turk against Ladislaus a Christian King of
Hungary, when he violated the accord sworn between them, having from the Pope a
dispensation for his perjury, which God never gives in lawful Oaths, as he
never obliges to or by unlawful ones.

True Religion binds us to such as are irreligious, to Heretics, to Mahometans
hometans and to all; it is a damnable divillish and Antichristian Doctrine,
that to them (much more to Christians) no faith is to be kept, that they have
no civil right to any thing: That they are Egyptians and may be robbed: or
killed by such as fancy or call themselves Israelites, Moses's or Saints; God
has given the earth to the children of men as such, in natural and civil
successions, not as to his Children and Saints, by Psalm. 115. 16. Heb. 11. 40.
grace and Regeneration; God has better things in store for them in Heaven,
which who so believes, will never by fraud or force, and so by way of sin and
in justice, seek to shark and scramble for these earthly things, which God
gives as a portion and reward sometimes to wicked men, and is indeed their all
that they desire or expect from God.

Lastly every creature is so far 7. The cause of every good creature is Gods.
included to the cause of God, as it has his Stamp and Character upon it. The
abusing of them to sin, riot, luxury, cruelty, is the Gods dishonor, as if he
made them for no better use and ends. Veneranda est, non erubescenda natura, as
Tertullian speaks, God is to be reverenced in all his works, and not
reproached; The not owning God in them, not blessing him for them, and not
serving him by them, makes the users of them impleadable at Gods Bar and
Tribunal; Read ratioonem, Read deprosium; Give an account of the Corn, and
Wine, Hos. 2. 5.
and Oil, the Silk, and Flax, and the Wool; the beauty, strength, estate and
honor, time, wit, learning, and all other enjoyments; Non hos quaesitum munus
in usus: as they are not ours by merit or by making the least of them, so Gods
action lies against us for every one of them, if abused, or not used as lent us
by him, who is Lord Paramount in chief above all, of whom we have and hold all
things in Frank Almoinage, as so many Alms or Beadsmen, Tenants at will, and
only by the courtesy of the grand Lord, being less then the least of his
mercys, as Jacob humbly and Genesis 32. 10.
ingenuously confessed. It will be eternally inculcated upon wicked men, with
repeated torments, not only as to their injustice to God and man, (
discite^justitiam moniti, and netemnite divos) but as to that which was said to
the rich fool, Luke 12. 20.
whose are all those good things now, whose will they be when thy soul is taken
from thee? enjoying neither thy self, nor any thing, since thou enjoyest not
God the chiefest good of all. And that, Son remember thou enjoyedst thy good
Luke 16. 25.
things in thy life time, not as Gods, but as thine own, and as thy chiefest
goods, which made them evil to thee, both as to sinning then, and to suffering
now. But I have done with the first particulars, showing you, first, that God
has his cause in this world, and what this cause is, in the particular
instances of it.

The second General Quere I 2 General. How and why the cause of God often needs
his pleading.
proposed, was, 1. How the cause of God comes to stand in need of his pleading.
2. And why the Lord in his providence permits it to come to come to such
lapses, low ebbs and distresses?

1. If we consider that cause of ^u the great degeneracy or corruption of
mankind as to common principles of reason and Religion.
God which is on foot in all the world among all Nations, according to what of
God and his glory is made known to them by the works of his power, wisdom,
bounty and providence; also by those innate and self-demonstrating principles
of right reason, which remain in men's hearts, as the measures of Justice, rules
of chastity, sobriety, veracity, humanity, and the impulses to some religion,
that is, agnition and reverence of the Divine Majesty; even this common cause
of God in nature, may stand in need of his special pleading, by the great
degeneration of 2 Pet. 2. 12.
people, when they have generally corrupted their ways, so that they Romans 1. 24.
are turned beasts, monsters, devils in pride, lust, oppression and cruelty in
contempt of all true Religion, in professed and practiced Atheism, and its
giantly consequences, prostituting all things to debauchery and villainy.

. Here the righteousness of God from heaven is usually so revealed by the way
of great judgments upon such persons, people, and Nations, by war and famine,
or plagues, or inundations, or fires or earthquakes, that the remnant may learn
to fear God, and do no more so presumptuously. So when the Old world Genesis ^.
and 7.
had polluted it self in all sensual fedities, and Cyclopick villainies, God
rinsed the earth with a flood, and washed the whole race of mankind, like dung,
from the face of the earth, except eight persons, one righteous Noah, and his
seven relations; God makes even Heathens and Idolaters as he did the Athenians
to acknowledge there is ((...)) an unknown God, who Acts 17. 23.
is too hard for all their Idols; too wise for their policies, and too just to
be either deceived or despised.

. Thus Gods cause was driven to a necessity of some judicial and extraordinary
pleading against those proud and presumptuous builders of Genesis 11.
Babel, who fancied to ascend ((...)) above the reach of a future flood,
forgetting that God had not only Seas and waters to bring upon them from the
great deep, but thunderbolts also and fire from above to cast upon them, as he
did upon Sodom and those other Cities who burning Genesis 19.
with unnatural lusts (the effect of high feeding and idleness) were made the
fuel of everlasting flames.

So when the sins of the Canaanitish Genesis 15. ^^.
Nations were ripe, and their measure full, God brings in the sickle of the
Israelites swords; a Nation which* of all in the world they would not have
feared or suspected, having lately been under hard bondage in Egypt, and their
spirits so infinitely cowed, that being Six hundred thousand fighting men, they
durst not make head against their accustomed Masters, the Egyptians; yet by
these did God plead against the abominations of these mighty Nations which
cried to heaven for vengeance, even to an utrer extirpation of men, women and
children, beyond all pity and sparing.

. So in humane histories, we shall still find such remarkable instances of
Gods Justice, making Nations punish one the other, by dashing them against each
other, by bringing some desolating judgments upon them, that mankind might
still preserve some fear of the Divine Majesty.

. Thus he brings the Median and Persian power under Cyrus and Darius Dan. 4. 1^.
to hew down the great tree of the Babylonian pride and Monarchy, when
Balshazzars saoriledge grew so impudent, as to use the holy vessels of Gods
Temple, as measures for his drunkenness and excess.

After this, when the Persian Monarchy was dissolved to excessive luxury and
tyranny under the last Darius, God brings the Grecian sword by the conduct and
valor of Alexander the Great, to mow down those Eastern Nations by thousands
and ten thousands, yea by hundred thousands in a few years.

. When the Greoian Princes which set up for themselves, in their seve ral
shares of that Macedonian Empire, in Persia, in Egypt, in the lesser Asia, and
in Greece, when these were debased to all vile affections and actions, against
the principles of their own Philosophy and Divinity (to which they pretended.)

Then did the Lord stir up the fourth Beast, the Roman Empire, Dan. 7. ^9
with Iron Feet and Teeth, to tear, devour and trample, all the others power
and glory, their riches and dominions. As all private judgments are Gods
pleading against single persons; so Epidemick miseries, do proclaim some
public indignities and extraordinary injuries offered to the Divine Majesty,
contrary to those principles of reason justice and Religion, which were known
among them; their very light being turned into darkness, and the bounty Matthew:
^ 23
of God, to all manner of wickedness; when his blessings to them had in vain
been witness of his goodness to them, he comes as a swift witness in storms and
tempests of desolation, against them, which none could withstand, or escape; as
is to this day often seen even among Mahometans, Tarters, Chinese, and Indians.

Secondly, Since the Church of 2 In the Churches great depressions.
God is more peculiarly and eminently his Cause, under his special care and
cognizance, the chief Quaere is, how this comes to need Gods own immediate
pleading.

1. By open enemies, persecuting, 1 By heathenish persecution
opposing, and many times utterly oppressing the Church of God, as Vultures or
Eagles seizing on Pigeons, or as Lions, Bears and Wolves, on Lambs and Sheep.

So when the Church of God Against the Church of the Jews
grew from a family, to the Nation of the Jews, and were owned by God as his
peculiar people and concern above all the world, all the world was generally
against them, and sought not only to despise but destroy them as gentem
exitiabilem, a vile and execrable Nation, as Tacitus terms them: So Pharaoh
first and the Egyptians held them under hard bondage, till they were weary of
life, as well as of their burdens; Exodus: 5
there was none to plead their cause, but God, who did it at last to purpose,
with an high hand, and outstretched arm, confuting Pharaohs Pride and obstinacy
(with the Egyptian Gods) in the red Sea; when no other miracles in lesser drops
would soften their hard hearts, he soaked them in such great waters, as quite
drowned them.

After this, how often was the little flock of Gods Church, as a speckled Bird in
the Wilderness, surrounded with Enemies, as a Lilly Ier: 12. 9
among Thorns? there was Gebal, and Cant: 2. 28
Ammon, and Ameleck, the Philistines Psalm 83. 11
and they of Tire, the Assyrian, Arabian, Egyptian, all were against them; from
not only reason of State, but of Religion, where different principles make the
most deadly antipathies, and desperate f^wds.

Thus the wild Bore sometimes Psalm ^0 ^3
with power, other while the subtle Foxes, of Mungril Jews, and half Idolaters,
with fly insinuations, sought to pull down and waste the peace, honor, plenty,
safety, and Religion of the Jews.

Thus the Heathens raged, and their Princes set themselves against the Lord and
his cause, fulfilled that Psalm 2. 1
first prophecy of an irreconcilable enmity between the Serpent and the seed
of the Woman; All the gods and Demons, all the Oracles and Priests, all the
Poets and Prophets, all the Orators and Historians, all the great Princes and
valiant Soldiers, and subtle Politicians 1. Gor, 1
all the Wise men and Philosophers, set themselves to despise, to reproach, to
oppress, and extirpate the name and Nation, and Religion of the Jews, (which
was that of the true God,) from under Heaven, as a most pestilent people, and
of a most detestable superstition.

Afterward when the blossoms of Persecut on of Heathen against the Church
Christian
Judaick ceremonies fell off, and in the fullness of time the ripe fruit of
Messiah came into the world, in spirit and in truth, that all Nations John 4. 24
might worship the true God aright, in every place, without confinement, I need
not tell you (who are not ignorant of Scriptural, and Ecclesiastical Histories)
how from Herod's malice and subtilty, seeking Matthew: 2
to destroy Christ in his cradle, and satiating his defeated malice (like a
worrying Wolf, or raging Bear, with the massacring of so many innocent children
(who were ever esteemed by the ancient Church, as Infant-Martyrs, suffering in
Christ's stead, and upon the first occasion of his cause pleaded in the world,
by the baptism of their own blood, until Constantine the Great's days of
refreshing and rest for a season) the true Church and cause of God was never
out of the furnace of tribulation, martyrdoms, fears, afflictions, and Rom: 8.
36.
daily deaths: true, the bellows did not always blow up the fire and fury of
men to the same flames, but there wanted not those, as Decius and others, who
envied Christians their numerous, cheerful and speedy Martyrdoms, of which they
were so ambitious.

. Nothing was more wonted in the mouths of the people, than, what they clamored
against, Polycarp, (a primitive Bishop of Smyrna in S. John's days) Toll
Atheos, away with these Atheists, and Christiani ad Leones; Christians were
thought such beasts, that they were only fit to fight with, and to feed Beast;
or to be baited in Beasts skins; Yea nomen, crimen, (as Tertullian observes)
men were so mad against them, and gnashed on them, as the Jews against S.
Stephen, Acts 7. 54
that they would not examine their cause or crime, thinking it accusation
enough, that they owned themselves Christians.

. Dioclesian makes such havoc (as Decumanus fluctus) after others, that he not
only cut up the harvest, but raked the gleaning of Christians in all the Roman
Empire (even so far as here in England, where S. Albanus and others were
Martyred) that he gloried and triumphed, and set up Trophies for the
extirpation of the Christian superstition. At this dead lift was the Church of
Christ and cause of God, when the Bishops of the Churches were banished, or
Butchered; the Presbyters starved, destroyed, and scattered; The Oratories and
Temples, or Churches all demolished, or put to profane uses; the Christian
people condemned to the Metals, Islands, Prisons, Limekills, Racks, Gibbets,
and Fires.

Thus did the cause of God as to the Christian Church stand, or rather fall, for
the first three hundred years, under Heatheninsh Persecutors, and the
oppositions of Philosophy, or science falsely so called, which yet afterward
came to naught, as all power and polity will at last do, which set themselves
to oppose the cause, the truth, the Church and servants of the living God.

Thirdly, After the Church had ^ The Churches depression by Heretics and
Schismatics.
some rest in Constantines time, by the suppression of Heathenish fury, and
Idolatrous folly; yet was the cause of God not without its following conflicts,
by reason of Hypocrites, Gal. 2. 4*
Heretics, Schismatics, false Apostles, Hucksters of religion, 2 Cor: 2. 17
deceitful workers, Wolves in sheeps Acts 20. 29, 30
clothing, who delighted to divide and destroy, to shake foundations, and
shipwreck consciences, to lead Disciples after them by factions, partialities,
and respect of persons, either darkening the verity, or dividing the unity, or
defacing the uniformity, or destroying the authority, or confounding that order
and subordination which Christ and his Apostles left in the Church of Christ;
men full of lusts and pride, daily spawned innovations in the doctrine, or in
the faith, or in the customs, and in the forms of Religion.

. Such were all those pristine Heretics and Schismatics, whose names and
deeds deserve to be buried with their damnable doctrines, and uncharitable
factions in eternal forgetfulness; they are too many and too odious to repeat:
I would to God they were not dug up out of their graves in our days by some
carrionly (...), who searching the graves, and raking the kennels of old
errors, seek to fill the English world with such odious, noysom and unsavory
spectacles both of opinions and practices.

. Who that is learned can be ignorant of the prevalent numbers and powers of
the Novatians, Arrians and Donatists; what petulancy and cruelty they used
against the Orthodox Cause, challenging the Cause and Church of God wholly and
only to themselves; what despite they had against St. Cyprian, Athanasius, St.
Cyril, St. Hilary, St. Augustine, Optatus and others, that opposed, routed and
confounded their contumacious impudence? Thus was the Cause of Christ one whole
age or century, like Noah's Ark, floating in a deluge of Arrian perfidy and
persecution, to its own grief and astonishment, till God took the matter into
his own hand, and pleading the Cause of Jesus Christ, and his eternal Godhead
against both people, and Bishops, and Emperors, that were infected with that
pestilence; for the inundation of the Goths and Vandals, the Huns and Heruls,
the Gauls and Daci, seemed no other but the fountains of the great deep, broke
up to wash away with humane blood the blasphemies, with which the Christian
world was then polluted, against the glory and honor of the Son and Spirit of
the blessed God; when times were such that men would not endure sound doctrine,
2 Timothy: 4. 5
but heaped up teachers, and clucked together Councils and conventicles
according to their own lusts and interests, without any regard to the primitive
Faith, and practice of the Church of Christ, which was so zealously tender for
the Cause of Christ, that they loved not their lives unto death, but rather
chose ( mill mortes) a thousand deaths, then once to crucify again, or deny
the Lord that bought them.

Fourthly, The Cause of God may 4* The Churches decline by corruption of
manndrs among true beleivers
need his special pleading, by reason of the great corruption of manners, which
like weeds grow in the garden of God, or as tares in the field of the Church,
which was first Aeatth: 13. 25
sown with good seed. Thus as Eusebius, Salvian, Suspitius-Severus and oaths
observe, Christian Religion suffered more by the evil lives of Christians, then
by the malice of persecutors, or Heretics; men that had sound heads as to
doctrine and Faith, yet had foul hearts; their brains good, but their breath,
lungs and liver were naught. This contagion sometimes seized Pastors and
Flocks, by idleness, pride, luxury, vain pomps, and superfluous ceremonies, by
secular policies, uncharitable actions, and scandalous practices, so far as
made the Cause of God, and the name Christ to be blasphemed and abhorred by
many; while they could not reconcile the holiness of Christians faith and
doctrine, with the solecisms of their sordid actions, and shameful lives.

Hence came over the Western The darkness and decay of the western Churches
unper Popery.
Churches that thick Egyptian darkness for many hundred of years; in which
religion was made up for the most part with Images and Pictures, with beads and
latin prayers, with repeated Pater nosters and Ave Mary's; which people
understood not, nor the Priests many times; with Purgatory, Masses and
Indulgencies, with infinite superstitious ceremonies, and empty formalities,
besides idle fables, and vain janglings, which like heaps of chaff had buried
the good wheat of Gods floor, and the glory of divine institutions, to make way
for Monastic superstitions, Idolatrous adorations, and Papal usurpations,
which were built on the flatteries of some, and the fedities of others, who
easily dispensed with the honor of marriage, when they had so cheap pardons for
those extravagancies and impurities, in which many lived, under the vail of
celibacy, but far enough from pure, unspotted, and unviolated virginity.

. To this Augean stable was the Church of Christ and Cause of God brought, by
the depravedness of Christian manners, by the rust and moss of superstition,
before the Reformation began to dawn in this western World; An hundred
grievances, were at once complained of, many confessed, some for very shame
reformed by even those of the Roman party, who with infinite bloodshed in
former ages, fought (under the Notion of holy Wars) not only against Turks,
Jews, and Sarazens, but against good, at least tolerable Christians, who might
have their errors and failing in some things, but it is sure they kept nearer
to the primitive piety, purity, and patience, both in faith, administrations
and manners, than did their proud and merciless destroyers; who eat up those,
poor Christians, as bread, and turned their cruel Croisadoes to crucify their
brethren, breaking their fast sometimes with 20000. of the poor Albigenses,
Lugdunenses, Waldenses, Berengarians, VVicklesites, Hussites, Bohemians and
others; proportionably were their dinners and suppers when the Popes flatterers
and vassals had a mind to fall upon them.

5. Yea, and at this day (even 5 The deccay of the reformed Churches
among the reformed Churches) the purity, simplicity, honesty, charity,
modesty, and equanimity of Reformers is so abated and wasted by the pride,
animosity, bitterness, sacrilege, rapines, cruelties, ambitions and
covetousness among Protestants, besides their endless factions, under
pretentions of reformation, immoderations, novellizings. and confusions. That
thi^ Cause of God, as to the true reforming of religion and just protesting
against Romish errors and enormities, is brought very low, as in other places
and Churches, so in England, which was the greatest beauty, honor, stability,
refuge and safety of the reformed Religion* and that cause of Christ which has
been so learned and valiantly pleaded by the Clergy and Layty, the Princes and
Parliaments, the Martyrs and professors, reverend Bishops and learned
Presbyters, against the Roman Usurpation, Superstition, Sacriledg, and
Idolatry, which are (without doubt) so far Antichristian, as they are clearly
against the Doctrine, example and institution of Christ, besides the judgment
and practice of his primitive Churches.

. Even this cause (I say) is now ^ick and ashamed of it self, so decayed,
disparaged, and divided, that it is next degree to being destroyed, and
despised by all, unless God arise by some extraordinary way of his providence
to plead and assert this his own cause of a just and due reformation, against
the factious policies and Fanatic fallacies of unreasonable men, whose ((...))
immoderations and transports have marred all by their King killing, rapine and
sacriledg, unless God arise to judge the earth.

. Nor is this the first time that God has helped this Church and the Reformed
Religion at a dead lift; for so it was in Queen Mary's days, when the reformed
party made conscience not to rebel against their persecuting Sovereign
Princess, when her persecution was according to her persuasion and conscience,
yea they pleaded and asserted her civil rights, committing the cause of their
Religion and 1 Pet* 4. 19
Reformation to God, with their loyal souls and consciences in well doing and
patience: There did God arise in his due time, and do his own works in his own
way, to the great honor of the reformed Religion, which had first the crowns
of so many Martyrdoms on its head, without the least spot of civil Tumults,
Wars, Seditions, or Rebellions, on the hearts or hands of the reforming Clergy,
and reformed people.

. By which preposterous methods of latter years, mightily cried up and carried
on by some men in order to reformation of Religion, not only Religion is
become retrograde many degrees, if we look to the Dial of Gods word, and the
primitive, Christians practice, as it pretends to be reformed; but even as it
is Christian too* that is, the 1 Pe^* 3 1^
Doctrine and imitation of a crucified, not a crucifying Savior: The lines
which some men have drawn, as the measures of their Doctrine and deeds, are
very excentrick and wide, as to the wonted* center of Gods glory, the
circumference of Scripture truth, and that strait rule of charity by which
those two were wont to meet in the conscience and conversation of good
Christians.

. Nor will either Christian Religion or just Reformation appear in their true
beauty and honor, while these are so far at distance and separated from each
other, that either verity and charity, patience and subjection, truth and peace
are wanting in the ways of Christians.

In the close of this second general 2 Parti^^^ar, Why God suffers his cause to
lapse
Question, it is fit to answer that other branch of it also, Why God so wise,
so potent, so good, s gracious, so compassionate and so vigilant for his own
Cause, that is his Glory and great Name (which is so much bound up in his
Churches welfare) yet suffers it many times so far to run to lapse, seeming
ruin and despair in the eyes of the world, in the triumphs of his enemies, and
in the despondencies of his servants; that they give all for gone, save only a
little hold and hope they have in their prayers, and in the precious promises
of God, to whom nothing is impossible or hard that is worthy of him, and who is
a present help, both inward and outward, in time of trouble, when his time of
help is come?

The Reasons of Gods permitting his Cause thus to lapse for a time, as silent
and unconcerned, or as not seeing, nor regarding the low estate of his Church,
may in brief be these.

1. To let wicked men see what 1 To show the malice that is in men's hearts
is in fundo cordium, in the bottom and lees of their hearts, if they be let
alone unpunished and unrestrained Psalm 50. 21
to the very dregs of their malice, what a perfect enmity and hatred they have
to God and his Cause, which is his Truth, Word and Worship, yea every grace,
and virtue, or good work, yea all rules of justice, good laws and decent order
in Church and State; that as the thoughts of their hearts are only evil and
that continually, so will the actings of their lives, if left to themselves.

2. For the trial of his grace in 2 To try and exercise the graces of the godly
those that are upright in heart, and on Gods side, that their prayers, faith,
zeal, patience, perseverance, and Christian courage, together with 1 Pet: 2. 21
James 1. 2, and 4
their love to God, and charity even to enemies, with their compassion for the
Church, may be manifested: Hence (as St. Paul tells us 1 Cor. 11.) God permits
Heresies, and Apostasies, and Schisms, to rise and prevail in the Church, yea
and many sinful, at least superstitious corruptions in doctrine and manners;
that by such trials the sounder sort may be approved, who in the hour of
temptation persevere without shipwreck of faith or good conscience, either in
their judgment or conversation, which is still such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ.

3. God permits these lapses and 3 To punish the malicious by penal hardening
oppressions of Religion, to punish by penal induration and blindness the
obstinate and presumptuous sinners, who gratify their immoralities and lusts,
by their errors and Apostacies, letting them alone to add sin to sin, Hosea 4.
17
and to fill up the measure of their iniquity. Hence they are given up to
strong delusions, to believe fables, and 2 Thessalonians: 2. 1
speak lies in hypocrisy, because they withheld the truth in unrighteousness,
2 Timothy: 4 4
Rom: ^: 18
and loved the darkness of sottish John 3. 19
superstition and confusion, more then the truth and power, purity and order of
Religion.

4. The Cause of God is many 4 To purge away the dross of his gold
times under great depressions, that by such fiery trials God may purge away
the dross of such as are for the main sincerely good; but yet gradually
lukewarm, too secure, too sensual, too carnal and worldly, too self-conceited,
and self-seeking; they are cast into the furnace of affliction to wean their
affections from the fleshly and sensual world, to prepare them for death, and a
better life, by a nearer conformity to Christ in his cross, that they may not
think the greatest reward of Christian piety to be had in this world, that they
may embrace ( nudum Christum and crucifixum) Christ with the cross as well as
with the crown.

5. Lastly, It is magnum praejudicium 5 To give the world presages of an after
judgment and pleading. Psalm ^3. 19 and 11. 16 Isai 3. 11 and 6^. 24
futuri judicii; an evident token of after judgment and future recompenses,
which shall reward the patience and perseverance of the godly, with a crown of
glory, and the wicked after all their prosperous oppressions with the fruit of
their own ways, by the impressions of divine Justice, in the ballancing of
eternity.

3. The third General Head is, 3 General, How God pleads his own cause
How God pleads his own Cause; 1. Immediately, by his own special appearing for
it against his and his Churches enemies. 2. Mediately, by such instruments, as
he stirs up to be on his side.

1. God has his pleadings in several 1 More immediately in the Court of
conscience against us
Courts. 1. In foro conscienciae, in that Court of conscience which is within
men; sometimes God pleads against them there, filling them with terrors and
stupors, with horror and inquietude, as in Cain (those surda fulmina and
secreta fulgura) those silent thunders, and unseen lightnings, which make them
self-arraigned, accused, convinced, judged and condemned in interiori
tribunali, at the bar or tribunal of their own breasts, as were Joseph's brethren
when they came into trouble, and were more afraid then hurt; yet guilty
consciences are afraid of a leafs shaking, and their own shadow: There is no
peace (says my God) that is no true, wellgrounded Isai 57. 21 and 48. 22
and constant) to the wicked, as such; they are as a restless sea, not only
foaming out their rage and fury against God, but filling and fowling themselves
with mire and dirt; Prima est haec ultio; quod se Judice nemo nocens
absolvitur; thus the heathens found and owned that the accuser, witness, judge,
condemner, and tormentor, which every wicked man had in his own soul, was of
all most inexorable and intolerable. Poena autem vehemens, etc. Nocte dieque a
suum gestere in pectore testem, yea pestem; that they seem sometime quiet,
jolly, merry and secure, it is but as a puddle of fowl water, which stinks the
more it stands still, or as a warm gleam before a smart shower; these are the
sharp Indictments in men's own souls, not verbal pleas only, but forked arrows,
and poisoned darts, which drink up their very spirits, as so many furies, or (
animarum hirudines) leeches of their souls.

2. Other times God pleads his 2 God pleads his cause in our conscience for us.
own Cause in the Court of conscience, for us, and in our behalf, in troubles,
doubts, darkness and desertions; when by the evil of times (as Eliah, Isa: ^0.
10
Jeremiah, Baruch) we are dejected, or by the evil of temptations, buffetted
and tossed as St. Paul in a Isa: 41. 21
long and dismal storm, that we see no light; there the promises and Spirit of
God pleads for us, crying and making intercession with us, commanding us to lay
hold on his strength; God furnishes us with strong reason, bidding us plead
with him, and urge his own name, and Exodus: 33. 12
glory and goodness, as Moses did to disarm an angry God: He then puts us in
mind of Christ's merits, Rom: 8. 1
who is our righteousness, of Gods free gift, of pardoning sin for his own
sake, of the Law fulfilled, of the no condemnation to them that are in Christ,
of his not quenching the smoking flax, or breaking the bruised reed; These and
the like are Gods gracious pleadings in us and for us, when we can say nothing
for our selves; as a Judge that turns Advocate for a modest and penitent
prisoner. God stops the mouth of the great accuser the Devil; Christ answers
for us all doubts and objections, all debts and indictments; they are paid and
cancelled by his rich and gratuitous grace.

3. God pleads his Cause many times in foro seculi, by the visible 3 God pleads
his cause before all the world by his providence Psalm 58. 1^
instances of his special power and providence, which makes all men to see
there is a God that judges the world, who is neither deaf nor dumb, neither
negligent nor impotent, only patient and long-suffering toward his adversaries,
that they might see they had space of repentance. Here, the pleadings of God,
when he arises terribly to judge the world, and Isai 1. 24
to ease him of his adversaries, and to plead the cause of his oppressed
Church, are most worthy of the divine majesty: For

1. They are most just in themselves. The nature of Godspleadings in the world
2. They are most pregnant and convictive in men's consciences, as the pleas of
God, 3. They are unavoidable, and irrisistible, and potent. 4. They carry the
cause (at last) against all opposition; the highest cedars are feld by it, the
Against the greatest and highest Princes
greatest mountains levelled: Gods Cause like Moses his serpent devours all
those Enchanters and Magicians. 5. They are impartial, without respect of
persons, great or strong, rich or noble, wise or foolish, few or many: God
sometimes so pleads it, as to pour contempt even upon Princes; to pull down the
mighty Psalm 107. 4
from their seats, to confound their counsels, to break the arm of their
strength, to lop off all their branches, yea to stub up their roots, as to
their posterity and renown, which was done against Nebuchadnezzar, Haman,
Balshazzar, and Judas.

Sometimes God pleads his cause Miraculous pleadings of Gods cause
even by miraculous appearings in signs and wonders, full of terror and
destruction; so against Pharaoh and the Egyptians; so against Senacherib and
his host, sending a destroying Isai 37. 39
Angel to confute in one night his bl^sphemous insolency, by slaying the
greatest part and flower of his Army, sending him away with shame, which was
followed with the parricide of his two sons, who slew him; So in privater
cases, God pleads against Miriams murmuring, by leprosy; Isai 37. 37
so against Nadab and Abihu, by fire; So against Korah and his Judges 7. 22
mutinous accomplices, God wrought a new way of burying them alive, Numb. 16. 33.
So against the pride of Herod, whose popular diety was confuted by worms, Act.
12. 23. Sometimes God fills his enemies with Pannick terrors, and makes them
sheath their swords in their own bowels, to become executioners of his
vengeance; yea and we read Achitophels or acular wisdom ended in a halter; even
so let all perfidious and impenitent Politicians perish O Lord, that are
enemies to thy Cause, in true Religion and just Government. Sometimes God stirs
up unexpected and despicable enemies against them, who kindle such fires of
intestine or foraign wars, as consume his proudest adversaries, as in the Kings
of Israel and Judah, when they forsook and rebelled against God.

When God arises to plead his Gods pleas impartial
own Cause, he fears the face of none, he spares none; not Families, or Cities,
or Nations, or a whole world (as in Noah's days) or the whole race and nature of
mankind, as in Adam and Eve, who fell under the curse, Genesis 3
with their posterity, when they believed and obeyed the serpent more then God:
Against some he pleads with fire, famine, pestilence, evil Ier: 15. 3
beasts, War, Deluges: Nay he spared not the rebellious Angels, but cast them
out of heaven, into hell fire, from the light of his blessed 2 Pet, 2. 4
presence to chains of eternal darkness.

Nay God spares not his own servants, Gods pleadings against the sins of the
best men, as David, etc.
People and Church; he pleaded sorely against David's sin, which argued his
despising of God, when he preferred his lust, and caused the 2 Samuel: 12. 10, ^
enemies of God to blaspheme all religion and grace, by the scandal of his
extravagancy; God shows us that as Saints may sin, so he sees sin in them, and
will not let it go unpunished.

. So he pleads against Eli and his 1 Samuel 2.
sons, even to their untimely death, and the extirpation of that family from
the honor of Priesthood: So against King Uzziah, for his sacrilegious 1 Kings
15. 5
intruding on the Priests office. So against King Saul for his rebellion, 1 Samuel: 15. 23
which was us witchcraft. So against King Solomon when his wisdom left him, or
he left it, and fell to so gross a folly and effeminacy, 1 Kings ii
as to countenance and tolerate Idolatry, in an uxorious vanity and
inconstancy; Isai 29, 5
So against King Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20
when his pride made him forgetful of so great a mercy, as his miraculous
recovery and delivery.

Nay God pleaded often (against the 4 Gods pleading against the ews
whole Church of the Jews in their Apostasies) the Cause of his Law, Worship,
Service, and Servants, the Prophets whom they slew, by cutting them short, by
pulling down, and abasing the crown of their glory, by giving their
adversaries dominion over them to destroy them, to burn their Cities and
Temple, to desolate their Land, to lead them into captivity, and so to give the
Land its rest and Sabbath, which they had profaned: Thus did he often plead the
controversies he had with that Church and people, that City and Sanctuary,
which was called by his own name, with whom at last he reckoned for all the
blood of the Prophets, and that of the Messiah too, which filled up the cup of
Gods wrath against them, Matthew. 23* 35
to an utter desolation, which has held now for near sixteen hundred years.

In like sort did the Spirit of God Gods pleading against Christian Churches
plead his Cause against the famous seven Churches in Asia, and their Angels or
Bishops, of which we read in the second and third chapters of the Revelations,
reproving and threatening them sorely, both Fathers and children, Bishops and
Presbyters, Pastors and people, except they did repent. So against all the
Greek and Eastern Christian Churches, whose heresies, luxuries, schisms,
ambitions and hypocrisies have at this day put them under the Mohammedan bondage
and tyranny, that they have scarce now a name to live as Christians or Churches.

. Nor was God wanting to plead his Cause by many terrible judgments against
the depraved state of these Western Churches, when overgrown with Image-Saints,
and Angels-worship; with Tyranny and superstition, with covetousness and
ambition, with sottery and debauchery, even from the Popes or chief Bishops
chair, to the Princes, and Peers, and Clergy, and Gentry, and people of all
sorts, how were they tossed too and fro in the sactions of Gnelphs and
Gibelins, wasted in the holy Wars, as they called them; terrified with
excommunication and bans, that 2 Chronicles: ^5. 5
there was no peace to him that came in, or to him that went out.

Lastly, God sometimes pleads his 5 Gods pleading his cause by persecutions
Phil: 1
Cause (and gives evident token it is his) by an unexpected way, even by
suffering it to fall into fiery trials, and many temptations; not as offended
with his Church, but as giving the world experience of the mighty power of his
grace, and the eminent faith, courage, patience and constancy of his servants,
who love Rev* 12. 12
not their lives to the death; but can set all the loss and dung of this world
at stake for Christ's sake: So the primitive Martyrs and Confessors, Apostles
and others glorified God; So many Bishops, Presbyters, Virgins young and old,
filled the world with admiration of that cause, for which they were so resolved
and undaunted, that their pious perseverance (as Justin Martyr and others tell
us), with their ((...)) pertinacy, as Mar. Aurelius calls it) was a most
powerful way to commend the glorious Gospel of Christ to the world: Thus the
blessed company and holy Host, after Christ's example, did assert the cause of
God and his Christ, not by armed forces fighting, but by sober preaching, and
patient suffering: This Spirit of glory was a riddle (indeed) and a new way to
advance the Evangelical cause, against the powerful oppositions found on all
hands, yet it was Gods way and prevailed, by the power of his Word, and the
testimony 1 Pet: 4. 14
of his Spirit of patience and glory which rested on them.

. As the first foundation stone of the Gospel or Church of Christ was laid in
John Baptists and Christ's blood, so it was after builded up by St. Stephens,
St. James and their followers: Then Christians, like Parthians, fought flying,
and prevailed by not resisting, and were Rom: ^. 37
more then conquerors when they were most conquered; the blood of Martyrs being
the seed of the Church, and their ashes as the compost ormendment of the world.

Fourthly, It remains that I 4 General, Gods immediate pleading his Cause by
men.
show how God pleads his and his Churches Cause, not always by miraculous and
immediate instances; but by the mediate instruments of By pious Princes.
his ordinary providence; whom he stirs up to protect, to favor, to speak
comfortably to his Sion, that his warfare is finished, that the days Isai 41. 2
of refreshing are come; such were some good or tolerable Kings among Acts 3.
19
the Jews, Asa, Uzziah, Hezekiah and Josiah; such was Constantine the Great,
and some other following Emperors, that were Christian and orthodox too.

So since the Reformation, God has given (specally in these British Churches)
Kings and Queens to be Nursing Fathers and mothers to true Religion, Defenders
of the true Faith, and the Professors of it, who had long ere this been
martyred and burned, butchered or massacred, blown up and extirpated as
Heretics, if the Romish Sea had not had bounds of national Laws, and sovereign
power set to it, which said Hitherto and no further thou shall go; here thy
proud and threatening waves shall be stopped: I pray God we have not sinned away
our defense and glory, making breaches upon the banks of our Laws, Government
and Religion, so wide as will let in at last that overflowing scourge again
upon us, under the names of Liberty, Toleration, and Super-reformation.

Again, God pleads his own cause as to true Religion, by furnishing his Church,
First of the Jews with extraordinary Prophets; such as was Moses, Samuel,
Eliah, Micah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel and others, till the Messiah
came; After the Apostles ( who were Master Builders) God gave to his Christian
Church such Heroes of learning, zeal and courage, as in all ages undertook all
those Goliahs and sons of Anak, who de^ied the host of God; such of old were
Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Clemens, the Cyrils, the Basils,
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, the Gregory's, the great Athanasius, St. Augustine, St.
Jerome, St. Hilary, Optatus, Prosper and others, during the heat of heathenish,
and heretical or schismatical persecution; And this not singly only, but
socially, junctis viribus; in Councils or Synods, By Councils and Synods.
which were Ecclesiastical Parliaments, either greater or lesser, in several
Diocesses or Provinces, or National or Ecumenical of all the Christian world,
by their Pastors and Representatives; these did mightily plead the cause of
Christ, against heretical novelties, and schismatical partialities; these kept
the faith and peace of the true Church entire; these guided, gathered and
healed the erring, scattered and worried of the flock; these by many hands made
walls against the seas and mighty floods, which the devil cast out of his mouth
Rev: 12
against the Woman clothed with the sun; the Church professing Christ. Thus
the famous Council of Nice, so pleaded the cause of Christ's Divinity, that they
crushed the Arrian Serpent in the egg, and gave that cockatrice its deadly
wound, which it never recovered, though it made a foul struggling a long time:
So the Council of Constantinople pleaded the cause of the Holy Ghost, against
the cavils of Macedonius: So the Council of Ephesus pleaded the unity of
Christ's Person, God and Man against Nestorius: And the Council of Chalcedon the
distinction of his Natures, against Eutyches his confoundiug of them; so in
other cases, as the cause of God and his Church required, Councils were
sovereign Physicians, and applied excellent cordials, till they came to be
servile to the private causes, lusts, power and interests of men, and less
intent to the Word and Spirit of Christ (as the first Council of Jerusalem was,
which ought to be the pattern of all after Synods.)

And afterward in the eclipse, Gods pleading in the reformed Churches.
decline, superstition and darkness of times in the Western Churches, yet there
were not wanting some that did still plead the cause of God as his witnesses,
against the Apostacies, extravagancies and luxuries of the Romish tyranny and
pride. So was St. Bernard, Nicolaus, Clemangis, Alvarus-Pelaegius, Wickliff,
John Hus, and Jerome of Prague; our Lincolniensis Baleus, and others.

Yea when God arose mightily to shake this Western world, and to rack us off
from our Monastic and Roman lees, who can sufficiently muster up the armies of
Worthies, both abroad and at home, of reverend Bishops, and other learned
Divines, who have either stood in the gap with their arms, or at the bar with
their strong arguments, pleading Gods cause by Scripture and antiquity, by
learned writings and holy lives, against all oppositions: I will name none,
because I will not seem partially silent to the merit of any; This only I may
without envy say, none have exceeded the worthy Bishops, and others of the
Reformed Church of England, who were and ever will be in impartial judgments
esteemed among the first therein; and the headmost ranks of Martyrs,
Confessors, Reformers, Preachers, Disputers, Writers and Livers, while we were
happy to enjoy such Fathers and such Sons of this Church, as were worthy to
enjoy those favors and Honors, which this Nation heretofore grudged not to
confer upon them, and abhorred to take from them, and their Episcopal Order,
which was excellently martialled and employed by worthy Bishops, as Jewel,
Usher, Andrews, Davenant, Morton, Prideaux, Hall, White, Bilson, Babington and
others; Also by Hooker, Willet, Sutliff, Rogers and others of the Presbyterian
subordination.

. It Is true they were all men, and so might have their infirmities more or less;
but they were such men of might and weight, and of valor and renown, that
(with all the grains of allowance) they far out-weighed all that popular stuff
or pomp of either learning or virtue, gifts or graces, Scholarship or
Saintship, which* has swelled their adversaries, rather then filled them, with
any real truth, or ingenuom worth, comparable to them: And however now (indeed)
the Reformed Church and Religion of England does look like an Army, that has
been so harrased and routed, as it has lost most of its gallant commanders,
which gave life and courage and skill to the whole Protestant party, and the
cause of the Reformed Religion; yet we must not despair but that God will
return in mercy to us, if once our lives and manners be but as reformed as our
doctrine was; this needs not, though the other do, reforming.

. And because there will be failers and infirmities on the best Gods pleading
at the day of judgment
men's part in pleading Gods cause in this world; therefore to make amends there
is a third Court, wherein God will (unavoidably) plead his cause against every
evil doer, and all nakedness in the world; this will be in foro poli or coeli,
at the last day, when the books of Omniscience, conscience and Scripture shall
be opened; Rev. 20. 12
and men's sins, with their wilful, immoral and impenitent errors shall be set
in order before them; Then the great Accuser within and without shall be heard,
and sentence and 20. 13
given secundum allegata and probata; according to the merit and evidence of
men's works: This is the last appeal of the oppressed righteous cause; where it
shall be heard, and have right done it: For then, as St. Bernard tells Judges,
and Juries, and Lawyers, Omnia judicata rejudicabuntur; All judgments and
causes shall be reviewed and rejudged.

. But the consideration of such 5 The right method of man's pleading Gods Cause.
Instruments, as God is pleased to (...) up to plead his cause in this world,
Leads me to the last particular, which is to show the manner and method* (
legitimi litigandi) of man's pleading, as becomes him, this holy cause of God,
when he is called to it in an ordinary (which all are) or extraordinary way, as
some may be.

. It is not only the work of God to plead his own cause (as Joash said Judges
6. 31
of Baal, If he be a God, he can and will plead for himself) But it is the duty
of every good Christian that loves God, to be a worker and pleader together
with him in Gods cause and way; we must be all willing to be retained on Gods
side, to be his Advocates and Attorneys, when he calls us to this work, to
contest for God against an evil, perverse, and adulterous generation, either by
living or dying, by doing or suffering, by preaching or disputing, by
discoursing or writing.

It will be demanded, why I add Of pleading Gods cause by fighting.
not by fighting? which is now much cried up, and used by some, as a most
speedy and effectual way to plead Gods Cause, and set up Christ^ Kingdom.

I answer, The cause of God is sometimes to be pleaded by the way of fighting.

1. In defense of any Church and State, against unjust and foreign invasion, or
intestine rebellion and sedition.

2. By way of a Princes relieving his oppressed Subjects and Confederates in
other States and Dominions.

3. By way of asserting the proceedings of Justice as to Law, according to that
power which is established in any Kingdom or Polity.

4. As to the Cause of Religion; it is no further to be asserted by the Sword,
then as it is established by the Law, and under the protection of the Sovereign
Power; there to plead its cause by such a Sword, as is the sword of God, and of
Gideon, Judge. ^* 1^.
is lawful, when it is done by lawful command and Supreme (which is in England)
Regal Authority.

Otherwise no Cause of God, as to Of Religion to be asserted by the sword.
Religion, is to be either planted and propagated, or reformed, or vindicated
by the sword of Subjects against any Princes or chief Magistrates will and
power, in whose hand the sword is: True, God by a special Prophet, and a
commission from Heaven, confirmed by many miracles, did once put a sword into
the Jews hand, to make their way against those Nations, which were declared by
Divine Justice worthy to be destroyed. But the Evangelical spirit is not of
that temper; the Commission of the Gospel, and Christ's Luke 9. 55.
Spiritual Militia, by which he conquers the World, is not to fight, and kill
and slay; but to preach, to pray, Mark 16. 15.
and to suffer. They grossly mistake Christ's Kingdom, and Gods Cause now, that
fancy it is to be pleaded by the Arm of Flesh; by popular furies and forces, by
tumults and violences; by subverting and opposing Magistratick power, and
breaking over the boundaries of good Laws and Customs, Civil and Ecclesiastical.

. Christ commanded Peter's gladiatorum Mat. 26. 52.
forwardness in his defense, to put up his sword into his sheath. Christ had
two other swords, of the Word and Spirit, which were enough to do his work; not
by Soldiers, but Ministers; not by Colonels and Captains, but hy Bishops and
Presbyters.

There are other ways to exercise a Christians love, zeal, and courage for Gods
cause; which as it is most worthy of our pleading, so we must take care to
plead it (...) and (...), as becomes our Lord and Savior: It is a caution
which Quintilian a great Orator gave to all Pleaders, Cavendum ne bonam causam
male litigando perdamus: Many men are untowardly forward to plead Christ's
cause; like hot mettal'd and heady horses, neither well mouthed, nor well wayed
and managed: They endanger more by their rashness, then they advance by their
capring activity.

The Cause then of God must in times, places, and points, be pleaded so as
becomes the Majesty* Truth and Honor of the great God.

1. (...)* Wisely, with understanding; Gods cause to be pleaded by men.
by the clear and potent demonstrations of it; grounded on 1 Understandingly.
the Word of God; not by humane fancies, wild notions, and extravagant 2 Timothy
3. 17.
presumptions, and fanatic fetches: The Word of God is able to make us perfect
pleaders of his Cause. We must not add to, nor detract from that (...),
complete armor, offensive and defensive: If any plead not according to that
rule of Isa. ^. 20.
Law and Gospel; of Faith and Loyalty; of patience and obedience, it is because
there is no light of truth, or grace of humility in them. Gods Cause needs no
cavilings nor sophisms; no wisdom or eloquence of man's invention, which is to
join humane fraud and force, mere froth and folly to divine sufficiency: As if
one would muster up Frogs and Mice, with their bulrushes, to join with Angels
in Gods battles, to help the Lord against the mighty.

2. Gods cause is to be pleaded by 2. Sincerely.
man (...), sincerely, for Gods sake, not for self ends and interests, for our
glory, gain, or advantage, as to our persons or parties, our secular and civil
interests of power and preferment; which are many times the dead Fly cast into
this 2 Kings 10. 16.
precious Ointment; as Jehu did, whose ambition was the belows and blazoner of
his zeal. So they that preached the Gospel out of Envy Phil. 1. 15.
and ill will, or for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1. 11.
to serve their bellies, and not the Lord Jesus; to please men, and not Gal. 1.
10.
God; seeking not the salvation of souls, or the good of the Church and State,
but their own emoluments and preferments: These are in all ages the greatest
deformers of Christian Religion, exposing it first to popular fury, and after
to the shame and contempt of all.

3. Gods cause must be pleaded 3. Entirely.
(...), Integre, (...), solidly and entirely; not picking and choosing what
parts, or points, or duties of it most suit with our fancies, opinions,
parties, designs, desires and private interests: We must not so plead for the
first table in piety, as to neglect the second in equity and charity: So to
contend against superstition in Gods worship, as to overthrow the order and
decency which ought to be solemnly observed in it; or that duty and obedience
we owe to those which are in Church or State called Fathers, and to whom we
stand obliged by the first Commandment with promise* We must not so plead or
urge our duty to God, as to skip over our duty to our neighbor; nor so plead
against Idolatry, as to indulge Sacri* ledge; or against Adultery, as to acquit
Murder; or so cry up Religion or Reformation, as to encourage Rebellion and
Sedition: No^ may we so inculcate and insist on one duty, as to omit and slight
others; to be mere Euchites for prayer, or Acoits for hearing; or ((...))
Pragmaticks, impertinently and irregularly busy in Church and State, as to
neglect the Sacraments; or to be so eager in dispute for Truth (even the
minores veritates) as to forget the (...)) great things of God in which the
Kingdoms of the Gospel consists; so magnifying faith, that we omit good works;
and crying down ceremonies, to the overthrow of all orderly and uniform
Devotion; to cast out Commandments, Lords Prayer, Creed, and all settled
Liturgy out of the Church.

4. The Cause of God must be 4. Holily, an^ justly, or lawfully.
pleaded by us, (...), (...), and (...), holily, justly, and lawfully;
according to our place and duty; after a righteous manner, also peaceably and
orderly: Nor ((...)) violently, rudely, and injuriously: This is the first
thing God requires of us, to do justice, and Micah. 6. 8.
then to show mercy, and walk humbly with him. Extravagant motions mar the
cause of God, and rather prejudice it, then any way plead it: We must not
commit Robbery to do Sacrifice; nor lie or oppress, upon Isa. 61. 8.
Gods account: We must not be so 1 Pet. 4. 15.
2 Pet. 2. 2.
far partial to Gods Cause, as to do Romans 3. 8.
evil that good may come thereby; this is to turn the staff of Moses into a
Serpent: The great care of the Apostles was, to have Mysteries of Religion made
good by Moralities. Cardinal Poole well expressed, that those would best
understand the eleven first Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans (which are
full of high mysteries and disputes) who did most practice the five last, which
exhort to holy life; teaching such as believed well, to do all things well,
that the Cause and Name of God might not be evil spoken of. 1 Pe^. 2. 12.
We must not violate the good laws of civil Societies, under pretense to exalt
the Law of God; nor run Church and State into confusion, to set up Reformation
of either in seditious ways. Gods Cause needs not the Devils engines; either
plead it as becomes it, or let it alone. It will support it self, without the
rash hand of Uzzah to stay it: If thou can not plead it actively, thou may
do it passively, and much more to purpose, as primitive Christians did, then by
any inordinate activity: No man, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 5.
that striveth, is crowned, unless he strive lawfully: Secundum leges
Athleticas, such as the (...), the Institutor and Umpire had appointed.

5. Gods Cause must be pleaded 5. With moderation and discretion.
(...), with moderation, discretion, and calmness; so as not to suffer any
Phil. 4. 5.
transports of passion and precipitancy to over sway us, to an ((...)) excess
or indecency: We must not so plead against superstition, as to reproach or
weaken true Religion; or against humane corruptions, as to vacate and void,
Divine institutions; or against the abuse of things, as to abolish the good use
of them: to have no Our Father, because we would have no Ave Marys in our
Prayers.

. Reformation must not run to the ruin of Church, or the riot of State; as if
a Physician should destroy the body with the disease, purging away the spirits
with ill humors, such as their former methods seem to be, who will have no
Bishops according to the primitive and Catholic order of the Church, because
some Bishops in after times had their fauls and frailties; or no Ministers,
because some of them have been too blame; or no Sacraments, because some may be
unworthy receivers: These as immoderations and madnesses, become not those,
that undertake to plead Gods Cause; It is like theirs who would starve
themselves, because some have been gluttons, or destroy all Vines, because of
some men's drunkenness, or have no singing, because some may sing out of tune;
it is an ordinary error in men to suffer their pleas to pass from the cause to
the persons, and so from the persons to the cause, which transports of envy and
anger, arise from the overboyling of men's passions, which wastes their
judgments, and make them instead of snuffing dim candles, to put them quite
out; an error that I fear has been too prevalent in some men's spirits and
practices among us; whose meaning and intentions possibly might be good, or at
least not so bad as the event.

Sixthly, Valiantly and courageously, ^ With Christian courage and magnanimity.
(...), according to the generosity and magnanimity of a true Christian spirit,
which is rather good, then great; or therefore great because good; not by a
military robus^ness, and boisterous forwardness, or childish pertinacy, that
resolves to maintain any cause they once engage for; but such a cool and sober
valor, as first has made a just conquest of our selves, as to all irregular
passions, inordinate lusts, and oblique designs; that being listed in Christ's
spiritual Militia, and having given our names to him, we may put on that
spiritual armor, which becomes a Christian in truth, faith, love, zeal,
patience, justice, sobriety, sanctity, and constancy, for these are the solid
grounds, and sure guides of a Christians courage in Gods cause; whose sacrifice
might not be offered with strange Exodus 30. 9.
fire, or strange incense, nor may Lev. 10. 1.
his cause be pleaded by brutish valor, or by turbulent passions. For that
were like baking the shewbread of the sanctuary with man's dung, which the
Prophet Ezekiel so much abhorred, and deprecated.

Seventhly, Gods cause must be pleaded by us (...), becoming Christ and
Christians, who are persons under the severest restraints of any men, with
modesty, gravity, With respect and modesty to superiors.
humility, and due respects to our betters and superiors be^itting their place
authority, and dignity: So the ancient Martyrs and other confessors, (in their
Apologies petitions and Remonstrances, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian and others
presented to the Emperors or Senates) owned them with due honor, and paid
that reverence to them which their dignity required, and Gods word either
commanded or permitted. They never used railing 2 Pet. 2. 11.
accusations against them; nor spoke Jude ^.
evil of dignities, to set a gloss and soil on their good cause, no not in
their greatest agonies, in their (...) when they were dying, and suffering, as
well as disputing, preaching, or writing; they blessed those that cursed them:
and prayed for those that spitefully Mat. 5. 44.
used them; This gave repute to the Cause of God, and showed the spirit of God
was in them of a truth: they did not speak but act great things, and if they
could less dispute, they would yet readily dye for that cause, which was
delivered to them by the Pillar and ground of Truth, the Church of Christ.

Secondly, (...) Charitative, 2 With charity and compassion to all men.
with charity to all sorts of people, pitying their blindness and barbarity,
in meekness of wisdom instructing them, as holy Polycarp did, fervently and
humbly praying for them, yea, ( osculando prodit orem) even kissing our
betrayers, and destroyers, as Crysologus observes of Christ: not behaving
themselves as vermin in a trap or wild Bulls in a Net, but as Lambs and Sheep of
1 Pet* 2. 23.
Christ's Flock and Mark, who opened Acts 8. 32.
not his mouth, save only to pray for his crucifiers; as also did the first
Martyr S. Stephen, whose Acts 7. 60.
name imports the comfort and crown of his thus suffering for Christ's Cause:
not as an evil doer, 1 Pet. 3. 16.
or an evil speaker, some men's stomachs are so full of Choler, gall and
virulency, that they do not plead for Gods cause so much, as spit and spue upon
it; when pretending high zeal and godliness, they so foully disgorge themselves
in ill language against their superiors and betters every way; no Magistrate no
Minister Of rude and riotous pleadng Gods cause
escape their dirt and mire; All are Beasts and Antichrists, and Satan's and
Enemies, and fit to be destroyed, that do not comply with the cause they look to
set up (together with themselves) by pulling down all that stands in their way.

. What scurrilous and scandalous Libels, have some men made, like the wast and
filthy papers of Martin Marprelate and others of that bran, to wrap up their
several causes in; what undecencies, what barbarities, what^edities, whatfuries
what menaces, have their Sermons and Prayers abounded with? and so their
action*s* by a superfluity of self conceit, passion, pride, arrogance, envy,
desire of revenge, and the like enormous distempers? so far beyond a Christian,
that they would make a modest and ingenuous heathen blush, and abhor any cause
that is pleaded or managed by such poy sonous pens, such polluted lips, and
unwashed hands.

. I may truly say with St. James, my brethren these things ought not to James.
3. 10.
be so, these are not the methods of Christians pleading their Gods and
Saviour^ cause, either bitterly to rail like Rabsakeh, or pompously to vapor
and flatter like Tertullus, crying up every cause as Gods, that is uppermost,
either in power or in popular applause, or vulgar pity, which are no true
Touch-stones of Gods cause, either as to civil Justice, or true Religion.

And thus (O worthy and Christian Auditors) have I finished the demonstrative
or doctrinal part, which showed first, the nature of Gods cause. Secondly, the
manner of pleading it, and Thirdly what method we must use in our pleading it;
so as to observe the holy laws and orders, which become our respects to the
cause of God, and to our Superiors, yea, to all men: whose rules are his
written word rightly understood, not wrested and depraved by sinister passions
and presumptuous dispensations of what is our duty indeed to God and man.

I will not abuse your patience, while I crave the use of a little time, to
feel how the pulse of your affections and resolutions do beat, and whether your
understandings have transmitted the cause of God to your heart, that knowing
your duty in so great a concern, you may resolve to do it.

1. Use of instruction: to show 1 Use to direc^ us to the best cause that is to
be pleaded.
us what is that cause which is most worthy our pleading, with all the wisdom,
power and capacities we have; it is Gods. For this cause as John 18. 37.
Christ speaks, he came into the World, and into the bosom of the true
Church; for this cause we are endowed with understanding, memory, eloquence,
conscience, civil influences in Counsel and in authority; public and private:
for this cause we were baptized by the Blood of Christ, and dedicated to him,
sutably educated and instructed; also nourished and refreshed by his body and
blood, that we should plead for Gods glory, for our Saviors truth, Worship,
Ministry, servants, and institutions against our own iusts and Passions,
against the ignorance, Athe^sme, profaneness, licentiousness, hypocrisy,
novelty, extravagancy, error, superstition, idolatry, Flattery, sacrilege, and
security of the world. It is a shame for us to be so zealous industrious,
solicitous and importune in our own petty concerns, for a little profit,
honor, or pleasure; and to neglect that cause, which is worth all we are and
have, even our estates liberties and lives, Nec propter vitam vivendi per dear
causam; if we expect God to plead ours we must plead his, and with a vehemence
as much above all other causes, as heaven is above earth, eternity above a
moment, and the excellency of Christ above the loss and dung, the seraps and
excrements of this world.

2. Use of Caution; but as we 2 Use, Caution to plead Gods cause in Gods way.
must be careful to adhere to, and assert Gods cause, so it must be in Gods
way, with Justice, holiness, order, humility, patience, charity, sincerity,
according to the bonds of Gods and man's laws, not with tumult, violence,
saction, sedition sraud, sury, partiality, injustice and hypocrisy; Gods Ark
though it ^otters must not be stayed or held up by such rash hands; better it
do honest cadere, then inhoneste stare. These Midwives are not fit for the
birth of Gods children; Such as call in the assistance of these, either mistake
Gods cause, or they make his cause but a stale and visard to their own private
interests and designs; or lastly they are ignorant of Gods methods, and the
way of his Saints in all ages; or they greatly distrust his power and goodness,
as if he were not sufficient to vindicate himself and his cause, by such means
as are only worthy of him, of Christ, and of us as his servants.

3. Use of trial and reproof, Of mistakers and mispleaders of Gods cause.
you may see clearly what cause they plead, who observe not Gods course and
method, but think to justify evil pleading by the goodness of the cause. To
such violent injurious, perfidious, and unreasonable men, we may put that
question which God does, Psalm. 50. 16. What have thou to do, to take my cause
into thy hand, or my word Psalm. 50. 16.
into thy mouth, since thou hate to be reformed, etc. On which words they
report that Origin after his lapse, commented with his tears. Those that plead
Gods cause any way by fighting or writing, speaking or doing, must have written
in their hearts, and affections on their forehead and hands, as the Horses in
Zacharies vision had on their bells Zach. 14. 20.
or bridles, holiness to the Lord; St. Chrysostom observes in the disorders
and corruptions which distracted, with exstatick convulsions and madness the
heathen Sybils and Prophets in their Oracles; and in the calmness or harmony,
which was in Gods Prophets, how great a difference there is between Diabolical
possession, and divine inspiration; such is the disorder that attends men in
their own cause, and the order, which they observe, who intend Gods. There was
wont to be proclaimed before the olympian games, and Athletick agonies; That
none who were misbegotten, or slaves, or vile or infamous persons, should offer
to enter the lists, or contest, in those famous and solemn, yea sacred
conflicts, which were not for private gain, but for the honor of their gods,
and the Victors; such a proclamation may I make, as to Gods cause, (...), let
no proud, profane, covetous, ambitious, sacrilegious, perjurious, popular,
partial, parasitick, insolent, disorderly and licentious persons pretend to
plead it, since they do more prejudice and disparage it, then any way advance
or forward it; good and wise men are ashamed, and weak men are jealous and
afraid to be s^en in that good cause, wherein wicked men appear (not good but
great sticklers) as Magots do in what was a good dish of meats; not to garnish
or adorn it, but to defile and devour it.

4. Use, fear to oppose Gods cause, 4. Use of Terror, to such as oppose Gods
cause.
or by anyforcible or fallacious ways to plead against it, for it will be as a
burdensome stone, a rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2. 8^
who ever dasheth against it, or on whom it falls at last, with the weight of
Gods vindication, It will dash them to pieces; who ever contended against God
and his cause, and prospered? For it will at last be pleaded with fire and
brimstone, with an omni potent and unexorable justice, which will consume as
fire does stubble, all the opposing powers, and fallacious pretensions.

5. Use of exhortation when we 5. Use, of exhortation, and comfort in the
lowest ebb to plead Gods cause by our prayers.
have done our duty in Gods cause, and in his way, according to our place, and
see that we profit nothing as to the public, but only to our own peace and
discharge of good consciences; yet cease not to follow God with our prayers,
and holy importunities, that he would Ps al. 119. 126.
take the matter into his own hand, Bonae causae sufficit unus patronus bonus,
Gods cause is never to be despaired of; though it have no patron or advocate
among men, yet it has one above who is optimus and maximus, the greatest and
best of all; It may (as a bladder) be forced under water, for a while, but it
will buoy up again: The Church may be as the ship in which Christ was tossed
and covered with waves, yet Christum vebit and causam Christi, (as Caesar said
to the fearful Mariners, of himself and his fortune) God often lets things run to
low ebbs, that he may show his mighty power, and make the extremities of his
cause the opportunities of his help; however let not thy faith or Prayers fast,
which have a kind of omnipotency in them, to remove Mountains, and to do
miracles, at a dead lift; Gods arm is not shortened, though man's be withered:
let God alone with his own cause, the gates of bell shall not prevail against
it.

6. Use, Measure not the cause of 6. Use, not to measure Gods cause by false
rules.
God by outward prevailings and prosperities; the gayest feathered foul are not
the best meat; we must condemn the generation of Gods people and the cause of
the righteous, Psalm. 73. 15.
if we think that the worst cause, which has the worst usage or success in
this world, look to the Prophets from righteous Abel to John Baptist, look to
the Apostles and the best of their successors, look to the holy Preachers and
people, we shall find they had always enough to do to plead the cause of God
and his truth, against the many open persecutions and secret underminings of
evil men and devils; who many times so prevayled by Gods just judgment, that
the cause of God seemed wholly routed, such were their powers, their victories,
their numbers, their policies, their cruelties, all bent against the cause of
God: yet, even their banishment and prison, and tortures, and plundrings, and
sequestrations, and loss of all, even to life it self, these with a good cause,
and a good conscience, were infinitely to be preferred before all the
Treasures, and Triumphs, and Thrones, and successes and applauses of impious
Heb. 2. 4.
prosperity or prosperous impiety. The just must live by faith not by Romans 1.
17.
sense; the touch stone of Gods cause is Godsword, both as to the end, and the
means the usual badg or mark of Christ's cause is Christ's cross, to which we
were all devoted in our baptism: nor must we fly from those colors, Mat. 7. 22.
least the Lord answer us, as those that plead with him at the last day, have
we not prophesied in thy name and cast out Devils etc. So have we not pleaded
thy cause O Lord by tumults, mutinies, falsities, sedition, rebellion, by
plunder and rapine, by sacrilege and perjury, by blood and violence; To whom
the Lord will reply, depart from me ye hypocrites, and accursed, I know you
not, you pleaded the cause of your own lusts and belly, of your pride, envy,
covetousness, ambition and revenge, and not of my holy name, and true Religion,
and reformation, which owns no such manner of pleading or practicing.

7. Use, Is by way of examination, Use of examination by putting two Questions.
wherein I will propound two Questions to you, with such answers, as I conceive
may suit them.

1. Question is, What may be that 1 Quest* what is the cause which God thus
pleads against us in England.
cause of God, for which he thus pleads in wrath against us in England? So far
that his hand has been a long time stretched forth against us, and his wrath
is not yet turned away from us, but burns as a consuming fire, to the very
foundations, in a long war, and the worst of all, a civil war, which destroys
even humanity it self, setting nearest relations at distances, and friends at
distances, and neighbors at enmity, and countrymen at mortal contentions. Yea,
and this upon the worst account, even religious dissentions and jealousies no
less then secular; if we ask why the Lord has brought all this evil upon a
people, that were once called by his name, and but too happy, the very wonder
joy or envy of all Churches, and Nations, and Kingdoms; Why is it that the
Lord has pleaded thus severely, against our Kings and Princes, our Parliaments
and Peers, our Bishops and Clergy, our Gentry and Commonalty even all sorts of
people, against Church and State, against our peace, our laws, our government,
our liberties, our estates and our plenty, against the prosperity, and the
honor of the Nation, yea against our very Religion, and reformation it self,
as if he did abhor us, So that we seem condemned to everlasting torments, to
contend with, and devour each other, with endless diesolations and confusions,
turning like Ixion in the wheel, or Sisyphus his stone, or St. Laurence from
one side to the other, upon the grid^ron of daily exactions, vexations, terrors
and vastations, while Manasseh is against Ephraim; and Ephraim against
Manasseh, and Judah against both; That we cannot find or will not follow the
way of peace. With what Earthquakes, and Shakings, and Overturnings, and bloody
Battles, and mutual Exhaustings, and unplacable Annimosities, have we been
wasted many years, and are still threatened every day, besides the bitter feuds
and factions, the divisions and subdivisions, which like fire have seized on
the Temple and House of God, this so famous Church, and our reformed religion,
heretofore so blessed with piety and peace, gifts and graces, with the beauty
and holiness, and the crown of double honor; against all which God has
written bitter things and powered contempt.

. These frowns and fightings do Gods controversy with the Land.
all testify to our faces, that God has a controversy with the land, Hos. 4.
1.
against Church and State, that he Ier. 25. 31.
pleads as an adversary against Court and City, and Country, against all
estates and degrees of men; Among whom such an evil spirit is risen, as between
Abimeleck, and the men Judges 9. 23.
of Sichem, that there is no peace to him that goes out or comes in, we are
left as sheep without a sheepherd; as a ship in a storm, without 2 Chronicles. 15.
5.
a Pilot; as Orphans without a Father, and as Widows without an Husband, in a
desolate, deplorable, self-destroying condition. Of which abyss or ocean of
troubles, we see no bounds or bottom, being condemned to an arbitrary
subjection, to a partial monopoly of power, and to a mere military protection,
in which not Philosophers (as Plato wished) but Soldiers and men of blood,
must be our Governors, and our exactors, our Protectors; Who keep us quiet
that they may fleece us, and fleece us, that they may keep us in subjection, of
whom we shall find that true, which is said of Physicians, many of them are but
a further disease to a Patient, qui medice, sic qui militariter vivit, misere
vivit, It is but a sad life, which must be maintained by daily leeches, and
bloodlettings, by laneings and searings and cuttings of some parts of the body
which are not so unsound, as those that are the executioners of them.

. Certainly God is too wise, and too indulgent a Physician, to use so Gods long
and sore pleading against us.
long and so great evacuations, purgations, and corrosives to this body
politic, if there were not many foul and marbose or malignant humors in it?
the Heathens were wont in public and long Calamities after they had tried
allways to appease their angry Gods by supplications and sacrifices, and yet
were never the better, to send to some famous Oracle for its direction:

Do not presume to be your Oracle, Answer to the first Quaere.
but let Gods word be it, this will give you a clear and unambiguous answer,
why the Lord has done all this evil against us, why he thus implacably pleads
against this Church and State, which formerly were his chief favorites and
darlings, ^^ the signets or bracelets on his hand and arm, as the vine Hag, 2.
23.
which himself had planted, and watered, and wonderful preserved, which is now
become a scorn Isaiah. 5.
and shame to it self, no less then an hissing and astonishment to all the
Nations round about.

As the Lord pleads against his God pleads against our unthankfulness to God.
Vine of the Jewish Church and State, appealing to the men of Judah and
Jerusalem, to judge Isaiah 5. 3.
between him and his vine, so may it be said in our case.

What could the Lord have done more for us then he did, and what could we have
done less for his cause than we have done, or more against it? How were we
planted, and watered and weeded, and fenced, and fortified, and loaded with the
choicest blessings of heaven and earth? What was there wanting in England to
make us happy, but holy, humble and thankful hearts, with suitable lives, the
good grapes which God expected; instead of which, Oh what sower grapes did we
bring forth to God and man, O how weary were we of Gods blessings, as if God
had cloyed and overladen us? How like the nansueating Jews, we lothed this
Manna, the reformed religion, with all holy institutions and Christian
Sacraments, and decent devotions and orderly Government. How neglected? how
profaned? how despised were these by many wanton Christians? how many
scornfully washed off their infant Baptism, by a Fanatic and Schismatic
novelty of Anabaptisme contrary to the Analogy of faith, and practice of all
Churches in all ages. How have many vomited up their former Lords Suppers, and
as if they had surfited heretofore have fasted from them these twice seven
years. How impatient have they been of such Pastors and Preachers, such Bishops
and Presbyters as told them the truth, and sought to restrain those inordinate
libertys, which they wickedly affected? how hateful have these Michajahs been
to those that loved to be flattered in sin? how have many gnashed their teeth
against such Stephens as have sowed no pillows under their elbows? Yea how over
Against our self seeking*
zealous have we been in pleading our own secular and civil causes, to much
civil War and blood; pretending to preserve our liberty till we overtook our
slavery, and really intending on all sides to get places of profit and
preferments to our selves, to feather our nests, and set up our selves on high,
above all that was called Gods among us. What vast sums have been expended to
make us miserable? on the other side O how cold, careless, formal and
indifferent have we been as to God's great Cause, for the good of souls, the
true Preaching of the Gospel, the due administration of Religion, the
preservation of our happy reformation, for the order, honor, government,
support, and just encouragement of able and faithful Ministers in this Church,
which are and ever will be wanting in many places of this Nation, where there
is as yet no provender for the Ox that should tread out the Corn; Hence St.
Austin observed, Quod Christus non capit, capit fiscu^, what Sacrilege
cetaines from Christ, is wasted for no purpose.

. We have with great clamor pretended Gods Cause, Religion and reformation on
all sides, but this on all sides is worsted, abased, deformed, discountenanced,
diminished, and by many evil eyes sought to be wholly improverished and starved.
God pleads against us Against our Hypocrisy and Sacriledg,
for our hypocrisy and pretensions, for our Sacrilegious invasions and
confusions, which rob God of his honor, Christ of his right and homage, the
Church of its portion and patrimony, Ministers* of their maintenance, The
nation of its liberality, the dead of their bequeathings or legacies, true
Religion of its support, and all sorts of people, of that piety charity and
hospitality, which was intended them, by those holy honest and legal donations,
against which no man pleads, that has not a mind to purloyn them, or to have a
good peniworth of them, at the Devils Marke^. God pleads against us for our
trusting too much to the arm of flesh, and profaning Gods Cause with evil
means, with sinister policies and practices, bringing to Gods ^ltar, the lame
and lean, and defective and deformed Sacrifices of parsimonious and sordid
spirits, which are not propitiations but pollutions, which the Majesty of God
is so far from accepting, that he abhors, and casts as dung in the deceivers
face, God is not to be mocked.

. God pleads against our unthankefulness Against our unthankfulness to man.
as to God, so to man, our discontented humors and impatience that knew not how
to bless God and man, for moderate blessings, God pleads against the perjuries
and forswearings among us; The little or no conscience made of contradictory
Oaths, the familiar but vain and most rude swearings, which are so common
among, not only the dregs and beasts of the people, but even those persons who
pretend to some good breeding; who by evil speaking corrupt good manners.

God pleads against us Ministers God pleads against Ministers.
of all degrees, for our insufficiencies, presumptions, popularities,
inconstancies, and scandals, for not better employing the great advantages and
Talents they had, to the glory of God and his Churches good, rather then
private Pomp, profit or pleasure. God pleads Against Lawyers.
against you Lawyers for your failing in those duties, which the law, your
callings, and your consciences call you to, in all righteous causes, public
and private; God pleads against the Gentry and Nobility for their luxury and
idleness, Against Nobility and Gentry
for the looseness and sottery of their lives, doing so little good where they
have so much means and opportunities, wanting nothing but good hearts, and a
true sense of honor, which aims in all things at Gods glory, the Churches
flourishing, and their countries peace. God pleads against all sorts of people
Against the people in and out of their Parliaments.
in and out of Parliament, for their servility and flattery; their partiality
and compliances with any powerful lusts and predominant humors of men, never so
palpably against law, reason, religion, oaths, and conscience, prostituting
Parliamentary honor, and privileges, fullness and freedom, not only to
interne factions, but to extern tumults, and violent impressions, after which
open rapes there is no great cause for some men ever to plead their
Parliamentary virginity and honor.

God pleads against the common people for their Phanatick giddiness and
factious foolery, that loves to have many Masters, to heap up teachers to
themselves, having itching 2* Tim. 4, 3.
ears that will not endure sound doctrine, but delight to be carried about with
every wind of doctrine, according to the sleights and cheats of those that ly
in weight to deceive unstable and silly souls, which are ever learning, and
never come to the knowledge of the truth.

. God pleads against the Soldiery, for their variableness, violences,
insolences Against the Soldiery.
and inconstancies; For their carrying on private and partial interests, so
much and so long to the prejudice of the public safety, peace and honor,
making their places and pays, their bellies and backs, the Commonwealth;
putting the military interest into the scale against the whole Nations: To the
exasperating of so many of their countrymen and brethren, who have not patience
to see themselves, their Parliaments and Country so often bafled and defeated, of
their long looked for peace, and pretended settlement. Hence they that should
be the bulworks and defense of the Nation are looked upon by many, as the
le(...)s and incubusses, that suck the blood and spirits of it, making
themselves the only Sovereign Senate, the necessary employment and absolute
Government.

. God pleads against Rich men God pleads against rich men.
for the uncharitableness of some in hard times, the unhospitableness of others
in the distresses of many, even excellent Ministers, who for their consciences
sake, and as they think for Gods cause, have been reduced to a morsel of bread.
For their racking and oppressing poor tenants; for their pusillanimity and
cowardice in a good cause; for being so prodigal of their souls and true
Religion, to save their estates or their skins.

. God pleads against us all, and as a Nation full of men that are wantonly
wicked, and industriously injurious to God and man, delighting to destroy its
self, refusing as Against our incorigibleness and obstinacy.
Babylon to be healed, when God and good men would have done it long ago. Men
that make a mock of such sins as the sober and modest heathens, though
Idolaters did abhor; a people as sacrilegious robers of God, and profaning his
house, that in affliction sinned more and more, and contracted dross even in
the very fiery furnace; that has so little fear of God or reverence of man, or
sense and conscience of duty to either, that it has shut its eyes as wilfully
blind, and is most impatient to see or seek and follow the things that belong
to the public peace; turning piety into policy, and reformation into faction,
and the true interests of Religion into those of parties and opinions; that
has so often prayed and fasted in vain, because we prayed amiss, to consume
James 4. 3.
blessings on our lusts, fasting only for strife, and for debate, to smite and
destroy one another, that might and not right should take place: a Nation that
is self condemned and self punished, yet still dares to pursue or applaud most
unjust and unwarrantable actions (that is downright villainies and horrid evils)
pretending that good willcome thereby; so that from the crown of the head (if
we had either Crown or Head) to the soal of the feet it is full of biles and
putrified sores, both of sins and pains: We have made necessities of sinning,
and God has made necessities of our sufferings.

Therefore has God suffered us to run God pleads against us by the voice of
his rod, and sore afflictions.
to this great consumption, and satisfied us with our own delusions; therefore
are we smitten once and again by the sword and rod of God, which cries aloud
to us* making upon us the wounds of an enemy, which are not healed by any
friendly hand, because we are not yet turned to him that smote us; therefore do
our eyes fail, not only with the expectation of the calamities that are coming
upon us, but also with looking for good things, when behold salvation is far
from us, because our iniquities have blinded us, and not only bereaved us of,
but still keep Our too greattrust in State Physicians.
good things from us, yet still we trust to I know not what Physicians or State
Montebanks, that are either (...), or (...), (...), or (...), or (...), either
many and cannot agree, or unsk lful and of no value, or unfaithful to others,
or unhealthful themselves ( insani and insanabiles) of inauspicious looks and
lives, yea and for the most part incurable as to their sins and sores; loving,
as vitiated appetites, to feed not on wholesome food, but on trifles and trash;
not Reason and Religion, Law and Gospel, but the froth of seraphick fancies,
and unbounded raptures, which the better to color over and excuse the miseries
and ruins of three flourishing Kingdoms, pretend to expect a glorious kingdom
of Christ on earth, such as he never yet enjoyed for sixteen hundred years, nor
ever will after their methods of blood and violence, which are the weapons of
Antichrist and Belial, not of Christ or good Christians.

This then is the answer which I may Answer to the first Question.
with too much truth and justice give as from the Lord to you or any that
enquire of the burden of the Lord, why he pleads, writes, and acts such bitter
things against us, as if he would be no more en treated by us, nor his heart
could be toward such a people as we are, whose iniquities have forfeited former
blessings; the sins of peace made way for war; and war for domestic confusion,
and these for foraign invasions, and this for Romish superstitions and Papal
usurpations; for there want not factors at home and abroad, Factors for the
Romish Cause.
who are earnest sticklers for a Cause; (which they call the Catholic Cause)
what it means, as to our civil and religious concern, as to the honor of this
Nation, and the prosperity, or peace, or liberty of the Reformed Religion, you
cannot be such strangers in the Christian world as not to consider.

How long (as Eliah said to the Israelites) 1 King. 18. ^^.
will you halt between two opinions, between two Causes; nay now they are
multiplied to twenty; if the Reformed Church and Religion, which God so blessed
with temporal and spiritual blessings, with excellent gifts and graces, to your
forefathers in the last century of Englands honor and happiness; if it be Gods
Cause grounded on his word, sealed by his Spirit, and conform to the best of
primitive Churches, let us plead and assert this against all other; for it will
be our wisdom and our strength, our honor, our peace and our safety, as it was
to our forefathers for the greatest part of an hundred years, while they joined
Loyalty to Religion, and thought nothing further from Reformation then
Rebellion against lawful Magistrates and their lawful power.

The Second Question you may make 2 Query, what is the cause of God we now are
to plead in England.
to me is, What is this Cause of God, which we are now to plead in England? or
what is there left for us to do?

I Answer as Joseph to his brethren, this do and live: First, retain righteous
Ans. Maintain honest and just principles with in.
principles as to civil Justice and true Religion, in your own judgments, and
in the Court of your consciences; that you be not warped in them, so as by any
events or successes, to call evil good, and good evil, darkness light, and ^sa.
5. 20.
light darkness: Though you have not opportunity, or power, or courage at
present to plead according to your principles, yet turn not from them, comply
not with such as are false, unjust, irreligious; though it be so evil a time,
that prudence advises, and piety indulgeth you silence; yet time may come when
you may plead for Gods Cause according to your principles: Mean time, as by
your speaking you do not strengthen the hands of an evil cause and evil
doers, so by your silence and reserve, you do cast a just reproach and
discountenance upon them; there is yet hope of a good Cause, if the Court and
Judge be not corrupted: Notwithstanding that some evil pleaders cry it down.

Secondly, As you have power and 2 Plead as you have power and opportunity.
opportunity given you, dare to own and plead for Gods Cause: 1. In your own
breasts and consciences, every grace and virtue, every good thought and 1. In
thy own soul.
motion is Gods, plead them against thy own lusts and the Devils temptations.

2. In thy Family and relations, plead 2. In thy family.
Gods Cause against lying, swearing, idleness, profaneness, etc.

Thirdly, In civil affairs plead the 3. In the public.
cause of Justice against any injury and oppression; the poorest man's cause if
just, is Gods; yea and the cause of a wicked man's so far as it is just, is
Gods. Specially As to justice.
in causes of public Justice, there thou must not be wanting to speak out, by
pleading when called to it, by petitioning and praying for Justice, yea and
acting for it, according to what is just and lawful; but a just Cause must not
be set, as the Ark on the cart of injustice; we must not so plead Gods cause as
to injure Cesars, nor Cesars, as to injure Gods.

Fourthly, Plead the cause of true Religion As to true religion.
of our reformed Religion, of the The verity of it.
Church of England, and its excellent constitutions against the Pseudo
Catholic Church of Rome; the cause of Christ's merits and intercession against
all mixtures humane or Angelick; the cause of the Scriptures against all
Apocryphal traditions, and fanatic illuminations, which are false illusions,
and not divine inspirations; The cause of the Lords Supper in its compleatness,
against the subductions and seductions of the Mass, which loses the bread to
all, and steals away the wine from the Laity; the cause of the worship of God
in a known tongue, to edification, against Latin service, which few understand,
so as to say Amen to what is prayed; So the cause of chaste and honorable
marriage against scorched and affected coelebacy. Further, Plead as for the
verity, so for the unity of the Reformed The unity of it.
Religion and this Church, against those lice and locusts, those noxious and
noysom vermin of factions, which have so gnawed and deface^ this Church, and
the reformed religion, and which seek to deprive your children of one, and your
selves of both the holy Sacraments.

Plead for the Churches patrimony, for the support and honor of an able,
learned, For the Churches patrimony.
authoritative and worthy Ministry, in due order and government of it, against
those sacrilegious spirits, who with Judas grudge all as wast, that is by a
grateful charity and devout superfluity, poured on Christ for the honor of his
name, and the encouragement of his Ministers, according to the general tenor of
Gods word, not only permiting, but commanding us by personal or national
donations, to honor God with our substance.

Plead for our due ordination and subordination For right ordination and
subordination among Ministers.
as Ministers, that we may not by novel projects of levelling confusion, and
plebeian Anarchy in the Church, be driven from conformity with the ancient
Fathers, and the order and universal government of all Christian Churches, as
well as our own from our first being Christian.

If you think us able or worthy to take care of your souls eternal welfare, and
to administer to you spiritual things: Do not think us worthy to be condemned
to live to dye, and to be buried even yet alive, with the meanest of the
people* since by what I have now discoursed to you, it may appear that we are
neither ignorant of nor enemies to the true cause of God and Jesus Christ, as
our blind and bitter enemies do maliciously pretend. Of which cause I have in
all my discourse not spoken my own private sense only, but the sense of my
Fathers and Brethren, of all true Bishops and Presbyters, and of the whole
Church of England.

Lastly, Since I hope you are as willing Peroration or conclusion of Gods cause
and the pleadings of it.
as able to plead Gods cause; and since I know you pray that God would plead
your and your posterities cause in Church and State, that he would make yours
his own cause; Keep, I beseech you, always in your souls this holy resolution,
not to be wanting in your place and to your power to assert Gods cause; cord
et ore, consilio and exemplo, prece and praxi, atramento and sanguine: In which
behalf you cannot form your thoughts to a better tune and words then Luther did
when he undertook that great Cause of religious reformation, Aut propugnemus
causam Dei, aut succumbamus cum causa Dei Either let us stand by the cause of
God, or let us fall with it; for as it will rise again in due time, so it will
raise those with it to eternal glory, who stood sted fastly by it; Which that
we may ever do, God of his mercy grant us wisdom and courage through Jesus
Christ our blessed Savior; to whom with the Father and holy Spirit be
everlasting glory. Amen.

FINIS.

