THE CHVRCHE PVBLICK ORDER

Argued and opened at a second Confere^^^ between SILVANVS and HIMENEV^
Discussing four questions. 1. Of Ministers, Officers and People. 2. Of the
time or times of meeting. 3. Of the place, or places where. 4. Of the worship
it self both for matter and m^^^


Wherein the Ordinances of the Church of Engla^^ GODS public Worship, are
proved to be agreeabl^ to GODS Sacred Word.

By I. G. a continual friend, and lover of the (...)

PSALM. 74.4. Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy Congregations, etc

LAMEN. 4.2, Among all her lovers she has (...) to comfort her, all (...) have
dealt treacherously with her, they are becom^ ^^^mies.

(...) Printed for W. W. 1^^3.

TO His most Excellent Sovereign Lord, Charles, of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland KING, the just Defender of the true Faith.
Most valorous and religious King,
YOur Magnanimous and Heroical spirit in Martial and Military affairs; And
your zeal, fidelity, and unshaken unmovable constancy in the established
Religion of Gods Church in this Your English Nation, fills the hearts of your
loyal subjects, the Lords servants to praise the God of Heaven for You; And to
pray earnestly, that he, that has covered your head in the day of battle,
would be always as tender over You as the Apple of his own eye, and so
prefer You as the Signet on his right hand, and that the gifts of Gods wisdom
and grace may be doubled on You his Anointed servant.

Your gracious acceptance of my former endeavors has encouraged me not only
(to compose this short discourse of the Churches public Order, for the true
worship of God, which declares the outward form of the Churches service, as the
former Treatise Dedicated to Your Majesty does the inward truth of the Church
it self) But also to presume to present it to Your Royal and serious
consideration, for as much as many of Your honest Subjects want the knowledge
of it; And all Your factious people, oppose, contemn, and hate it, even those
weeds spring up amongst the good Corn; As Brownists, Anabaptists, Papists,
Familists, Antinomists, with solly and Semi Separatists, all which having not
their parts in the fear, the sorrow, the poverty, and preparation spiritual,
come all short of Gods Spirits testimony, although^ like Mountebankes in
marketplaces they lift up their voices, avouching the goodness and proof of
their medicines, which notwithstanding all their brags and vain boasting
cannot give a foot to the lame, nor an eye to the blind; And compared with
truth, are at of them found, poisonous doctrines of death that instead of
saving health, we are mad^ thereby deadly sick: And were it not for that
unparalleld verity of Your Majesty confessions, and resolved resolutions, we
have for our remarkable examples, next an^ immediately under him, that is our
goo^ GOD over all blessed for ever, we^ might fall into the same Consumption
(...) our souls in matter of Religion, as now w^ are in our lives and estates,
for false corrup^ and lying doctrins, have so darkened the cl^a^ light of the
pure truth like smothering fire and smoke, have destroyed many weak
Christians, yea such an universal destruction, as the plagues of Egypt made
in that land, on ^an and beast, fruitful Trees and every ^reene herb, but
blessed be the Lord for ^he good will of him that dwells in the bush, that
has blessed Your Royal Head, and Heart, like the head of JOSEPH, that still
^ou have been the same Anointed with the ^ame truth, in which truth, the
Children ^hereof are your truest loyal'st and faithfull'st ^ubjects, of whom
although the most unworthy (...) your Highness servant that suffers and
^eleeveth with you,

I. G.

TO The Right Honorable the LORDS and Commons of the High COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
ONE unknown to the most of You, yet daily praying for You all, that the God
of Heaven, the alone giver of the best Counsel would sit with You, to guide
and counsel You all, in all things for the present, and to come; As those
great blessings through his blessing You have effected for Us, already in
suppressing the pride, the Idleness, and superstition of the Clergy, the
destruction of the abominable and popish innovations, the annihilating of the
great oppressing Courts of High Commission, and Star Chamber; And that of
honor which was greatly dishonored, and above all that incomparable Act of
the Triennial Parliament, a permanent benefit to Gods Church, for a ground and
foundation of continual Justice and Religion, that reformation both of
Magistrates and Ministry in ruling and teaching may be perfected, and such
order and manner appointed for the peoples obedience, that unity and concord
in the truth may be harmonious throughout this kingdom, And our gracious,
King, with Your most honorable Assembly, and the whole Nation blessed; And
because the best reformation, and perfect restitution are spiritual things;
the one, the new making or re-begetting of mankind unto God, the other the
inheritance or purchased possession of Gods Children, called in Scriptures
regeneration, and the perfection, and restitution, both which are the subject
of my discourse, in my former Treatise Dedicated to Our dread Sovereign, His
Gracious Majesty. And in regard that life is hid for the present, and those
truths are inward and spiritual, whose heavenly nature is not apprehended and
understood by all Ministers, and I am certain by fewer of the people: but they
all for the most part look for outward form, and things exterior being such
our selves for the greater number.

Right Honorable (the mistake of the Scriptures are so general in this
particular in applying the testimony of the Holy Prophets, who generally speak
and altogether agree in promising, and assuring the eternal heavenly and
perfect estate to be fulfilled and accomplished at the Resurrection, the
Glorious coming of our Lord to judgment. Notwithstanding, such is the daily
and continual misprision of those precious promises to a worldly temporal and
conceited estate here in this life by many several factions; some of which, as
in this, so in my former Treatise I have instanced) this mistaking, I say has
constrained me, and as I am persuaded in bounden duty, I am obliged, to
Dedicate and present in all humble submission this short Treatise unto Your
Grave wisdoms, that by Your favorable countenance and respect to a thing so
mean and from the hands of one meaner; My Brethren and fellow Citizens may
come to see that Your prudent, and Honorable predecessors since the time of
Reformation, from that mystery of iniquity, and superstitious darkness of
Antichristian Popery, that GOD Almighty has so assisted them by the aid of
the HOLY GHOST, that the Ministers Ordination, the time, place, the matter and
manner prescribed for Gods public worship, (as is within this short Treatise
briefly touched) is agreeable to GODS holy Word, for so far as they have
gone; And for the rest in a further and larger manner, Or for the better and
more perfect ordering of what is already done, the LORD of Heaven direct the
heart of Our Gracious KING with You His greatest and best Council; And give
unto You all the spirits of zeal, and fear of the LORD, so to Decree and
Enact, that the Truth, the power and Sincerity of the Gospel may be the
honor and glory of this Kingdom, with the Ordinances of GOD in the purity
thereof, all misunderstanding between His Royal MAJESTY, and Your selves
reconciled, and all evil Counselors on both sides removed, all dissentions,
discords and disaffections amongst us people composed. And all of Us again,
KING, Parliament and people, made one, as the Truth and Our GOD thereof is one.

Finally my humble prayer is that Your Wisdoms would pardon my boldness; And
that You would be pleased to construe all that I have done or said to be
enti^ely and sincerely from the bottom of my heart, for the glory of GOD, the
Honor of KING and Parliament, and the duty of love I owe unto my Christian
Neighbors in the fellowship and unity of the Truth; And I shall ever remain
praying for you.

J. G.

To the Reader.
Christian Friend;
AS Gods love has been free to me, so my hearty desire is to manifest my love
to all that are his: And as in all things, I have received of him, so
especially of the best blessings, that we may all prosper, even as our souls
prosper. And therefore, the first thing I communicated to the public, was a
brief description of the Kingdom of God, and the Children thereof, their
spiritual conditions, and holy persons, their estate of suffering, and that of
triumphing; And although therein I have showed, and set it forth (yet briefly)
the great things of Gods Law or Covenant, yet some have accounted it a vain
thing, so that there was some cause to have spoken no more. Yet the general
breach of conformity, and uniforme walking in the public Ordinances of the
Church of England, has so grieved my spirit, that I am constrained through the
love I bear to Gods people therein I say, to make this brief discourse
following. Wherein I have kept my self close to the Ordinances themselves,
examining them by such rules in Scriptures, as do apparently warrant them: so
that if all things be considered, there is nothing imposed in the public, by
Authority, that does any way hinder or prejudice the spiritual sincerity of
the true and pure worshipp of God; therefore beloved let us study to give God
thanks for these reformations in the outward, we do enjoy already, and that
the same God would direct the same power of King and Parliament, to go on to a
full perfection of what is begun. And in the mean while we to demean our
selves in obeying, praying, and studying to show our selves approved unto God
and men, giving no offend in any thing that our profession be not blamed; And
as there (...) more truth in the Doctrine of the Church of England, then in an
other profess^on of Religion, I know of, so let our Uniformity an^ agreements
in all other outward Ordinances of public commun^ on exceed theirs, And let
us endeavor to manifest our holy inward and spiritual communion by our
external union, so shall (...) ever be yours that is the Lords.

I. G.

THE CHVRCHES PVBLICK ORDER.
Wherein the Ordinances of the Church of England for Gods public worship, are
proved to be agreeable to Gods Word: argued and opened at a second conference
between Silvanus and Hymeneus.

Hymeneus. WEll met friend SILVANUS, I have often thought of our discourse when
we were last together.


Sil. Sir, I am glad if it have given you occasion for your better meditations,
that Truth and the God thereof, may have any glory by my poor endeavors.


Him. I must confess that I have reviewed it since it hat^ been published;
and I am persuaded your description both of (...) Christian in particular, and
the true Church in general, is agreeable to Gods Word: and that the promises
to the Patriarch Prophets, and Apostles are truly expounded, of which I desire
(...) have further conference hereafter.


Silv. It is but a breviation of those many particulars mentioned, but if the
Scriptures be examined it will make the truth more manifested.


Him. You have spoken nothing of the outward condition of the Church, neither
of Minister nor people, which are things I would feign have your judgment in.


Sil. The true and inward Christian only knows how rightly and truly to
order, state, and dispose of ou^ward things; and the Christian without or
outwardly knows not how to order one or other, as Saint Paul says, the
spiritual man or he that is spiritual discerns all things, 1 Cor. ^2.15.


Him. I would pray you to resolve me of those four particulars that concern
the outward estate of the Church: First, of the Ministers, Officers, and
people, of each Congregation or Pa^rish: Secondly, of the time or times of Gods
public worship: Thirdly, the place or places for their meetings: Fourthly the
worship it self, both for the matter and manner?


Sil. Express your meaning in the first question.


Him. For as much as you deny that the people are to call their Minister, show
me how they should be called by the Scriptures?


Sil. It seems by calling of Ministers, you mean ordination of Ministers, and
so I understood you the last time we spoke of your new fashion in New England.


Him. Yes that is my meaning.


Sil. We find it written, that our Lord Himself, Mark 3.14. Ordained, that
is, sent his Twelve Apostles: and Saint Luke says, he gave them power and
authority, etc. and sent them to preach the kingdom of God, Luke 9.1. 2. And
this Evangelist sa^^h, the Lord appointed or sent other seventy also, and
further teaches us to pray therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would
send forth laborers into his harvest, ver. 2. So likewise after Christ,
Assension, the Apostles that were sent by himself, sent others: And so this
same Evangelist witnesses in the Acts that the Apostles prayed and laid their
hands on Stephen and Philip and others, and did thereby ordain and sen^ them
into the ministry, as well as into the Deaconshi^ Acts 6.6. And indeed,
wonderful and powerful they were in their Ministry, as he afterward
shows: so the Apostle Paul affirms, that Timothy received the gift and
authority to preach, through the laying on the hands of t^^ Ministers; which he
there calls the Presbytery, 1 Timo^^ 4.14, 15. And so also himself the same
Apostle in par^^cular speaks to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.6. Wherefore I^^ put thee in
remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of G^ that is in thee, by the putting
in of my hands: and so (...) Apostle gives him direction also for his ordayning
ot^^ Ministers, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay thy hands suddenly on^ man, neither be
partaker of other men's sins, keep thy (...) pure.

According to these Scriptures the Church of Eng^^^^ has ordained and
appointed, that none but such me^ are ordained Ministers, shall have power and
authorit^ the ordination of Ministers.


Him. These Scriptures you allege now, and that before our first conference,
Acts 14.23. And they ordained them E^ in every Church, that is, Preachers as
you there observed, (...) Yet not one nor all those places do show the form
they (...) though they prove the thing they practiced.


Silv. Neither do the Scriptures lay down the f^^ of Marriage, although it
be honored beyond con^ by God Himself in Paradise, Genesis 2.22. As also b^
Lords first miracle, John 2.1, 11. And the author (...) ^ebrewes lays it down
as an Ordinance for ever: Marriage (...) honorable in all, Hebr. 13.4. and yet
in all the Scrip^^^es old or new, we do not find a form for the manner, ^or
persons appoined to celebrate the matter, but some ^^nes we find the Parents
did perform it in the Patri^^hs times, and in the Judges times, the
Magistrates; and (...) other places it is said, they took unto them Wives as
(...) they married themselves; for so it is said, Gene. 6.3. ^ow because there
is not a form of words in Scripture, ^he holy ordinance of Marriage waste and
void? No, ^inke none will be so void of Religion to say so, but (...) it not
rather prove that it is left by the Authority Gods Word to the liberty of
Christ's Church, to de^ine, assign, and order in every Country, as I shall
(...) anon, an Act of Parliament of this Church in ano^^^^ case.


Him. But has the Church of England appointed a form ^rdination, as it has
done for Marriage?


^^l. Yes, such holy exhortations, divine instructions, ^ffectuall expressions,
as there cannot be better thought (...)


Him. I pray let me hear your knowledge of it?


(...). As the ignorance of Scriptures is the cause of all (...) and faction,
so also the ignorance of those whole^ Laws and Ordinances which the Church
has pro^^^^ in many particulars, makes many have a worse opi^^^^ of the
government of the Church, then otherwise ^ould possibly have.

^^nnot but admire the solemn, grave, and honor ^orme of Matrimony, the
Scriptures for instru^^^^ ^ppointed to be read, the holy exhortations and
ad^^ons, the union pronounced in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost, the concluding the ordnance with pertinent blessings; I say, I cannot
chose but more and more admire it, because now a many of unadw^sed Ministers,
use unworthy and unwarrantable form thereby couzening and cheating those they
pretend t^^ Marry, for except the words are used in the manner appointed by the
Law, the Law knows them not marrie^ but the Wife in the sense of the Law is
accounted a who^ and the Children Bastards, and the next of kin will (...)
cover all personal estate, and inheritance: And the reason is clear, because
the Law knows nor allows of a^^ other form for Marriage but that enacted.
Oh, woe^ to such unwise Ministers, that have done this wrong a^ injury to the
Children unborne, by seducing their ignor^^^^ Parents.

But to give you satisfaction in that you desire concer^ing Ordination of
Ministers, the Church has appoint^^ a very good rule and form for it; many
pithy and apt pr^^ers unto God for His blessiing, many Scriptures to be r^^^
agreeing to the Ordinance. As Saint Paul's counsel to ^mothy, and the words and
gesture the Apostles used wh^^ they ordained Stephen and the rest, Acts 6. as
also (...) words of our Lord, John 10.

And diverse questions are made to them that are to (...) ordained such as
these; are you assured or do you bele^^ you are inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost to take upon you this office and ministration, to serve God for the
p^moting his glory, and the edifying his people? And he ^^swers, I believe so.

Also he is asked, do you think you are truly called ^^cording to the will of
our Lord Jesus Christ; do (...) unfainedly believe all the Canonical
Scriptures of (...) ^ld and New Testament, and will you apply your self to
^udy, read, and preach the same; they promise they will. (...) And further
also, to lay aside the studies of the World (...) the flesh, and to endeavor
by good life and holy exam^e, to edify Christ's flock: These and many more are
the ^questions and exhortations; then does the Minister ordain^ng speak to the
whole Congregation, declaring to them ^e Ordination; and there being no cause
showed against ^y the people, he proceeds in prayer, and lays on his ^d upon
him, thereby giving him power to preach and ^ficiate in all other
administrations.


Him. This form is very good, and seems to me warran^e, but what rule has
the Church of England for ordination ^other Officers?


Sil. For such as have the place of ruling Elders, com^only called
Churchwardens, and for such as receive and ^tribute to the necessity of the
poor, commonly called ^erseers, the Minister and Congregation do choose ^^^m
together by most voices, according to Act of Par^^^ment.


Him. But how are the people or Congregation ordered?


Silvanus. All Parishes, or Congregations, are ^orporated and Ordained by Act
of Parliament: ^e law gives power to the Minister and Church^ficers to examine,
and see that obedience by yielded to (...) such things as concern the time,
the place, the manner (...) matter of Gods worship in public, and accordingly
^acquit them if innocent, or to indite or present them ^uiltie. Anno 1. Edw. 6.
Anno 1. Eliz. 2.


Him. I pray Sir, resolve me in my second question, how a ^e may be commanded,
for it seems to me, the Apostles doct^ teaches otherwise, Galath. 4.10, 11.
Where he says, Ye ^ve days and months and times and years, I am afraid of
of you lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.


Sil. The Apostle being rightly understood, does not write to the Galatians
against a time or times to be appointed by authority for the public worship of
God, but he teaches against the use of such Ceremonies, that the clear and
open manifestation of the Truth and substance thereof made weak, beggarly, and
useless: and more principally, he directly preaches against them, as some
thereby and in Obedience to sought life and justification; against this the
Apostle concludes peremptorily to the Romans, Romans 3 28. in these words, We
conclude therefore that a man is justified by faith without the works of the
Law: and he accepts none to the Galatians, but affirms, that whosoever seeks
justification by the Law, he is fallen from Grace, Gala. 5.4. And aggravates it
by reduplications as most certain, and a thing never to be questioned; the
holy Ghost bearing witness with him, and therefore speaks in a phrase never
to be repealed, for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified, Gal.
2, 16.


Him. What rule have you then for the time and times of Gods public worship?


Sil. The first day of the week, and all other days and times are by Ordinance
of the Church appointed, this has been the judgment of former times, amongst
the Fathers, as Hierome, Austine, and Tertullian; Master Frith, and Master
Tindall, amongst the Martyrs: Master Calvin and many others in the book called
the Harmony of confessions of most or all reformed Churches, p. 473, and page
499. And it is an Act and Statute Law in our Church of England, Anno 5. and 6.
of Edw 6th. Chap. the third, in these very words, Neither is it to be thought,
that there is any certain time or definite number of days prescribed in holy
Scripture, but that the appointment both of the time, and also of the number of
days is left by the authority of Gods Word, to the liberty of Christ's Church,
to be determined and assigned, orderly in every Country by the discretion of
the Ministers and Rulers thereof, or as they shall judge most expedient in the
true setting forth of Gods glory, and the edification of the people: And it
follows, be it therefore enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord with the asse^t
of the Lords, etc. and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
the authority of the same, that all the days hereafter mentioned shall be
kept and commanded to be kept Holy Days, and none other, that is to say, all
Sundaies in the year, etc. and so names all the rest particularly.


Him. But you have not a Scripture for this day, nor any of the rest?


Sil. For the first day of the week called Sunday, we have Apostolical and
Primitive example for it, Acts 24.7.


Him. You know, examples without precepts, bind not in Divine things.


Sil. Therefore I have showed you before, the Act of Parliament, the command of
the Church: And where Man's Ordinance is not against Gods command, there St.
Peter commends subjection, in these words, Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sike, 1 Peter 2.13. There is no word in
Scripture to command you to fast the last Wednesday of every month, yet your
practice sh^wes, you think you ought so to do, it being commanded.


Him. You have fully satisfied me by Scripture, And the Churches Ordinance for
the time and times commanded for Gods public worship.

Now pray resolve my next question, and show me what warrant there is for
commanding a place where to meet.


Sil. Authority commanding one for the public, does not forbid any for the
private; And therefore there is much cause and reason for it, for if there be no
place, there can be no meeting.


Him. I think the Scripture speaks against the appointment of a place, John
4.21. You shall neither in this mountain nor at Jerusalem worship the Father.


Sil. Although our Lord did know, and foretell to the woman the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the dispersion of both Jews and Samaritants, and that it should
be done by Gods enemies, and Idol worshippers, so that there should be no true
worshippers, to worship in those places, which were the usual places of their
public worship, intimated in these words, verse 21. Woman believe me the hour
comes when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship
the Father; Yet it does not follow, but that in other places the true
worshippers might and should worship God in spirit and in truth, for so much
our Lord says ver. 23. The hour comes, and now is when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him: we read that Our Lord came often to the Temple, daily teaching
the people, often worshipping in the Mount of Olives, He appointed an upper
room for the celebration of the Passover with his Disciples, so it is said,
when the Eleven were together, Christ cmae amongst them; And also that they
were altogether in the Mount of Olives at our Lords Assension into Heaven, and
they were not to depart from Jerusalem, but there to wait for the promise of
the Father; And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with
one accord in one place. Peter and John went up together into the Temple at the
hour of prayer; we find Paul often in the Synagogue, and abundance more
instances to prove the public places that Gods people met into worship.


Him. But we have no command for any in the New Testament.


Sil. No more you have for the time as before is showed, nor for the Femall
Sex, or Children of either Sex to be baptized, it is warrant sufficient, that
authority commands them all.


Him. I pray what reason is there to call the place appointed, for public
worship the Church? for you have proved before in our fir^^ ^nference, Peter 5.
That the Elect of God called and sanctified are the Church of God; And I am
sure that is true, but that wood and stone should be so called, it seems
strange to me.


Silv. It is strange ^mee that you should be such a stranger to the Scriptures
^r the Scriptures often give the name of the thing signified to the
signification of it; so our Lord calls the signification of his body, His body
it self, in the words, Take eat, this is my body, Matthew. 26.21. So Moses and
Abraham both call the sign of the Covenant Circumcision, the Covenant it
self, Genesis 17.10, 11. this is my covenant, etc.

Solomon also calls the house he built for Gods public worship, the Temple, 2
King. 11. And the Temple of the Lord, 2 Chro. 26.16. when it is not so properly
but by way of allusion and resemblance only. For the regenerated ones, the
truly faithful men (are Gods house his habitation and dwelling place, as the
Scripture speaks, Ye are the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16. and again, for the
Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, ver. 17. So likewise the material
house is called the Church, or the Temple of God also: because it is appointed
and set apart only for the holy services of this spiritual Temple, there to
converse with God in his holy Ordinances of praying and preaching, and all
other his holy services: and in this respect has been, and may be called a
holy place. And such Vessels and Vestments holy, in regard of the holy use
they are sanctified or set apart for. Not that stones, wood, mettalls, or
clothes are capable of holiness; but they are in Scripture called holy, in
regard they are assigned to serve about Gods holy worship: Now as the Temple,
and all Vessels and Vestments are called holy, in regard of their holy
employment: so also they are called holy, in regard of Gods holy presence, who
is more manifested present, in the place of the administration of his
Ordinances, than in any other place, and so the place is called holy, Exodus
31. 1. and Vestments likewise. And so is the ground also, Exodus 3.5. The place
where thou stand is holy ground. And therefore we ought to have them in a
reverent esteem and respect: Pull off thy shoes, says the Angel to Moses;
Those places and things therefore are not to be common, as other things and
places: wherefore our Ministers are to be blamed, that they do not inform the
people with the truth of this Doctrine, our Lords own practice, that only and
alone act of corporal punishment, that first execution of Justice, aggravates
and argues the fault of the people abundantly, in making the Temple a
Marketplace. Saint John says, John 2.15. our Lord made a scourge of small
cords, and drove them all out of the Temple, and the Sheep, and the Oxen, and
poured out the Changers money, and overthrew their Tables, and said unto them
that sold Doves, take these things hence, make not my Fathers house a house of
Merchandise. Mark how exact and particular he is in every thing, and how
reverently he speaks of the material Temple, and calls it his Fathers house,
and by Saint Matthew, The Temple of the Lord: And it is further to be noted,
that all the four Evangelists testify to this act of our Savior, which
wrought so upon their affections, that it is said, And his Disciples remembered
that it was written, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, John 2.17.


Him. I thank you for this satisfaction; for these passages of our Lord are
very considerable in all the circumstances.

I pray let me hear your judgment also of the last question, the worship it
self both for matter and manner.


Sil. For the matter of Gods worship it is clearly set down in both the parts
of it by our Lord himself to the Samaritan woman, John 4.23. The hour
comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers, shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth.

God is worshipped in ^irit and in truth, when Gods Word is read, and the
tru^^nse and meaning opened and made known: So Ezra the Scribe, and the other
Priests did truly worship God. Ezra 8.8. The Text says thus, So they read in
the book in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to
understand the reading. And Saint James preaching to the Church at Jerusalem
says, For Moses of old time has in every City them that preach him, being
read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Acts 15.21. To this purpose speaks
our Savior of the Pharisees, Matthew. 15.9. But in vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of men, undenyably proving, they had
worshipped God truly, if they had taught for Doctrines the Commandments of God.


Hymen. It is clear, and proved plainly, that Reading and preaching Gods Word,
are material parts of Gods worship, but what are the rest?


Silv. Prayer and praises are other parts of Gods public worship, to be
performed in the Temple; and especially Prayer; and therefore all the rest are
included in that denomination of prayer; As the Lord says, It is written, my
house shall be called a house of prayer, Matthew. 21.13. Notwithstanding it was
also the house of preaching and reading, and praising, offering Incense, and
Sacrifice; and of blessing God and the people. And to prove praises a part of
Gods worship, David is excellent, Psalm. 149. Sing unto the Lord, Sing unto the
Lord a new song, and his praise in the Congregation of Saints. And Psalm 150.
Prasse ye the Lord; And that is not enough, but he appoynts the place too,
Praise God in his Sanctuary: yea, his expressions are so full of excellent
variety, Psalm 100. Enter into his Gates with thankes-giving, and into his
Courts with praise, be thankful unto him, and bless his name. And in another
place, My praise shall be of thee in the great Congregation, I will pay my
vows before them them that fear him, Psalm 22.25. Yea, this worship is so
acceptable both in public and in private, that the Holy Ghost bears witness
that whosoever offers praise, glorifieth God. Psalm. 50.22.


Him. The Scriptures thus consorting, methinks makes a sweet harmony; and
excellent are these considerations from them; but I pray proceed to show the
other parts of Gods public worship.


Sil. Friend at this time I will speak only of the Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, because the time will not permit me else to make you answer concerning
the manner of these perticulars in their administrations. Now the communion of
the body of the Lord, as the Apostle calls it, is one of the parts of that
days public worship, Acts 20.7. where he proves all that I have said in every
particular, to the office of administration to that he himself was ordained,
as he proves to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.7. whereunto says he, I am ordained a
Preacher and an Apostle: And because of the greatness and verity of the
office, he therefore speaks with the greater testimony, saying, I speak the
truth in Christ and lie not, a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity: And
in the faithful administration of the Gospel, coming to Troas, Verse 6. met
together with the Disciples upon the first day of the week, there is the time:
And the place is said to be an upper chamber, where they came together, verse
8. And the matter of their worsh^ and service is expressed to be preaching and
breaking of br^^ and conference. And that which is included, is prayer, (...)
giving of thanks; for so the same Apostle does prove to the Church of Corinth,
that our Lord did first institute the S^^^^ent with prayer, 1 Cor. 11.23.
saying, the Lord Jesus the ^he night he was betrayed, took bread, and when he
had g^^^n thanks he brake it, and said, Take eat, etc. Yea, praying and
blessing at the Communion was this Apostles practice in this Church of Corinth,
as in all other Churches, for so he testifies himself in imitation to the
first institution, 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not
the Communion of the blood of Christ; the bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ.


Him. These are all cleared and manifested by plain Scripture: I pray is not
the manner of the administration of these particular Ordinances prescribed in
the Scripture also?


Sil. As I have showed before, that I find no form in the Scriptures for
Ordination; neither can I find any Rule prescribed for the time when to receive
the Lords Supper, nor the place where, nor the manner how, nor the particular
kind of Wine; nor bread of what grain; nor who shall provide them ready; nor
the gesture of giving, nor receiving; and yet without these we cannot
Communicate in them.


Him. Some say there is a word for all these things, an^ urge it upon this
Scripture, Hebrews 1.2, 3. Wherefor^ holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly
calling, conside^ the Apostle and high Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus,
who was faithful to him that appointed him; as al^ Moses was faithful in all
his house.

Silv; If there were a word in the Scripture, they should do a good office to
Gods people, to show them when they may find them written: I am sure there is
no such thir^ in those words you have read: I know the bold audacio^ Brownists,
and the ignorant seduced Annabaptists, a^ both as one enemy, grossly falsify
and abuse, wrong a^ spoil this holy testimony, by affirming that Christ is m^
perfect and exact in prescribing an outward form for (...) particulars in Gods
public worship under the Gospell^ Christians, than Moses was under the Law to
the Jews, (...) making and ordering every particular, according to (...)
perfect platform and pattern which was showed him (...) the Mount, Exodus
25.9. The Holy Ghost proves ind^ that Moses was a faithful servant of God, to
hear (...) do the Commandment, the work of the Sanctua^ the Tabernacle, and
all the instruments, and every ve^^ from the least to the greatest, even to
every pin the of, Exodus 27.19. And in this comparison Moses was fa^ full in
all his house: that is, to make the material, or ea^ly Tabernacle; that was
but a shadow, a representation, (...) figure of that spiritual, heavenly, true
and everlas^ Tabernacle, which Christ made or built, purchased and sanctified
with his own blood; wherein Christ our Lord was much more faithful, as a
Son to make, to redeem, ^o bless and save his own house. And the Apostle to
the Hebrews shows what this house of the Son is, saying, whose house we
are, If we hold fast the confidence: and ^ejoycing of the hope firm unto the
end, Hebrews 3.6. Mark how the Apostle excells in expressing this spiritual
House, as we made a descrption in our first conference upon Saint Peter's
words, Page 10. where the Apostle ^alls the building living stones; and the
house it self, a spi^tuall house. 1 Pet. 2.5.


Him. It appears there is not any such thing in the Text, as ^e Separatists
(...) ^abaptists do affirm from it, for the out^ard Order and (...) of the
Church.


Silv. This mak^ (...) ^he Separatists bold and auda^ous; because, that like
the ^otten-hearted Pharisees, they ^stifie themselves for a (...)-side of their
own fancy, ^d so in word only, never (...) nor heard of in the Scrip^es; and
neglect the inwa^^grace, the truth, and pow^, that whosoever has not, shall
perish, Luke 13. and ^ark 16, and 16. And notwithstanding our Saviors ^unsell
is, Make clean the inside; and the outside ^ll be clean also. Matthew
23.26. And therefore I call (...) Anabaptists ignorant, and seduced, because
all this ^ile they have not learned the difference between that ^tizme, the
putting away the filth of the flesh, which ^an may have and perish: And that
Baptism, the an^r of a good Conscience unto God, that whosoever is ^tized
with, shall be saved: the one being called the fi^e or outward figne; the other
the substance that saves, ^^ward grace. 1 Pet. 3.21. which substance indeed is
the pu^ifying the heart by Faith, as before I showed at our first Conference,
Page 8, 9. And so speaks the Apostle Paul clearly to the Galatians; for you
are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, for as many as have been
Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Chapter 3.26, 27.


Hymen. Doubtless these Scriptures must be thus understood. I pray Sir inform
me what ground the Church of England has to prescribe a rule for the time, and
the rest that concerns the manner of Celebrating the Lords Supper.


Silv. But before I show you that, we will take a brief^ view, how particular
Moses was to give direction, for every circumstance, as well as for the
substance in Circumcision and the Paschall Lamb: And then consider what rules
ou^ Lord and his Apostles have given for Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which
are significations and outward signe^ of the same substance and grace under the
Gospel, as the other were Ceremonies, Types and Figures of the sam^ heavenly
truth under the Law: Therefore the Apostl^ Paul to the Collossians uses both
the terms of Circumcisi^ on and Baptism, expressing one and the same life an^
grace in Christ, in whom says he, ye are Circumcise (...) with the
Circumcision made without hands in putting (...) the body of the sins of the
flesh by the Circumcision of Christ buried with him in Baptism, wherein also
yo^ are risen with him through the faith of the operation (...) God, etc.
Colos. 2.11, 12. Now Moses speaking of ^ braham, gives rules for Circumcision,
for the parties wh^ shall be circumcised; that is, all the Males: And the tim^
when, at eight days old, Genesis 17.12. And the pla^ or part of the body, the
foreskin, Verse 11. And the parties who shall do it, Abraham the Father,
Verse 2^ and Joshuah the Magistrate, Jos. 5.3. Also for the Passover, which
was the same to the Jews, as the Lords Supper is to the Christians: He
appoynts the time, the tenth day of the month, and it shall be kept till the
14. day of the same month; and then appoynts who shall kill it, the whole
Congregation: and what time of the day, the evening; and who shall provide it,
that is every house; and if the household be too little, then two Families
shall join together; he appoynts what it shall be for the kind of it, that is,
a Lamb; and not every Lamb, but a Lamb without blemish; and not Male or
Female, but Male only; and not of any age, but a Lamb of a year old: Also he
prescribes the manner of dressing it, not cut to pieces, but whole, his body
with his Legs, and with the purtenances thereof (...) must not be boiled, or
baked, but roasted with (...), and ye shall eat the flesh in that night; And
he prescribe the manner and gesture how they shall eat it, saying thus shall
you eat it, with your Loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff
in your hand; and you shall eat it in haste, etc. Exodus 12. ult. For it is the
Lords Passover.


Hymen. Moses has been very particular in Gods direction to Abraham
concerning Circumcision; and abundant in the Paschall Lamb; for every
Circumstance. I pray show me how the Scriptures in the new Testament give rules
for the Celebration of Baptism, and the Lords Supper.


Silvan. All the rule we find for Baptism is in these words, Go ye
therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19.

Here is a plain direction for the form of words that are to be used, but
none for the Action of the Baptizer, nor for the gesture of the baptized: so
we read the Eunuch went down into the water; but which part of the body
Philip washed is not mentioned: neither is there direction for the Sex, nor the
age, neither for eight days, nor eight years; nor of time, place, nor of what
sort of Water, salt, or fresh. So for the Lords Supper, the words in the
Institution are these, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body: And he took the
Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for
this is my blond of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins. Yet in all these words here is no commission for his
Disciples, as there is for Baptism: Yet Saint Paul says, he has received
Commission from the Lord, concerning the Lords Supper, 1 Corinthians. 11.23. But
we find it not in the Scripture what it should be: Yea, as I said before, we
find no direction for the Sacrament it self, nor for any circumstance that
concerns the Celebration of it; neither for time, place, nor manner. And shall
we say therefore that Moses is more faithful than Christ; No sure, for that I
have proved to be another thing before. But it proves this rather, that under
the clear light of the Gospel, the truth and substance of things fore-spoken
by the Patriarchs and Prophets are so evident and apparent, that there needs
no such particular directions and shadows, as the dim and dark Ceremonial
Law required: And that it is left unto the discretion of such as are in
Authority, rule and government, to appoint and regulate, as may be most for the
glory of God, and best for the convenience of the place and people.


Him What Rule then has the Church of England for these Ordinances, and all
the rest we have spoken of?


Silv. The Statute Law does order particularly every thing as I have showed you
before, of the Ministers, Officers, the time, and the worship it self; and of
the name of the place: so now I shall show you that the Statutes appoint the
public place it self, and for the order and manner of the rest of the
particulars; and how all is agreeable with the word of God, in the Statutes
made in the second and third year of King Edward the sixth: and the first
Chapter, the affection of this religious King is there recorded to be such,
that he had an eye and respect to the most sincere and pure Christian
Religion, taught by the Scriptures, as also to the usages of the Primitive
Chur^^^ advising with his most learned and godly Minist^^, ob^^ving the prudent
judgment of his beloved Vncl^^ the ^^rd Protector, the best assistance of his
Privy and great Council of Parliament, with the aid of the Holy Ghost, and
with one uniforme agreement is of them concluded, set forth and delivered to
his great comfort and satisfaction of mind, a composer containing rules and
orders for the regulating of the manner of Gods public worship, in a Book
entitled, the Book of the Common Prayer, and administration of the
Sacraments; and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church: as in this, so in
other Acts, the times and places are appointed, the Persons to officiate and
administer, in Praying, praising, and reading, and preaching Gods word, the
people to assemble on Sundays and Holy Days, upon penalty to be inflicted by
Officers Temporal or Ecclesiastical; and that none shall deprave, that is,
speak ill of, or condemn this Order. 1 Elizabeth 2. Elizabeth 2.23. Jacob. 4.
And that the Congregation shall behave themselves quietly, and with civil
demeanor and orderly all the time of Gods public worship. Anno primo Marioe,
the third Chapter, and also the rules and order for the particulars for
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, are contained in the Statutes, that Children of
believing Parents shall be baptized, and that there shall be witnesses to
testify so much, and also to promise a Christian endeavor for religious
instruction and education, the form of words that contained in the Commission
given to the Apostles before mentioned, the manner appointed, Dipping in, or
sprinkling with water: And so also for the Supper of the Lord, the Elements,
Bread and Wine to be provided by the Churchwardens, at the charges of the
Parishoners, the time to be appointed by the Minister, and the people to have
notice of it by his directions: An^ as the former, so this, to be blessed and
administered by the Pastor, or Minister, in the words of our Lords first
Institution, and the people to receive in a praying gesture, both Ordinances
being communicated with prayer and thanksgiving: for the Vestments of the
Ministers, and gesture o^ both Minister and People are ordered also.


Hymen. But how can you prove to me that those Ac^ and Ordinances are
agreeable, and warrantable by the Word (...) God?


Silv. Such Ordinances of men that are not against the Word of God, I am
warranted by the Word of God (...) obey, but the Traditions and Ordinances of
the Chur^ are no ways opposite, or contrary to GODS Wor^ therefore GODS Word
injoynes Christians obedie^ thereunto.

The general Rules in Scripture of Traditions for (...)der and Decency in the
Churches, were only for (...) things as concern the public worship of God;
which rules are not found expressed and determined in the Scripture; therefore
the Apostle 2 These. ^.^. speaks to the Church of Thessalonica, in words of
Dignity, and Authority saying, Now we command you brethren, in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every brother that
walks disorderly, and not after the Traditions which he received of us.
Observe the holy Apostles extraordinary expressions, and likewise how he
ingages the Lord Jesus Christ in the cause, that Order should be observed,
according to Traditions given, which Traditions were not written Scriptures,
but things of like nature, as the Apostle to the Corinthians speaks of, 1 Cor.
14. And although of much variety in the Church, yet he thus would have all
things regulated, Let all things be done decently, and in Order: And the ^der
and decency is expressed throughout the Chapter A^ ^eaching, verse 3.4. which is
declared by speaking, by Revelation, by Knowledge, or by Doctrine: And that
preaching, and praying, singing, and giving thanks are to be in a known
tongue, to the edifying of the Church, verse 12.15. 17. That also the Prophets
do beak one by one, that all may learn, and all may be com^orted, verse 31.
And just so it was with the Church at Ie^usalem, Acts 15.7. The Church being
met together, it is ^yd, Peter rose up and spoke unto them, as in the 8, 9, 10,
^1 Verses. And in the twelfth Verse it is said, the multi^de kept silence, and
gave audience to Barnabas and Paul: and after they had held their peace, James
answered saying, Men and Brethren hearken unto me, v. 13. so that 4. Apostles
^one meeting prophecyes, but in order, one after another: ^d to this the
Apostle speaks fully to the Church of Co^h, for God is not the Author of
confusion or tumults, or unquietness, but of peace, as in all Churches of the
Saints. 1 Cor. 13.33. So also in the next Chapter he gives general rules to
all Churches, Let your women keep silence in the Churches; for it is not
permitted to them to speak: And in another place directions are given for
women's habits, that their heads be covered, 1 Cor. 11.6 So in the Chapter
following he gives many rules about preparation before the sacrament, as
concerning our carriage in communicating, where you come together (says he) to
eat, tarry one for another: So he requires knowledge to discern the Lords
body: So Temperance and modesty of behavior, that the Communion may be
answerable to the thing Communicated in; and thus concludes, And the rest will
I set in order when I come: as doing it by that place and seniority he had in
the Church: And therefore he speaks in the singular number, I will, and not in
the plural: and so in another place he speaks, as if the care of all the
Churches lay upon him, 2 Cor 11.28. And as the care was specially in gathering
and edifying the Churches by Doctrine; so also in ordering; therefore he says,
as he had given order to the Church of Galatia about things that had not been
ordered by the Scriptures, even so do ye, says he to the Church of Corinth,
1 Cor. 16.1. And he rejoices in the holy Order that was in the Church of
Collossia, being much comforted in the order, as well as in the grace it self;
in these words; for though I be absent in the flesh; yet am I with you in the
spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and the steadfastness of your faith in
Christ, Col. 2.5. And this was not Saint Paul's practice alone, but general in
all Churches by other Apostles, Elders, and Evangelists, as appears by his
Epistle to Titus, saying; For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City, as I had appointed thee, Titus 1.5. All which in total, in what has
been said, the Apostle to the Thessalonians makes a conclusion without any
exception, in these words, Therefore Brethren stand stast, and hold the
traditions which ye have been t^ught, whether by word or by our Epistle, 2
These. 2.15.


Him. These Scriptures do clearly show that the Church has power to prescribe
Order, and make rules for such things as Gods word does not particularize, so
that the traditions be consonant thereunto.


Sil. That the rule for reading the Scriptures is agreeable to the Word, I have
sufficiently proved before; but that you may beyond all exception be satisfied
here, what the Apostle says to (...) ^hurches of Collosse and and Laodicea:
And when the (...) is read amongst you cause that it be also read in the Church
of the Laodiceans, Col. 4.16. And the command of our Lord Christ, to search the
Scriptures is to read the Scriptures, John 5.39. According to that Matthew 29.
Let him that reads consider, as also blessed is he that reads; and they
that here the words of this prophecy, and keep those things that are written
therein, Romans 1.


Him. But what warrant is there for the reading of those parts of the
Scriptures appointed of the Psalms, the Chapters, the Epistles and Gospels?


Sil. If you grant it is warrantable to read them, Order and convenience calls
to authority to appoint which, and how much, for all the Scriptures cannot be
read at one time; therefore it was well done of the Church to divide the
Prophesies of each Prophet that are long, and the History of the Evangelists,
and the Epistles of the Apostles into several parts or Chapters: and in the
use we find it profitable, and therefore warrantable, though there be no rule
for it in Scripture, but merely of humane Order: And for the Epistles and
Gospells, they are but parts of the Chapters for the most part of them, but
such portions of Scriptures as do most fit the occasion, and the time of
solemn Feasts, and days of humiliation: According to our Savior Christ's
example, Luke 4.17. It is said, there was given unto him the Book of the
Prophet Esayas: And when he had opened the book, he found the place wherein it
was written, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has aunoynted me to
preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the broken hearted,
etc. to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And when he had read this
portion of Scripture, he closed the book, and gave it again to the Minister:
By which it is plain, our Savior Christ sought in the Prophecy for that
part; and such a part it was that fitted the particular occasion, as himself
says, verse 21. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.


Him. I must confess this is clear to me: But pray show how the Statutes and
the Scriptures agree in appointing set forms for prayer and praises in the
Congregation.


Sil. Authority in appoynting a form for prayer and praises does not require
nothing but set forms for the public, for before and after Sermons; their
prayers are left to their own ordering: and each man is free in regard of any
form imposed. But the Church, for the better direction of the Minister, and
edification of the many, does appoint, and command some to be used; but they
are such as are both for matter and manner without just exception (...) only
observing there in words of Truth to the only tru^ God; to which we adding our
spiritual affections, make up the true Worship of God, in every part of it, as
our Lord has taught us. God is is a spirit, and he that worships God must
worship him in Spirit and Truth: John 4.29.

T The brevity, shortness, and exactness of these forms ^f prayer following,
are agreeable to the wisdom of So^omon his Order, for Gods public worship:
When thou go (says he) into the house of God, be not rash with thy mouth,
etc. for God is in heaven, therefore let thy words be few. Eccles. 5.1, 2. And
such is the council of the King of Kings, the wisdom of wisdom, Matthew.
6.7. When ye pray, use no vain repetition, as the heathen do, etc. for your
father knows what things you have need of before you ask him: According to
which, see and read the general Confession of sins; and that, O God which
art the Author of peace, and lover of concord, etc. As also O Lord our heavenly
Father, Almighty and everlasting God, which have safely brought us to the
beginning of this day, etc. with the rest, examine and see how plain and full
the expressions are; so brief, pithy, and pertinent as words can possibly be
thought of, terms of such excellent, yet plain meaning, that the lowest and
meanest capacity, may join in affection, that a sweet harmony may be made by
the supplication of the whole Congregation in truth, to the God of Truth. Now
to prove that such set-formes of words are lawful to pray and invocate God by,
the Scriptures are plentiful, both in the Old and new Testament, as Luke 11.2.
The Disciples desiring the Lord to teach them to pray, as John taught his
Disciples, our Lord says unto them, when ye pray, say, Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc. And he gives them a perfect form of words. And the example of
our Blessed Lord himself is left written for our example, Matthew 26.44. that
he prayed the third time the same words: Mark it, here is a large
consideration in a short Petition, excellent in brevity, pertinency, fervencie,
and importunity: all the men in the world cannot answer this command and
example of our Savior Christ; which gives warrant without control, that God
may be worshipped truly in a set-form of words. I make a general demand to
all opposites, whosoever, If there be any thing alike authentic to the precept
and example of our Blessed God. Oh how are those men therefore to be reproved,
even withstood to their faces, that have, and do preach, that all set-formes
of Prayer are from the Devil, and first invented and found out by him; when
that holy man Moses, being led by the Holy Ghost every day, morning and
evening, when the Congregation journyed, used these very words constantly, when
they took up the Arc in the morning, thus he prayed, Number. 10.35, 36. Rise up
Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee fly
before thee. And every evening when they set down the Arc, or rested, he
said, Return, o Lord, to the many thousands of Israel: and the very words of
Moses, the Prophet David writes down for a form to be used, and sung in the
Temple, many a hundred years afterward, Psalm 68.1. And the Lord Jehovah
commands Moses, even his servant Moses to give to Aaron, and his Sons a set
form of words to bless the Congregation with, Number. 6.22. And the Lord spoke
to Moses, saying, speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, saying. you shall bless
the Children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee,
the Lord Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee, the
Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and grant thee peace: Here the Lords
Name is three times used in one form of blessing: And yet I hope none is so
ignorant, as to say it is vain repitition: So in 150. Psalm, Praise God and
Praise him, is used thirteen times in six verses: so in 126. Psalm to the
praise of God these words, For his mercy endures for ever, are used or
repeated twenty and six times: so in 107. Psalm, O that men would therefore
praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works for the
Children of men, where the Prophet in this Psalm repeats the same words four
times: And the Apostle for the Romans prays thus, The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you, Romans 16.23. and so for the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.23. 2
Cor. 13.14. and so for the Galatians, Gal. 6.18. and so for the Philippians,
Phil. 4.13. and so for the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.28. 2 These. 3.18. And also
for the Church in Philemons house, Phil. 25. using the same words of prayer and
blessing eight times for six several Churches: Thus, even thus the Old and New
Testament agree together in this one truth, as the holy Prophet gives
direction, 1 Chronicles. 16.3. 5. Say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and
gather us together, and deliver us from the Heathen, that we may give thanks
to thy holy name, and glory in thy praise.


Him. That a form may be lawfully used in Gods public worship of prayer and
praise, is a truth so fully proved by you, that men nor Angels cannot gainsay
to disprove: But I have heard a Minister preach it is unlawful to use the
Lords prayer, because we find no example for it in any of the Apostles.


Sil. We do not read that any of the Apostles in the act of Baptism, repeated
all the words commanded by our Lord in the form of Baptism, which are these,
Baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: is it
therefore unlawful for Ministers to use the words, or the Church, to enjoyne
them? and is it therefore unlawful for the Minister to use the words of our
Lord, which he used at the institution of the Lords Supper, because we do not
read the Apostles did use them at the administration thereof? They do no less
than the Pharisees their Fathers in denying the lawful use of the Lords
Prayer, to make the Commandment of God of none effect by their contrary
Traditions, Matthew. 15.6. And these are the last days, and perilous men and
times the Apostle fore speaks of, 2 Timothy 3. and Saint Jude in his general
Epistle.


Him. Pray let me see how the Ordinances for the Sacraments appointed by
authority agree with the Scriptures?


Silv. The Traditions and Order that the Church has prescribed for the manner
of celebrating the Sacraments, are very agreeable to the Scripture, as I have
before showed in the manner of the celebration of both, and that there is no
circumstance added the Scripture omits; neither in the admonitions and
exhortations appointed to be read before the Communion or Baptism; nor any
thing that concerns Ministers nor people in the communicating of one, or
either, nor the blessing in dismissing the Assemblies, as in particular before
instanced, but what stands with the holy honor and dignity of the ordinances
themselves, and the glory of God. And therefore our Obedience thereto falls in
with this general rule of the Apostle, whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.


Him. Some Ministers will not administer the Lords Supper to any but such as
are regenerated, that so by faith they may eat Christ's body, and drink his
blood.


Sil. For any man to preach that none ought to commucate of the communion of
the signs of the Lords body, but such as have justifying faith, by which they
are incorporated into his body, they err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God, as the Anabaptists do in point of Baptism, for our Savior
himself gave it to Judas that never had the faith that justifies: so the
Apostles never denied the preaching the Word, nor the participation of the
Sacraments to any that received the common faith, as Circumcision; and the
Passover was not to be denied to any that became Proselites, nor to the
Children of such as did believe. Now I have showed before, that the Passover
was the same in signification to the Jews, as the Lords Supper is to the
Christians; and it is as lawful for Christians to receive the Sacrament, as to
hear the Word; for as by the Word preached the ear is instructed in the
Gospel and way of Life, so by the Lords Supper, Christ Crucified is taught
visibly to the eye: Now a the Word and Sacrament have a teaching faculty, or
operation, so also they have a nourishing, strenthening and confirming faculty,
or operation to teach grace where it is not, and to confirm and increase it
where it is. And there is no rule in all the Scripture to exclude a common
Christian from these common Ordinances but in such cases as concern the
censure of excommunication, within which, a true believer, through weakness,
may fall, as well as an ordinary or common believer: and he does discern the
Lords body, that rightly understands the Sacrament in one sense, thereby to be
brought to Christ, as he that by faith eats Christ's flesh, and drinks his
blood, in a saving and spiritual sense: and the word preached to the
disobedient, is the savor of death unto death, as is the Ordinance of the
Supper of the Lord, to them that never attain to eat by faith, as well as by
sense.

And thus I conclude, that no believing man is to be denied communication in
the Supper of the Lord, except in such cases as the Scripture, and so also the
Traditions of the Church has made exception, according to the exhortation
before the Communion.


Hymen. I am fully satisfied hitherto, I pray let me crave you^ opinion but in
one thing more at this time, and that is concerning singing of Psalms, as it
is used in the Church of England.


Sil. This part of Gods public worship, as it is used i^ our Church, is the
most corrupt of all other; for althoug^ the Church allows Psalms to be sung,
yet the Statute-La^ does not justify and warrant the Meeter of Thomas Stern^
hold and John Hopkins, and others, for they are very corruptly done, and very
false, and contrary to the prose, if you compare one with another: as Psalm
103. verse 19. where the Meeter says, The heavens are the Lords footstool:
bu^ the Prose says not so; and other Scriptures says, The heavens are his
Throne, and the earth his footstool. Not only fal^^fying the text, but also
that wherein it does agree in man places, the phrases and expressions in the
Meeter are impertinent, and not proper. And yet I have heard many Ministe^
after they have in their Sermons, for an hour together e^veighed against all
forms of prayers, and condemned it Hell, that they themselves have called for
a Psalm to b^ sung, which is no other than presently to do the same thi^
themselves, they did condemn others for an hour together: And in this case
the Apostle speaks expressly, the art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art,
it matters no^ whether thou art a Preacher, or a Hearer, young, or old, ric^ or
poor that judge: for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self;
for thou that judge, do t^^ same things. Romans 2.1. For a Psalm is a
prayer, or a pray (...) and he that condemns others in praying a form, condem^
himself in singing a form.


Him. I pray show me how the Scriptures speak of this part Gods worship.


Sil. The Scriptures declare it to be a special part of ^ods worship, both
public and private, the Apostle admonishes the Church of the Ephesians to be
filled with (...) spirit, speaking to your selves (says he) in Psalms and
^nes, and spiritual songs, singing, and making melody in your (...) to the
Lord, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. And David, that holy Prophet made Psalms for the prasse
and glory of God, in sundry respects and occasions of prayers and praises, and
gave ^^mes to the sons of Korah to sing in the Temple, and ^^ngs of degrees,
Psalm 123. and Psalm. 84.

It is a spiritual service: and the Apostle to the Corinthians seems to speak
of it, as of other ministerial gifts for the ^^ifying of the Church, 1 Cor.
13.26. when ye come toge^^er, every one of you has a Psalm, a Doctrine, has
a ^ongue, has a Revelation, has an interpretation: let all ^ings be done to
edifying: by which it appears that Psalms (...) spiritual songs, are of
continual study, practice and use the Churches; and that such as have gifts
therein, may impose forms even for the public use of the Churches, (...) Gods
worship. Paul and Sylas prayed at midnight, and ^^g Psalms and praises unto
God in Prison, Acts 16.25. and Saint James his general rule is, is any among
you afflict^^ let him pray: is any merry? let him sing Psalms, James 5. (...)
must for this time take my leave, friend Hymeneus; the Lord bless unto us the
consideration of these things, and all other truths, to whom be glory, world
without end.


AMEN.
FINIS.

