THE LOVE OF TRVTH AND PEACE.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT.

November. 29. 1640.

By JOHN GAUDEN, Bachelor in Divinity. Published by order of that House.

LONDON Printed by G. M. for Andrew Crook in Paul's Churchyard at the Green
Dragon. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
SVch is the powerful, and universal influence, which the great and noble
Constellation of your House bath, under God and the King, over all that are
members of this State, that none with modesty may deny your desires, or with
safety (at least of their discretion) disobey your Commands; So irresistible a
force must the intimation of that Will carry, which proceeds from somany wise
and excellent judgments united together. This may sufficiently justify my
obedience, in presenting this Sermon to your, and the public view: which not
any self-forwardnesse, or over-valuing has obtruded. It was enough, in the
Authors opinion (if not too much) that so sudden and abortive conceptions had
once adventured the Hearing of so Learned, Pious, and Judicious an Assembly.
Where obtaining (through Gods blessing) some approbation, (by doing some good,
I hope) they were further, by the vote of your Honorable House, required to be
Printed: Which they now are; and with all Humility presented to your
Acceptance. That at once I may, both cast in a mite to Gods glory in the
public good ( which should be the end of all our actions) and also testify a
mind vehemently sensible of, and thankful for those free and Noble
expressions of favor generally from the whole House, and particularly from
some members of it, my special friends, conferred upon me. What good others
may now get from these notions, I know not: I pray, and hope, they may not be
wholly useless to candid, pious, and unprejudiced minds, since your censure
has allowed them as fit and necessary for our times.

This I am sure, your wisdom and piety are (above all others) by the
publication of this Sermon, more straightly obliged in conscience, to justify
before God and man, your desires and opinion of it, by your proceedings
answerable to the subject and intent of it; which is the love of Truth and
Peace. The splendour of so many clear minds, concentred in Truth, cannot but
kindle to a public love of it. And from the sacred light, and heat of so
many wise and warm hearts, the life sweetness and abundance of our Peace
cannot but grow and flourish.

That this may be the happy success, wherewith with God will be pleased to
crown your public endeavors; as also these, which from my private Pen are now
adopted unto your so great and Honorable protection, is the earnest prayer of

Your most humble Servant, GAUDEN.

THE LOVE OF TRUTH AND PEACE.
ZACH. 8.19. Thus says the Lord, The fast of the tenth month, shall be to the
house of Judah, joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts; therefore love the
Truth and Peace.
THough the weight of this Service and Employment be so great, that it might
well have required abler shoulders to bear it, and longer time to prepare for
it, and not to have put Saul's Armor on David's back: Yet that I may not be
wanting, to Gods glory, my own conscience, or your desires and expectation; I
have adventured to appear this day, in this place, before this Honorable,
Grave, and Judicious assembly. Nothing did more encourage me, against the
greatness of the Work, the shortness of the Time, and the insufficiency of my
own Abilities, than the auspicious fitness and readiness of this Text, so
every way suitable, as I conceive; 1. To the Auditors. 2. To the Times. 3. To
the present Occasion.

1. To the Auditors; who are, or should be all Filii veritatis and alumni
pacis: Lovers of Truth, and Peace: professors of Truth, and protectors of
Peace: being called together by his sacred Majesty, and Deputed by the
Country, to be Counselors, and Vindicators of Truth and Peace.

2. To the Genius of our Times* nothing is more needful to be preached than
the love of Truth and Peace. The Winters distemper of our age is such, that the
Love of many (if not most) is grown cold to both: Truth much obscured,
depraved, blemished, prejudiced, undermined, discountenanced, suppressed: Peace
very crazy and shaken: rumors of wars, preparations for wars, study of sides
and parts, great division of thoughts, pertinacy in opinions, breeding
disaffections; and disaffections flaming to open contention and hostility; so
far, as from the strife of pens and tongues, writing, and disputing, we are
come to the terror of war, to swords and arms; That if the great God, who is
the Father of Truth and Peace (who refraines the spirits of men that delight in
war) had not been gracious unto us, and inclined the heart of our King to
Counsels of Peace, you had not this day been Auditors, nor I a Speaker of this
Theme, but all of us miserable actors, or spectators of the contrary, the
suppression of Truth, and utter subversion of our Peace.

3. The Text suits to the present occasion of the Sacrament: Your late fasting
is this day happily turned to a cheerful feast: your Water changed to Wine;
the best viands, the best wine; the souls provision for eternity, the body and
blood of Christ. A souls feast, a feast of exceeding joy, of eternal
gladness. A feast of love; Gods love to us; Christ's love for us; our love to
them, and to each other.

A Feast of Truth; the sealing and confirmation of the highest, most necessary
and comfortable truth, which received by faith, is able to save our souls. And
a feast of Peace too; the most glorious peace between God and our souls,
between Christ and his Church; between one another.

So that nothing can come more seasonably after your Fast, and with this Feast
of spiritual joy, the holy Sacrament, then this divine exhortation, most
worthy of God to teach, and of us to learn, as men, and as Christians: both
which names import a special relation we have, above all creatures under
heaven, to Truth and Peace, as we are (...), rational and sociall creatures;
as (...), regenerate and sanctified by the Spirit, which raises our souls to
the enjoyment of the highest Truth and Peace, which is in God, and from God,
bringing the soul to God, and uniting it ever with him.

The three words in the Text (whereon I purpose to insist) are a sacred
Trinity. Three precious Jewels; Truth, Peace, and Love; all eminent in God, and
from him: objects, and affections of the highest capacity, use, and excellency
to our souls; Truth, as the light of the Sun; Peace as the heat, which
enlivens, fosters, quickens, makes fruitful all. Love makes us enjoy them
both. Truth and Peace are, Bona publica and universalia. Truth for the soul,
Peace for the body and state; every one has a share and interest in them,
Prince, Peers, and People.

Of these I intend to speak, not as a Statist or Politician (to which I pretend
not) but as a Divine, a Messenger from the God of Truth and Peace; seeking to
kindle and inflame your hearts to such a love of them, as may be most happy to
your own souls, and most beneficial to our Church and State: in the good of
both which, you are all highly concerned: and in nothing can you promote the
prosperity of either or both of them, more, then in your Love and advancement
of Truth and Peace.

May God the Fountain of Truth, Christ the Savior of Love, the holy Ghost the
Spirit of Peace, assist me in speaking, you in hearing, all in doing so, as we
may show a pure impartial, and unpassionate love of Truth and Peace.

In the words consider three things: First, the inference, Therefore: Secondly,
the objects propounded, Truth, and Peace. Thirdly, the duty required: Love.

Every word has a weight, beauty and benefit in it; so that they well merit
and require your attention.

First, the inference, Therefore: The greater mercies God shows to us, the
stricter obligations to love and obedience he has upon us. When our fasting
and mourning are happily turned to cheerful feasts, our fears and jealousies
cleared up to joy and gladness, to hopes of better estate and times, what does
God require of us, but this? Therefore to love the Truth and Peace.

When Gods infinite mercy and patience to us has beyond expectation, as well
as desert, brought back our Church and State, from the brink and precipice of
war, ruin, and confusion, which threatened our Peace. From the spreading, and
prevailings of errors, heresies, schisms, and superstition, which strive to
oppress or eclipse our Church and Truth: That there is a breathing space, a
lengthning of our tranquillity, put into our hands, What does God require of us
by way of gratitude to him, of loyalty to our Sovereign, of fidelity to our
Country, then to Love the Truth and Peace; which are so happily still
continued to us; and by an active, serious, and industrious love to study the
settling and recovery of them both.

Secondly, the Objects propounded: here we will consider.

First, What Truth is.

Secondly, What Peace.

Thirdly, The union of them: Truth and Peace.

Fourthly, The loveliness in them: which best appears in the benefit by them,
so as to merit our affection.

1. Of Truth.
That question of Pilate to Christ, will here be made: What is Truth? I answer.
It is a conformity, agreeableness, or answerablenesse of our minds or things
to their Ideas, patterns, rules or measures; As that Copy is true, which
agrees with the Original; That weight or measure true, which fits the
Standard, That impression true in wax or paper, which exactly fits the types
and engravings, That notion or perception true in the mind or sense, which
agrees with the nature of the thing or object, whereto they are applied.

Truth is the increated light of the intellectaull world, shining from God to
Angels and Men.

The first Idea, rule, measure or Standard of Truth, is God: his Will, which I
call Veritas Dei. Whereby he is, what he is, essentially, simply, immutably: by
which he wills all things to be, what indeed they are, and knows them to be,
such as they are most certainly. This Sun of Truth is in God: never clouded,
spotted, or eclipsed; never setting or changing. Eternal light, day, noone, a
constant serenity.

From this is the eradiation of Truth; or shining forth of the Divine will by
his Works and Word. Which we call Veritas Rei: and this is first Entitatis,
whereby things are such as God would have them to be, and so are true and good.

Secondly, Veritas mentis; whereby things are known or believed by us to be
such, as indeed they are, either made or revealed by God to us: this is the
truth of science or faith;

Thirdly, Hence flows Veritas sermonis, of dicti; when our words and orall
expressions are conformable to our knowledge, and belief or things speaking the
truth. Ephesians. 4. 15.

Fourthly, Veritas facti and Vitae; whereby our actions are conformable to what
we say, and seem to know, judge, or believe of things, which is the doing of
the Truth. 1. Ioh. 1. 6. The Idea or pattern of our actions are our words; of
our words, our minds and conceptions; of our minds things themselves; of all
things the Divine will, most wise, powerful, and immutably good. All Truth as
being, is originally from God, as a Sea and Sun derived, and must by a right
beam and clear stream be reduced to him again: and so it is; when we do as we
speak: when we speak as we think, know or believe; when we know or believe, as
things are either made, or revealed by God: Then does the ray or veyn of truth
flow aright from God to us, and reflect back again from us to him: When in any
of these we fail: there comes in hypocrisy and simulation in our actions;
lying in our words; error, falsity and unbelief in our minds, when our actions
contradict our words, our words our minds, our minds the nature and truth of
things, made, or revealed by God: whose will in his works and word, is (as I
said) the rule of Truth.

There are diverse manifestations of truth; though it be but one, yet as light
shining through diverse pores; or one Fountain derived in several Conduits, for
the benefit of rational creatures.

First, There is Truth, natural or physical in the Works of God, which by
sense and discourse, by art and science we learn.

Secondly, There is Truth moral, political, or civil; which is in the
enacting, interpreting, and executing of Laws according to the rules of Justice.

Thirdly, there is a truth Theological, supernatural or religious; which
chiefly concerns our Souls, and is immediately taught from God.

The first is in the Works of God and Nature.

The second in the laws and edicts of men agreeable to principles of reason.

The third is in the sacred Scriptures, the only foundation and rule of faith
and religion.

The first concerns us as creatures severally.

The second as sociable creatures jointly in a state or Commonwealth.

The third as Christians, in a Church and nearer call or relation to God.

The first requires our love to it, as we love our selves in a natural way:
the second, as we love our Country, relations and liberties: the third as we
love our souls.

By the first, the health and welfare of our bodies, and pleasure of our
senses, fancies, and minds, are maintained, while we know and enjoy the true
virtues, power, and use of creatures; able to apply fit means to our ends.

By the second, the health of the state, or body politic is preserved; while
Laws, which are the nerves and ligaments of civil societies, are grounded upon
innate, infallible and eternal principles of equity, reason, and justice, to
which all men agree; and being so constituted, are truly interpreted and
executed; not wrested, depraved, obscured, or violently broken: this is veritas
justitiae and decisionis: the truth in judicature, Zach. 8. 16. Execute the
judgment of Truth and Peace in your gates.

By the third, our souls health and happiness are maintained; while we see,
know, believe, and rest upon those excellent and saving truths, which God has
in his word revealed to us, in the plainness and simplicity of the sense, not
denying or doubting any thing, but humbly and willingly embracing every truth
revealed, as it agrees to the general rule and Analogy of Faith, contained in
the holy Scriptures, this is Veritas fidei and religionis.

The first truth we gain by senses and discourse. The second by common
notions, or inbred principles of reason. The third by divine revelation;
depending upon the veracitie, infa^libility and authority of God.

No truth is to be neglected, because it is a beam or lineament of God; but
those are most to be loved and esteemed, which discover God most clearly to
us; bring us nearest, and make us likest to him! This, as the most excellent
and useful truth, I chiefly here understand; which exceeds all others, as much
as the soul does the body; or eternity a moment. And in this, men's hearts are
most prone to be negligent, and coldly affected.

2. Peace.
Peace in any kind, and under any notion is sweet and lovely. (...) Naz. We
can better tell what it is by the fruition, than description of it: what health
is to the body, and calmnesse to the sea, and serenity to the day, such is
peace: which arises from the fit, orderly, and proportionable disposing of
things. It is a kind of sweet, divine, and heavenly concent, harmony or beauty
of things, subordinate one to another.

Such it is: first, peace in nature, and the greater World, from the wise and
apt combination of creatures; by symbolicall qualities so contempered, that all
agree to make up one entire body, the World.

2. In the lesser worlds of mixed bodies, Peace is that (...) or (...) due
temper and moderation of humors and parts, which keep their true place and
proportion; Qua quodlibet corpus non minus appetit unitatem suam quam entitatem.

3. In the rational World; Peace is that composedness, and tranquillity of
the soul, whereby all the inferior faculties, and the populacy of affections
or passions are regular, and subject to the rule, and sovereignty of reason.

4. In the spiritual world, the regenerate soul; Peace is the humble and
willing subjection, and sutablenesse of the conscience in all things to the
Will and Spirit of God.

5. In the Political or civil world, the State, or Church; Peace is the
settling and due ordering of things by just Laws of government; and by true
grounds or rules of Piety and Religion; whereto all submit. It consists, (...),
in the right skill of governing; and will to be governed. When all agree in one
thing, all think, speak, and do by the same thing, all conspire in one maine
end, the glory of God, and the public good, which is the supreme Law: when
all are settled on one ground, move by one rule, and tend to one end. Truth,
Order, and Justice, are the only foundation and pillars of Peace, in both
Church, and Commonwealth.

2. The second consideration is the union of the two, Truth and Peace; In God
they are united: and so in every good soul, and well ordered Church or State,
they may, and do best agree together: no firm, or durable peace, which is not
fastened and cemented with truth: so false and pernicious a principle is that of
some; that the less men know of truth, the more easily they will be kept in
Peace; that the way to subdue men to an asinine patience, is to cast them into
an asinine ignorance. Whereas on the contrary, no men or minds are more
obedientially disposed to an heroic patience, as to the burdens, pressures,
and exactions upon their states and liberties, etc. than they, who are best
informed, how little all these worldly things are to be valued, having hopes of
far better. And no men are more stubbornely contumacious, refractory and
prone to flame, to rebellion and munity, than they, who know, and expect no
better, or higher good than those of sense and present life, who think you
rob them of their heaven, God, and all happiness, if you injure them in
their estates, honors, or liberties.

Those subjects are most shie, and prone to start from obedience, and fall from
peace, who live by Moone-light of humane reason, and senses only, which
amazeth their minds with the shadows of good in riches, pleasures, honors,
and liberties temporal, and walk not by the Sunneshine of divine truth, which
discovers the only necessary, excellent, and satisfactory objects, worthy of
the souls love and acceptance; for nothing is truly lovely, which is not
spiritual and eternal.

No such bonds of peace and unity, then, as the spirit of truth, which ties the
conscience to obedience and patience; The wisdom from above is first pure,
then peaceable, James 3. 17.

So that they best may march together; but first truth, then peace. Truth must
have the precedence: rather truth, than peace. Truth we owe to God, and our
souls immediately; peace only to our bodies and states, etc. If one must be
despensed withal, it is peace, not truth: better truth without public peace,
than peace without saving truth. Truth alone will bring us peace, the best
peace, Christ's peace, which the world can neither give nor take away. Pax est
omni bello tristior, quae veritatis and justitiae ruina constat. That peace is
far to dear, which costs us the loss of truth, I mean great, saving,
necessary, and fundamental truth.

2 Where these truths are asserted, study to add peace to them; that truth may
root, spread, fasten, and fructify the more. Nor is the public peace to be
violated for every truth, such as neither tends to faith, Acontius. straing.
Sat.
nor much to good manners. Dissidiis magnis, and controversis non sunt
redimendae minores istae veritates.

We must not by contention of tongues, or pens, or hands, so far vindicate
truths of lesser size, and consequence, as to break the peace of our
affections, words and conversations.

Let truth and peace then go together, in our loves and lives. Truth as the
root, peace as the fruit: Truth as the light, Peace as heat: truth as the
foundation, peace as the structure.

And certainly in the Church, those tenets and propositions are likeliest to
be true, which tend to the peace of the Church, ^ing. 3. 25.
as it was the true mother, which pleaded against the dividing of the child.
And that peace in the civil state is likeliest to be lasting and sound, which
is built on the Truth of Reason and Religion both, and not upon the fancies,
opinions, dictates, traditions, examples, and tyranny of custom and men.

Neither peace of Church nor State is to be purchased with the sale of Truth,
saving and necessary: nor yet are all truths to be prosecuted with such
vehemency, heat, and contention, as to make Shipwreck of eithers peace. The
windows and lights of truth must not be so enlarged as to weaken the
firmness, solidity, and entirenesse of the building: Nor may the Walls be so
thick, close and compacted, as to exclude or obscure the light: which the Turks
do, who so far secure their peace, as they forbid the searching of Truth:
neither darkness may make the house of God useless; nor breaches, under
pretense of letting in more light, may be made so wide, as to render the
edifice unsafe and tottering.

As divine Truth of Religion, so civil truth of Judicature and Peace must
kiss each other. Here the veracity and conscience of Judges, and Magistrates
is chiefly required; that they be Men of truth, Exodus 18. 21. For, false,
corrupt, and unjust Judges, like Comets, portend wars and commotions in a
state; scattering so malignant an influence into men's minds, that every one had
rather adventure the injuries of war than suffer the injustice of peace.

4 The Loveliness of them, which will best appear by the benefits from them,
why truth and peace are to be loved.

1 Civil or Political truth is the mind of the Law, the rule of Justice, the
right measuring and distribution of things to every one, according as equity
and reason require.

By this truth the propriety and enjoyment of what is our own are maintained;
fraud, injuries, and violence, detected, punished, and restrained. Innocence
releeved, industry maintained and encouraged; due rewards to virtue and merit,
as well as punishments to sin and vice are dispensed: In a word, the safety
of your persons, wives, children, houses, lands, goods, honors, liberties,
lives, and all that is dear to you in this world, depends upon this truth in
Judicature, without which no Society of men can subsist, at least not flourish;
but degenerate to a poor and slavish vassalage, and such a lazy despondency
of minds, which sink them next degree to beasts; seeking no more but to live,
having no thoughts or designs generous, noble, or extending beyond the present
supply of back and belly.

See then how much they deserve public hatred, who through fear or flattery,
or base and sinister ends, falsify the mind of the Law; at once cutting
asunder that great Cable which holds the state from shipwreck: turning the
sword of justice put into their unworthy hands, to cut the throat of laws and
liberties.

2 The loveliness and benefit of Divine truth revealed, whereon our Faith, our
Religion, our Souls, our Church depends, is so great that no time or words
serve to let it forth.

By this light of sacred truth, we know our selves in our worst, lost, sinful,
and damnable estate, wherein else as heathen or beasts we should stupidly and
miserably die and perish. By this we know God in his infinite mercies through
Christ, which is life eternal, Ioh. 17.3. By this we discover his grace and
love to us: for our free justification by the righteousness of Christ, and
sanctification by his Spirit.

By this truth the burdens of our sins, our fears, our miseries, the
horror of death, hell, and eternity, are disarmed and releeved: by this
blessed light of truth, we have many sweet and precious promises to support us
in all states, and all trials and temptions. But this as Moses from Mount Nebo,
we discover the pleasant and happy prospect of heaven and eternity: the joys,
peace, pleasure, happiness, and security of that after-state we expect in the
other world: we see a full, though future, victory over sin, fatan, flesh,
world, men, death, hell, and all; a full triumph and crowning of the soul and
body in eternal glory. You may see then how little experience or knowledge
they have of this truth, and the comforts by it, who are weary of it, enemies,
or indifferent to it: Better not have the truth, than having it to want the
love of it.

3 The amiablenesse of peace, public and National in Church or State; it is
like the smiling of a beautiful face, when peace flourishes with truth: O how
lovely is it, at once to serve God with purity and safety; with sincerity and
security; to enjoy the blessings of Gods right and left hand together!

To eat every man with joy and cheerfulness of heart the fruit of his own vine
and plantings* Mich. 4. 4.
to reap the harvest he has sowed: to dwell in the house he has builded:
to enjoy the wife he has espoused, and the children he has begotten.

Your own long and happy experience may best teach you, what is the beauty and
sweetness of the breasts of peace: whence plenty flows; Learning, Arts,
industry, trading, thrive and prosper; your private and in them the public
strength, honor, and treasure increases.

God grant you be not taught to prize and be thankful for it, by the want of
it your selves: look over Sea on the sad and black Characters, which fire,
famine, and sword, have wrote, nay engraven, and ploughed upon the faces of men,
women, and children; on their houses, fields, vineyards, Cities, Churches, etc.
and you may with weeping and amazed eyes read this lesson; O the sweet and
lovely blessings of Truth and Peace! O the horrid, hideous deformity of errors
and wars!

-- En quo discordia gentes
Perduxit miseras.
3 We come now to the third general head: having seen what truth and peace
are; how well they agree, how much they merit our love; now we go on to the
last part, which is our duty. Therefore love them. Here we will inquire two
particulars. 1. What need there is that men should be thus exhorted to love
these, which have so attractive a loveliness in them. 2. Wherein most
effectually we must express our love to them.

I Although nothing more deserve our love: yet such is the ignorance, dullness,
or depravednesse of men's minds, affections, and manners, that few there are,
which truly love them. First, some love neither Truth nor Peace; of which
temper the Iesuitick spirit seems to be, which deceives the Nations with the
Cup of error, and scatters coals of fire and dissension among men. Secondly,
some love truth, but not peace: zealously affected to truth, but for want of
sound and steady knowledge, or meek and humble hearts, they are full of
violence and bitterness; so prone to strife and contention, that from words
and disputes they easily kindle to blows: Some, when you speak to them of
peace, prepare for war, Quia multis utile bellum; their best fishing being in
troubled waters. Thirdly, some love peace but not truth; as Ishachar,
sluggishly couching between the burdens of Superstition and Oppression, rather
than trouble their Peace, in a land of plenty. Out of a lazy, gross, and
sensual humor, so addicted to the enjoyments of peace, that they care not
what encroachments are made on Truth. Fourthly, many seem to love them, but
not simply, per se and propter se; but corruptly and partially, for by-ends and
advantages to be had by them, of profit, preferment, applause, and the like;
as Demas did 2 Timothy 4. 10. (...). It is neither truth nor peace so much they
love (though they stickle for both) but their bellies, pleasures, plenty, and
selves, which they enjoy under the wings of truth and peace.

5. Many love what they think truth (and happily is so) yet not because it is
so, but because they think so; extremely biased with self love and pride;
that they pertinaciously retain, what ever opinion they have once undertaken,
though they cannot maintain it; only on this ground, Ne videantur errasse; so
hardly drawn by overcomming themselves to triumph over their errors. Ita
perit judicium, ubi res transit in affectum, and nostram qualemcunque
praevalere volumus sententiam, quia nostra est: so much do our affections
blind, bri^^, corrupt, and warpe our judgments.

6. Many say they love truth; but not universally; not such truths as cross
their credits, opinions, ends, pleasures, sins and lusts; Nolunt id verum
videri, quod affectibus suis adversatur. He loves not any Truth, that loves not
all; as he likes not the light or Sun, who is offended with any beam of it.

7. Veritas animae sponsa; Truth is a pure Virgin, which every soul should
woo and seek to wed to it self; Many pretend to love it, but not casto and
honesto amore sed meretricio and prudendo. Lascivientia ingenia, such as fondly
and wantonly out of a vanity and curiosity only court that Truth, which they
see is countenanced and shined upon by public favor and authority; ready
enough to discountenance and forsake it, if the stream of things should
change: Venales animae, vile and mercenary souls, that buy and sell the truth,
prostituting it, not entirely loving and wedding themselves to it.

8. Some to purchase their peace, are ready to sell the Truth, by flattering,
complying and mancipating their judgments to other men's opinions and errors,
either discovered, which is very wicked, or unsearched, which is very weak,
Degenerate minds which so easily enslave that (...), the noblest and
sovereign faculty of the soul, which is the understanding, to other men's
errors never so great, if their power be so too.

9. Veritas animae pabulum, there is as great an aptitude and proportion
between the mind of man, and truth, as is between the eye and the object,
meat and the stomach: now we know, it must be a pure and unblemished eye, that
sees with certainty and constancy; a clear, sound, and undiseased stomach,
that desires, likes, and digests wholesome meats. Such must that mind be
which loves. (...). 1 Timothy 4 3.
Wholesome Truths, sound Doctrines.

1. Many are so vitiated and distempered by sin, the World, their Lusts and
Vanities, that they wholely refuse to take down any truth; what the ear may
receive sometime, their heart casts up again profanely and reproachfully, by
their words and actions. Ita veritas odium and nauseam parit. The speediest way
to lose the love of many is, freely to tell them that truth, which might do
them most good, 1 Kings 22.
for it seems to them as Michaiahs words to Ahab, odious and offensive,
although it gave him warning of his danger, and showed him the only way for his
safety.

2. Many like choice and wanton stomachs, receive and digest indeed, some
truths in their minds and memories; but it is morbum alere non hominem; only
thereby the better to nourish and strengthen their erroneous humors and
conceits; and what ever truth they meet with, is presently swallowed without
chewing by some monster of opinion, which they maintain. For error is so
feeble and unbottomed, that it must have some buttresses and seeming basis of
truth to support it. By this means detayning the truth of God in
unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18.

3. Many are of so hot, unquiet and choleric stomachs, that they love not
truth sweetened with peace; not calm and sober truths. Afraid to be thought
coldly, if peaceably religious, even in matters of lesser moment. Interpreting
that zeal, which is but natural passion and choler, an humane feverish and
praedatorious, not that holy, gentle, and propitious heat of love, which only
well digesteth sacred truths.

So that most men we see had need to be called upon to love truth and peace.
In some, hopes of preferment will do much to pervert, leaven, and suppress
truth, warping which way the Sun of favor shines warmest. In others,
despair of preferment, and popular inclinations may do as much to disturb
peace, and established truth: Every way Pronus lapsus, major sit cautela. Few
are true, sincere, and hearty lovers of them; by the Antiperistasis of others
coldness, let the heat of your love grow more intensive.

2 Which is the last particular: The way most effectually to express the love
we owe to truth and peace: first to truth, then to peace, to both if possible.
Amor est pondus animae: Love is the weight and motor of the soul, the Spring
that sets all the wheels on work. It is a vehement, active, industrious,
unwearied, invincible affection; if rightly placed on worthy objects, it works
wonders. Amor non potest abscondi, the fire of love is impatient to be hid or
smothered: Nescit nimium, never thinks it has done enough: Est extaticus, nec
sinit amantem esse sui juris: it has a kind of rapture and extatick power,
which transports the mind beyond it self, and dispossesseth it of it self,
to bestow it self on that it loves. Delicata res est amor; It is a tender
affection, impatient of any injury or dishonor cast on what we love. Et sibi
lex est severissima: Love needs no motive but it self to carry it to the
extremity of its power.

If our love then to truth be real, it will show it self.

1 In the serious and earnest searching for, finding out, and discovering of
truth: for, Veritas in profundo: Truth is not obvious in the surface of things,
but has a depth, being sunk and retired from us, as now we are. There is a
great deal of false and loose earth, rubbish of Opinions, probabilities, and
falsities to be cast away, before we come to the clear stream of truth,
which by secret derivations flows from the eternal Fountain, God. There are
not only grosser clouds of errors and falsities, which darken truth; but
parelii too, verisimilia, seeming suns of truth, which are but apparences and
probabilities, of no long continuance. He then that will seek and find
certain, and saving truth, must apply himself to God, his Word, and Spirit,
not take it upon trust and credit of humane fancy, or reason: Multi taedio
investigandae veritatis ad proximos divertunt errores: Many out of an
easiness, laziness, or presumption, take up truths from custom, education,
prepossessed conceits, show of Antiquity, excellency of men's parts, etc. prone
to count that truth, which themselves or others have a long time believed to be
such. Sed oculos a rebus omnibus abducas, quae Deus non sunt si veritatem
quaeras, Esaias 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, Joh. 5.29. Search the
Scriptures; from these wells must we draw the waters of life, purifying,
refreshing, and saving truths; (...). The Veyn and Mine of truth, has many
windings, and intricate turnings, requiring a sagacious and industrious mind
to follow it.

2 Show your love to truth, by propagating, and imparting it to others, when
your selves have discovered it. Veritas nihil erubescit, praeterquam abscondi;
T^rtul.
Truth is only ashamed to be hidden; as the Sun to be clouded, or eclipsed.
Truth, as light, wastes not by communicating it self to others. Quo communius
bonum eo divinitus. Show your love to it and to men, by teaching it to others,
but in a calm and unpassionate way; truth is best seen in clear and
untroubled waters, (...), Ephesians. 4. 15. Speaking the truth in love. Pitying
not triumphing in others ignorance, or reproaching their errors and weakness
of judgment. Farther, show your love, by using all means to plant and nourish
truth, by setting up the lights of good and painful Preachers, in the dark,
and obscure corners of our Land, where, God knows, many poor souls perish
for want of knowledge (such I mean) as can and will rightly divide the Word of
truth, 1 Timothy 2. 15. There is no engine you can invent so effectual, to batter
down and demollish the adverse party, or to secure the prosperity of our
Church and State. But this will hardly be done, without encouraging men to the
study and preaching of truth in the way of necessary, competent, and liberal
maintenance; for it is most certain, as Bishop lewell sometime told Queen
Elizabeth, in a Sermon, Tenuitatem beneficiorum necessario sequitur ignorantia
sacerdotum. Never flatter your selves, that the Lamps of the Temple will burn
at all, or but very dimly, and poorly, if you supply them not with Oil
sufficient to enliven themselves and enlighten others.

3. Show your love of truth, by a zealous, active, and constant maintaining of
it: Zeal, is flamma amoris: Love raised to a flame: by all justifiable ways
asserting the honor of it, and the professors of it, against the profaneness,
idleness, envy, calumnies, and oppositions of the enemies thereof, either
Atheists, sensual, ignorant, or superstitious, 2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth, do all you lawfully may: by
severe, and wholesome Edicts, fencing in, and fortifying truth against the
Seminary incursions of those, that seek to encroach upon its ancient bounds:
also against the bold, and impudent Preaching, Printing, and Disputing for the
contrary errors, which have been long ago exploded and confuted; which by
misused power, or tacit connivence, seek to creep in, and undermine our
truth. Leakes may sink us, as well as rocks split us. Jude 3. Contend then
earnestly for the truth; but with the power of Gods, not man's arm of flesh;
with a contention of love, not of force; such as may not destroy men, but their
errors, which otherwise will destroy them. Truth is so sufficiently armed with
its own power, that it needs not the assistance of the Sword or Canon, which
reach not the minds of men; nor can divide them from their errors, nor batter
down the (...), strong holds of prepossessed false opinions; That excellency
if power which is in the Word of God and his Spirit, is only able to subdue
the understanding? Yet must not the Magistrate* so far be wanting to Gods
glory, and the Churches good, as to fail to defend truth against those that by
cunning or force seek to subvert it, setting up the just t(...)or of those
Laws, which may chase away those Owls, and Bats, and ferall Birds, that love
darkness, and portend a night, where ever they appear; that cannot endure
the light, because their works are evil, as well as their doctrines false.

4. Show your love to the Truth, as by doing for it all you can; so by obeying
the truth from the heart, 1 Pet. 1. 22. by living conformably to it: that there
be no solaecisme in your lives, that the truth of your doctrine be not
confuted, by the corruptnesse of your manners: not only seeking the truth, and
speaking the truth, and defending the truth; but farther, doing the Truth, 1
John. 1. 6. which is the strongest vindication of its honor, and your belief
of it. There is a labor of love, which loves its labor; ready to deny our
selves, in any thing near or dear to us, rather than deny any saving truth:
chearefully suffering for it, rather than it should suffer; a good mind, that
loves the truth, suffers more in truths suppression, than its own; yea, by
dying for it, if need be; and God choose us out for his champions to crown and
improve the necessity of death, with the glory of martyrdom, which is the
highest witnessing of our love to God and his Truth. Difficulties rather wh^^
and twist to a firmer resolution, than any way bl^t or discourage a well placed
affection. The Heathen man set such a price on truth, that he thought it worth
our life; -- Vitamque impendere vero,
Nec propter vitam vivendi perdere causam.
It is a blind and preposterous love, that loves life better then that, for
which only life is worth the having; better we dye, than truth decay, which as
a Phoe nix is wont to renew its life out of martyrs ashes.

5, Lastly, what we come short in doing or suffering for the love of truth, at
least, seek to supply by our frequent and fervent prayers to God, that he
would so make the way, and carry on his truth that it may prevalile upon the
hearts of men to a love of it.

But in this variety of Opinions, and Distraction of sides, every one
challenging truth to be on their party, How shall we know, what is that Truth,
which we ought to love and adhere unto?

I Answer, the Truth of God, like the light of the Sun, is best known and
distinguished from all other, by the beauty and excellency of its effects, of
life, heat, and fertillity; that is infallibly the saving and necessary truth
of God, most deserving our love and study, which has, and always had the
greatest and best influence on men's hearts and lives: that is, Gods truth which
makes men more godly, more holy, pure, just, good, humble, peaceable,
charitable, selfe-denying, and conscientious in all their ways: What brings us
nearest, and makes us likest to God, which conformes us most to that highest
and divinest pattern of Christ's mind and conversation.

It has been always the Seal of honor set upon Christian Religion: and
that truth, whereon it is founded, that it most magnifies God and goodness.
Those truths which have the greatest operation on men's minds, consciences, and
lives, so as to amend them, are set beyond all question and disputes: These let
us chiefly study, love, and live by.

2. If our love be thus rightly set to Gods truth, he will take care to settle
our peace: to which we owe a love too, and must show it in the second place.
First, by praying heartily and constantly for it, Psalm. 122. 6. Every one
should think himself called upon in those words. O pray for the peace of
Jerusalem. Prayer engages God on our side, and calls in an omnipotent arm to
settle, strengthen, and secure our peace. Secondly, by assisting really, to the
support and maintaining of it, against the perturbers of it. 1. By seasonable
counsels, and faithful advise grounded on Truth and Justice. 2. By arming
counsels with power and Subsidyes of purses and persons; to suppress all
unjust and rebellious practices, which seek to violate our peace. Peace is not
safe, except there be power for war; which is the guard of peace; as power
without counsel is brutish, and self confounding; so counsel without power
is feeble, and subject to be despised. 3. By living orderly in a way of
meekness, humility, and subjection in the fear of God, and obedience to the
wholesome Laws established; which is that we are taught by the truth of God,
Romans 13. ^. Let every soul be subject, etc. This I am sure will bring a man
peace at the last. If not external, yet internal, which will be eternal. 4.
By searching out, and exemplary punishing those that are the perturbers of our
peace; justly troubling those that have troubled Israel, as Joshua to Achan.
Psalm. 34. 14, Thus seek peace and pursue it; by pursuing those that would rob
us of it. And certainly you will find, none are more enemies to, and
perturbers of our peace, then those that are the perverters and opposers of our
Truth: either in judicature, or Religion, for these scatter and blow the coals
of discontent in every corner, that the whose house must needs be set on fire,
if they be not timely quenched.

And now give me leave by way of Conclusion, a little to apply to you and my
self, the weight and force of this Text.

Therefore love the Truth and Peace.
Had we in this Church and State (Right Honorable, and the rest) been so
happy in the love of truth and peace, as we have been in the long glorious
enjoying, and the miraculous preservation of them among us, certainly, neither
truth had this day been so clouded and perplexed, nor our peace so broken and
distracted.

The God of truth and peace declares his displeasure, and high indignation
against us, for the negligence, coldness, and ingratitude of many; for the
profaneness, Atheism, and malice of some: for the superstition, formality,
and backe-sliding of others. How many are there, that deny, or despise, spise,
or suppress, or oppose, or contemn, scorn, and deride, and corrupt and belie
the Truth? That the Prophets complaint may come near our times, Esaias 59. 15.
Truth fails, and he that departs from iniquiry makes himself a prey: Nos
patim^r longae pacis mala saevior armis,
Luxuria incumbit --
Long peace, like fair weather, has raised up the vapors of sins to cloud
our Sun, and trouble our Heaven withal; which almost of us, from highest to
the lowest are not guilty of one or more of those forenamed degrees of neglect
against truth: which shows, we have either no love at all, or a small love, a
tepid, and Laodicean love, a shamefaced, which is a shameful love, or a false
and base love of truth, not for it self, but for our selves: as our Diana; the
mystery, by which our gain or greatness are sustained. If we have not loved
truth in peace, were it not just with God to make us want truth in war? And
because men received not the love of the truth, he should give them over to
strong delusions, to believe a lie, 2 These. 2. 10.

Certainly God will severely exact of this Church and Nation, of Prince and
People, of Preachers and Hearers, an account for our long enjoyed and
undervalued truth and peace. Have we so long been a Vine planted, and
watered, and fenced, both to necessity, and omament, by an excessive
indulgence of God, and do we bring forth sour grapes; that neither please
God, nor profit men? May we not justly fear (what we have deserved) to be
laid wast and desolute, to be made a hissing and astonishment to all Nations*,
that God should remove, or extinguish the glorious Lamp of the Gospel, in
whose light we have not rejoiced, because we have not loved it?

Love is an affection of union and fruition. Do we love the truth if we are
weary of it, tediously and peevishly affected to it, willing to leave it, and
withdraw from it? The loathing and nauseating of this Heavenly Manna, as if we
have had so much, that it is necessary to recover and quicken men's appetites to
it, by a more scanty allowance of it, is this to love the truth? The tampering
and essays of someto clip, or wash, or new coin, or allay, and abase, with
some Romish mixture, the gold and purity of our Doctrine; is this to love the
truth? That pure and refined Truth, which has passed the fiery trial, has
been baptized in the blood of many Martyrs, sown in a field, made fruitful
with their ashes; who loved not their lives so much as the Truth. To set up
lying vanities, Pictures, and Images, and to cry down Praying and Preaching,
whereby those toils may be useful and necessary to the ignorant (because
untaught) people, Is this to love the truth? To suffer Idolatry, or
superstitious formalities in serving God to get ground upon our Opinions and
practices. Is this to love the truth? Quae quo nudior, eo venustior; which the
less it has of painting, the more it has of true loveliness and native
beauty. Are not the lengthen and increase of Ceremonious shadows, a presage
and sign of the shortning of our Day and setting of our Sun, or diminishing
of our Light.

To quarrel at those Truths, which have bin long ago determined by the
Scripture, in the public confession of our Church, and in the Writings, or
Preachings of our gravest and learned Divines, Prelates, and others; as in
the points of Justification by faith alone; of Trasubstantiation, of auricular
Confession; of prayer for the dead; of worshipping before Images; of fiduciary
assurance, and the like; which some doting and superstitious Spirits, dare to
question, and retractate; Is this to love the truth? What has been done by
Preaching and Printing, by correcting, or rather corrupting of Books (where
the correctors themselves deserve to be corrected) your piety and wisdom may
best find out. Nay, such has been the shameless impudence and effrontery of
some ridiculous heads, that plain and honest minds shall be scorned, derided,
and in judgling fashion, cheated out of truth, and the power of Religion (which
is a holy life) if you do not harden your faces, and confirm your resolutions
against, supercilious vanity of such men: Whether they have any intent to
reedifie Babels ruins or no, I cannot tell (some vehemently suspect it) sure I
am, there is such a confussion and noveltie of Language affectated by some men
of Altars, Sacrifice, Priests, Corporiety of presence, penance; auricular
Confession. Absolute, that is, blind obedience; the holy of holys; and
Adoration, which must be salved from a flat Idolatry, or at best an empty
formality by some distinction or notion that must be ready at hand; that most
people know not what they mean, what they would have, or what they intend to
call for next.

Not that I am ignorant how far pious antiquity did use these and such like
words innocently, without ill mind or meaning, and without offense to the
Church, as then times were: yet let me tell you: 1. Such swerving from the
form of sound words used in the Primitive and purest times, occasioned and
strengthened after errors. 2. They were not then engaged to mainetaine Truth
against such erroneous and pernicious Doctrines as we now are of the reformed
Church: which Doctrines are now eagerly maintained by a proud faction, who
seek to abuse antiquity, and patronize their own errors, by using those
names and words to other intents, and things, than ever was dreamed of by the
Ancient Church. 3. By such dangerous symbolizing with them in words, and some
outward formalities, we do but prepare our minds, and sweeten them with less
distaste to relish their Doctrines and Tenets; and as it were in a civil way
we complement our selves out of our Truth; giving the adversaries strong hopes
and presumptions, as they have discovered, that we are inclining toward them:
To be ashamed of frequent, serious and conscientious preaching, which was the
work of Christ and the holy Apostles; the honor and chief employment of the
Primitive and best Bishops and Ministers, in all ages, as that deservedly
famous Bishop Jewel in his Apology prooves out of the Fathers sufficiently
against the Popes, and other idle bellyes; which count preaching as a work
below their greatness, as indeed it is above their goodness. Is this to love
the truth? To preach ridiculous, impertinent, flattering or corrupt matter,
which is the shame of the Pulpit and foolishness of preaching, in good
earnest; so as to bring an infinite contempt, odium and envy upon the Sacred
function of the Ministry, that men abhor the Services of God, and daily
separate by swarms from our Church; are these the fruits of our love of the
Truth? -- Pudet haec opprobria nobis, etc. Sure there is something extremely
amiss and displeasing to God as well as men, either in our Doctrine, or
manners, or hearts, or all. Else whence should that burden of dishonor, those
loades of reproaches be cast upon the Clergy, which makes them drive so
heavily: and this even among Christians, and reformed Churches; whereas
naturally all men, though otherwise barbarous, and insolent, yet are prone to
pay a special reverence and double honor to their holy men, such as are in a
more immediate neerenesse and relation to their deity or gods: Now truth
carries a Divine Majesty and luster with it, casting a glory on every Moses or
Man of God, who converseth with it. The more truth there is in any religion,
the more love and honor will arise from the professors to the Preachers of
it; if they seriously affect the one, they cannot scornefully neglect the
other. God himself has long ago taught all men, especially Churchmen in
Elyes heavy doom, this lesson as an infallible maxim in point of True honor,
1 Samuel 2. 30. Those that honor me I will honor, and those that despise me
shall be lightly regarded. Saint Paul gives a charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
and to Titus, Tit. 2. 15. both Bishops, Let no man despise thee, etc. One would
think the Apostle should rather have charged the Ephesians and Cretians not to
despise them; but the Apostle shows the true way for Ministers, to be Masters
of men's love and affections, is to be a holy rule and example to men's life and
actions. To Timothy, But be thou an example in word in conversation, in love,
in spirit, in faith and in pureness, 1 Timothy 4. 12. To Titus, Showing thy self
a pattern, Tit. 2. 7.

Certainly had Divines both great and small, been more busied in preaching
and practicing those great weighty and necessary Truths, that are able to save
their own and others souls, they would not have had such leisure, to have
been so inventive and operative in poor beggarly toys and trifles, which
neither bring honor nor profit to God, themselves or others. Nothing (I say)
nothing, will restore the Church and Churchmen to their Pristine honor, love
and authority in men's hearts and minds, but a serious setting of themselves to
the study, preaching and practicing of Truth and Peace in a holy life. These,
these were the Arts, these the Policies, these the pious frauds, and
stratagems by which anciently they won peoples hearts to love God, his truth
and of themselves the witness of it. To such a height of honor and ecstasy of
love, that they received them as Angels of God, Ambassadors from Heaven;
counting them dear as their right eyes. Humility, Piety and industry, laid the
foundation of all those magnificent structures, dignities, titles, places,
revenues, privileges wherewith Churchmen were anciently endowed: what has or
is likely to wast and demolish them is easy to conjecture. Iisdem artibus
retinenda quibus olim parabantur.

O consider then (I beseech you) how precious a jewel, how sweet and
necessary a blessing we are like to loose by our want of love to it. Solemn e
mundo tollunt; what the Sun is to the world, that is Gods Truth to our soul,
the light, life, joy, day and soul of our souls. As the darkness,
barrenness, coldness and deformity of the earth would be, if the Sun were
always absent from it, or clouded to it, such will the state of our poor
souls and our Church be, if the healing wings of the Sun of righteousness,
Truth, Mal. 4.
be quite removed; or only a winters Truth, clouded, deaded and obscured by
many superstitious Doctrines and practifes. If (I say) such a truth content us;
where will be the cheerful light of the promises, which now we enjoy? where
that only rock of the souls comfort, which no temptation can shake or
undermine, the free Justification of our souls by faith in the merits of
Christ only? where the sound and well grounded peace of our consciences? where
the warmth of our zeal, love and affections to God, from the fiduciary
apprehensions of his love to our souls? where will be the ravishing joy, hopes
and expectation of a better life? where the zealous care of leading here a holy
life? will not all these fail us, if truth does? and is not truth like to
fail if our love does? Are not all those flowers and beauties of our souls
and Church heliotropia, such as have their life and motion from the sun?
following and depending upon that glorious truth; which so much offends weaker
eyes, is so little seen or desired by blind, darkened and sensual minds? If
this go, Ickabob; 1 Samuel 4. 21.
The glory is departed from our land. Our Goshen will soon turn to an Egypt:
Our fruitful field and Garden of God, where so many famous Preachers, and
zealous professors of Christianity have flourished, will be changed to a
barren howling, and desolate wilderness.

If the love of our selves moove us not; nor the love of truth and Peace, which
have happily dwelt together a long time with us, yet let us not be so
barbarously cruel to posterity, as to put out their souls eyes before they
can see, and deprive them of the light of the Gospel, before they enjoy the
light of the Sun. What can you transmit to posterity more desirable than
Truth and Peace? Paix and peu. Peace and a little, but Truth and less, will
do very well, and make you and them live and dye happily: what will your
honors, lands, offices, estates, houses, names do them good, if they be
betrayed to ignorance, superstition and slavery of conscience, which are in the
bottom and dregs of error and confusion.

O then let the first care be to clear, and settle Truth among us; and then
Peace; sweet and most desirable Peace, which we have had to the envy, wonder
and astonishment of all our Neighbors, enemies and friends. Alas! have we so
long drunk of Peace, as to become intoxicate with so sweet wine, and now do we
fall to quarrel with tongues, pens and swords!

That we in this Island are divided from all Nations is our safety under God,
and by the providence of our gracious Sovereign: but to be divided among our
selves will be infallibly our ruin. Si collidimur, frangimur: as two strong
arms united to one body and under one head fighting against each other; That
censure of a great Captain and Statesman is remarkable which he gives of our
State. That it is a great and strong body which will never dye, D. de Rohan.
Interest des estates. Angle terre est ungrand animal, qui ne mourira ja mais si
lue se tue luymesme.
unless it kill it self.

Civili in bello trist is victoria, Civil wars can neither merit nor expect
Laurells, triumphs nor trophies: the memory and monuments of them are best,
when buried in oblivion; victory it self is sad, and ashamed of it self;
weeping, dejected and blushing with its own blood unnaturally and barbarously
spilt; as having fought not so much against enemies as humanity; not so much
conquering others, as wasting and destroying it self. -- Pax una triumphis
Innumeris potior. --
One fair and spotless Lilly of peace is a greater ornament to a Princes
Diadem, than to have it beset round with many red Roses of bloody triumphs;
especially in civil, which are the most sanguinary wars. O then let us not so
easily abandon so great, so precious, so hardly recoverable a blessing, if once
it be lost. The Orator said well: (...). Any rash hand or furious head may
inflict a wound, or kindle a fire, but it is God alone, who can heal up the
breaches, or extinquish the flames of a state or Church. The miserable
spectacles of other countries and Churches, do they not, as foyles,
sufficiently set forth the beauty and loveliness of this Jewel of Peace? O
then let us all take up thoughts, words, counsels, resolutions, prayers for
Peace: away with all bitterness, strife, malice, jealousies, and all those
divelish maxims of severing the Interests of the Prince and the people as
inconsistent; whereas rightly considered they are, as the head with the body;
united, both are safe and firm; severed, both inevitably ruin. Divide and
regnare desine: Devide them and you destroy them. Love and union are the
mutual safety of Prince and people.

Counsels of Truth and Peace, like light and fruitful showers, descend from
above from Heaven, from God: but falsity and dissension, like tempestuous
vapors and fiery exhalations, come from the earth, from the divellish hearts,
designs and practices of men.

O consider then (as I know you do) how large afield, how ample a province the
mercy of God, the favor of our King, the love of your Country has put into
your hand, where to show your love of God, his truth, worship and religion;
your loyalty to your King, his Throne, dignity and succession; your fidelity
and zeal to your Country, its peace, liberty and prosperity. How great a
disservice you must do them all (besides your selves in particular) if you
fail or slaken by any means in your love to these two, Truth and Peace.

Imagine with your selves you hear daily, your Noble and famous progenitors
(who being dead yet speak, by those blessings of Truth and Peace, which by
their studies, prayers and endeavors they have bequeathed to you) Imagine (I
say) these calling earnestly upon you all, O love the Truth and Peace. Shame
not our names, and your selves by being wretchedly negligent of what we
esteemed the most precious Jewels, the honor and happiness of our times:
which were dearer to us than our lives: which we purchased for you with our
blood, with infinite expenses, hazards and sufferings.

Think you here the joint prayers and importunities of all estates in the
Kingdom, the Nobles, the Gentry, the Commons; your parents, wives, children,
friends, alliances, neighbors, all with one voice calling to you, Pacem te
possimus omnes. O love the truth and Peace, and by your love preserve them for
us. Betray not us and your selves, to the darkness of errors, to the miseries
of war. Be you as suns and shields to us, and the commonwealth: Your
populous Cities and Towns, your stately houses, your fruitful fields, your
pleasant gardens, your costly clothes, your plentiful tables, your ancient
liberties and Noble immunities, wherewith above all subjects in the world you
are invested and honored, all join in this voice, O love the truth and peace:
which affords you all these sweet enjoyments and Noble ornaments of life. All
complaints, all grievances, all petitions may be resolved into this lesson,
Love the truth and peace, in so doing you shall remedy, releeve and satisfy
all.

O have a care then, that truth as the pillar of fire may go before us to
enlighten and direct our way to the heavenly Canaan; and Peace as the pillar of
the cloud may over-shadow, and refresh us in our travailes; through the tedious
wilderness of this life.

The way to peace is by the paths of truth, Never hope to recover and settle
your former peace, unless you return to your first love of the truth.

Truth is but one, as the Center, and draws all minds to an unity, which tend
to it. Errors and falsities are various and full of crossings enterfirings,
and contentions both with truth and themselves: as several Cards in a Map,
whose lines drawn out infinitely cross, cut, and thwart each other.

Here give me leave by way of short digression, in so great and public an
Assembly, to recommend to your favor, the noble endeavors of two great and
public Spirits, who have labored much for Truth and Peace, I mean,
Commenius, and Duraeus: both famous for their learning, piety and integrity,
and not unknown, I am sure by the fame of their Works, to many of this
Honorable, learned and pious Assembly.

The one has laid a fair design and foundation for the raising up a
Structure of Truth, Dur(...)s.
Humane and Divine, of excellent use to all mankind, for the easiness and
exquisiteness of attaining the true knowledge of things.

The other has long studied, Cousmenius.
and with great pains, endeavored and well advanced the peace and unity of
the reformed Churches (a blessing that cannot be purchased at too dearea a
rate) whereunto he has the suffrages and assistance of many learned Divines,
and some of our own, especially the reverend Bishop of Salisbury, as you may
see in his letters to him, and his late tractate, De pace Ecclesiastica, etc.

But alas, both these noble plants (to the infinite shame and reproach of the
present age, to the loss and detriment of the future) a(...) like to wither to
a barrenness for want of public encouragement and aid to go on in so noble,
great and useful undertakings; I leave it to your Wisdoms, at your leisure
to consider, whether it were not worthy the name and honor of this State and
Church, to invite these men to you, to see and weigh their noble and excellent
designs; to give them all public aid and encouragement to go on and perfect
so happy Works, which tend so much to the advancing of Truth, and Peace.
Whereunto if it shall please God to incline any of your thoughts for the
effectual promoting of so commendable purpos^s, notwithstanding the distances
whereat they now are, the one being in ^^land, the other in De^marke, yet there
is a fair, easy, and safe way of addresses to them both, opened by the
industry and fidel^ty of Mr. Hartli^e, whose house is in Dukes place in London,
a Gentleman who has been a constant furtherer, and great coadjutor wit^ them
both, in their Work s: who has correspondence with them; whose learning, pi^^y
and unwearied industry toward the public good, are so well known to the
learned world, and many of your selves as well as to me, that he needs not the
farther testimony of my Pen.


But to return to your particular and nearer concernements; If you love your
selves, your relations, wives, children, houses, lands, liberti^s, lives and
honors; if you love your King, your Country, your Church, your consciences,
your souls, your Savior, your God; Love the truth and Peace; but heartily,
sincerely, courageously, constantly. Let your faith in the truth, work and
show it self by an active love of the truth. Shall the Adversaries of our
Truth and Peace, be so bold, vigilant and desperately active, for the bringing
in of their shadows, lies, paintings and adulteries of Truth and Religion;
and shall we be cold, remiss and timorous? Shall they as Assasinates, be
prodigal of their own and our bloods, and shall we be sparing of our words,
estates or persons? Hoc agite. Do then Gods business, and the Kings, and the
Countries, and in them all your own. Do them worthy of your selves, worthy of
the honor of this Church and State, worthy the memory and renown of your
Ancestors, worthy the expectation of the world, both at home and abroad; the
eyes of all Christendom being upon you especially the Reformed Churches, whose
hopes and prayers meet in you. Do them worthy the Majesty and favor of our
gracious King; worthy of the truth, worthy of the glory of our God, and great
Redeemer: At once show yourselves good Subjects, good Patriots, good
Counselors, good Men, good Christians.

You have long enjoyed Truth and Peace, therefore love them; No Nation under
Heaven, has more cause, and will be less excusable, therefore love them; none
has had a clearer light of Truth, and a greater length of Peace, therefore
love them; you and yours have long thrived by them, therefore love them: you
have Fasted and Prayed for the preservation of them, therefore love them: you
are this day solemnly to renew your Covenant with God in the holy Sacrament,
the Seal of Gods love to you, and yours to him, therefore love the truth and
peace, for they are Gods. And upon the heat and sacred flames, which by this
days duties possess your affections, take up (I beseech you) serious
resolutions, and make tacit vows in your selves to God, that you will love the
truth and peace, and by all lawful ways (for other they neitherneed, nor will
allow) seek to advance them.

None are fit and prepared to receive, but such as have hearts filled with this
love; none will have the comfort of worthy receiving, but such as daily
increase, and persevere in this love.

For Conclusion, I will use the last and weightiest argument in the world,
which raised the victorious soul of that great Apostle Saint Paul, to such an
invincible patience and unwearied Activenesse for Gods glory and the Churches
good, 2 Cor. ^. 14. O let the love of Christ constrain you; that free,
preventive, transcendent love; that humbled, sorrowing, sweating, bleeding,
crying, crucified dying love, which this day is presented to you, who loved our
souls more than his own life: Greater love can no man express, greater
motive to love can no man desire.

Quid amplius pro se facere aut pati potuit, quam pro te and fecit and passus
est Christus? What could Christ have done, or suffered more, if he had been
to redeem himself, then he has both done and suffered to ransom thee and
me. Content to make himself the object of his Fathers wrath (whom he
infinitely loved) that he might procure our peace.

O what shall we render to him again for this excessive love; but an unfeigned
love of him and his Church, his Truth and Glory, an undaunted zeal for his
Honor and Worship, for the purity and peace of his Church? Zach. 8. 16.
These are the things you shall do, speak ye every man the truth to his
neighbor. Execute the judgment of Truth and Peace in your gates. That so it
may be fulfilled on you, and us all which the Prophet prays, Esaias. 26. 2. The
gates of mercy and peace here, of glory and happiness hereafter may be opened,
so that the righteous nation which keeps the truth may enter therein.

FINIS.

