THREE DISCOURSES OF HAPPINESS, VIRTUE, AND LIBERTY.

Collected from the WORKS of the Learned GASSENDI, By Monsieur Bernier.

Translated out of French.

LONDON: Printed for Awnsham and John Churchil, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row, MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE.
THE Epicurean Philosophers placing the Happiness of Man in the Satisfaction of
the Mind, and Health of the Body, assure us that those two are no otherwise to
be procured than by a constant Practice of Virtue: And because they have had
the hard Fate to be misrepresented by most of the other Sects, as well Ancient
as Modern, and their Principles traduced as favoring the most brutal
Sensuality; the Learned Gassendi, who had either examined their Doctrine with
more Diligence, or interpreted their Sentiments with more Candor and Justice,
thought he could not employ his Time better, than to vindicate the Morals of
Epicurus and his Followers, from the Slanders of Mistake and Malice, and to
show that their principal Design was, to lead Men by smooth and easy Paths to
a just, sober, wise and virtuous Behavior, as the only way to true Happiness.
This he proved at large, and illustrated with the Sentiments of many great and
excellent Men among the Greeks and Romans. But because these Things were
diffused through the voluminous Works of that Great Man, Monsieur Bernier,
whose Name is a sufficient Commendation in the Commonwealth of Learning, took
the Pains to put them together, and to form them into several entire
Discourses; which on account of their great importance to Mankind, are here
presented to the Public.

OF Moral Philosophy IN GENERAL
MAnkind having a natural Inclination to be happy, the main bent and design of
all his Actions and Endeavors tend chiefly that way. It is therefore an
undeniable Truth, that Happiness, or a Life free from Pain and Misery, are such
things as influence and direct all our Actions and Purposes to the obtaining of
them. And though several Persons, who neither want the Necessities nor
Conveniences of Life, possessing great Riches, promoted to Dignites and
Honors, blessed with a beautiful and hopeful Offspring in a word, who want
nothing, that may seem requisite to complete their present Happiness; though I
say, we find many, who have all these Advantages, yet they lead an anxious and
uneasy Life, disquieted with Cares, Troubles and perpetual Disturbances. From
whence the wiser sort of Mankind have concluded, That the Source of this Evil
proceeds from the Ignorance of the Cause, wherein our true Happiness consists,
and of the last end, which every one should propose to himself in all his
Actions, which being neglected we are led blindfold by our Passions, and
forsake Honesty, Virtue and good Manners, without which it is impossible to
live happily. For this Reason they have therefore undertaken to instruct us
wherein true Happiness consists; and to propose such useful Precepts for the
due regulation of our Passions, whereby our Minds may be less liable to be
disturbed. This Collection of Precepts, Reflections and Reasonings, they name
The Art of Living; or, The Art of leading an happy Life. And which they
commonly call, Moral Philosophy; because it comprehends such Doctrins as relate
to the Manners of Men; that is to say, the accustomed and habitual Actions of
Life.

From hence we may understand, That this part of Philosophy is not only
speculative, and rests in the bare Contemplation of its Object, but proceeds to
Action, and that it is, as we usually say, active and practical; for it directs
and governs our Manners, rendering them regular, and agreeable with the Rules of
Justice and Honesty. So that in this respect, it may be said to be The Science,
or if this Term be scrupled at, we may call it, The Art of doing well. I only
make this Supposition; for let it be styled Art or Science, it is a difference
only in Name, which depends upon the manner of understanding those two Words,
and therefore requires no further Scrutiny into the matter.

We will rather take notice, that Democritus, Epicurus, and diverse others of no
small Eminency, have had so high an esteem for Moral Philosophy, that they have
judged the Natural to be no further regarded, than only as it was found useful
in freeing us from certain Errors and Mistakes in our Understanding, which
might disturb the Repose and Tranquillity of our Life, and wherein it might be
serviceable to Moral Philosophy, or to the better obtaining of that Knowledge,
which teaches us to live happily and comfortably. I shall not mention the
Followers of Socrates, Aristippius, Anthistenes, with the Cyrenaicks and
Cynicks, who altogether neglecting the Natural, gave themselves entirely over
to the study of Moral Philosophy, considering with Socrates, what might make
for the Good or Ill of Families, and what might contribute to the Grief and
Disturbance of Man's Life.

Quid siet in domibus fortasse malumve bonumve. We may also here observe, That
though Socrates is supposed to be the Inventer of Moral Philosophy, this is only
to be understood, so far as he did cultivate and improve a new and considerable
part, not that he laid the first and Original Precepts of it; for it is certain
that before him, Pythagoras had much improved this sort of Knowledge. And it is
well known, that he commonly asserted, That the Discourser of a Philosopher,
that cures not the Mind of some Passion, is vain and useless; as the Physic
that drives not away the Distemper from the Body, is insignificant. It is
likewise very certain, That the wise Men of Greece, who lived a little before
Pythagoras, were named wise, only because they addicted themselves to the Study
of Moral Wisdom. Therefore at this present time, their famous Sentences, that
relate to Men's Manners, are generally known all over the World. We might add,
if we would make farther search into the Antiquity of the Heroes, that we shall
find Orpheus, by this same Study of Moral Philosophy, drawing the Men of his
time off from their barbarous and savage way of Living; which gave occasion of
that Saying of him, That he tamed the Tigers and the Lions, as Horace
describes; Orpheus inspired by more than human Power,
Did not (as Poets feign) tame savage Beasts,
But Men as lawless and as wild as they,
And first dissuaded them from Rage and Blood.
Thus when Amphion built the Theban Wall,
They feigned the Stones obeyed his Magic Lute.
In a word, it was Morality that first set a Mark of Distinction between
public and private Good, settled our Rights and Authority, and gave Laws and
Rules for regulating Societies; as the same Poet expresses: -- When Man yet new,
No Rule but uncorrupted Reason knew;
And with a native bent did Good pursue,
Vnforc'd by Punishment, unawed by Fear,
His Words were simple, and his Soul sincere.
No suppliant Crowds before the Judge appeared,
No Court erected yet, no Cause was heard;
But all was safe, for Conscience was their Guard.


However, we must acknowledge our selves much indebted to Socrates, as to Moral
Philosophy, since by his applying himself to the study thereof, it has given
us Opportunity of great Improvement, by reducing it to a more distinct and easy
method than formerly; and we find, that the Disciples of the great Plato, and
of Xenophon also, have left behind them curious and excellent Monuments; nor
have those who succeeded them, as Aristotle, and the Stoics, come short of
handling it more methodically, and at large.

THE First BOOK CONCERNING HAPPINESS.
CHAP. I. What Happiness is.
Though Felicity or Happiness be properly the enjoyment of the Sovereign or Chief
Good; and therefore the most blessed Estate that can be desired; yet because
this Estate of Enjoyment comprehends this Sovereign Good, it is for that Reason
called by this Name. It is also termed the Chief or the Ultimate Happiness, the
End of all Ends, or The End, for its Excellency, because all other things are
desired and sought after for it is sake. And lastly, that it is desired alone
for it is own sake. To this purpose Aristotle tells us, That amongst the things
that are desirable, there must be something at last which is most desirable,
that so we might avoid an Infinity. But here we may make two considerable
Remarks.

The First is, That we don't concern our selves here with that Happiness
mentioned by the Sacred Penmen, when they tell us how happy that Man is, who
being assisted with the Divine Influences, betakes himself entirely to the
Service of God; and being filled with Faith and Hope, and inflamed with
Charity, spends his Life in Peace and Tranquillity. Nor shall we Treat of that
which may be called Natural Happiness, because it may be obtained by the
strength of Nature, being such as the ancient Philosophers did not doubt but to
enjoy here on Earth.

The Second is, That by this Natural Felicity that we here Treat of, is not to
be understood such a state of Life as we cannot imagine a better, a more
pleasant, and more desirable; in the which we cannot apprehend any evil, nor
think of any good thing which we shall not possess; nor of any thing that we
have a desire to do, but we shall be able to accomplish it, and that it shall
remain fixed and unchangeable. But we understand such a certain state of Life,
in which we may be as happy as is possible; in which there are abundance of
good things, and very few of any sort of evil; and in which consequently we may
lead as easy, quiet and undisturbed a Life as the Condition of the Country,
the Society we Converse with, the Constitution of our Bodies, the manner of our
Life, our Age and other Circumstances will permit: For to propose to our selves
more than this, or to affect during the Course of our Natural Life the highest
Felicity, is not to acknowledge, but rather forget our selves to be Men; that
is to say, weak and feeble Animals, who by the Laws of Nature are subject to an
infinite number of Mischiefs and Evils.

And in this sense it is that we usually say, a Wise Man, though tormented with
exquisite Pains, may nevertheless be happy; not in a perfect and complete
sense, but he may attain to that degree that we call Human Happiness, which the
Wise Man always enjoys in that measure that the Circumstances will permit,
because he don't increase his Misery, either by Impatience, or Despair, but
rather abates it by his Constancy. And by this means he is happier, or to speak
more properly, he is less miserable than if he suffered himself to be dejected,
as others in like Cases, who bear not their Misfortunes with the same patience
and constancy of Mind, and who besides are not supplied with the same
Encouragements from Wisdom as he has; such I mean as an innocent Life, and a
good Conscience void of offense, which always afford great quiet and
satisfaction to the Mind.

Wherefore it is improper to use this kind of Expression; That it is the same
thing for a Wise Man to be burning in Phalaris 's Bull, as to be solacing
himself upon a Bed of Roses; for it is of such things as Fire and Torments that
he desires to be exempt, and wishes much rather that they were not, or that he
might not suffer by them; but when they come upon him, he considers them as
unavoidable Evils, and suffers them with Courage; so that he may say, Vror, sed
invictus; I burn, it is true, and suffer, and sometimes I sigh and weep, but
for all this I am not vanquished, nor overcome, nor do I suffer my self to be
transported with Despair, which would render my Condition much more miserable.

Several Opinions concerning the efficient Cause of Happiness.
AT our first entering upon this Discourse, we may observe, that the efficient
Causes of Happiness being nothing else but the Goods of the Soul, of the Body,
or of Fortune, some of the Philosophers have highly extolled the first, some
the second, and others have included them all. Those who chiefly recommend the
Riches of the Mind, as Anaxagoras, propose for the obtaining of Happiness, A
Contemplative Life, together with such a kind of Freedom which proceeds from
profound Knowledge. Possidonius requires Contemplation, with a Dominion over
the irrational part of Man. Herillus, generally and simply, Learning, or
Knowledge. Apollodorus and Lycus generally, the Pleasures of the Mind. Leucinus
the Pleasures that proceed from honest things. The Stoics, Zenon, Cleanthes,
Aristus, and the rest, require Virtue. Therefore these last proceeded so far as
to say, That if a Man possessed Virtue, it mattered not whether he were sick or
well. All the rest by common Consent maintained, that to live happily, was
nothing else but to live a Virtuous Life, or as they express it, according to
Nature.

As for those who prefer the Riches and advantages of the Body, and who chiefly
aim at sensual Pleasures, they were for that Reason Named the Voluptuous,
Voluptuarii Philosophi, of whom we shall have occasion to discourse hereafter,
when we shall compare them with Epicurus.

At present we shall only take notice that they have had Aristippus for their
Leader, and with him the Cyrenaicks, of whom we shall make mention afterward;
and that the Annicerians, who proceed from the Cyrenaicks, aimed at no certain
end of Life, but at the Pleasure of every particular Action, of what kind or
Nature soever.

Lastly, amongst such as prefer the Goods of Fortune, they are generally the
vulgar sort of People, who look with a greedy desire, some upon Riches, some
upon Honors, some upon other things: But amongst the Philosophers none are
mentioned, but such as join to these outward Advantages the perfections also
both of the Mind and Body; for this has given occasion to the Poets to make
these excellent representations of Happiness, which they have borrowed from
several Opinions of the Philosophers, such as this, which requires that good
Fortune might accompany Virtue.

Virtus colenda; Sors petenda a Diis bona:
Haec quippe duo cui suppetunt, is vivere
Et vir beatus, and bonus simul potest.
Another desires to enjoy perfect Health, and a sound Constitution of Body,
Riches purchased without Fraud, and in short, to spend his Life amongst his
Friends.

Fragili viro optima res been valere,
Atque indolem bonam esse sortitum;
Tum and possidere opes dolo haud partas;
Tandem and cum amicis exigere vitam.
Another Description we find in Martial, who among many other things, desires
to enjoy a Paternal Estate, acquired without Labor, to be free from the
vexation of Lawsuits, etc.

Since Dearest Friend it is your desire to see
A true Receipt of Happiness from me;
These are the Chief Ingredients, if not all,
Take an Estate neither too great, nor small,
Which Quantum sufficit the Doctors call.
Let this Estate from Parents Care descend,
The getting it too much of Life does spend.
Take such a Ground, whose gratitude may be
A fair Encouragement for Industry:
Let constant Fires the Winter's Fury tame,
And let thy Kitchins be a Vestal Flame:
Thee to the Town let never Suits at Law,
And rarely, very rarely Business draw;
Thy active Mind in equal Temper keep,
In undisturbed Peace, yet not in sleep;
Let Exercise a vigorous Health maintain,
Without which, all the Composition's vain:
In the same weight Prudence and Innocence take,
Ana of each does the just Mixture make:
But a few Friendships wear, and let them be
By Nature and by Fortune fit for thee:
Instead of Art and Luxury in Food,
Let Mirth and Freedom make thy Table good.
If any Cares into the Daytime creep,
At Night without Wine's Opium, let them sleep.
Let Rest, which Nature does to Darkness wed,
And not Lust, recommend to thee thy Bed.
Be satisfied, and pleased with what thou art,
Act cheerfully and well the allotted Part:
Enjoy the present hour, be thankful for the past,
And neither fear nor wish the approaches of the last.
Here we may first observe, as Horace according to Aristotle tells us, that
many are often disappointed in their search after Happiness, imagining that it
consiks chiefly in such things as they want, and which they admire in others;
as the Ignorant suppose it in Knowledge, the Poor in Riches, the Sick in
Health; which Horace very well expresses, speaking of the Merchant, of the
Soldier, and of the Husbandman; the one envies and admires the other's
Condition.

O happy Seamen! cries the Old Son of War,
With battered Limbs, and half his Face a Scar.
The restless Seaman, when insulting Gales
Toss the light Bark, and Conquer all his Sails:
(If fear allows one distant thought, or word,)
Trembling applauds the Brother of the Sword.
The Man of Law when pondring at the Door,
His wakeful Client knocks him up at four
Would leave the Bar, to lie securely warm,
And part with all his Practice for a Farm.
The clumsy Peasant, if when Harvest's done,
A kind Subpoena call's him up to Town;
It Is odds, but ravished with the gaudy Scene,
He sells his Team, sets up for Citizen.
Secondly, To admire nothing, as Horace again says, is almost the only thing
capable of rendering a Man happy, and continuing him so.

Not to admire, as most are wont to do,
It is the only Method that I know,
To make Men happy, and to keep them so.
And this does not only show the Tranquillity of mind unto which he has
attained; who perceiving the Vanity of all Human things, does not admire nor
any way seek after, but rather despises the Glory of Power, Honors, and
Riches, which generally dazzle Men's Eyes; but it also shows that other sort of
Tranquillity, which he has attained, who has arrived to the knowledge of
Natural Causes; so that he neither wonders, nor fears, nor is any way
disquieted, as the Vulgar usually are.

Happy the Man who studying Nature's Laws,
Through known Effects can trace the secret Cause;
His Mind possessing in a quiet State,
Fearless of Fortune, and resigned to Fate.
Thirdly, That the sweet Repose and Quiet which we meet with in a retired
state, void of the Encumbrances of the World, contributes not a little to our
Happiness; for he that aspires to the true Felicity of Life, which consists
chiefly in the Tranquillity of Mind, must not, as Democritus tells us, incumber
himself in much Business, either Private, or Public. And it is generally
known, that the Oracle esteemed not the Great King Gyges so Happy as the Old
Father Aglaus Psophidius, who in a little Corner of Arcadia, Husbanded a small
Estate, from which he reapt plentifully the Necessaries of Life, and never
departing thence, spent his time comfortably, free from Ambition, and without
the least sense of the Evils which torment the greatest part of Mankind.

It Is this sweet Retirement that Horace has so much commended in his Praise of
a Country Life.

Happy the Man, whom bounteous Gods allow,
With his own hands Paternal Grounds to Plough!
Like the first Golden Mortal happy he
From Business and the Cares of Money free!
No Human Storms break off at Land his Sleep,
No loud Alarms of Nature on the Deep.
From all the Cheats of Law, he lives secure,
Nor does the Affronts of Palaces endure.
The same state Virgil describes in his 2d Georgic.

O Happy (if his Happiness he knows)
The Country Swain! on whom kind Heaven bestows,
At home all Riches, that wise Nature needs,
Whom the just Earth with Ease and Plenty feeds.
It Is true, no Morning Tide of Clients comes,
And fills the Painted Channels of his Rooms;
Adoring the rich Figures as they pass;
In Tapestry wrought, or cut in living Brass;
Nor is his Wool superfluously died
With the dear Poison of Assyrian Pride;
Nor do Arabian Perfumes vainly spoil
The native Use and Sweetness of his Oil;
Instead of these his calm and harmless Life,
Free from the Alarms of Fear and Storm of Strife
Does with substantial Blessedness abound,
And the soft Wings of Peace cover him round.
Through Artless Grates the murmuring Waters glide,
Thick Trees both against Heat and Cold provide,
From whence the Birds salute him, and his Ground
With lowing Herds and bleating Sheep does sound;
And all the Rivers and the Forests nigh,
Do Food and Game and Exercise supply.
As to Epicurus we shall speak more at large, that he makes Happiness to
consist in the Ease of the Body, and the Tranquillity of the Mind, teaching at
the same time, and maintaining, That the efficient Causes of this Felicity, are
neither the delicious Wines, nor the delicate Meats, nor any such thing; but a
sound, just and enlightened Reason assisted by Virtue, from which it is not to
be separated, and which duly weighs and examines the Causes and Motives that
induce us, either to embrace or shun any thing. Therefore designing to treat
afterward of Happiness, he earnestly exhorts, to consider thoroughly of the
things that conduce to it; and because amongst those things the chief is, That
the Mind may be disengaged from certain Mistakes, which cause continual
Disturbances and vain Fears, he mentions several Particulars, which he believes
to be of that Importance, that when well examined, will settle the Mind, and
procure to it a real and solid Happiness.

Some Particulars needful to be examined, and considered, which will contribute
very much to the Repose and Happiness of the Mind.
THE First Particular, is the Knowledge and Fear of God. And certainly this
Philosopher had good Reason to recommend to us in the first place, the right
Ideas that we are to entertain of this Sovereign Being; because he that has a
right Notion of him, is so much inflamed with Love and Affection for God, that
he constantly endeavors to please him by an honest and a virtuous Life, always
trusting in his infinite Goodness, and expecting all things from him, who is
the Fountain of all good: By this means he spends his Life sweetly, peaceably,
and pleasantly. We shall not concern our selves here to show the Existence of
this Being, seeing we have already done it elsewhere: But shall only take
notice, that though Epicurus delivers some Notions that are very just and
reasonable, yet he has others that are not to be entertained by pious Men,
though he interprets 'em after his own Fashion; such are to be looked upon as
impious; for he believes, That God has a Being, as Lucretius makes him
acknowledge in his first Book.

For whatsoe'er's Divine must live in Peace,
In undisturbed and everlasting Ease;
Not care for us; from Fears and Dangers free,
Sufficient to it is own Felicity:
Naught here below, naught in our Power it needs,
Never smiles at good, never frowns at wicked deeds.
Now I say, to believe such a supreme Being, that exists to all Eternity, is
immortal and infinitely happy in it is own Nature, enjoying all things within it
self, and stands in no need of us, nor has any Cause to fear; that is not
subject to Pain, Anger, nor other Passions, are undeniable Truths, and an
Opinion that is Praiseworthy, especially in a Heathen Philosopher; but when he
denies Providence, as these Verses do intimate, and when he thinks that it is
not consisting with the highest Felicity, as if God had no particular Care of
Men; That the Just are to expect nothing from his Goodness, nor the Wicked are
not to dread his Justice, are such Opinions, that our Reason and Religion will
not permit us to entertain.

The second Particular relates to Death. For as Aristotle observes, Death is
looked upon as the most dreadful Evil, because none is exempted, being
unavoidable. Therefore Epicurus judges, That we ought to accustom our selves to
think upon it, that we might learn by that means as much as is possible to free
our selves from such Fears of Death, as might disturb our Tranquillity, and
consequently the Happiness of our Life; and for that Reason, he endeavors to
persuade us, that it is so far from being the most dreadful of all Evils, that
in it self it is no Evil at all: And thus he argues; Death, says he, don't
affect us, and by consequence in respect of us, is not to be judged an Evil;
for what affects us is attended by some but, now Death is the privation of
Sense. He tells us also, with Anaxagoras, That as before we were capable of
Sense, it was not grievous to us to have no Sense; so likewise when we shall
have lost it, we shall not be troubled at the want of it. As when we are
asleep, we are not concerned, because we are not awake: So when we shall be
dead, it will not trouble us, that we are not living. He concludes with
Archesilas, That Death, which is said to be an Evil, has this belonging to it,
that when it has been present, it has never troubled any body. And that it is
through the Weakness of the Mind, and the dismal Apprehensions that we have of
Death, that makes it seem so terrible to us when absent, insomuch that some are
struck dead with the very Fear of dying.

We may very well acknowledge, That Death is the Privation of our External
Sense, or of Sense, properly so called. And Epicurus has very good Reason to
say, That in Death there is nothing to be feared, that may injure the Sight,
the Hearing, the Smell, the Taste, or the Sense of Feeling; for all these Senses
cannot be without the Body, and then the Body ceases to be, or is dissolved.
But that which we are not to allow is, what he affirms elsewhere, That Death is
also the Privation or Extinction of the Spirit, or Understanding, which is an
internal Sense; a Sense according to his Notion. Therefore, that we may not be
hindered, by this Impiety, which has been sufficiently refuted in treating of
the Immortality of the Soul; let us proceed to give a Check to the
extraordinary Apprehensions of Death, and to those Fears that frequently
disturb all the Peace and Quiet of our Life, and with a sullen Blackness infect
and poison all our most innocent Pleasures, as Lucretius says, -- Those idle
Fears,
That spoil our Lives with Jealousies and Cares,
Disturb our Joys with dread of Pains beneath,
And sully them with the black Fears of Death.
Let us therefore in the first place, remember to give a Check to that fond
Desire of prolonging our days without bounds. Let us, I say, so remember this
frail and infirm Condition of our Nature, as not to desire any thing above it is
Reach and Capacity. Let us calmly and quietly, without repining, enjoy this
Gift of Life, whether it be bestowed upon us for a longer or a shorter time. It
is certain, that our Maker may deprive us of it without doing us any wrong. Let
us thankfully acknowledge his Liberality, from whom we have received it, and
add this to the number of those Benefits, which we daily draw from his Bounty.

Nature favors us for a while with the use of the Prospect of those
Enjoyments: Be not angry, that we must withdraw when the time is expired; for
we were admitted upon no other Terms, but to yield our places to others, as our
Ancestors have done to us. Our Bodies are naturally inclinable to Corruption,
and the manner of our Nativity renders our Death unavoidable. If to be Born is
pleasant, let not our Dissolution be grievous to us, to make use of Seneca's
Words. If the striving against this Fatality could any ways advantage us, we
should then perhaps approve of the Endeavors that are made, but all our
Strugglings are to no purpose, we do but add to our pain.

The number of our Days is so appointed, that the time of our Life slides away,
and is not to be recovered; and we run our Race in such a manner, that whether
we will or not, we are brought at last to the end.

As many Days as we pass over, so many are cut off from that Life that Nature
has allotted to us. So that Death being the Privation of Life, we are dying
continually, as long as we live, and that by a Death that carries not all at
once, but by degrees one step after another, though the last is that unto which
the Name of Death is assigned. So true it is, that the end of our Life depends
upon the first Moment.

Let us therefore moderate our Desires according to the Rule that Nature has
prescribed; and if the Destinies (to speak according to the ancient Poets)
cannot be prevailed upon, so that against our Wills, we are hurried away; let
us at least alleviate our Trouble by suffering our selves to be carried off
willingly.

The best and only Remedy to pass our Life free and void of Trouble, is to suit
our selves to our Nature, to desire nothing but what it requires, and to esteem
the last Moment of our Life as a free Gift of Providence, and to dispose and
prepare our selves in such a manner, that when Death approaches, we may say, I
have lived, and I have finished the Race that Nature has appointed me.

Vixi and quem dederas cursum Natura peregi. She calls away, but I come of mine
own accord. Nature requires of me what I am entrusted with, I yield it
willingly: I am commanded to die, I expire without Regret. We might also very
well make use of the Advice of Lucretius, and speak thus to our selves. The
greatest and most mighty Monarchs of the World are dead; and Scipio, that
Thunderbolt of War, and Terror of Carthage, has left his Bones in the Earth,
like as the vilest Slave: Anchises, the most Religious of all men, and Homer
the Prince of the Poets, are dead; and shall we murmur to die?

But more to comfort thee --
Consider, Ancus perished long ago;
Ancus, a better Man by much than thou.
Consider, mighty Kings in pampered State
Fall, and ingloriously submit to Fate.
Scipio that Scourge of Carthage, now the Grave
Keeps Prisoner like the meanest common Slave;
Nay, the great Wits and Poets too, that give
Eternity to others, cease to live.
Homer their Prince, the Darling of the Nine
(What Troy would at a second fall repine
To be thus sung?) is nothing now but Fame,
A lasting, far diffused, but empty Name.
Let us say moreover, Gassendus himself is dead, and that great Man has
finished his Course like other Mortals; he who in profound Learning and Wisdom
excelled the rest of Mankind, and who rising like a Sun, darkened the Light of
all the Stars.

Nay Great Gassendi's Race of Life is run,
That Man of Wit, who other Men out-shone,
As far as meaner Stars the midday Sun.
And can not thou, O Wretch, resolve to die?

Then how dare thou repine to die and grieve,
Thou meaner Soul, thou dead even whilst alive?
That sleep'st and dream'st the most of Life away,
Thy Night is full as rational as thy Day.
Still vexed with Cares, who never understood
The Principles of ill, nor use of good,
Nor whence thy Cares proceed, but reel'st about,
In vain unsettled Thoughts, condemned to doubt.
Thou whose Life is as half dead; thou who spendest above half thy time in
Sleep; who snorest, (as I may say) waking and feedest upon Fancies, and who
live in the midst of Fears and continual Troubles. It is what our famous
Malherbe had in his Thoughts, when he bewails the unhappy Fate of great Men,
who are subject to the same Laws of Death as the meanest Beggars.

Yet these are turned to Dust, and Fate
Rules with such Arbitrary Sway,
So binds its Laws on every State,
That all their Equal's Doom Obey.
With none ever yet Impartial Destiny
Of all it is numerous Subjects would dispense,
Hear this ye Vulgar Souls, and hence
Vnrepining Learn to Die.
But here some will object, we shall be deprived of all the Blessings of Life,
as Lucretius Elegantly Expresses it, Lib. 3.

Ay, but he now is snatched from all his Joys;
No more shall his Chaste Wife, and Prattling Boys
Run to their Dad, with eager have, and strive
Which shall have the first Kiss, as when alive.
Ay, but he now no more from Wars shall come,
Bring Peace and Safety to his Friends at home;
Wretched, O Wretched Man! one Fatal Day
Has snatched the vast Delights of Life away.
It is true, that this is commonly objected, but they seldom Consider that this
supposed Unhappy Man shall then have no desire at all for such things; and that
when he shall be really Dead, he shall not see any like himself standing near
his Tomb, beating the Breast, and languishing with Grief, as the same Author
Describes.

Thus they bewail, but go no further on,
And add, that his Desires and Wants are gone.
But the fond Fool never thinks, that when kind Death
Shall close his Eyes in Night, and stop his Breath;
Then nothing of this thinking thing remains,
To mourn his Fate, and feel sharp Grief and Pains.
May not we likewise thus Argue, as Plutarch Observes, and which often occurs
in our Thoughts? If our Life, which we esteem very long, when it extends to an
Hundred Years, were naturally but of one Days continuance, as some Animals
mentioned by Aristotle, in the Kingdom of Pontus are; And if like them in the
Morning we were in our Youth, at Noon in our Strength and full Growth, and at
Night in our Old Age; It is certain, in this Case we should be as well pleased
to live one Day till Night, as we are now to live an hundred years. And on the
contrary, if our Life did now extend to a thousand years, as did that of our
first Fathers, in that Case it would grieve us as much to Die at the end of six
hundred years, as to depart now at the expiration of threescore. It is the same
in respect of those, who first came into the World, if they had continued till
this present time, it would trouble them as much to Die now, as it does us.

These Considerations therefore ought to teach us, that our Life of what sort
soever, is to be computed, not by its length, but by the good Qualifications
and Pleasures that attend it. In the same manner (says Seneca) As the
Perfection of a Circle ought to be computed, not by the Greatness, but by the
exact Roundness of the Figure. O Vain and Indiscreet Diligence, says Pliny,
Men compute the number of their Days, where they should only seek their true
Worth.

Heu vana, and imprudens diligentia, numerus dierum
Computatur ubi quaeritur pondus!
We don't Consider, that as the Mass of this Earth, and all the World beside,
and a thousand other such Worlds, if you please, are but as a Point, if
compared with the vast extended space of the Heavens: Thus the longest Life of
Man, were it as long as that of the Hamadryades, or a thousand thousand times
more, is but a Moment, if compared with Eternity. This Life, says Seneca, is
but a Point, How can we extend this Point?

In hoc punctum conjectus es,
Quod ut extendas, quousque extendes?
Know, says Lucretius, That by the prolonging of our Days we diminish nothing
from the time and long continuance of Death; and that he who dies to day, shall
not be dead a less time than he who died a thousand years ago.

What though a thousand years prolong thy breath,
How can this shorten the long state of Death?
For though thy Life shall numerous Ages fill,
The State of Death shall be Eternal still;
And he that dies to day, shall be no more,
As long as those who perished long before.
If Nature, says he again, should in anger speak to us in this manner? What
Cause have thou, O Mortal to Weep, and to Complain of Death? If thy former Life
has been easy and pleasant, and if thou have known how to make use of the
good things and delights that I have afforded thee, why do thou not as a
Guest, depart when thou art full, and satisfied with Life? and why do thou
not accept, fond Creature, of the agreeable Repose that is offered thee? But if
otherwise, thy Life has been to thee a burden, and if thou have suffered my
Bounties to perish, why desirst thou more to mispend them after the same
manner? for I can give thee no new thing. And if thou should live thousands
of years, thou will but still see the same things repeated over again. If
Nature should speak to us in this Language, should we not have reason to
approve of this Discourse, and own that it has cause to Reproach us in this
manner?

Fond Mortal, what is the matter thou do sigh?
Why all these Tears, because thou once must die,
And once submit to strong Necessity?
For if the Race thou have already run
Was pleasant, if with joy thou saws't the Sun:
If all thy Pleasures did not pass thy Mind,
As through a Sieve, but left some Sweets behind;
Why do thou not then like a thankful Guest,
Rise cheerfully from Life's abundant Feast,
And with a quiet Mind go take thy Rest?
But if all those Delights are lost and gone,
Spent idly all, and Life a burden grown;
Then why, fond Mortal, do thou ask for more?
Why still desire to increase thy wretched store?
And wish for what must wast like those before?
Not rather free thy self from Pains and Fear,
And end thy Life, and necessary care?
My Pleasures always in a Circle run,
The same returning with the yearly Sun:
And thus, though thou do still enjoy thy Prime,
And though thy Limbs feel not the rage of Time;
Yet I can find no new, no fresh Delight,
The same dull Joys must vex thy Appetite:
Although thou coud'st prolong thy wretched Breath
For numerous Years; much more if free from Death.
At least we must acknowledge that a Wise Man who has lived long enough to
consider the World, ought of his own accord to submit himself to the Course of
Nature, when he perceives that his time is come, and cannot but suppose that
his Race is Run, and that the Circle that he has finished is complete; and if
this Circle is not to be compared to Eternity, it is however with the
continuance of the World.

As to what relates to the whole Prospect of Nature, he has often beheld the
Heavens, the Earth, and other things included in the World; He has often seen
the rising and the setting of the Celestial Bodies; He has taken notice of
several Eclipses, and many other Phaenomenas or unusual Appearances in the
Sky, the constant succession of the Seasons, and in a word, many particular
Generations, many Corruptions and Transmutations. And as to those things which
relate to Mankind, he has seen, or at least has heard and understood from
History the Transactions that have happened from the beginning; of Peace, and
of War, of Faith kept, and violated; of a Polite Life, and of a rude and
barbarous Behavior; of Laws Established, and Abolished, of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths in their first Birth and Declension, and generally all other
things that he has any knowledge of, or which have been told him, and with
which he is in any wise acquainted, as if he had been present when they first
happened. So that he ought to consider, that all the time that is gone before
him relates to him, as if his Life were begun with the things themselves. And
because we must judge of the future by the time past, he ought also to think
that all the subsequent time relates to him in the same manner; and that there
shall be nothing hereafter, but what has been already; that there is nothing
but the Circumstances of things that alter, and that all things in general
steer the same common Course, and make the like appearances; so that Holy Writ
has reason to say, The thing that has been, it is that which shall be, and
that which is done, is that which shall be done again, and there is no new
thing under the Sun. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, see this is
new? From whence we may conclude, that a Wise Man ought not to fancy his Life
short; for by casting his eye upon the time past, and foreseeing the time to
come, he may extend it to as great a length as the duration of the Universe.

Moreover, though Epicurus had cause to say, That it is ridiculous to assert that
there is no evil in Death when it is present, and yet to dread it, and be
troubled when it must come; as if there were any reason to be disturbed for
that which is absent, which when present never gives us the least sorrow:
Nevertheless, because other Considerations represent Death dreadful, as the
Evils and Pains that Usher it, and those that we think will be its necessary
Attendants; Seneca therefore makes it his business to recommend diverse
Considerations, wherein he shows, that though Death in it self is no Evil, yet it
appears so much in that Notion, that it ought not to be looked upon as an
indifferent thing; for as he expresses himself; Death is not indifferent in
the same manner as it is indifferent whether the Hairs of my head be of one
length, or not; for Death is to be reckoned amongst those things, which though
they be no real Evils, yet they appear to be so; for we love our selves; and
naturally desire to subsist and preserve our selves, and we have an innate
aversion from a dissolution, because it seems to deprive us of many advantages,
and draws us away from that plenty of Enjoyments unto which we are accustomed.
There is yet one thing more which causes us to dread Death. We know the things
present, but we are altogether Strangers to those unto which we are a going;
and therefore we fear that which is unknown. Besides, we have a natural dread
of Darkness, into which we imagine that Death is leading us: So that though Death
is indifferent, yet it is not of the number of those things that are easily to
be despised; we ought to inure and harden our Minds by a long accustomed Habit,
to enable us the more willingly to undergo and encounter with the dismal
approaches of Death.

The Third Particular relates to the abominable Opinion of the Stoics, who
were persuaded that in some Cases Men had the liberty to kill themselves; for
thus you see Seneca represents them arguing. It is certainly a great affliction
to live in want; but there is nothing that obliges us absolutely to continue in
it; for which way soever we glance our eyes, we may see the end of our
Sufferings, and our Deliverance, either in a Precipice, in a River, by a
Dagger, by a Tree, by opening a Vein, or by Abstinence. We ought to give God
thanks that none of us is detained against his Will in this present Life. The
Eternal Decree has admirably well appointed that there should be but one kind
of entrance into the World, but many out of it. Death, say they, is to be met
with in every place; God has very wisely contrived, that there is none but may
take away our Life, but no Man can take away our Death, though it has a thousand
Passages open to it.

Ubique Mors est; optime hoc cavit Deus:
Eripere vitam nemo non homini potest;
At nemo mortem; mill ad hanc exitus patent.
He that knows how to die, can free himself, and he has always the Door of his
Prison open. True it is, there is a Chain that holds us fast, namely the Love
of Life; and this Love, though we ought not absolutely to reject it, yet we
should at least mitigate it, that if sometimes Accidents require, it may not
keep us back, nor hinder us from being ready to perform at present, that which
we must one day do or suffer. These following Tenets proceed from the same
School. The Wise Man lives as long as he ought, though not so long as he may; He
knows where he ought to live, with whom, and how, and what he ought to do. He
considers the manner of his Life, and not the length. If he meets with Crosses,
and Misfortunes, he frees himself, and don't stay for the last necessity to set
him at liberty; but as soon as Fortune begins to frown upon him, he seriously
considers, if he ought not at that time to end his days. He believes that if he
himself hastens his end, or expects it from another hand, it is the same thing;
or whether it be brought to pass sooner or later, it grieves him not.
Nevertheless sometimes though his Death is certain and appointed, and that he
knows himself set apart for Execution, yet he will not lend his helping hand, nor
will he be overwhelmed with Sorrow. It is a folly to die for fear of Death. If
he that is to kill thee is coming, wait for him, Why will thou prevent him? and
why will thou undertake to execute upon thy self another's Cruelty? Do thou
covet the Office of an Executioner? or will thou save him the labor? Socrates
ought to have ended his Days by Abstinence, and die by Hunger, rather than by
Poison, yet he continued thirty days in Prison, in expectation of Death; not
because during this time he had hopes of a Reprieve, but to show himself
Obedient to the Laws, and to give his Friends the Pleasure of enjoying the
Conversation of Socrates, when he was ready to Die. When therefore an outward
Violence threatens us with Death, we cannot give any general or absolute
Directions, whether we are to prevent it, or to expect it with Patience, for
there are many Circumstances to be considered. But if there be two kinds of
Death, the one full of grievous Torments, the other sudden and easy, why may
not we choose the latter?

This was the Opinion of Hyeronimus, of all the Stoics, and namely of Pliny,
who styles the Earth a good Mother, because it has compassion of us, and has
appointed the Poisons for our use. It seems to be likewise the Opinion of
Plato; for though Cicero makes him say, That we ought to preserve the Soul
enclosed in the Body, and without the command of him who gave it, we must not
depart out of this Life, that we might not thereby seem to despise this gift
that God has bestowed upon Man: Yet in his Book of Laws, he declares, That he
who kills himself is not to be blamed, but when he does the act, without being
thereunto forced by the Sentence of the Judge, or by some unsufferable and
unavoidable accident of Fortune, or by Misery and Public shame. Not to mention
Cicero, who in a certain place commends the Opinion of Pythagoras, because he
forbids to depart out of our Fortress, or to quit our Station of Life without
the appointment of the General, that is to say, of God. Yet elsewhere he
teaches, That in our Life we ought to observe the same Rule, that is in the
Banquetings of the Greeks, that is to say, either to Drink, or to Depart; so
that if we cannot bear the injuries and affronts of Fortune, we must undergo
them, by flying from them. To speak nothing of Cato, who seems not to have
sought Death so much to avoid the sight of Caesar, as to obey the Decrees, and
follow the Dictates of the Stoics, esteeming it his Glory to observe them, and
to leave his Name Famous to Posterity, by some Great and Notable Action; for
Lactantius says, Cato was during his Life a Follower of the Vanity of the
Stoics.

What relates to Democritus, Truly his Opinion, as the same Lactantius informs
us, was different from that of the Stoics; yet he suffered himself to die by
abstinence, when he found in his very great Age, that the strength of his Body,
and the abilities of his Mind began to fail.

Sponte sua letho Caput obvius obtulit ipse. Which we may say, is altogether
Criminal; for if a Murderer is an Offender, because he kills a Man, he that
murders himself is guilty of the same Crime, because he also kills a Man. It is
very probable that this is the greatest Crime, whereof the Vengeance is
reserved to God alone; for as we do not enter upon Life of our own accord, so
neither are we to depart out of it of our own heads, but by his Order, who has
placed us in the Body to inhabit there. And if any violence or injury be done
us, we must bear it patiently, because the Life of a guitless Person that is
destroyed, cannot be unrevenged; for we have a Powerful God, unto whom
Vengeance always belongs.

Finally, As for Epicurus, it is thought that he was not of the same Judgment
with the Stoics; not only because he says, That the Wise Man is easy under
his Torments, but also because that he himself being grievously tormented with
the Stone and Gravel, he never hastened his Death, but waited for it patiently.
Besides, Seneca assures us, that Epicurus does as much blame those that desire
Death, as those that fear it; and that there is a great indiscretion, nay
folly, in advancing our Death, for fear of Death.

Yet this happens very often, as Lucretius tells us, not only because that the
extraordinary fear that Death begets in us, casts us sometimes into a dismal
Melancholy, which renders all things uneasy to us, and proceeds so far as to
make Life it self to become a troublesome, incommodious, and an intolerable
thing; and at last to seek out the strangest means to deliver our selves from
it, and to procure our Death: Et saepe usque adeo mortis formidine, vitae
Percipit ingratos odium, lucisque videnda
Vt sibi conciscant moerenti pectore lethum.


But this extraordinary Fear causes by degrees a certain kind of Melancholy,
which depresseth the Heart, enfeebles the Spirits, and obstructs all the
operations of Life. It stops Digestion, and draws upon us many Diseases, that
are the immediate Causes of Death.

However, the Opinion of the Stoics is not only contrary to the Sacred
Precepts of our Religion, but is also contrary to Nature, and right Reason. We
must except some certain Persons, who being directed by a Particular and Divine
Instinct, have been instrumental in procuring their own Deaths, as Samson, and
others in the Old Testament, and Sophronia and Pelagia since the New; for
Nature furnishes all sorts of Animals with a Natural love of Life, and there is
none besides Man, let them be tormented with never so grievous pain, but
labors to preserve Life as much as they can, and to avoid Death. This is a
sign that none but Man does by his mistaken Opinions corrupt the Institution of
Nature, when he refuses the benefit of Life, and advances his Death; he acts
then by a wickedness peculiar to himself; for the true state of Nature is to be
considered in the general body of the Creatures, and not in some few
individuals of one single Species, that hasten their own destruction, and cast
away themselves before the time appointed by Nature. From hence we may
conclude, that such are injurious to God, and Nature, who being designed and
ordered to perform a certain Race, stop in the middle of their Course of their
own accord, and who being appointed to watch, forsake and abandon their Post,
without waiting for Orders from their Superiors.

Besides, Reason forbids us to be Cruel against the Innocent, who never did us
any harm; and by consequence it don't allow that we should act inhumanly upon
our selves, from whom we never experienced any Hatred, but rather too much Love.

Moreover, upon what occasion can our Virtue appear more conspicuous, than in
suffering Courageously the Evils that our hard Fortune imposes upon us? To die,
says Aristotle, because of our Poverty, or for Love, or for some other
mischievous accident, is not the act of a Man of Spirit and Courage, but of a
mean and timorous Soul, for it is the part of a weak Mind to shun and fly from
things hard to be endured. Stout Men, says Curtius, are wont to despise Death,
rather than to hate Life. It Is the trouble and impatience of Suffering that
carries the Cowards to base Actions, that makes them despised, and scorned.
Virtue leaves nothing unattempted, and Death is the last thing with which we
must Encounter, but not as timorous, lazy, and unwilling Souls.

I shall not here stay to examine the Opinion of those, who imagining, says
Lactantius, that the Souls are Eternal, have therefore killed themselves, as
Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and Zeno, expecting to be transported at the same time
to Heaven; or as Empedocles, who cast himself in the Night into the Flames of
Mount-Aetna, that by disappearing so suddenly, the World might think that he
was gone to the Gods; or, as Cato, who was during his Lifetime a Follower of
the vanity of the Stoics; who before he killed himself, as it is Reported, had
read Plato 's Book of the Eternity of the Soul; or finally, as Cleombrotus, who
after he had read the same Book, cast himself down a Precipice. This is a
Cursed and Abominable Doctrine, that drives Men out of their Lives.

Neither shall I trouble my self with that Cyrenaick of Hegesius, who Disputed
so Elegantly concerning the Miseries of Life, and the Blessed Place of the
Souls after Death, that King Ptolomy was forced to forbid him to speak in
Public, because so many of his Disciples after they had heard him, destroyed
themselves, as Cicero Reports, and some others. For the Evils that we endure in
this Life may happen to be so great, and increase in such a manner, that when
the time of Death is come, the loss of Life may not be unpleasant, and that in
such a Case, Death may be esteemed as the Haven that shelters us from the
Miseries and Torments of Life. But to aggravate our Afflictions so far, as to
beget in us a scorn and hatred of Life, is to be injurious and unthankful to
Nature, as if the Gift of Life that has been bestowed upon us for our use,
were to be rashly cast away; or as if we were not to accept of it any longer,
nor honestly and quietly to enjoy it, as long as is possible.

It Is true, what Theognis said formerly, That it were much better for Men not
to be Born, or to Die as soon as they are Born, is a Celebrated Saying.

Non nasci res est mortalibus optima long,
Nec Solis radiis acre videre Jubar,
Aut natum Ditis quamprimum lumen adire.
This is confirmed by the Example of Cleobis, of Biton, of Agamedes, of
Pindarus, and of some others, who having Petitioned the Gods to grant to them
the thing which was best and most desirable, were admitted to this great
favor, To die in a short time. Answerable to this is the Custom of the
Thracians, who wept at the Birth of their Children, but Congratulated the
Happiness of such as Died. Not to mention Menander, who wished a young Man
dead, because he was well beloved by the Gods.

Quem diligunt Dii, Juvenis ipse interit. Nor to say any thing of that Famous
Sentence; Vitam nemo acciperet, si daretur scientibus,

That no body would accept of Life willingly, if it were given to them that
knew what it were. But pray who will believe that Theognis, and the rest, have
spoken seriously, and without any Restriction? I say without any Restriction;
for if they would have it, that it is better for such only, who are to be
miserable all their Lives, that they had not been Born, or to have Died at the
very moment of their Birth, the Saying might be tolerable, and allowable; but
to speak this in relation to all Men, is to affront Nature, the Mistress both
of our Life and Death, that has ordered and appointed our Birth, and our
Dissolution, as she has all other things for the preservation of the Universe.
It were to expose our selves to be contradicted, if not by all, yet by the most
part of Men, who are not weary of Life, but seek to preserve it as carefully as
they can. For Life, as we have already observed, has something in it very
pleasing and lovely; therefore he that speaks in this manner, shall feel
himself bound and held fast; and I am apt to believe, that he may be like the
Old Man in Aesop, who sent Death back again, though he had often called for it
before; or like another, who refused to make use of the Dagger that he had
desired to be brought, to free himself, as he pretended, from the Misery that
he could no longer endure. Certainly that Person was in jest, who said, That to
Live, or to Die, were Acts of Indifferency. And when one asked him, Why then
don't you Die? his Answer was, Because it was indifferent to him. But I am
persuaded, if any had assaulted him with a Naked Sword in his hand, he would
have chosen rather to Live than to Die. Another answered more ingenuously, who
when some Reproached him, that he having made profession of Wisdom, acted not
accordingly, when he trembled at the approach of Danger, said, For your part
you have no reason to be afraid, because your Soul is of small value; but I am
afraid for the Precious Soul of Aristippus. And another, when some told him,
that he had no reason to have such a desire of living to be Old; Well, quoth
he, I but just now arrived to the Knowledge of Wisdom, and I desire therefore a
little time to enjoy it; as they who enter into Matrimony well stricken in
years wish for long Life to breed up their Children. But there is nothing more
remarkable than what Cicero relates of Leontinus Gorgias, who having attained
to the Age of one hundred and seven years, without any interruption by his
Labors, and ordinary Occupations, answered, to those, who desired to know from
him why he had a mind to live so long?

Nihil habeo quod incusem Senectutem. I have, says he, no reason to complain of
my Old Age.

The Fourth Particular relates to the time to come, and forbids either
impatiently to expect, or totally to despair; that so we may not feed our
selves with vain Hopes, nor depend upon that, which neither is, nor it may be
ever shall happen. For Fortune being of it is own Nature changeable and
inconstant, nothing that is within her Power can be foreseen, or relied upon
with so much certainty, but it may often deceive him who expects it. So that it
is much our surer way, not absolutely to despair of the things that we foresee,
nor yet to be too much assured of them as Infallible; and in the mean while to
prepare our selves in such a manner for all Events, that in case it happens
otherwise than we expect, we may not think our selves deprived of a thing which
is of absolute necessity to us. This kind of Sentence, Ni trop esperer, ni trop
desperer, Neither too much Hope, nor too much Despair, tends to the same
Purpose: For as to Hope and Expect with too great Reliance makes Men neglect
other things, and the Mind wanders elsewhere; so to have no Hopes, causes Men
to be altogether careless, and to forsake all things. Whereas he that has a
Mind moderated in respect of both Passions, finds himself in an admirable
Temper, and is not forced to Exclaim, O Jupiter venerande, quale Spes malum est.
O what a miserable thing is Hope!


It Is what Torquatus expresses very well in Cicero, when he says, That the
Wise Man lives in expectation of Future Events, as if they might chance to be;
but nevertheless he depends not upon them, because it may so happen, that they
may not be; in the mean while he enjoys the things present, and remembers with
satisfaction the things past. It Is to the same purpose that he speaks also in
another place; That we ought not rashly to Despair in a mean, abject and
cowardly manner, nor to be too confidently transported by an immoderate Desire.
This is the Reason, that when Epicurus speaks of a Fool, in opposition to a
Wise Man, he says, That the Life of the Fool is uneasy, full of Fears, and
altogether depending on the time to come.

Stulti vita ingrata est, trepida est, tota in futurum fertur. A Fool's Life is
troublesome and uneasy, always transported with the thoughts of what may
happen hereafter.

The Fifth Particular is but a Disgrace or Reproach to Mankind; for by
deferring from Day to Day, their Life passes away without any profit, always
depending upon the time to come. Consider, says Seneca, according to Epicurus,
how pleasant it is to desire nothing, and what a greatness of Mind it is to be
always full, and not to depend upon Fortune! Take hold of, and secure the
present time, whereby you will have less occasion of dependence on the future.
By deferring the enjoyment of Life our Life vanishes insensibly. Dum
differtur, vita transcurrit. To the same purpose he says in Plutarch; He that
needs not to Morrow, nor wishes for it, comes to it insensibly; as if he should
say, That the Wise Man ought so to reckon, as if he considered every Day of his
Life as the last, and as that which was to Complete the Circle; for by this
means he will not put off the Pleasure of the Enjoyment 'till the Morrow; and
if he arrives to To Morrow, that Day will be so much the more Pleasant, it
being the less expected, and being added as an overplus to the rest; it will be
looked upon as an Advantage, and esteemed as pure Gain.

Pacuvius, a Viceroy of Syria, having spent a whole Day in Feasting, and
Drinking, was wont when they carried him home from the Table to his Bed, to
cause these words to be sung to him, Vixit, Vixit; he has Lived, he has
Lived. What this Glutton did, says Seneca, out of a Spirit of Debauchery, let
us Practice in Reality; and when we shall have Seriously and Virtuously spent
the Day, and are retiring to our Rest, let us say with Joy and Contentment,
Vixi, and quem dederas cursum Fortuna peregi.

I have Lived, and have accomplished the Race that Providence has appointed
me; if God adds another Day, let us receive it with Joy and Thankfulness. He is
certainly Happy, and enjoys himself most, who expects the Morrow without
anxiety of thought. And whosoever after this manner can say, I have Lived,
arrives every Day to a new Advantage.

Horace gives almost the same Advice. We must, says he, suppose every Day to
be the last of our Life. Thus the time which we don't expect will become
grateful to us.

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum,
Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur hora.
Let us quietly make use of this present time, never reckoning upon that which
is to come.

Be not inquisitive what shall happen to Morrow; but as if you were to Die this
very Day, look upon it as an advantage, if Providence grants you any longer
continuance.

Quid sit futurum cras fuge quaerere, et
Quam Sors dierum cumque ferat, lucro
Appone --
Accept with thankfulness the time that God bestows on you, and do not deferr
the Enjoyment of the Comforts and Pleasures of Life 'till the next Year.

Tu, quamcunque Deus tibi fortunaverit horam,
Grata sum manu, nec dulcia differ in annum.
The best of our Days are those that past first.

Optima quaeque Dies miseris mortalibus aevi
Prima fugit --
As if every Day we drew nearer to the Dregs of our Life. And as if the purest
Pleasures that we delay, could never be recovered again, and those that follow,
were not to be compared with the Pleasures that are past. From hence proceed
the frequent Complaints of the time ill spent.

The Years I once have spent, could Heaven restore! And nevertheless, we don't
endeavor so to Husband the present time, that if God did restore the former,
we might say, Now I understand how I might better employ it. We fancy always
that our time of living Happily is not yet come; that the good things we
expect, are far above those that we have already enjoyed, or could enjoy. So
that what is past we esteem as nothing, but have always in our eye and thoughts
the time to come, being now as desirous of Life as ever.

Sed dum abest quod avemus, id exsuperare videtur
Coetera, post aliud cum contigit, illud avemus,
Et sitis aequa tenet vitai semper hiantes.
As if we were not to reckon the Time past as any way acceptable or pleasing,
but at the same time to rejoice, that it is as it were put out of danger; and
the rather, because many expect the same Fortune, and are deceived in their
expectations. We must do this piece of Justice to Epicurus, says Seneca, That
he continually complains of our being ungrateful for the time past, that we
call not to mind the good things that we have enjoyed, nor so much as reckon
them amongst the real Advantages and solid Pleasures of Life, because there is
no Delight more certain than that, which we cannot be deprived of. Praesentia
bona nondum tota in solido sunt, potest illa casus aliquis incidere, futura
pendent, and incerta sunt; quod praeteriit inter tuta sepositum est.

Therefore Plutarch concludes, That the Nature of Good consists not only in
shunning the Evil, but also in the Remembrance, and in pleasing our selves with
the thoughts that the thing is thus come to pass. But to instance once more in
these ridiculous delays, and deferring of things 'till the Morrow.

It Is a strange thing, says Epicurus, that considering we are Born but once,
that our Days are to have an end, and that the Morrow being out of our Power,
nevertheless we always put off 'till the next day to Live: So that our Life is
spent miserably in these continual delays, and there are none but die busied in
such Affairs as concern not their real Happiness; for we occupy our selves in
every thing else, but to Live. From hence proceeds that other just Complaint of
Seneca, Amongst other Evils, this also attends Folly, That it is always a
beginning to Live. And Martial says, Thou art for Living to Morrow: Alas!
consider, it is already late to Live to Day; he is a Wise Man who knew how to
Live Yesterday.

Cras vives? hodie jam vivere, Postume, serum est.
Ille sapit quisquis, Postume, vixit heri.
To the same purpose are those Verses of Manilius.

Quid tam sollicitis vitam consumimus annis,
Torquemurque metu, caecaque cupidine rerum,
Aeternisque senes curis, dum quaerimus aevum
Perdimus, and nullo votorum fine beati,
Victuros agimus semper, nec vivimus unquam?
Wherefore do we spend our Days in continual Cares and Troubles, tormented with
vain Fears, and greedy Desires? We grow old in endless Vexation, we lose our
Life in seeking it, and without enjoying the end of our Desires; we are always
laboring to Live, and never really Live.

The Sixth Particular relates to our Lusts or Desires, the Knowledge whereof is
of that importance, that our Skill ought chiefly to be employed in
distinguishing between such as are really to be termed Natural and Necessary,
and such as are Vain and Superfluous; for the Happiness of Life depends upon
the denial of the latter, and our being content with the enjoyment of the
former. But as we shall have occasion to speak of this in other places, we
shall here rest satisfied only to have mentioned 'em.

The last Particular that Epicurus recommends to our Consideration, is properly
an Exhortation to Study Philosophy, it being the best Physic for the Soul; for
Philosophy, if we rightly consider the Etymology of the word, is The Study of
Wisdom; and Wisdom to the Mind, is not only as Physic, by which our Health is
procured and preserved, but is as the very Health it self. In truth, as the
Health of the Body consists in a convenient Temper and Disposition of the
Humors and Qualities, so the Health of the Mind consists in a moderation of
the Passions, We need but listen to Cicero to understand the Reason of this
Comparison. All Passions, says he, are adjudg'd by the Philosophers the
Distempers of the Mind; and they deny, that amongst such as are Fools, there
are any that are exempt from these Distempers. Now such as are Distempered,
says he, are not Healthy; therefore every one that is a Fool is really Sick.
For according to the Judgment of the Philosophers, the Health of the Mind
consists in a certain Tranquillity, and fixed Constancy; and such as are not in
that Disposition, they esteemed to be Sick, or Distempered. Now we must suppose
with Epicurus, and the rest, that usually there is nothing dearer and more
valuable than the Health of the Body, which plainly demonstrates how dear and
precious the Health of the Mind ought to be, seeing, as we shall take notice
hereafter, that the Goods and Evils of the Mind are of far greater and more
considerable value than those of the Body, and consequently the end of a Happy
Life, consisting in the Tranquillity of the Mind, and the Health of the Body (as
shall hereafter be made appear) the former is much more valuable than the
latter; for he that has a sedate Mind, composed according to the Rules of
Wisdom, earnestly studies Temperance and Sobriety, which are the most solid and
best supporters of Bodily Health. We must then, quoth Epicurus, act the part of
a Philosopher, not in appearance, or out of Ostentation, but effectually, and
seriously, because it concerns us not only to seem to be in Health, but to be
really so. Old Men as well as Young must apply themselves to this Study,
because it is the interest of both to be sound in Mind, as well as in Body. So
that none may reproach us, with Horace, that if we have any thing in our Eye
that hurts us, we are very earnest to take it out quickly, nevertheless we
spend many Years, and not once think of Curing our Minds.

Quae laedunt oculos festinas demere, si quid,
Est Animum, differs curandi tempus in annum.
We ought to deal otherwise with Philosophy, than Thales did with Marriage.
When his Mother persuaded him to Marry, he had still some pretense to offer,
that it was yet time enough, but afterward, he said it was too late. And as it
is ridiculous to say that it is not yet time, or that the time to Heal or Cure
the Body is over, so it is as ridiculous to say, that the time to play the
Philosopher, that is to heal the Mind, is not yet come, or that the time is
past to be Happy. It Is strange that we should thus miserably wast and consume
our time, and should not apply our selves to that which will be as useful to
the Rich, as to the Poor, and which being neglected, is as prejudicial to the
Young as to the Old. It Is a Reproach that Horace applies to himself.

-- Fluunt mihi tarda
-- Ingrataque tempora, quae spem
Consiliumque morantur agendi gnaviter id quod
Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque,
Aeque neglectum pueris, senibusque nocebit.
Take from hence, both Young and Old, take from hence with you the Viaticum,
the Entertainment, and the Consolation of poor Old Age.

-- Petite hinc
Juvenesque, senesque miseris viatica canis,
For it is of the Study of Philosophy that the Poet speaks, according to
Biantes, Aristippus, Antisthenes, Aristotle, and other Philosophers, stiling it
the Viaticum of Old Age. But to mention that chiefly which ought to persuade
young Men to Study Philosophy, is that there is nothing more Excellent and
Commendable, than to accustom our selves betimes to good things, and to adorn
the Beauty of Youth with the sweetness of Wisdom, which commonly is the
Blessing of a more mature Age. Nor is there any thing more agreeable than to
prepare and make our selves fit to meet and receive Old Age, which besides it is
proper Blessings of Maturity, may also shine forth with the luster of those
Virtues, which were Splendid and Remarkable in our Youth. So that by the
frequent remembrance of the Virtuous Actions of our Youth, we may in our Elder
Years seem to grow young again. Moreover, Wisdom is not only a proper and true
Ornament, but a very useful Prop and assistance against the Inconveniences and
Infirmities of Age. It Is that which animates Old Men with the same Vigor as it
does the young. Here we again ought to listen to Seneca, who when he was very
Old, was wont to hear the Lessons of Sextus the Philosopher. The same was
practiced in imitation of him, by the Emperor Antoninus. Behold, says he, this
is the fifth Day that I frequent the Schools, and that I listen to a
Philosopher, who Disputes from Eight a Clock. You may perhaps say, it is time
indeed to Study in our younger years. And why not in this Age? Is there any
thing more ridiculous than to refuse Learning, because we have not Learned a
long while before? Shall I be ashamed to go and meet a Philosopher? We ought to
Learn while we are Ignorant, and according to the Proverb, As long as we Live.
Go, Lucillus, and make have, for fear that it should happen to you, as to me,
to be obliged to Study in your declining years; and make what speed you can,
the rather because you have undertaken that which you will scarce Learn when
you come to be Decrepit. But what advantage shall I gather, may you say? As
much as you will endeavor for: What do you expect? No Man becomes Wise by
Chance. Riches may come to us of themselves, Honors may be offered to us, and
we may be advanced to Employments and Dignities, but Virtue will not come and seek
us; we must endeavor to find her, for she never bestows her Blessings, but
upon such as take Labor and Pains. These are the Particulars which the Ancient
Philosophers, and chiefly Epicurus, have recommended to our serious
Consideration, as the best means, not only to discover to us the surest way to
true Happiness, but also to render it easy and pleasant.

CHAP. II. What sort of Pleasure it is that Epicurus Recommends as the End of a
Happy Life.
IT IS strange that the Word Pleasure should have blasted the Reputation of
Epicurus, or, to make use of the Words of Seneca, That it has given occasion
for a Fiction; for it is certain that this word comprehends the honest
Pleasures, as well as the loose and debauched. I say it is certain; for Plato,
Aristotle, and all the other Ancient Philosophers, as well as their Disciples,
speak in express words, that amongst the Pleasures, some are Innocent, others
Impure; some are of the Mind, others are of the Body; some true, others false.
We Believe, says Aristotle, that Pleasure ought to accompany Happiness. And as
it is confessed, that amongst the operations that are agreeable with Virtue,
such as proceed from Wisdom are more Pleasant than the rest, therefore Wisdom
seems to contain Pleasures that are pure, admirable, and fixed. There is a
Delight, says Cicero, in seeking after great and hidden things, and when there
appears something of resemblance, the Mind is filled with a sweet Pleasure. In
the Discoveries of Nature there is an unsatiable Pleasure, and those who
delight in pursuit hereof, neither regard oft-times their Health, nor their
Fortune; they suffer all things, being Captivated with the love of Knowledge
and Understanding, and with great labor they pay for the Pleasure they acquire
by Learning. We read also in the Holy Scriptures, that God himself in the
beginning Planted a Garden or Paradise of Pleasure; that the Blessed shall be
filled with the Fatness of his House, and drink of the Rivers of his Pleasures.
I mention this, only because some imagine that this word Pleasure cannot nor
ought not to be taken but in an ill sense. Therefore when Epicurus says that
Pleasure is the chief End, they fancy that he cannot and ought not to be
understood but of sordid and forbidden Pleasures. So that when we say, or when
they read that there have been some Philosophers who were called Voluptuous,
they presently take Epicurus for their Chieftain, or Leader.

But let us examine this Business from the bottom, and first let us begin with
the Accusation which they bring against him. And as amongst those who allow
other Pleasures than of the Body, there are some that will have what he says
to be understood only of Bodily Pleasures; let us weigh his own words as they
are found in Laertius, for there he expresses his Mind, and declares plainly
what that Pleasure is which ought to be the End of our Life, and the Chief
Good. The End of an Happy Life, says he, is nothing else but the Health of the
Body, and the Tranquillity of the Soul, (...). Because all our Actions aim and
tend to this End, that we may be free from Pain and Trouble, (...). And because
this End he styles by the Name of Pleasure, some took occasion from thence to
scandalize him, saying, that hereby he understood the mean and sordid Pleasures
of the Body. Therefore he makes his own Apology, and clears himself from this
Calumny, by declaring plainly what kind of Pleasure he means, and what not; for
after having made it his main business to recommend a Sober Life, which is
satisfied with plain Food, and easy to be got, you shall hear what he says
next. When we say that Pleasure is the main End, we mean neither the Pleasures
of Debauchery, nor the other sensual Delights, which terminate in the very
moment of enjoyment, and by which the Senses are only gratified and pleased; as
some ignorant Persons, and who are not of our Opinion, or who being enviously
bent against us do thus Interpret. But we only understand this (...), To feel
no pain in the Body, and to have no trouble in the Soul; for it is not the
Pleasure of continual Eating and Drinking, nor the Pleasure of Love, nor that
of Rare Dainties, and delicious Bits of large and well-furnish'd Tables, that
make a Pleasant Life; but a sound Judgment, assisted by Sobriety, and
consequently by a serenity and tranquillity of Mind, which thoroughly enquires
into the Causes why we ought to embrace or avoid any thing; and that drives
away all mistaken Opinions, or false Notions of things, which might raise much
perplexity in the Soul. I might add another Passage which I shall only mention,
Venereorum usus nunquam prodest, praeclareque agitur nisi etiam noceat. That
the Delights of Venus are not only unprofitable, but it is very rare if they be
not mischievous. But this ingenuous and plain Declaration of his meaning is
sufficient to justify him from the slanderous Accusations of his Enemies. Let
us nevertheless take notice of the difference and contrariety, that Laertius
puts between Epicurus, and Aristippus; for this difference or antithesis shows
clearly that Epicurus believed no other Pleasure to be the End, but that which
consists in a constant Repose, namely a freedom from pain of Body, and trouble
of Mind. But Aristippus would have it consist in that Pleasure of the Body,
which is chiefly Communicated to us by action, or by which our Senses are
actually pleased and gratified. This contrariety, I say, discovers Epicurus's
Opinion to have been misrepresented, and taken in a wrong sense, such as
Aristippus's deserved. So that all the Reproaches that were due to Aristippus,
have been cast by this mistake upon Epicurus, and the other has escaped
unblemished.

The Famous Dispute of Torquatus in Cicero, plainly discovers this Truth; Hear
his words. I will explain, says Torquatus, what that Pleasure is, that I may
prevent all cause of mistake in them, who understand not the matter, and that I
may make them apprehend that this Doctrine which they fancy to be loose and
debauched, is Grave, Chaste, and Regular. We do not pursue that Pleasure, which
gratifies Nature with a little seeming sweetness, and that is relished by the
Senses with a haut-gust. But we esteem that to be the chief Pleasure, that is
taken without any sense of Pain; for as Thirst and Hunger are allayed by Eating
and Drinking, this deliverance, freedom or privation from that, which is
troublesome and uneasy, causes Pleasure; so in all other things a deliverance
from Pain begets Pleasure. Epicurus therefore admits of no Medium between Pain
and Pleasure; for he maintained, that what appeared to some to be a Medium,
namely, the privation from all Pain, was not only a Pleasure, but the chief
Pleasure. In truth, he that rightly understands himself, and knows what ails
him, or what Condition he is in, he must needs be either in Pleasure, or in
Pain. Now Epicurus was of Opinion, that the chief Pleasure consisted in a
privation from all Pain, and by Consequence, that Pleasure may be diversified
and distinguished, but not augmented, and increased.

We might here produce some Witnesses of this matter. Certainly Seneca may be
heard and credited before all others, as being without doubt a Person of great
worth, unspotted Reputation, of an Exemplary Life and Manners, and addicted to
a Sect which had chiefly drawn upon Epicurus all the shame and disgrace that is
commonly cast upon him instead of Aristippus, being thereunto encouraged by the
evil sense and meaning that they have given to his words. According to
Epicurus, says Seneca, there are two Advantages required to the completing
the Sovereign Good, or Chief Happiness of Man. The First is, That the Body may
be without Pain. The Second, That the Mind may be calm and sedate: These
advantages don't increase, if they be complete; for how can that which is full
increase? When the Body is free from Pain, what can be added to that Freedom?
when the Mind enjoys it self, and is quiet, what may be added to this
Tranquillity? Like as the Serenity of the Heavens is perfect, and cannot admit of
any other new degrees of Light, when it is absolutely clear, and without the
least shadow or mist: Thus the Condition of Man is perfect, when he has taken
care of his Body and Soul, making his chief Happiness to consist in the
advantages of both together in a Freedom from all trouble of Mind, and from all
pain of Body; for we may then say, that such a Man is arrived to the full
accomplishment of all his Desires. And if beside all this, there happens to him
an additional Repose, it don't increase his chief Good, but it only seasons it;
for this complete Happiness, the perfection of the Human Nature, is
comprehended in the quiet of the Body, and the Mind. In which words we may take
notice, that Seneca expresses clearly and plainly Epicurus's Opinion, as it is
related by Laertius.

Moreover, because that Epicurus gave the Name of Chief Good, or Complete
Happiness to a freedom from Bodily Pain, and a perfect Tranquillity of Mind, the
loose and Debauched Persons of his time took encouragement from thence,
mistaking the word Pleasure, and boasting, that they had a Philosopher to
countenance their Debaucheries. For this Reason Seneca argues with them in this
manner in his Book of a Happy-Life. It Is not Epicurus that forces or persuades
them to Luxury and Debauchery, but being accustomed to these Vices, they
endeavor to conceal their Vices under the Covert of Philosophy, and they flock
together when they hear Pleasure mentioned with Praise. Non ab Epicuro impulsi
luxuriantur, sed vitiis dediti luxuriam suam in Philosophiae sinu abscondunt,
and eo concurrunt ubi audiunt laudari Voluptatem.

Without doubt it is not the Pleasure of Epicurus which is esteemed and sought
after; I know how sober and innocent that Pleasure is. But they skip at the
Name of Pleasure, seeking some protection and veil from their Lasciviousness,
and filthy Delights. Nec aestimatur Voluptas illa Epicuri (ita enim me Hercules
sentio quam sobria ac sicca sit) sed ad nomen ipsum advolant, quaerentes
libidinibus suis patrocinium aliquod ac velamentum. My Opinion, says he again,
is, (for I will speak it in despite of the Vulgar) The things that Epicurus
teaches are fair and just, and have something of solid, and serious, if we
consider them exactly; for his Pleasure is reduced to very few things. He
prescribes to it the very same Rules that we do to Virtue, and appoints it to
be Obedient to Nature, which is easily contented. Mea quidem sententia (invitis
hoc nostris popularibus dicam) Sancta Epicurum and recta praecipere, and si
propius accesseris, tristia. Voluptatibus enim illa ad parvum and exile
revocatur, and quam nos Virtuti Legem dicimus, eam ille dicit Voluptati. Jubet
illam parere Naturae; Parum autem est Luxuriae quod Naturae satis est.

Will you then understand what it is? He that says that the Happiness of Life
consists in Idleness, in Good Cheer, in Ease and Wanton Pleasures, and calls
that Happiness, seeks a good Excuse to an evil Cause, and when he comes
flattering himself with the softness of the Name, he follows not that Pleasure
which he hears Praised, but that which he brings with him; and when once he
begins to believe his Vices to be consistent with the Doctrines professed, he
freely adheres to them, no longer disguising and acting them in secret, but
boldly and openly proclaiming them to the World.

Thus he concludes, I don't say what many don't scruple to affirm; That the
Sect of Epicurus is the encourager of infamous Crimes, and lewd Debaucheries.
But this is what I say, it is ill spoken of I confess, but without Cause, and
this cannot easily be discovered, but by more narrowly prying into the very
first grounds of their Opinions. The mere name of Pleasure occasions the
mistake, and casts an odium upon it. Itaque non dico, quod plerique nostrum,
Sectam Epicuri flagitiorum Magistram esse, sed illud dico, male audit, infamis
est and immerito; neque hoc scire quisquam potest nisi interius fuerit
admissus; Frons ipsa dat locum Fabulae, and ad malam spem invitat.

We may after the Testimony of Seneca, bring that of Plutarch, who though he was
an Enemy of Epicurus, yet he has done him so much right, as to say, That the
things that were objected against him rather proceeded from vulgar Mistakes,
than from the Truth of the matter. Besides, in another place he merrily cries
out upon the Pleasure of Epicurus, and his Disciples, O the vast Pleasure and
Felicity that there is in being insensible either of Sorrow or Pain! Elsewhere
he says, Though Epicurus places the Sovereign Happiness in a perfect Rest, and
as it were in a Center of Quiet, etc. And in another place, That young Persons
will learn from Epicurus, that Death does not so much affect us, that the
Riches of Nature are limited, that Felicity and a Happy-Life don't consist in
abundance of Silver, or in Large Possessions, in Dominion, or in Power, but in
a freedom from Pain, in the Government of our Passions, and in that Disposition
of the Mind, which confines all things within the limits of Nature. From hence
it is evident that the chief Happiness of Epicurus is not that Pleasure which
is in Motion, or in the pleasing of our Senses, but rather that which is and
appears in Rest, in a freedom from trouble.

We might here farther add the Testimonies of Tertullian, of St. Gregory
Nazianzen, of Ammonius, of Stobeus, of Suidas, of Lactantius, and of many
others amongst the Ancients, who though being no entire Friends of Epicurus, yet
some of them have declared, that the Pleasure that Epicurus recommends was
nothing else, but a peaceable State agreeing with Nature, and not a mean and
sordid Pleasure. Others have said, That between Epicurus and Aristippus there
was this difference; that Aristippus placed the chief Happiness in the Pleasure
of the Body, but Epicurus in that of the Mind. Others, That the Pleasure which
the Disciples of Epicurus propose to themselves for their End, certainly is not
a sensual and a Bodily Pleasure, but a quiet Temper of the Soul, which is
inseparable from a Virtuous and an Honest Life. Others, as Lactantius, after he
had abated of the warmth of his Style, he says, That Epicurus maintains the
chief Happiness to be in the Pleasures of the Mind, and Aristippus in that of
the Body.

I speak of the Ancients within these two hundred years; that is to say,
toward the end of the ignorant Ages; we have amongst others John Gerson, and
Gemistus Pletho, that speak and verify the same. The first having mentioned
diverse Opinions concerning Happiness, declares, that some are of Opinion that
Man's Happiness consists in the Pleasures of the Mind, or in a peaceable
Tranquillity of Spirit, such as was that of Epicurus, mentioned often by Seneca,
in his Epistles, with very much respect. But, as to the other Epicurus, quoth
he, Aristippus, Sardanapalus, and Mahomet, who placed it in the Pleasures of
the Body, they were no Philosophers. Here we must pardon the ignorance of that
Age, and the common vogue, if he has imagined that there have been two of that
Name. The second Named Gemistus Pletho, Treating of the Delight of
Contemplation, shows, That Aristotle, never taught any other Doctrine than that
of Epicurus, who placed the Chief Happiness in the Pleasures of the Mind. Now
it is not without Reason that I have insinuated, that since these Men, there
has sprung up an Happier and a more Learned Age, that have revived Learning,
that lay almost Languishing; for since that time an infinite number of knowing
Men are risen up, who have entertained better thoughts of that Philosopher, as
Philelphus, Alexander ab Alexandro, Volateranus, Johannes Franciscus Picus, and
many more.

What shall we say then to those who Charge him with a contrary Opinion?
Nothing else but what has been spoken in the Apology of his Life, namely, that
the Stoics who very much hated him for Reasons there expressed at large, have
not only misunderstood his Opinion, but they have also forged and published in
his Name scandalous Books, whereof they themselves were the Authors, that they
might the more easily gain credit to their Malicious Insinuations, and fasten
upon him their Calumnies without suspicion. Now one of the Causes of their
hatred against him was, that Zenon their Principal Leader was naturally
melancholy, austere, rude, and severe, and his Disciples following their Guide,
affected the same Air, and a severe Mien. This has caused the Virtue of the
Stoics or their Wisdom to be represented as some very austere and reserved
thing; and in regard that caused them to be admired and respected by the
Common People, and that we suffer our selves willingly to be carried away to
vainglory, and to be puffed up with Pride, if we don't take great heed to
prevent it, they fancied themselves to be the only possessors of Wisdom; and
therefore they boasted that he alone was the Wiseman, whose Soul was
strengthened and fortified with the Virtue of the Stoics, that he alone was fit
to be a King, a Captain, a Magistrate, a Citizen, (for such were their
Expressions) an Orator, a Friend, Beautiful, Noble, and Rich. And that such a
one never repents, is not touched with Remorse, cannot receive Affronts, is
ignorant of nothing, never doubts of any thing, is free from Passion, is always
at Liberty, full of Joy and Content, like God himself, and several other
qualities they ascribe to him; which caused Plutarch to reproach them in these
words. The Stoics have taught some things far more ridiculous than the Poets.
But Epicurus on the contrary was of a sweeter and more candid Temper, and as he
acted with sincerity and plain-dealing, he could not endure this vanity and
ostentation. So that when he considered besides the weakness of our Human
Nature, and what it was capable of undergoing, and what not, he quickly
understood that all those great boastings which made such noise in the Schools
of the Stoics, were but vain Fictions, when the Glory and the Pride of their
words were removed; therefore he proposed to himself a Virtue that he knew our
Human Nature capable of. And because he observed that Men in all their
Proceedings were naturally carried to some Pleasure, and after he had well
inquired into all the several kinds of Pleasure, there was none more Universal,
more firm, more constant, and more desirable, than that which consists in the
Health of the Body, and the Tranquillity of the Mind; he therefore declared,
that to be the chief End of all Delights, and that Virtue alone was the best
means to obtain it, and consequently, that a Wise or a Virtuous Man, did by his
Sobriety and Chastity, that is to say, by the Virtue of Temperance, preserve
the health of his Body, as far as his Natural Constitution would permit; and
that being assisted by Moral Virtues, by which he appeaseth the Passions of
Lust, Gluttony, Covetousness, and Ambition, he endeavors chiefly to preserve
likewise as much as he is able the Tranquillity of his Thoughts. At the same
time he also maintained, that true Pleasure was not to be found in the Act, or
in the Motion, as Aristippus imagined, but in statu, in a state or manner of
existing, without Pain in the Body, and disquiet in the Mind, as we have
already often declared heretofore. And this was his plain and simple manner of
acting; he cared not to obtain the reputation of the Vulgar by a glossy
Rhetoric, or by a Majestic Deportment, that expressed a great deal of Vanity
in Manners, as Zenon did, nor did he deceive the People, as the other did with
a vain ostentation of things, which takes much with them, though they neither
understand them, nor can practice them.

Now Zenon and the Stoics understanding this simplicity of Manners and
Doctrine, and seeing that many Men of Parts were undeceived, and made no account
of their great and glorious words and promises, conceived so great a prejudice
against him, that they sought always how to defame him, taking occasion from
the word Pleasure, and affirming that he thereby understood sensual and
debauched Pleasure and Excess.

We are not therefore too easily to assent to what they say, nor too readily
give credit to the Report of others, who being imposed upon by their Mistakes,
have exclaimed against him. But if some honest Men have been guilty of this
Error, it is to be supposed, as Seneca observes, that they never knew the
inside of this Sect, but had only some forged Books, or believed the Stoics,
his Enemies; or perhaps though they understood his Opinion, they believed
nevertheless that it was not easy to undeceive the People, as it was
convenient to continue their Clamours against this Philosopher, that they might
declare thereby their hatred to Vice, and Sensual Pleasures, by exclaiming
against their supposed Protector and Incourager.

For the Holy Fathers of the Church as they designed nothing but Piety and good
Manners; they have furiously declaimed not only against all filthy and brutish
Pleasures, but also against their Patrons and Protectors. And because the
Report was already spread abroad, that Epicurus was the Chief, they have
treated him according to the common mistake. So that it is not their fault,
that he has been Scandalized, for he was so before, and what they did, was
only, as we have already hinted, to give a greater abhorrence of Vice, and of
sordid and sensual Pleasures. This is so certainly true, that some, such as
Lactantius, who being otherwise provoked against Epicurus, have nevertheless
retracted their former Opinion. And St. Jerome amongst the rest, writing against
Jovinian, places not Epicurus amongst them, who commonly say, Let us Eat and
Drink, etc. but looks upon him in another manner, than the common Report. It is
wonderful, says this great Saint, that Epicurus, the great Patron of Pleasure,
fills his Books with nothing but Herbs and Fruits, affirming that the plainest
Food is the best, because Flesh, and other dainty Dishes require a great deal
of care and trouble to be fitted for our use, and that there is more Pains in
seeking them, than Pleasure in abusing them; that our Bodies have no need but
of plain Meats and Drinks, that where there is Bread and Water, and such like
Necessaries, we may thereby easily satisfy Nature, but what is over and above
is needless, and tends to gratify our Lust; that our Eating and Drinking is not
for Delight, but to expel Hunger and Thirst; that Wisdom is inconsistent with
the laborious toil of procuring good Cheer; that Nature's Desires are soon
satisfied, and that by moderate Diet and plain Apparel we expel Cold and Hunger.

There is but one passage more that may seem to create some difficulty. It is
that which Cicero objects, as being taken out of the Book wherein Epicurus's
Ends and Designs are described; for he makes him say, That if we take away
Bodily and Sensual Pleasures, he knows no other good. But why may we not easily
suppose that the Stoics, who have been so bold to forge whole Books, and make
Epicurus their Author, have maliciously put this Passage in his Book, and it
being thus abused and falsified, it is come into the hands of Cicero, and
Atheneus? That which makes us suspect this is, First, That Laertius, who has
left us a Catalogue of Epicurus's Books, and consequently ought to know what
was in them, when he relates a passage out of his Book of The End, and others
of the same, says, That they are Fools that impose such things upon Epicurus,
for they are not to be found in the true Copies. And Hesichius assures us that
they are gross Liars, that assert any such thing of him. Secondly, Epicurus
himself complains of their making him speak those words which were against his
Judgment, and his Disciples would never acknowledge that passage; but they have
rather always complained of it, and exclaimed against it. Thirdly, These words
are expressly contrary to those, which are known to be of Epicurus, Res Venereae
nunquam prosunt, and multum est ni noceant, as we have already observed.
Fourthly, That Cicero amongst these Objections that he makes, cannot but
propose this Question, as if Truth himself had forced him to it; What, do you
believe that Epicurus was of this Persuasion, and that his Opinions were
dishonest, sensual, and lewd? For my part I cannot believe it; for I find, that
he declares a great many excellent things, and very virtuous. Fifthly, That
Cicero acknowledges, as he was a very Popular Man, that he did not tie up
himself to speak according to the strict Opinions of the Philosophers, but
agreeable with the Notions of the People. Verum ego non quaero nunc quae sit
Philosophia verissima, sed quae Oratori conjuncta maxim: Not to say that he
could not bar himself from speaking well of Epicurus, as being a Man without
Malice, or rather a right honest Man. Venit Epicurus Vir minime malus, vel
potius Vir optimus. And when he speaks of the Epicureans, he says, that they
are very good Men, that he has never met with a sort of Persons less
malicious; that the Epicureans complain of his endeavoring to speak ill of
Epicurus; that whole Crowds of Epicureans came frequently to visit him, but
that nevertheless he does not despise them. Quos tamen non aspernor; These are
his own words.

Wherein Epicurus, and Aristippus differ.
NOW that we may see exactly in what Epicurus differs from Aristippus, we need
but Examine Laertius. They differ, says he, First, in Relation to the word
Pleasure, in that Epicurus ascribes it not only to that which proceeds from
present action, and the immediate gratification of the Senses, but likewise to
that, which he says is settled firm and abiding, and is found in that sweet
Repose which he Names (...), Tranquillity, and a freedom from Pain; whereas
Aristippus ascribes it to that only which proceeds from action, laughing at
that Tranquillity, and Exemption from Pain of Epicurus, which is like the
Condition of a Sleeping or a Dead Man. They differ therefore in this, that
Epicurus has placed the End or the Happiness of Man in that Pleasure that is
in a continuing state, in statu, or in duration; but Aristippus in that which
is in motion, in motu, transient. Epicurus places it in that of the Mind, but
Aristippus in that of the Body. Epicurus amongst our Pleasures reckons the
remembrance of past advantages, and the expectation of those which are to come;
but Aristippus values them as nothing. But as we have before mentioned, these
Particulars, so we shall at present hint but two things to you. First, That
when Atheneus declares that not only Aristippus, but also Epicurus and his
Disciples declared for the Pleasure that is transient and flitting; this
relates to that Scandal, which has caused some to believe that Epicurus was of
the same Opinion as Aristippus, and which according to the Expressions of
Atheneus, belong to Aristippus properly. These are his words, Aristippus, says
he, being wholly addicted to the Pleasures of the Senses, judges those
Pleasures to be the End and Happiness of Life, and making no account of former
Enjoyments, nor of the expectation of any to come; he knows no advantages, but
such as are present, as the most Debauched Persons do; and as those, who are
immerged in Delights. And his Life was answerable to his Doctrine, for he spent
it wholly in Luxury, and the great expenses that he was at for that purpose; he
never dissembled, nor offered to excuse, but answered in a pleasant manner
jesting, I enjoy Lais, but she don't enjoy me; I live Sumptuously, but if that
were Criminal, it would not be so much practiced in the Festivals of the Gods.
I give fifty Drachms for a Partridge, for which thou would not spare a
Halfpenny: I buy a Dainty Bit dear, for which thou would grudge to bestow
three halfpence. I have not therefore so great a fancy for Pleasure, as thou
have for thy Money.

The Second thing that we must here take notice of, is, that these words of
Seneca, I shall never call an exemption from Pain Happiness, which a Worm, a
Bird, or a Flea enjoys, etc. cannot nor ought to be understood of an exemption
from Pain, or the Pleasure that Epicurus places in a settled Rest, for that
thereby he never understood a Lazy Life, or a Rest like that of a Drone, or of
a Worm, but such a Life as Seneca himself praises, and highly esteems, when he
says, why may not that Rest in which he will dispose and settle the Ages to
come, and will give Instructions to all Men, as well to them that are as shall
be, be convenient for an Honest Man? or when speaking particularly of Epicurus,
he says, Nor is that Person, of whom we are wont to speak hardly, for
maintaining a soft and idle Pleasure, but for such as is consistent with
Reason. As if he should describe it like that which Aristotle represents
proceeding from a Life of Contemplation, or that State of Rest and Tranquillity
which is employed in Speculation, and Meditation, and therefore ought not to be
called Idleness, and Laziness; for Contemplation is such an action, which alone
does complete the Divine Felicity. Besides, the same Aristotle declares, action
is not in motion, but that there is some in Repose, and that Pleasure consists
rather in a Repose, than in Motion.

And what Seneca asserts speaking of Pleasure, that it chiefly consists in
action is much to the purpose. This Pleasure, says he, is extinguished when
the Delight appears in its greatest strength; it is soon accomplished, it soon
passes over, and becomes tedious after its first impress. Now that which comes
and passes away so speedily, and perishes in the use, and in the very act,
has neither substance, solidity, nor duration, but cease the same moment
that it appears, and in the very beginning it looks to the end, and perishes.

It Is true, what Plato speaking of this Concern maintains, that it may as well
be styled Pain as Pleasure, because as it is a Pleasure to pass from Pain to
this; so it is Pain and Grief to fall from Pleasure into the same. Nor is it
near so grievous, to cease from the enjoyment of Pleasure in case no Pain
succeeds, as it is grateful to cease from being tormented with Pain, though no
Delight follows; therefore this State is reckoned to be a State of Pleasure,
rather than of Grief. This is the meaning of Torquatus in Cicero. I suppose
that when Pleasure is removed, nothing immediately succeeds that is uneasy,
unless by accident Pain follows after that Delight. On the contrary, we rejoice
to be delivered from Pain, though none of those Pleasures which gratify the
Senses succeed; from whence we may infer, what a great Pleasure it is to be
free from Pain.

But let us listen to Seneca, who esteems this State of Life to be not only a
Pleasure, but even the chief Happiness of Man.

The Condition and Satisfaction of a Wise Man, according to Epicurus's Opinion.
THE Wiseman, says Seneca, is he, who like the Gods lives pleasant and easy,
without trouble or discontent. Now examine your selves, if you are not often
dejected, froward, and at some times transported with too violent Expectations,
and earnest Desires, which render you uneasy. If your Mind continues always
Day and Night in the same even temper, equal in respect of it self, always
exalted and content; If so, you may then say, that you are arrived to the most
accomplished pitch of Happiness that Men are capable of. But if you are still
in pursuit of all sorts of Pleasures, and seek them every where, know that in
such a case you want as much Wisdom as content. You desire to attain this Chief
Happiness, but you are deceived, if you expect to procure it by the means of
Riches; if you seek Delight amongst Honors, it is to seek it amongst Cares and
Troubles. That which you fancy will give you Pleasure, is the Origin and Cause
of a thousand Torments. Pleasure and Content are the Universal desire of all
Men; but they generally are ignorant of the Methods how to obtain such Content
as may be fixed and permanent. Some seek it in Feastings and Luxury, others in
Riches and Great Offices and Dominion; others in the Favors and Smiles of their
Dalilah's, others in a vain ostentation of their Learning and Parts, which
oftentimes stand the Soul in little stead. Their short-lived and deceitful
Pastimes delude them, such as Ebriety, which for the seeming Pleasure of an
hour, causes many Months of real Sorrow and Trouble: Or the Applauses and
Acclamations of the People, which we have already purchased by much
unquietness, and which will not fail to draw upon us as much more. Remember
therefore that a Wiseman ought to procure to himself such a satisfaction of
Mind as is always firm, constant, and equal. His Soul ought to be like that
part of the World above the Moon, where a continual Serenity reigns. You have
reason therefore to endeavor to be Wise, seeing the Wiseman is always full of
Content. This satisfaction proceeds from his own Conscience, and from his
knowledge of being a virtuous Man. It is impossible to enjoy this quiet, unless
we be Just, Magnanimous, and Temperate. But what, will you say, Don't Fools and
Wicked Men rejoice? No more than Lions, when they have found a Prey. When such
have spent the Night in Debauchery, when they have gorged themselves with Wine,
and consumed their strength in the Converse of Women, and that their Stomachs
can no longer contain the quantity of Meats they have devoured, they may then
well cry out, What miserable Wretches are we? We now plainly perceive that this
Night has been spent in vain and deceitful Pleasures.

Namque ut supremam falsa inter gaudia noctem
Egerimus, nosti --
The Joys and Pleasures of the Gods, and of those that imitate 'em, are never
interrupted, and never have an end. Their satisfaction would fail, if it came
from without. That which Fortune never gave, it can never take from us.

That the Pains and Pleasures of the Mind are greater than those of the Body.
THE last difference that Laertius puts between Epicurus and Aristippus is,
that as Aristippus esteems the Pains of the Body greater and more troublesome
than those of the Mind, he supposes likewise the Pleasures of the Body much
greater and more considerable than those of the Mind; whereas Epicurus is of a
contrary Opinion. In the Body, says he, we can feel only things present, but
the Mind can be sensible of things past, and to come. It Is manifest, that a
great degree of Pleasure, or an extreme Affliction of the Mind contributes more
to an happy or to an unhappy Life, than much Pleasure, or much Pain of the
Body. If the painful Diseases of the Body imbitter the sweetness of our Lives,
those of the Mind ought to render it much more unhappy. Now the Principal
Distempers of the Mind, are the greedy extravagant Desires of Riches, of Glory,
of Dominion, of Sordid and Unlawful Pleasures: Moreover the Disturbances,
Gripings and Sorrows that overwhelm the Mind, those anxious Cares that consume
it, etc.

This seems to be what Ovid thought, when he upbraids us, because we can
readily undergo the scorching heat of the Fire, the sharpnesess of Iron, and
the trouble of Thirst, to free our selves from some Distempers of the Body, but
to heal the Mind, which is of a far greater value, we scruple to suffer any
thing.

Vt Corpus redimas, ferrum patieris and ignes,
Arida nec sitiens ora lavabis aqua
Vt valeas Animo quicquam tolerare negabis;
At pretium pars haec Corpore majus habet.
And I suppose Horace had the same Fancy in the forementioned Passage.

-- Nam cur
Quae feriant oculos festinas demere, si quid
Est animum differs curandi tempus in annum?
Truly as the Soul is infinitely more Noble than the Body, and according to the
Opinion of Aristotle, it alone makes up almost the entire Man; it must
therefore necessarily be much more susceptible as well of the impressions of
Good, of Pleasure and Delight, as of Evil, Trouble, and Disquietness. Besides,
the Diseases of the Mind are so much the more dangerous than the Diseases of
the Body, because these have signs to make us understand them, but the other
are often concealed from us; for our Reason that ought to ponder them is
disturbed, and cannot make a right estimation. Therefore such as are Sick in
Body seek a Remedy from Physic, but such as are Distempered in Mind, from
Philosophy, yet will not obey its Directions. Again, amongst the Diseases of
the Body, those are the greatest and the most dangerous of all, which cast us
into a slumber, and are not felt by the Patient, as a Lethargy, the
Falling Sickness, and that burning Fever which causes a Dilirium. Now there is
scarce any Distemper of the Mind, but ought to be reckoned of as dangerous a
Consequence; and the rather, because they are not known to be what they are,
and oftimes are covered over with a fair show and pretense of contrary Virtues;
for Example, Fury and Wrath, are styled Courage; Fear and Cowardice, usurp the
name of Prudence. In short, Discontent, which is a grief of the Mind, and a
Distemper which generally causes the other Diseases to be more unpleasant, sad
and troublesome, affects nothing more, than to seem to be taken and caused not
without great Provocation and just Resentments. Neither are we to pretend with
Aristippus, That Criminals are commonly punished with Pains and bodily
Torments, as being more severe and uneasy to be undergone. For as the
Legislator or the Judge, has not the same power over the Mind, as over the
Body, so it is as true, that he cannot appoint, that the Offender should be
tortured in his Mind, but in his Body, that so a visible Punishment might be
inflicted upon the Offender, whereby the People might be kept in stricter awe
from Offending: But it follows not from thence, that there is no greater pain
than that, or, that the pain of the Mind may not be a more grievous Torment.

Besides, when a Man is really under the actual sufferings of the Body, or when
he supposes that he shall shortly be so, he fancies in his Mind, that he shall
be tied to the Rack, or perhaps, that his Head shall be cut off; that he shall
be broken upon the Wheel, or burnt at the Stake; that he shall lose his Life in
sight of the World with public Shame, and be accounted a perpetual Ignominy
and Reproach to his Family and dearest Friends; and who cannot but be troubled
at this? And can you imagine any torture of the Body (supposing it to be
separated from all this) that can stand in competition with this inward kind of
Grief and cruel Vexation of the Mind? And for this reason it is, that I have
asserted, that the Pains and Torments are not directly appointed by the Judge,
but are thereby indirectly designed, to the end they might increase the former,
and render the punishment more grievous. To this purpose, have we not seen,
that the Threats and terrible apprehensions of Death, have changed the Hair of
the Head into a hoary color in one Night; have dried up the moisture of the
Body, and have Killed several? This plainly shows, that the last and greatest
Torment, is not that of the Body, but that of the Mind, etc.

I don't here recount the grief and disturbance of Mind, which Envy, Ambition,
and the remorse of Conscience causes in an evil Man, a Tyrant, or ambitious
Wretch; I will at present only insert what Juvenal, Horace, and Persius mention
of it, as a greater Torment, than ever Caeditius, or Rhadamantus ever invented.

Juv. Sat. XIII.
Not sharp Revenge, nor Hell it self can find
A fiercer Torment, than a guilty Mind,
Which day and night does dreadfully accuse,
Condemns the Wretch, and still the Charge renews.
And Horace, Epist. 2. Lib. I.
The fiercest Tyrants never yet could find
A greater Rack, than Envy to the Mind.
And Persius, Sat. III.
Great Father of the Gods, when for our Crimes,
Thou send'st some heavy Judgment on the Times,
Some Tyrant King, the Terror of his Age,
The Type and true Vicegerent of thy Rage;
Thus punish him; set Virtue in his sight,
With all her Charms, adorned with all her Graces bright.
But set her distant, make her pale to see
His Gains outvi'd by lost Felicity.
And, tho some pretend, that a wicked Varlet by his repeated Crimes and long
accustomed habit in Villainy, may attain at last to such an insensibility, as to
have none of those ordinary Remorses, which rack the Minds of the cruellest
Tyrant, and by that means may become Happy: And, besides, that the freedom from
Remorse, makes not a Man Happy, I will farther add, That in the ordinary course
of Life, this supposition is not only scarce to be found, as is easy to be
proved, but altogether impossible; and, that there is no man, though never so
much hardened in Wickedness, that can banish, or expel out of his Mind, this
inward Executioner. Again, such a Wretch cannot be reckoned in the number of
Men, but of Monsters, that are to be Strangled; and not only so, but in the
number of Fools, because he has lost his Sense and Reason, by brutishly
exposing himself to the Rage, if I may so say, and to the Fury of all Men, who
abominate him, and look upon him as a Beast of Prey, or as a Tyrant, that
deserves to be cut off.

Wherein Epicurus differs from the Stoics.
LAertius takes also notice, in what Particulars Epicurus differs in Opinion
from the Stoics, upon account of that irreconcilable hatred they bore him. He
says, that Epicurus having declared, That Virtue is desirable for Pleasure's
sake, they took this pretense to exclaim against him, as if he had spoken of
sordid and sensual Pleasures; saying, That it is unworthily spoken, and
scandalous to maintain, That Virtue was not to be sought for it self, but for
this sort of Pleasure. Amongst others, there was one named Cleanthes, who to
heighten the matter, and render Epicurus more Odious, made this Picture, which
Cicero objects to Torquatus. Fancy to your selves, (said he to his Disciples)
Pleasure finely drawn, sitting upon a Royal Throne, shining in very splendid
and magnificent Attire, attended by all the Virtues, standing about her as so
many Servants, yet acting nothing else, nor performing any other Office, but to
Advise and Whisper her in the Ear; Take heed that you commit nothing
imprudently, and that might offend the Minds of Men, or from whence some
Reluctance and Displeasure may proceed: We are the Virtues, born for to tender
you this Service, and our Office is only to admonish you.

This is the Picture that the Envy and Jealousy of Cleanthes made of
Epicurus's Pleasure. There wanted but one thing more, the saying of a certain
Person. That Epicurus had imitated Paris, who of the three Goddesses, selected
Venus, upon whom he bestowed the Golden Apple. That Epicurus by Pleasure, had
nothing else in prospect but mean and low Pleasures, such as a beautiful Face,
Hair loosly spread, with Perfumes, gaudy Attire, and a wanton Carriage and
Behavior, tending to all Softliness and Effiminacy, to Lust, Lasciviousness
and Debauchery, Altera Achaemenium spirabat vertice odorem,
Ambrosias diffusa comas, and vest refulgens
Ostrum, quam fulvo Tyrium suffuderat auro;
Front decor quaesitus acu, lascivaque crebras
Ancipiti motu jaciebant lumina flammas.


Whereas, he ought to have imitated Hercules, who meeting with Pleasure and
Virtue together, gave the preference to the latter, though Virtue appeared to him
with an austere Countenance, in a careless Undress, making her approach with a
Masculine Aspect, accompanied with a becoming Modesty, as the Poet says; --
Frons hirta, nec unquam
Composita mutata coma, stans vultus and ore
Incessuque viro propior, laetique pudoris.


That Virtue, (according to Epicurus) is essentially related to Pleasure, as it
tends to the main end and design of an happy Life.
BUt there is no need that we should stop here to deface this Picture of
Cleanthes, or busy our selves in discovering what Malice and Detraction have
invented. What has been already spoken, may suffice for that purpose; and the
rather, because we have plainly made it appear, that the Pleasure meant by
Epicurus, is not that soft, sensual, and debauched Pleasure represented in this
Picture, but that which he intends, is quite contrary, Pure and Undefiled, viz.
An Indolency of the Body, and the Tranquillity of the Mind, but chiefly the
latter. So that this kind of Pleasure cannot hinder any from seeking after
Virtue, seeing that it is in this only that Felicity or Happiness of Life
consists; and that Epicurus proposes no more than the Stoics themselves do,
who affirm, That Virtue is sufficient to procure a pleasant and a happy Life.

And truly this Maxim alone does sufficiently evince, That what Shift or Excuse
soever they may seem to frame, yet they suppose Virtue designed for no other
end, but to live well and happily. So, that an happy Life is desirable for it
self; but Virtue is not so much desirable for itself, as for an happy Life.
Now, when I mention this nice Distinction, I include Seneca himself, who makes
Pleasure an accidental Companion only, or something that is casually incident
to Virtue; like as a small Weed, which grows and flourishes amongst Wheat.
This seems Popular and Taking. And we may truly compare Virtue to the Wheat;
but as we seek and covet the Wheat, not simply for the sake of Wheat, nor for
that small Weed that grows amongst it, but for the uses of Life that we expect
from it: So Virtue is not sought after simply for it self, or for its own sake,
or for any slight thing that may intervene, but chiefly in order to Happiness,
or which amounts to the same, for this kind of Pleasure that we now treat of.
Therefore, when he adds, Thou art mistaken when thou ask, what that thing is
which moves us to seek after Virtue, for it is to ask for something above that
which is the highest of all; I seek and desire Virtue it self; I desire it for
it self; there is nothing better; it carries with it a sufficient Reward. It is
manifest, that this Question is full and to the Purpose; and we may say, That
when we desire something beyond Virtue, we don't desire a trivial thing, but
something that is above the highest and Supreme. It is true, that in order to
all the means which are used to render Life happy, it is impossible to find any
more conducive thereunto than Virtue. Nevertheless, we are to esteem an happy
Life above Virtue; for Virtue only relates to Happiness, or an happy Life, as
to its proper End.

And therefore Aristotle seems to be very exact in this point, when he speaks
of that Happiness which Virtue above all things can procure. Is is, says he,
evident, That the recompense or reward of Virtue, is something very Excellent,
something Divine and Happy. And elsewhere, That Felicity is not a thing that
happens to us by a Divine appointment alone, but is to be obtained by Virtue,
or by Learning, or by our Endeavors; there is nothing can be more Excellent,
nothing more Happy. Besides, he makes this distinction with Plato and Architas.
There are some things says he, That are desirable for themselves, and not for
any thing else, as Felicity; and others are desired for something else, and not
for themselves, as Riches; and other things, are desired for themselves, and
for others, as Virtue. This I instance on purpose that one may see what sort of
Men may be opposed to Seneca, when he is so confident, that Virtue cannot nor
ought not to be desired for any thing else but it self. By this Opinion, we
offer no wrong to Virtue; for just as much as we value Pleasure, Felicity, and
the chief Good, so much do we praise and esteem Virtue, which leads us to, and
is the proper means of obtaining them.

But not to busy our selves any longer about this matter, it suffices to
relate here what Cicero makes Torquatus speak according to the Sentiments of
Epicurus. The Text is long, but excellent, and it explains and decides, as I
may say, the whole Matter. When therefore after a long Dispute, it was
concluded, That whatsoever is Right, Just, and Praiseworthy, tends to live
Pleasantly, and with Delight, Torquatus continues thus to speak; In regard
therefore that this is the chief and supreme Good, which the Greeks have called
by the name of End, because it tends to no other thing, and that all things
center in it; We ought to confess, that to live with delight and Pleasure, is
the chief Good or Happiness. They who place it in Virtue alone, and whose
Understandings are dazzled with the glory of the Name, not rightly comprehending
what Nature requires, may be freed from a gross Mistake, if they please to
hearken to Epicurus; for to instance in all your laudable and excellent
Virtues, and First, of Wisdom, Who can believe them to be Praiseworthy or
desirable, if they procured no Pleasure? Truly, as we don't esteem the Art of a
Physician for the Art sake, but for the Preservation of Health; so we should
never desire Wisdom, which is the Art of Living, if it were Insignificant and
Useless: But as it drives us in the search, and helps us in the obtaining true
and real Pleasure, we earnestly desire and pursue after it. You understand now
what Pleasure I speak of; and lest the ambiguous acceptance of words should
render our Discourse untelligible or doubtful, I must explain my self, That it
is Wisdom alone that banisheth Sorrow and all uneasiness of Mind, that supports
us under our anxious Fears, that curbs the fury of our Lusts and Appetites, and
causes us to live Peaceably and Easy. These are the unsatiable Appetites, that
ruin not only every particular Person, but also Families, and oft-times the
whole Commonwealth. From these Appetites proceed Hatred, Quarrels, Discords,
Seditions, Wars. And these Passions break not only outwardly upon other Persons
with a blind Fury, but struggle inwardly, and War within themselves in our
Minds. It is this that must needs cause our anxious and uneasy Life. So that
the Wise Man alone having banished all boundless and irregular Desires,
confines himself, and is satisfied within the limits of Nature, and by that
means may spend his time without Grief, Sorrow, or Fear. If therefore we see
all our Life disturbed by Error and Ignorance, and that it is Wisdom only which
delivers from the Affronts of our vain Desires, and groundless Fears, and that
advises us to bear with Patience the injuries of Fortune, and teaches the ways
that lead to Rest and Tranquillity, ought we not to say, that Wisdom is
desirable, because of Pleasure; and that we are to shun Folly, because of the
Mischief which attends it, by bringing Trouble and Disturbance to our Minds?

By the same Reason we will say, that Temperance is not desirable for it self,
but because it brings Peace into our Minds; it sweetens and preserves them in
quiet. Because it is Temperance that directs us to follow Reason, either in
things that we ought to desire and follow, or things that we are to shun and
avoid; for it is not sufficient to judge what ought to be, and what ought not
to be, but we must likewise continue constant and resolved, in what we have so
judged. Now, there are many who cannot remain firm in what they have resolved,
but being overcome by a seeming and mistaken Pleasure, give themselves over to
the slavery of their Lusts, without foreseeing what will from thence ensue; and
from hence it happens, that for a small and trivial Pleasure, which might be
otherwise obtained, and which we might easily want without Pain, they fall into
great Sicknesses, into Loss, into Shame, and incur many times the penalty of
the Laws and Courts of Judicature. But such as will so enjoy their Pleasures,
that no inconveniency nor trouble may thereby ensue, and who continue constant
in their well-grounded Resolutions, for fear of being overcome by false
Pleasures, and lest they should be persuaded to do what they understand ought
not to be done; such I say, find a great pleasure in denying themselves these
seeming Delights. They oftentimes easily undergo small Pains and Troubles, lest
by shunning of these, they might fall into greater. From hence we may learn,
that Debauchery is not to be shunned for its own sake, nor Sobriety to be
desired because it declines some Pleasures, but because it procures greater
and more substantial ones.

We shall find the same Arguments for Fortitude; for it is neither Labor, nor
Pain, nor Patience, nor Constancy, nor Industry, nor Courage, nor Watchfulness,
that draw us of themselves; but we are persuaded by these actions, that we may
live without Trouble or Fear, and that we might free our selves as much as is
possible from that which incommodes either the Mind or the Body; for oftentimes
the Calm of our Life is disturbed with the extraordinary fear of Death; and it
is a miserable thing to be oppressed with Pain, and to bear it with a mean and
feeble Courage; insomuch, that by this weakness of Spirit, many have lost their
Parents, many their Friends, and many their Native Country, nay, have
altogether lost themselves. But a generous, stout and courageous Spirit, is
free from such Cares and Troubles, because it despises Death, and is so
provided to receive Grief and Pain, that it knows the greatest are cured by
Death, and the least have diverse intervals of Rest; and that as for moderate
Griefs, we are Masters of them. Besides, a noble Spirit considers, that if the
Pains be not extraordinary, they are easily suffered; but if they be very
grievous, we shall then willingly surrender and quit our Life, which in such a
case, becomes unpleasant to us; so that we leave it in the same manner as we go
off a Theater. From hence we may conclude, that Fear and Cowardice are not in
themselves blameworthy; neither do Courage and Patience of themselves, merit
Praise. But the first are slighted, because they increase Pain and Sorrow, and
the other are desired, because they procure real Pleasure.

There remains nothing else to be examined but Justice, of which we may almost
say the same. For as I have already demonstrated, that Wisdom, Temperance and
Fortitude, are so joined with Pleasure, that they cannot be separated from it,
we ought to say the same of Justice, which is not only inoffensive to all Men,
but does also constantly bring with it such advantages, as by the strength of
its own nature, does quiet and settle the Thoughts, by affording continual
hopes of never wanting those things which an honest Mind may desire. And as
Timerousness, Covetousness, and Cowardice do perpetually torment the Mind, and
are continually vexing and disturbing its quiet: So where Injustice bears sway
in the Soul, it begets much Trouble and Vexation; and if it has committed any
evil action, though never so secretly, yet it can never be assured that it shall
always remain undiscovered. Jealousy and fear of being found out, do commonly
attend evil Actions, and we suppose every one to be our Accuser, and ready to
Inform against us. Nay, some out of fear of being Discovered, have been their
own Accusers. If some think their Riches a sufficient shelter, and capable of
quieting their Conscience, yet they have such a dread of the Justice of God in
punishing their Crimes, that upon a due resentment of this, their Thoughts
labor under a perpetual Agony and Disturbance. Now, their wicked Actions can
never be able so much to lessen the anxiety of their Life, as the gripings of a
Wounded Conscience, or the Laws of the Country, and the hatred of their
Acquaintance, have to increase it. Nevertheless, such is the unsatiable desire
of some Men after Riches, Luxury, Honor, Dominion, etc. that in the obtaining
of them, they will stick at no indirect Means; so that nothing but a severe
Punishment inflicted on them by the Laws, is able to stop their Career. True
Reason therefore directs all Men of sound Judgment to observe the Rules of
Justice, Equity and Fidelity, which are the best means to procure to our selves
the good Esteem and Love of others, and which is absolutely necessary to render
our Lives Pleasant and Sedate: And the rather because hereby we have no
temptation to do what is ill, because that the desires which proceed from
Nature may easily be appeased without doing wrong to any Person; and as for
other vain Desires, we are not to regard them; for they prompt us to nothing
that is really worthy seeking after; and Injustice it self brings a greater
damage to us than the recompense it can be able to make us, by the seeming good
things it brings along with it. Therefore we cannot say, That Justice is of it
self desirable, but only because it is attended with a great deal of Pleasure
and Content; for we are not a little pleased with the esteem and good will of
others, which renders our Life Comfortable and Pleasant. Thus we don't believe
that we ought to shun Vice only because of the inconveniences that fall upon
the Wicked, but chiefly because it never suffers the Mind to be at rest, where
it has once taken possession.

I might here mention the Objections that are brought against this Opinion, but
they relate to nothing but sensual and dishonest Pleasures, which Epicurus
abhors in express words. I will only take notice, that the Pleasure that is
here understood, is such true real and natural Pleasure, in which our Happiness
consists. We therefore say, That Virtue is inseparably accompanied with it,
being the real and genuine cause of it; for where that is supposed, Happiness
immediately attends, and when that is removed, Pleasure it self must needs
decay. In the same manner as the Sun is said to be inseparable from the Day,
because it alone is the true and necessary cause thereof; for as soon as the
Sun appears over our Horizon, the Day must needs be, and when it withdraws, the
Day dis-appears. Now, the reason why Epicurus supposes Virtue to be the
efficient cause of Happiness, is because he thinks that Prudence does as it
were contain all other Virtues; for all the rest proceed from this, and have in
a great measure a dependence upon her.

CHAP. III. Wherein an Happy Life does consist.
WHat we have already discoursed of, tends to little else than to make a plain
discovery of Epicurus's Opinion. But now we must come closer to the Matter, and
strictly examine whether he had sufficient ground to say, That Pleasure is the
main End.

Here we must weigh two of his chief Maxims, First, That all Pleasure is of it
self and of its own nature a real Good; and on the contrary, That all Grief and
Pain, is an Evil. The Second is, That notwithstanding sometimes we must prefer
some sort of Pains before some sort of Pleasures.

Whether all Pleasure be good of it self?
IN respect of the first Maxim; It is not without ground, that Epicurus
asserts, That all Pleasure is of it self good, though by accident it happens
sometimes otherwise, for all Creatures are of themselves so inclinable to
Pleasure and Delight, that it is the first and chief thing that they naturally
covet; nor do they willingly reject any Pleasure that is offered them, unless
it chance to be accompanied by some Evil that may after procure a Pain, and so
cause us to repent of its first acceptance. And truly, as it is the nature of
Good, to invite and persuade the Appetite to love and embrace it, so we can
give no Reason why all Pleasure should not be of it self Lovely, and to be
desired, seeing there is none but in it self is pleasing and desirable, and
which does of it self incline our Appetites. So that if we refuse any, we
refuse them not as Pleasures, but because of some inconveniences that are
annexed, and will infallibly attend them.

Now, to illustrate this more plainly by an Example, There is no Person but
will allow Honey to be naturally sweet; yet if Poison happens to mixed with it,
whereby the Poison it self does also become sweet, we shall then have a real
aversion for the sweetness of the Honey; but this is by accident; for the Honey
of it self is naturally sweet and pleasing to our Taste. So that if we have any
dislike, we may say it is not really for the sweetness of the Honey, but for the
Poison that is mixed with it, and for the Mischief that Poison will bring; for
if it were separated from the Honey, we should then willingly taste of it. Now,
adjust any Pleasure whatsoever to this Example, and you will easily perceive it
to be never otherwise; for we shall always eschew the Evil, but not the
Pleasure it self, when distinct and separated from the Evil: For either it is
the thing from whence it is taken, or the action that is joined to it, or the
damage that ensue either from the thing, or from the action, or the pain and
grief that will attend it, which proceed from the Thing, from the Action, or
from the Damage.

And to make the matter still appear more obvious and intelligible. Suppose
that the same Pleasure is to be drawn from a Thing or Action, that neither Law
nor Custom, nor Honesty prohibit; suppose that from this Action or thing, no
damage or prejudice will happen, either to our Health, Reputation, or Estate:
Suppose in a word, that no Punishment will attend it, nor Grief, nor
Repentance, neither in this Life nor the next: And you will plainly understand
that nothing can hinder it to be esteemed a real Good, and real Advantage; and
if at present it is not so reputed, this proceeds not from the nature of the
Thing, but from the Circumstances that I have mentioned.

Aristotle also proves the thing by an Argument taken from Pain, which is
opposite to Pleasure: All the World (says he) are agreed, that Pain is an
Evil, and to be avoided. Now, that which is contrary to a thing that is to be
avoided, and a real Evil, is good; therefore Pleasure is a real Good. Now; to
enlarge upon this Reason of Aristotle; Is it not manifest, That all Pain in
general, is of it self Evil and Hurtful, and by consequence every Animal has
naturally an aversion against it? So that if at any time it is called Good, it
is only by accident, in regard it has some good thing that is joined to it,
which obliges us to love and desire it. But if you remove from Pain all hopes
or expectation of obtaining any good thing, either Honest, Profitable, or
Pleasant, there is no Man so foolish as to wish for it, or seek after it. As
this is undeniable, so it is apparent that if all Pain be of it self Evil, and
not good but by accident, all Pleasure being contrary to Pain, is of it self
good and an evil by Accident.

Some object, That a Temperate Man flies from Pleasures, and that he that is
Wise, seeks rather a freedom from Pain. That there are some Pleasures which are
impediments to Wisdom, and the rather because they are Violent and Furious, as
all Venereal Pleasures generally are: That there are others which are not only
hurtful, because they dull the Understanding, beget Diseases, and cause
Poverty, but are also filthy and infamous. But, First, The Temperate and
Prudent Man, flies not from all Pleasures; for it is plain, That he seeks after
such as are pure and honest; and if he avoids some, it is not because they are
only Pleasures, but because inseparable from actions which are certainly
attended with Destruction, which a Prudent Temperate Man ought not to be guilty
of for the enjoyment of a present Pleasure. In the same manner as we fly from
Poison sweetened, not because it is sweet, but because it is deadly, and brings
a Mischief with it, which undoubtedly ought not to be bought at so dear a rate.
Besides, it is plain, That Pleasures alone are no impediments of Wisdom or
Prudence, but rather the Actions that accompany them; such actions I mean by
which the Spirits are too much spent, whereby the strength of the Mind is
weakened, and the Judgment blinded. So, that when these Mischiefs are charged
upon Pleasure, it is a Paralogism or deceitful way of Arguing, called by
Aristotle, Non causae ut causae; when that which is not the Cause, is taken for
the Cause; as if the Evil which ought to be ascribed to the Poison, be
attributed to the Honey, or to the Sweetness. Thus by consequence, that which
may be said in respect of Diseases and Poverty, and other inconveniences which
commonly succeed, is that Pleasure simply considered as it is Pleasure, is not
the cause of these Evils, but rather Gluttony, or the excess of Wine and Meats
prepared with Sawces, which tempt us to exceed the Bounds of Moderation, whence
proceed Fevers and other grievous Distempers. So also from the excess of Venery
proceed the Disease of the Gout and other shameful Maladies, accompanied with a
numerous Train of other Mischiefs. Thus the same may be said in respect of the
Infamy which we commonly ascribe to Pleasures; for it rather regards the
actions that accompany them, which are of themselves contrary to good Manners,
and therefore are reputed Vicious and Dishonest for this reason; for Instance,
The Laws prohibit not the pleasure in Adultery, but the action of Adultery it
self, which being forbidden and infamous in it self, causes the pleasure that
it procures, to be esteemed also filthy and infamous. But suppose in this case
there were no prohibition, as in the Estate of pure Nature: Or, suppose that it
happened, that the Wife of this Man, had been the Wife of the present
Adulterer, here he had enjoyed the same Pleasure, which in that case had not
been reckoned of ill Repute, because that action which accompanies it, had not
been then forbidden nor dishonest. From whence we may conclude, That Pleasure
is not blameworthy in it self, but for the Circumstances that accompany it.
Some answer, That though Pleasure be no Evil, yet it is necessary to place it in
the number of the Evils, because of the Common People, who being inclined to
Pleasure, ought like crooked Trees to be bent a contrary way, and by that means
to be made strait. But Aristotle answers, That it is not convenient to
entertain them with these kind of Discourses, because when it concerns us, as
in the case of the Passions and Actions, we give not so much credit to the
Words as to the Thing it self. From whence it happens, that when the Words
agree not with what the Senses apprehend, they are despised; and though they
comprehend something that is good, yet they are thereby baffled. Therefore
Aristotle seems to intimate, That it is more reasonable not to place the
Pleasures amongst the Evils, seeing the Senses are of a contrary persuasion;
and when they are barely looked upon as Pleasures, they approve of them, and
judge them good; but it is more reasonable to discover and lay open the Evils
that frequently accompany such Pleasures, which cause a prudent and considering
Man to abstain from them, lest he being tempted thereby, should be drawn into
so great Mischiefs.

If these Answers of Aristotle will not satisfy, nothing can hinder us from
exclaiming against Pleasure it self, supposing those to be Pleasures which
cause much more Evil, than they procure Good. For when it concerns us to
persuade, it is the same thing, to say, That Pleasure, or the Action that
accompanies the Pleasure, is Wicked, to conclude that we are therefore to shun
it, by reason of the Evils which infallibly attend and proceed from both.

Whether the Opinion of the Stoics in respect of Good and Evil, be Justifiable.
WE might here enter into a large Field of Dispute with the Stoics, who
pretend, That there is nothing Good, but that which is Honest; and nothing
Evil, but that which is Dishonest. But hereby we should only trifle away our
time in unnecessary Disputes; for in short, it is manifest, that they have
raised a Dispute about the bare Name, when at the same time they have limited
and confined the thing it self, ( viz. the Notion of Good) according to their
own Fancy, which all Mankind besides, take in a large Sense: For whereas, other
Men place several things besides Virtues, in the number of good things, as
Health, Pleasure, Glory, Riches, Friends, etc. And besides Vices, they reckon
several other things amongst Evils, as Sickness, Pain, Shame, Poverty, Enemies,
etc. The Stoics have rather named these things Indifferent, or neither Good
nor Evil. But this seems very absurd and contradictory, to take Health and
Sickness, Pleasure and Pain, for the same things, etc. They have endeavored to
feign new Words, and call Health, Pleasure, Glory, and other things (...),
Promota, Assistants: As if they should say, that they were not really Good, but
such things as did approach the nearest to Virtue, and lead us to that which is
the chief and only Good. The same Fancy they have had of Diseases and Pain;
they have named them (...), Abducta, remota: As if they should say, that they
were things less Noble, and separated from Virtue; for when it concerns us to
make a Choice, those are preferred, and these are forsaken. This is their way
of Discourse, which I think not worth Answering any otherwise than as Cicero
does, when he cries out, O the great strength of Mind, and the brave Subject,
to raise a new Doctrine! O magnam vim ingenii causamque justam cur nova
existeret disciplina! The Stoics argue, and with their weak Reasonings, would
maintain, That Pain is no Evil; Concludunt ratiunculis Stoici cur dolor non sit
malum, etc. As if Men were only troubled about the Word, and not the Thing.
Wherefore must you Zeno, deceive me with your subtle Niceties, and new coined
Words (...) and (...); for when you tell me that what looks grievous, is no
Evil, you put me at a stand. I would desire to know how that which seems to me
most prejudicial and hurtful, is no Evil in it self. Nothing is Evil, as you
pretend, but that which is Dishonest and Vicious. These are but Words, neither
can you hereby remove the difficulty. I understand very well, that Pain and
Grief are not criminal Evils. You need not trouble your self to tell me that;
but show me whether it be an indifferent thing to suffer Pain, or to be free
from it. You say, That it is indifferent, as to the Happiness of Life, seeing
that consists in Virtue alone: But in the mean while, what you call Pain, is to
be reckoned amongst those things that you are to avoid, and by consequence is
an Evil. When you pretend that Pain is no real Evil, but only something uneasy
to be suffered, etc. It is to speak at large what all the World besides name in
one word, Evil. And when you say, That there is nothing Good, but what is
Honest, and nothing Evil, but what is Dishonest, it is to vanquish in Words,
but not in Sense; it is to express Desires, and prove Nothing. Doubtless, this
is an undeniable Truth; All that Nature hates, ought to be esteemed in the
number of Evils; and all that is grateful to it, is to be reckoned on the
contrary.

Whether at any time Pain ought to be preferred before Pleasure.
THE Second thing to be Examined, before we conclude about Epicurus's Opinion,
is, Whether we should sometimes avoid Pleasure to embrace Pain. This Question
depends very much upon the former; for if any Pleasure offers it self of that
sort which Plato calls Pure, and disengaged from any mixture of Grief and
Trouble; that is to say, such as is never to be succeeded by any future Pain,
neither in this Life, nor in that which is to come; or if any Pain offers it
self, such as may be styled Pure, and free from any Pleasure, that is, such as
can never be supposed to yield any Satisfaction: No Man can give any reason why
such a Pleasure ought not to be accepted, and such a Pain avoided. But if any
Pleasure offer it self, which might hinder us from obtaining a greater, or
which will be attended by a Pain that may cause us to repent the suffering our
selves to be drawn away to it; or if a Pain offers it self, which may turn away
a greater, or which may be followed by a Pleasure very great, there is no
Reason can persuade us the shunning such a Pleasure, and embracing such a Pain.
Therefore Aristotle observes, That Pleasure and Pain are the Criteria or
distinguishing Marks by which we ought to judge, whether any thing is to be
accepted or avoided. Now, any Wise Man will decline Pleasure, and embrace Pain,
if he sees that Repentance will follow, or that by admitting a little Pain, he
may avoid a greater. But Torquatus plainly clears the Doubt. And to the end we
may easily see from whence the Mistake arises among those who accuse Pleasure,
and approve of Pain, I will briefly tell you how it is, and expound unto you
what that Author of Truth, and Encourager of an happy Life, has said. No Man
despises, hates, or shuns Pleasure, because it is Pleasure, but because that
such as know not how to pursue Pleasure, and keep it within its due bounds,
fall into great Mischiefs. Nay, there is none that loves and seeks after Pain,
because it is Pain, but because it happens sometimes, that by Labor and Pain
we procure to our selves some great Pleasure: As to instance in some
Particulars; Does ever any Man undertake any laborious Exercise or Task of the
Body, unless he expects to reap some Advantage by it? Now, can any body
reasonably blame him who embraces a Pleasure that is not accompanied with any
Inconveniency, or him that flees from a Pain that can procure no Advantage? But
we justly blame and condemn those, who being enticed by the allurements of
present Pleasures, blinded by their Passions, foresee not the Mischiefs and
Inconveniences that will from thence arise: And those are in the like Error who
are governed by a weakness of Mind, that is to say, for fear of Labor and
Pain, abandon their Duty and Station. But it is no difficult matter herein to
distinguish aright; for in a time of liberty, when it is in our power to choose,
and that nothing hinders us from acting what pleases us best, all Pleasure is
to be embraced, and all Pain to be avoided. But it happens, that at some times
and upon certain junctures of Affairs, that we ought to decline Pleasure, and
accept of things that are Uneasy. The Wiseman therefore makes a prudent and
discreet Determination in this Affair, viz. To reject such Pleasures by the
absence of which, we may enjoy greater; and to suffer those Ills, by undergoing
of which, we may avoid more Mischievous.

Let us add to this, the general Consent of Plato, Socrates, and Aristotle, who
make use of the same Rule to distinguish by. Let us not forget the Opinion of
Cicero, who would have us proceed as if all the Pleasures, and all the Delights
present and to come were set before us, and poised in a Balance, for says he,
If you weigh the present Pleasures with the future, we are always to choose the
greatest and the most numerous; but if we weigh Evils with Evils, we are to
choose the least and the fewest. But if you weigh the present Pleasures with the
future Evils, or the present Evils with the future Pleasures, in such a case,
you must choose the Pleasures if they out balance, but on the contrary, if they
be Evils.

Of the first Good that Nature has in it is View.
THat we may come at last to Epicurus's Opinion, That Pleasure is our main End,
we must consider, that the Reason that induced him to this Opinion was, That he
considered Pleasure generally and simply in its own Nature, or else as it is
managed and directed by Prudence and Wisdom: for it is in this manner also,
that Alexander observes, That we are to distinguish the Matter, when he says,
That Pleasure according to the Judgment of Epicurus, is the first Good that
Nature pursues, or the first Good unto which we are Naturally bent and
inclined; but afterward this Pleasure is regulated and directed by Wisdom and
Prudence. Esse quidem Voluptatem ex mente Epicuri primum familiare, primum, and
congenitum bonum, primum aptum accomodatumque Naturae; verum deinceps quasi in
ordinem redigi talem Voluptatem. Wherefore, as we shall speak hereafter of this
last, which with Epicurus, is nothing else but a freedom from Pain, and a
Tranquillity of Mind, let us at present say something of the First, and let us
examine if this Pleasure understood in a general sense be really this Primum
Naturae familiare, or the first and chief Good that Nature goes in quest of;
for, it remains a great Question among the Philosophers. And it seems as in the
order of good things that are desirable, there is one thing that is the
ultimate and chief, so ought there to be one thing first, which may be the
beginning of all our Desires. Some, says Cicero, Conceive Pleasure or Delight,
to be the first Good, others an exemption, or a freedom from Pain; for as soon
as any Creature is born, it naturally desires and labors after an indolence or
freedom from Pain. Others place the first good things of Nature, amongst those
which they call our Being, Life, Perfection, the preservation of all our
Members entire and in Health, our Senses, Strength, Beauty, and such like.

Now, among these Opinions, the first and second is included in that of
Epicurus, for he places our exemption from Pain among those things we call
Pleasure. The third Opinion being that of the Stoics, is less probable; for
though we may say, that every Creature desires to have its Being, Life, Health,
Perfection and Preservation of its several Parts, etc. Nevertheless, we must
observe, that all these things are desired, because it is pleasant to enjoy
them. And therefore, if these things are desirable for being Pleasant,
doubtless Pleasure is the first good thing, or holds the chief place among
those things that are desired. And this is probably what Aristotle meant when
he said, That Pleasure is common to all living Creatures, and the inseparable
Companion of our free and voluntary Actions; for we perceive, that what is
Honest, is Pleasurable, as well as what is Useful. Besides, Pleasure is born
and bred up with us from our very Cradle. Therefore it is to no purpose to
endeavor to wean our selves from this Inclination, with which our Natures are
naturally tinctured. This plainly discovers to us two things; First, That though
we commonly reckon three sorts of good things, viz. The Honest, the Profitable,
and the Pleasant: The Pleasant or Pleasurable, which is nothing else but
Pleasure it self, is so intermixed with the rest, that it don't seem to be a
distinct Species of it self, but part of the common Stock, which renders the
others Good and Desirable; as if that which is Honest and Useful, were only to
be desired because it is Pleasing and agreeable. Secondly, That Pleasure being
common unto all sensible Creatures, and so fixed and settled in our very first
Desires, that we have not a liberty of refusing it, seems verily that this
should be the first Good that we wish for or desire, Primum expetibile, primum
familiare; for these are the ordinary Terms, Primum expetitum accomodatumque
Naturae.

Epicurus therefore seems to have dealt more heartily and sincerely, than all
the rest, when he declared, That Pleasure, Est primum Naturae accomomodatum;
and that it is that, In quam tandem definimus, quatenus Animalia omnia simul ac
nata sunt, sponte ipsa Natura and citra ullum ratiocinium ipsam complectantur
and dolorem refugiant. Let us but hearken to Torquatus in Cicero. Epicurus,
says he, teaches, That every Animal as soon as it is born, desires Pleasure,
as its chief Good, and delights in the enjoyment of it, but hates Pain, as its
great Evil; shuns it, and flees from it as much as it is able; this it
practices while it is not corrupted, then Nature judges aright and without
mistake. There is no need of Reasoning and Disputing in these Cases, or to seek
for Causes, why Pleasure is desirable, and Pain to be avoided, we our selves
can as easily judge of this matter, as of the Fire, that it is Hot, the Snow
White, and the Honey Sweet.

Maximus of Tire teaches the same Doctrine; Pleasure, says he, more ancient
than Reason or Art, goes before Experience, and stays not for Time. But that
violent desire we have for it, and which is coaeval with our Bodies, is as the
foundation of the Creature's well-being; so that if we renounce it, all that
shall be born, must immediately Perish. Man after he comes to years, may by
Experience and Industry, arrive to a competent degree of Knowledge, Reason, and
Understanding, (which is so much Extolled) naturally and of his own accord; but
from his Infancy he loves Pleasure, and avoids Pain, without any help or
Instruction, for it is Pleasure that delighst him, and Pain that annoys him. If
Pleasure were a thing of no value, we should not bring it so early into the
World with us, nor would it be the first thing necessary for our Preservation.
But it is not necessary, from what we have here said, that you should conclude,
That Pleasure is Man's chief Good or Happiness; for as Eudoxius says in
Aristotle, As in all things, that which is desired, is Good, so that which is
chiefly desired, ought to be the chief Good, or that which every thing desires,
is chiefly desirable; therefore what every thing desires, must be the chief
Good; but that is Pleasure; therefore Pleasure is that chief Good. Let us here
now admire the Wisdom and Foresight of the Great Creator and Author of Nature,
That in regard all our Actions and Operations are of themselves painful and
troublesome, and these also, as Aristotle terms them, being Natural, as Seeing,
Hearing, etc. He has caused them all to be sweetened with Pleasure; and the
more necessary these Operations are for the preservation of our Species, the
greater Pleasure Nature has allotted them; otherwise all Creatures would
neglect or forget not only the act of Generation, but even Eating and Drinking
it self, if there were not certain natural Instigations that stir and move us,
and by causing some kind of Pain and Uneasiness, minds us of the Action, which
the Pleasure that ought to appease this Pain and Uneasiness, does promote and
encourage, which is a manifest Proof, that these sorts of Pleasures, are not of
themselves Evil, though Men abuse them afterward by Intemperance, contrary to
other Animals.

Neither is it requisite here to hint again, that by the name of Pleasure, we
don't mean those gross sensual Pleasures of Luxury, Effeminacy, delicious
Meats, Revellings, and the Debauchery of Women: In short, such as the Sages, as
( Maximus observes) exclaimed against, styling them, Sardanapali scilicet
Luxus, Medica mollities, Ionicae deliciae, Siculae mensae, Sybariticae
saltationes, Corinthiae meretrices, etc. but generally all that we can call and
is generally styled by the name of Joy, Pleasure, Contentment, Satisfaction,
Delight, Sweetness, Pleasantness, a peacable State, Quietude of Thought, secure
Tranquillity, etc. which are nothing else but synonymous Names for Pleasure. We
must only here remember, That what we have already observed, is one of
Aristotle's Principles; That whatsoever we make choice of, is always
accompanied whith Pleasure: And seeing there are three sorts of things named
Good, according to Vulgar Distinction, the Honest, the Useful, and the
Pleasant; The latter is common to the rest, for the Honest and the Useful seem
to be also Pleasant and Grateful. From hence therefore we may infer, that Good
and Pleasant, are but different Names for the same thing; and that Good is
Good, and described to be what all Creatures desire, only because it is
grateful and pleasing; and by consequence that that Good which is pleasing, is
desired for the Pleasure it affords. It remains, that we next prove, That the
good things which are Honest and Useful, are also desired for the Pleasure they
yield.

That things Profitable and Useful, are sought after for the sake of Pleasure.
NOw, there is no difficulty to prove that things Profitable and Useful, relate
to what is grateful, or to the Pleasure which we receive from them. For it is
manifest, That things Useful are not desired merely because they are Useful,
but for something else, which is either Pleasure it self, or which relates to
Pleasure. As first in respect to Eating or Drinking, soft Music, or sweet
Perfumes, and the like, it is plain that we value them in respect of the
Pleasure that attends them, which may likewise be understood of diverse Arts and
Sciences, as of Cookery, Hunting, Painting, Physic, Surgery, etc. which
tend to free us from several Distempers, from which to be delivered, is very
pleasing. The same thing may be said of Navigation, of Merchandise, of War; all
which center in the getting of Money, or something like, whereby we may attain
to some Pleasure that we promise to our selves. So when any one by hard Labor
has acquired sufficient to purchase an Habitation, Clothes, Medicines, Books,
and the like Conveniences, does not he promise to himself the Pleasure he shall
enjoy when he shall have obtained these things, and shall be able to subsist in
Ease and Quiet for the future, without any further Pains or Trouble; to eat
when he shall be an Hungered, and drink when he is Thirsty, or warm himself when
Cold, to be at leisure, and satisfy his Curiosity when he shall desire it; in
short, when he shall be in a condition to spend his days Comfortably, Securely,
Honestly, Honorably? This is generally the aim of all the World, of the
Husbandman, of the cheating Tradesman, (as Horace styles him) of the Soldier,
Merchant and Seaman.

The Soldier Fights, the busy Tradesman Cheats,
And finds a thousand Tricks and choice Deceits:
The heavy Plough contents the laboring Hind,
The Merchant strives with every Tide and Wind;
And all this Toil to get vast heaps of Gold,
That they may live at Ease when they are Old.
This is the design of the Courtiers, and of such as busy themselves in
obtaining great Employments and high Offices; they undergo many Labors, make
great Courtships, suffer many Hardships, and all for no other purpose, but that
they might at last, as they pretend, retreat in Peace, and spend the remainder
of their Lives to their own Content, quietly and peaceably. The most sordid and
most covetous Misers, propose to themselves the pleasure to look upon their
Coffers full of Gold and Silver.

A sordid Churl, the Jest of all the Place,
Thus comforted himself for his Disgrace:
The Lowsy Rabble Hiss me at the Play,
And Grin and make the greatest Farce of me.
But what care I, when I can hug at home
My strutting Bags, and give my self an Humm.
Not to mention those, who not understanding, That Nature is satisfied with a
little, delight in Debauchery and Excess, who by Rapine and all indirect means,
strive to acquire Riches, that they might have the pleasure of wasting them in
Prodigality, Rioting and Luxury. This has given occasion to Manilius too
justly to Complain; For Heaven is kind, with bounteous hand it grants
A fit supply for Nature's sober Wants.
She asks not much, yet Men press blindly on,
And heap up more, to be the more Undone:
By Luxury they Rapine's force maintain,
What that scrapes up, flows out in Luxury again,
And to be Squandered, or to raise Debate,
Is the great Only use of an Estate.


That those good things which we call Honest, have the nearest relation to
Pleasure.
THis seems a little more difficult to be made out: Bonum honestum, or honest
Good, seems to carry its own intrinsic worth, and to be desired only for it
self. Cicero amongst others, appears very much incensed against Epicurus, after
he had proposed a Form of Honesty, such an one as he would have us understand;
he applies himself to Torquatus. Thy Epicurus says, That he knows not what
they mean who compute Man's chief Happiness only by Honesty; who say, that all
things are to be referred to that, and that there is nothing of Pleasure to be
intermixed with it. These are idle. Discourses which he cannot understand, and
that he cannot conceive what they mean by this word Honesty; for to speak
according to the usual Dialect, we style that Honest, which the People by their
general Vogue, term Glorious and Honorable. And though that, says he, be
oftentimes more pleasing than diverse other Pleasures, still it is desired for
Pleasure sake. See here, says he, this great Dispute! A famous Philosopher,
who has made so much noise in the World, and has spread his Fame not only
over Greece and Italy, but over the Barbarous Nations, says, That he
understands not what that Honesty means that is so much talked of, if there be
no Pleasure intermixed with it. In this manner Cicero proposes the Opinion of
Epicurus, in relation to these remarkable Words, That nothing is called Honest,
but what the General Vogue of Men recommend. Aristotle explains the Matter in
these Terms, (...), Either that there is nothing Honest, or it is that which is
so esteemed in the Opinion of Men.

Now, to speak first, as in reference to the Notion or description of Honesty,
What harm is there if we consider it with a respect to Man, from whom it
receives Praise and Recommendation? The word Honest amongst the Latins, is said
to be so from the Honor that Action deserves, and amongst the Greeks, (...),
seems to have no other Signification; for if you please, you may interpret it
not only Honest, but also Beautiful, Honorable, and Praiseworthy, etc. And
you will find, that it is not so in respect of it self, but in respect of Men,
who allow of it to be so, and consequently it appears to them Beautiful and
Honorable, and of whom it is, and ought to be Praised. The same ought to be
understood of the word (...), which is contrary to (...): for when we interpret
it Ignoble, Shameful, and Detestable, we mean always in reference to Men, to
whom it seems to be so. And that it is really so, we will appeal to Cicero
himself, who gives this description of Honesty; That when it is divested of all
Profit and Applause, it still remains desirable and commendable for its own
sake, without any regard to a Reward. Now, as I say, is it not true, that in
this sense, Honesty is that which may be approved of and desired, which shows a
relation to them, who Praise it, or as Epicurus says, To the common Esteem of
the People? But by this word People or Multitude, who can think, that Epicurus
has a design to exclude Men of Wisdom and Understanding; and that he means not
generally all the Men that make up a City or People? It were Ridiculous and
Foolish to have such a Fancy. Now, in reference to what Cicero says, That all
Profit is removed, Epicurus will agree with him; That Honest Men don't propose
to themselves any Profit or Advantage, such as Money and the like low, mean
things; but they propose to themselves some other Benefits, as Praise, Glory,
Honor, Renown, etc. which Cicero himself Acknowledges; for in his Oration for
Milo, having supposed, That there are diverse Recompenses offered to Men of
Honor, he says, That of all the Rewards of Virtue, Glory is the greatest. And
in another Place he declares, That Virtue desires no other recompense for all
its Labors and Dangers, but Praise and Glory; which being removed, says he,
what is there in the course of this Life of so short a continuance, for which
we ought to be at so much Labor?

Epicurus therefore seems to have given a good description of what is Honest,
viz. That which is Glorious and Honorable, by the Vogue and universal Consent
of all Mankind. For if at any time People account that to be Commendable and
Glorious, which is esteemed Mean and Dishonorable amongst some People or
Nations, who have different Laws and Customs, according to which, the Notion of
Honest and Dishonest differs, but not in respect of the same People, amongst
whom that thing may be esteemed Honest and agreeable with their Laws and
Customs. For this Reason therefore, Cicero sometimes gives this general
description of Honor; A reward of Virtue, granted to some Body by the Judgment
and Approbation of his Fellow Citizens, Praemium Virtutis judicio studioque
Civium delatum ad aliquem. As if he should say, That Honor and by consequence
Honesty, or that which is Glorious and Honorable by Reputation, depends upon
the Judgment of the Citizens, or of the People who make use of their own Laws
and Customs.

But in conclusion, to speak one word to the Purpose in reference to that
Honesty which relates to Pleasure, we must observe, That this Relation hinders
not, but that Honesty in one sense, may be said to be desired for it self, or
for its own sake, because it is desired nulla contingente sive superveniente
re, as Aristotle Teaches; that is to say, as Cicero Interprets it, All Profit
being laid aside, and without any Reward, Recompense, or Advantage, such as
Money and the like can produce. For some may desire, Honor, Learning and
Virtue, not because they may thereby advance Gain, or increase Wealth, but for
the Renown and Satisfaction that will arise from the enjoyment of a clear and
enlightened Understanding, whereby we may the better rule and Govern our
Passions, and all this nevertheless, because it is pleasant to be Honored,
Learned and Virtuous, and to enjoy a Soul Calm and Serene.

Whether the desire of Honor be Blameworthy.
WE must here observe, that tho a too eager and violent pursuit of Honor,
under a color of Virtue, be not to be allowed, yet we must not totally condemn
the Desire of it, as some have done, especially if we seek after it with a just
and lawful Moderation. It is not without Reason, that this Desire is Judged to
be Natural, for we may see it appear very early in Children; and the very
Bruits themselves are governed by it: Nay, though some may seem to neglect and
despise, yet there is no body that can absolutely and altogether free
themselves from the desire of it. It Is also very requisite, that it should be
so highly esteemed, for it is commonly proposed as the reward of Virtue; and
that there is neither Kingdom nor Commonwealth, but encourages their Subjects
to Noble Actions, by the expectation of it. There is likewise this difference
between a Noble Generous Mind, and a base and mean Spirit; that whereas the
latter seeks nothing but Gain and Profit in the Undertakings; the former
desires nothing but Glory and Renown. Besides, Experience teaches us, and all
Ages can Witness, That where we remove from the minds of Men, the desire of
Honor and Glory, there is never any mention made of those great Exploits by
which Kingdoms are obtained. Now this being supposed, we may here take notice
of two sorts of Pleasure, for which Honor is desirable. The First, is that
extraordinary Satisfaction that a Man expects to receive when his Fame shall be
spread abroad, and he shall become Renowned in the World. The Story of
Damocles, is not unknown, and the hopes that he proposed to himself of an
unexpressible Joy for the Royal Honors they would bestow upon him. And that of
Demosthenes is no less Remarkable. This Great Man confesses ingenuously, That
he was well pleased to hear a mean Woman coming from a Fountain, whisper softly
to her Friend, There is Demosthenes, pointing at him with her Finger. And we
may without any wrong to Virtue, believe the same of other Illustrious Men,
when in their Walks they hear themselves named, and the People say of them
publicly, There is Chappellus, the finest Wit of the Kingdom. Here is
Despreaux, the Horace of our Age, the everlasting speaker of Truths. There is
that famous Racinus, who by the charming efficacy of his Verses, knows, when he
Pleases, how to force us to Weep. Here is the Learned and unparalled Lady,
Sabbiere. How pleasant is it to be thus taken Notice of in the World for some
Perfection, and pointed at by eminent Persons!

At pulchrum est digito monstrari and dicier hic est. And we know what is
reported of Themistocles, when after a notable Victory, he observed, That all
the Spectators neglecting the public Pomp, had their Eyes wholly fixed upon
him, which transported him with so great Joy, that he could not forbear thus to
express himself: This day, says he, I receive sufficient recompense for all the
Toils that I have undergone for Greece.

The other sort of Pleasure that carries Men to the desire of Honor, is that
great Security that attends us; the enjoyment of which is so pleasant, and the
rather, because he that lives in a perfect and entire Security, finds himself
in power to act what seems him good, and to enjoy all the Pleasures that he
fancies without any control. Now, we easily believe, that Security is obtained
by Honor, because Honor is bestowed for Virtue's sake, or because of Offices
and Performances that suppose Virtue to be there. If it be for Virtue's sake,
then it is certainly free from Contempt, and the Reverenced Person can by no
means sink into that Estate which is exposed to Injuries and Affronts. If it be
for the sake of Offices or Dignities, and consequently for some Advantage
expected, or some Evil that we dread, even for that cause, we look upon them
commonly as a great and strong Support. But herein we may find this difference,
That the Honor that is rendered for the sake of Dignities, is more Splendid and
taking with the Common People; therefore we see a great many very desirous of
Dignities and noble Employments, and very few look after Virtue. As if those
who are promoted to Dignities, had wherewith they may Injure some, and Pleasure
others; and therefore can secure themselves from the Power of some by Hope, and
of others by Fear.

CHAP. IV. What Advantage Moral Virtue procures.
NOw to mention something of Virtue it self. Aristotle and Cicero declare
Wonders about the delights and pleasures of Knowledge and Learning, which make
the first part of Moral Virtue. Nature, says Aristotle, the common Parent,
stirs up and gives unspeakable Pleasures to such as can attain to understand
the Causes of things, and study Philosophy truly and to purpose. If we cannot
without Delight, look upon the bare Images of Nature, because in casting our
Eyes upon them, we behold the ingenuity and skill of the Painter or the Graver
that made them; How much more ought the Contemplation of Nature it self, and of
its admirable Wisdom and Contrivances, to fill our Minds with Joy and
Satisfaction? Cicero also speaks of it to no less Advantage. The Consideration,
says he, and Contemplation of Nature, is the real and natural Food of the
Soul: It is that which raises and elevates our Thoughts; for when we think
upon the Celestial things, which are so Great, Large and of such a vast
Extent, we despise these here below, as Mean and of no Value. Seneca's
Expressions are no less Remarkable; O! how Contemptible is Man, says he, if he
raises not himself above Human things! We may say, That then the Spirit of Man
has attained to its greatest Happiness that its Nature is capable of, when it
has trampled upon all Vice, and raises it self to sublime Matters, and
searches into the Secrets of Nature. It Is then, that walking among the
Celestial Orbs, it disdains the green Fields, and all the Gold that the Earth
produces for our covetous Posterity. There are above us, spacious Heavens,
which our Souls take then Possession of. When it is there arrived, it is
nourished and increases, and being freed from its Earthly Prison, it returns
to its first Principle; for, it is a certain sign of its being of a Divine
Nature, that the Divine Objects are pleasing to it, which it looks upon not as
belonging to others, but as its own.

Here it will not be amiss to mention the Pleasures and Transports of Joy that
the Mathematical Sciences cause. Plutarch relates, That Eudoxius would have
been willing to have been Burnt as Phaeton was, if he could first have been
admitted to approach so near the Sun, as to have a full inspection of its
Figure, Greatness and Beauty. The same Author tells us, That Pythagoras was so
ravished with Joy when he had found that famous Theorem, (which is the Forty
seventh of Euclid's Book) that immediately he offered a solemn Sacrifice. He
writes also of Archimedes, That many times they have been forced to divert him
from his deep Contemplations: Nay, so great a Pleasure he found in them, that
his excess of Joy, was like to have cost him his Life, when by laborious and
tedious Study, he had arrived to discover, how much Brass might be mingled in
that Crown of Gold which the King had Dedicated to the Gods. He thereupon (as
he was going out of the Bath) transporred with Joy, cried out, (...) There is
nothing, says Cicero, more Pleasant, than the sweet repose of a Learned Old
Age. We see Gallus, your Father's Friend, dying for Joy, in the Speculation of
the Stars, and measuring the Heavens and the Earth. How many times has he
Surpised him from Morning, until the Evening, when he had undertaken to
describe something of the Stars? And how many a Night has he found him in the
Evening, when he had begun from the Morning? O what Pleasure did he take to
foretell the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon?

For the other Liberal Arts, it is known what Recreation the Knowledge of
History and Antiquity, the Beauty of Poetry, and the Grace of Rhetoric give.
These Studies, says Cicero, are delightful Employments for Youth, are pleasing
to Old Age, are Ornaments in Prosperity, and a grateful security in Adversity.
Haec studia Adolescentiam alunt, Senectutem oblectant, secundas res ornant,
adversis perfugium and solatium praebent; delectant domi, non impudiunt foris,
pernoctant nobiscum, peregrinantur, rusticantur. They afford Pleasure at Home;
they are not Troublesome to us Abroad; they continue with us Sleeping; they
accompany us in our Travels; they go along with us in the Fields. How mean are
the delights of Banqueting, of Plays, of Women, when compared with these
Pleasures? Men freely spend whole days and nights in pursuit of Learning, and
think no pains too great to be bestowed in obtaining it; so great and exquisit
is the Pleasure thereof, when acquired. Omnia prepetiuntur ipsa cognitione and
scientia capti, and cum maximis curis, and laboribus compensant eam quam ex
discendo capiunt voluptatem.

For the other part of Virtue, which is commonly called Moral Virtue, we shall
be obliged hereafter to treat of it more at large, where we shall speak of its
four Kinds, viz. Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance and Justice. Only supposing at
present, that it is an undoubted Truth, That there is nothing more Pleasant,
than to lead a Life not liable to Reproach; a Life that is Innocent and void of
Offense, free from the Checks and Remorses of a guilty Conscience; and so to
govern all our Actions according to the Rules of Honesty and Prudence, as not
to fail in any of the Duties of Life; to wrong no Body; to do good to every one
as much as is possible. Suppose I say, such Maxims to be True, which we shall
have hereafter occasion to mention; I shall here take notice of three things.
First; That it is not without great Reason, that we compare Virtue to a Plant,
whose Root is Bitter, but the Fruit very Sweet; and that Plato, Xenophon, and
several others, have highly commended those Verses of Hesiod, that inform us,
That Virtue is not to be attained without Labor and Sweat; and that the way
that leads to it, is truly Long and Difficult, and of an uneasy access in the
beginning, but when ever mounted to the top, there is nothing Sweeter, nor more
Pleasant.

The Gods through Sweat and Pains to Virtue lead,
But long and arduous is the Path we tread:
Rugged and steep when first you venture on,
But at the top arrived, with easy speed you run.
Unto which we ought to add that Sentence of Epicharmus, That the Gods afford
to us no good things, but for our Labors and Pains.

Labor nobis cuncta,
Dii vendunt bona.
Which gives us to understand, that we ought freely to endure the Labors that
occur in the way to Virtue, because they are attended with wonderful Pleasure
and Satisfaction.

Nor is that Story without Ground; Where Pleasure and Virtue are supposed to
meet in a double Way, and each of them to use the strongest Motives to incline
Hercules to follow them in their different Paths; for that confirms the truth
of those Rules that are before alleged, when we took notice, That we ought to
shun that Pleasure which is attended with a greater Mischief; as we ought to
embrace those Labors and Toils which will procure us greater Advantages and
Delights. I know very well how they have represented Hercules rejecting
Pleasure, that is to say, an easy and Effeminate Life, to pursue Virtue, which
is a Life full of Labor and Difficulty. Nevertheless, Maximus of Tire, says
very well; That when he was under the greatest Labors, he felt, or had a
prospect of wonderful Pleasures. You see, says he, in Hercules extraordinary
Labors, but you see not the incredible Pleasures that either attend or succeed
them. Whosoever takes away Pleasure from Virtue, takes from it all Strength and
Efficacy; for were it not for Pleasure, Men would never undertake any great
Matter: And he who out of Zeal for Virtue, willingly undergoes any Trouble,
this is purely for the sake of some Pleasure he feels or expects: For as in
hoarding up of Treasure, no Man will prefer a Pebble before a Ruby, nor Brass
before Gold, unless he be utterly destitute of all Reason and Understanding: So
in respect of Labor and Trouble, no Man labors merely and purely for Labor's
sake; this would turn to a very sorry account; but we willingly exchange the
present Labors for Virtue; that is, in plain English, as the Stoics term it,
for Pleasure; for, who speaks of Virtue, speaks of Delight; and Virtue it self
would be much neglected, if at the same time it were not attended with Delight.
For my part, I must declare, that I run quite counter to the common Vogue, for
I look upon Pleasure to be the most Beautiful, the most Desirable thing in the
World, and that which we ought the most strictly to pursue; and for its sake it
is, I believe, that Men so frequently expose themselves to all Hazards and
Dangers, and even encounter Death it self; for though we are apt to give diverse
Names to the Cause that first moves us to undertake such great things; as for
Instance, That which put Achilles upon dying voluntarily for Patrocles, we call
Friendship; that which inclined Agamemnon to enter into and carry on a War with
so much Care and Fatigue, was the care of preserving his Kingdom; that of
Hector's so frequent Encamping and defeating his Enemies, was the desire to
preserve his Country. All these several Terms are but other Names for Pleasure.
And as in the Distempers of the Body, the Patient for want of Health, not only
freely submits himself to Hunger and Thirst, but also willingly undergoes the
most virulent Pains and Torments of Surgeons Instruments; but if it were not
for this hope, he would never endure such Tortures. So in the actions of Life,
there is a compensation for the Troubles that we undergo with Pleasure, which
you truly term Virtue, and which I allow so to be. But at the same time I
demand, Whether your Mind does embrace Virtue, without any love for it? And if
you yield to this, that you have such a Love, ought you not to agree also that
you have a Pleasure in it? Vary the Terms as much as you please, call it
neither Pleasure nor Delight, but Joy or Satisfaction, I shall not differ about
Names; I look only to the thing it self, and I find that Pleasure or
Satisfaction, put Hercules on Action.

The second Observation that I make, is, That the Philosophers themselves who
have declared open War with Pleasure, whereby to advance their Virtue, and so
to become more Remarkable, don't differ so much from Epicurus in the thing, as
in the Term. I might here with Lucian, mention their Ways and Manners, who tell
them, That if they had the Ring of Gyges, and the Helmet of Pluto, so that they
might become invisible to the World, they would soon forsake their beloved
Labors, their Pains and Toils, and hunt after those Pleasures and Delights
that they seem to slight and condemn. Maximus of Tire, compares them with
Aesop's Sheperd, who being asked by a Lion in pursuit of a Buck, whether he had
seen it; answered No, but with his Finger pointed at the Place where it fled.
Thus these pretenders to Virtue, when they disclaim against Pleasure, it is only
in Word and in Show. But to pass by their Manners, which don't any ways
correspond with their Words, it is sufficient to let you know, That Epicurus as
well as they, embraces and esteems Virtue very highly, and that when they storm
so much against him, it is because he maintains, That Virtue is only a means
very proper to attain our End or chief Good; whereas, they assert, That Virtue
it self is the last End and chief Good. So that in effect, they declare the
very same thing as he does, though in different Words.

And truly these are their own Expressions, so often celebrated among them;
That Virtue is sufficient of it self to make us Happy. Or as Cicero says, That
to live happily, we need only be Virtuous. Now, if we rightly understand this
Maxim, we must necessarily perceive thereby that Virtue it self is not the
chief Good, but a means that contributes in such a manner to obtain it, that it
is alone sufficient for that purpose, without having need of the assistance of
any thing else; And consequently we may thereby perceive, that a happy Life, or
true Felicity, which is obtained by Virtue, is the chief Good, or the last End,
because this Good, or this End, is for it self, and tends not to obtain
afterward any thing else.

And, now to live Happily, is nothing else, but to live agreeably, contentedly,
and with Delight; and if we may be permitted, to add the other Word, which
offends so much, with Pleasure. Certainly though the Stoics deal not so plainly
as Aristotle, who holds, That Pleasure is mixed with Happiness, and that by
Pleasure, the contemplation or operation of Happiness is increased: Yet I doubt
not but if an happy Life could be fancied to be really void of Delight and
Pleasure, they would render it so barren and desolate, that in ascending their
steep and craggy Mountain of Virtue, they would never endure so many Hardships
and Dangers, if they were not encouraged with the hopes of Happiness, when they
arrive at the top. And Socrates himself, whose Resolutions and Courage they
desire; Has he not plainly described Happiness to be a Pleasure which is not
attended with Repentance? And Antisthenes, the Father of the Cynicks, and the
Author of that famous Maxim of the Stoics; That he would rather become an
Idiot, than seek after Pleasure. Does he not yield to this in the Writings of
Stobeus? Venandas esse eas voluptates, non quae labores aut molestias
praecedunt, sed quae consequuntur. That we ought not to seek after those
Pleasures which go before our Labors and Difficulties, but such as follow.

But to show still more plainly how Pleasure accompanies a Cynical Life, which
the Stoics themselves, though they look upon it as Austere and Grievous, yet
nevertheless Happy: We need but hearken once more to Maximus of Tire, who the
best of any, has represented this Life, speaking of Diogenes: What, says he,
made Diogenes to retire into his Tub? Was it not Pleasure? For though it was also
Virtue that made him abide there, Why must we separate his Pleasure from his
Reason? Diogenes was as well pleased in his Tub, as Xerxes in the City of
Babylon; and in feeding upon his boiled Barley and dried Bread, as Smindrides
upon his dainty Dishes and exquisit Fare. He was as well satisfied in the Sun,
as Sardanapalus was in the Purple Garments; with his Staff in his hand, as
Alexander with his Lance; with his Wallet at his Back, as Cresus in the midst
of his Treasures. And if you please to compare the Pleasures of the one with
those of the others, you shall find the Pleasures of Diogenes to be preferred;
because Pain and Trouble have always from every side, come to disturb the
Pleasures of those Men who seemed to be Happy. When Xerxes was Overcome, he
Wept; Cambises being Wounded, fell into Sorrow; Sardanapalus groaned in the
Flames. When Smyndrides was Banished, he was Troubled. When Croesus was
Prisoner, he shed Tears: And Alexander being stopped in his Wars, Complains. But
the Pleasures of Diogenes were free from Complaints, Cries, Tears and
Displeasure. You may call Labors and troublesome Actions, those sort of
Pleasures, if you should put your self in Diogenes's Place: But this is not
fair; for if you should do what he did, you might be Grieved with what Diogenes
made his Pleasure. And yet I dare affirm, That never any Man had a more earnest
desire for Pleasure than Diogenes had. He had no House; the care of a Family is
Troublesome: He was never concerned in the Government; it is an Employment full
of Sorrows: He shunned Matrimony, for he had heard the Fame of Xantippe: He
never brought up Children; He understood well the Difficulties. But having
banished from himself all Sorrow, being altogether Free, void of Care, Fear, or
Grief; He alone among Men, enjoyed all the Earth as a single and common House,
fully possessing the Pleasures which are not to be circumscribed, and which are
free and open to all the World, and which are to be found plentifully in every
Place. Verum depulsa omni molestia, plenus liberate, expers solicitudinis,
absque metu, citra dolorem habebat unus hominum universam rerum quasi unam
domum, voluptatibus passim fruens incustoditis, patentibus, copiosis.

The third Observation is, That notwithstanding some do so much talk and glory
of acting by Principles out of love to Virtue, yet upon a strict Enquiry, we we
shall find, that Pleasure is their chief Motive; for they that expose
themselves to Hazards and Dangers for the sake of a Friend, or for the
deliverance of their Country, and that defy even Death it self, which they know
to be unavoidable, do all this in Expectation of some Pleasure or Satisfaction,
which they shall enjoy after Death: But still it is present Pleasure which
excites and animates them, when they think that the Actions which they are
going about, shall procure Liberty to their Relations, Friends, or Countrymen,
or perpetuate their Memory, and make their Generations Famous in after Ages: It
is, I say, the thoughts of being rendered Famous to Posterity, that thus
Animates and Transports them.

This is to be understood of him who goes to a certain Death; for when there
remains any hopes of Escaping, we need but see what Torquatus relates of one of
his Predecessors. It is true, says he, that he wrested the Lance out of his
Enemies hands, but he endeavored as much as was able, to secure himself from
being Killed. He run a great hazard, but it was in the view of the whole Army.
What Advantage did he receive? The Praises and Love of all the World, which are
very strong Supports to us to bear our Dangers without fear. See likewise what
Seneca says, Upon the performance of any great and glorious Action, there
immediately arises an extraordinary Joy and Delight; and though we reap no
Advantage after Death, yet the very thoughts of the Action that we are about to
commit, please us; for when a generous Man represents to himself the reward of
his Death, namely, the Liberty of his Country, the deliverance of those for
whom he sacrifices his Life, he receives from thence a great deal of Pleasure,
and enjoys the recompense of the Hazard: And he who feels that Joy, which
happens at the last moment of the Action, runs on to Death without any Demur,
content and satisfied in the Goodness, Piety and Holiness of the Action.

The same may be said of those severe Fathers, who have punished with Death
their own Children, though they seem to deprive themselves of great Pleasures.
It Is what Cicero continues to object to the same Torquatus, who by giving a
blow with his Ax to his Son, preferred the Right of the Empire, to that of
Nature and Fatherly Affection; for those who proceed to that Extremity,
understand the temper of their Children to be such, that it is better for
themselves and for their Children, rather to Die than Live, because they are
likely to receive nothing from them, but continual Sorrows, and that their
perpetual Shame would retort upon them. Therefore when they consider that it is
more grateful and desirable to them to prevent their future dissatisfaction and
infamy, by a present Grief, and to expiate (if I may so say) that Disgrace that
has been committed, by some Noble and illustrious Action, rather than to sink
themselves by a mean Baseness, and a deceitful Weakness, into an Abyss of
Calamity. This is the Pleasure which such relish, who desire to free themselves
from this Abyss. Take notice also what the same Torquatus Answers; He condemned
his Son to Death; but if it be without Cause, I would not desire to be the Son
of such an unnatural Father. If he did it to secure and establish the Military
Discipline, to keep the Army within the bounds of their Duty, by the fear of
punishment, during a moct dangerous War, had an eye to the Preservation of his
Countrymen, in whose Safety his own was included and comprehended.

Of Self-Love.
BUt that which is generally spoken of Virtue may be also said of Piety toward
God, seeing that it is not likely, that there can be any sincere Piety if God
be not purely and entirely loved for himself, or because he is infinitely Good,
or because he is infinitely Excellent. So that he who loves and honors God,
has no respect to himself, neither does he consider his own Profit or
Pleasure. For my part, God forbid, that I should undervalue the Piety of any
Person. As there are some who don't only persuade that we ought to love God in
this manner, and consequently don't only suppose, that this is possible, but to
give Authority to this Doctrine, and prevent the Objection, boast and believe
they perform all this: Truly I don't envy, nor shall I contradict them; but far
from that, I approve and applaud their Happiness, and that special favor of
Heaven, granted to them; for we must believe, that it is a Gift of God and
Supernatural, that any Man can prevail upon himself to love and honor God in
such a manner. But we are treating here of Piety, and generally of Virtue,
which is suitable to Nature, according to which, Man performs all that he does
with some respect to himself. May not we therefore say, that God has in such a
manner complied with the infirmity of our Nature; That as there is scarce any
Passage in Holy Writ that allows or expresses their Doctrine, there are a great
many that approve of loving God greatly, because he has pardoned them their
many Sins; or because he has granted them many Favors; or of loving him for
the hopes of the promises of Heaven; and who perform diverse offices of Charity,
suffer Persecution, keep the Faith, etc. because of that Kingdom prepared for
them from the beginning of the World, because of the extraordinary Rewards that
wait for them in Heaven, because of the Crown of Righteousness, which God has
promised to them that love him? May we not, I say, be of this Opinion, and
conclude from these Passages, That there is nothing to hinder us from having in
view those everlasting Delights which such are to enjoy who have loved and
honored God? I will not appeal to the Consciences of any Person, nor do I ask
what they would do, if after God had been Honored and Loved, if he took no
care of those who had loved and honored him; and if in such a case, he neither
granted them any Advantage, nor gave them hopes of any to be expected to all
Eternity: I do not ask them, I say, What they would do? Whether they would Love
or Honor him less? I only desire them to take in good part this Question,
Whether they don't Love and Honor him, because it is very pleasant to Love and
serve him in this manner? And whether they believe it not consequently very
Pleasant and very Grateful to be thus disposed toward God, purely and
absolutely for his sake, and without any regard to our selves? Seeing he tells
us, That his Yoke is easy, whereby to incline us to love him with all our
Heart, with all our Soul, with all our Understanding, and all our Strength;
certainly he excludes not this Sweetness and Pleasure. But let this be hinted
by the by, the better to strengthen and confirm the Reason by which we prove,
according to the Judgment of Epicurus, That Pleasure is the chief Good, or the
last End, being desired in such a manner for it self; that all other things are
desirable for its sake. Let us now say something of that other Reason, which is
derived from a Comparison between Pleasure and Pain, which is its contrary. Let
us suppose, says Torquatus, a Man enjoying many great and continued Pleasures
both of Body and Mind, without any interruption or disturbance by any Grief,
either present or to come, What State, in short, can we say is better and more
desirable than that? Is it not certain, that a Man in that condition, is in an
unshaken Tranquillity of Mind; That he will not foolishly and childishly fret at
the sight of Death, but will consider, that it is unavoidable? On the contrary,
Suppose another Man tormented with the most exquisite Tortures both of Body and
of Mind, that a Human Nature is capable of, without any hopes of Relief, or
ease, or of any Pleasure either present or to come, How can we represent any
more Unhappy than such a one? Now, if a Life full of Pain, is chiefly to be
avoided, and consequently to live in Pain, is without any question, the chief
of Evils, it follows by the Rule of Contraries, That to live in Pleasure, is
the chief Good; for there is nothing beyond it, where our Mind stops and rests
satisfied, as there is nothing beyond the pain either of the Body, or of the
Mind, which can shake our Nature, or undermine her Settlement. I dare not
declare, says Cicero, whom I should prefer to your pretended Happy Man; Virtue
shall decide the Controversy, and will, no doubt, prefer Marcus Regulus before
him, who of his own accord, without any Constraint, and contrary to the Faith
that he had given to the Enemy, returned back to his own Country to Carthage.
Virtue, I say, shall prefer this famous Man; and when he shall be tired and
tormented with Watchings and Hunger, it will declare, that he is happier than
Thorius, who was drinking deliciously, and stretching himself upon a Bed of
Roses. Regulus had waged great War; he had been twice Consul, and carried in
Triumph. Yet he looked not upon all this so Great and Glorious, As this last
Enterprise, to which his Faith and Constancy obliged him. This condition when
we hear it described, seems to be Miserable to us, but to him it was a State of
Pleasure and Happiness; for it is not always Pleasure, Delight, Laughter and
Sports that cause Happiness, but often times Resolution and Constancy, render
those Persons Happy who are in the midst of Sufferings and Sorrow.

Of the deceitful Virtue and deceitful Happiness of Regulus.
BUt to speak a word of the Examples instanced by way of Comparison, before we
yield to the Eloquence of Cicero. Tho we ought not in all respects to approve
of Thorius, and of his too delicious manner of Living, which Epicurus himself
would never have allowed; Nevertheless, it is not easy to conceive, how Regulus
was really happier than Thorius. In truth, I perceive a specious Show and a
fine sound of Words, by which it is usual to extol this so famous Virtue of
Regulus; yet, if we will seriously examine his Story, and weigh sincerely the
several Circumstances, we shall not find it so Plausible. Polybius informs us,
That Regulus having fortunately Commanded in the War against the Carthaginians,
and fearing lest another Consul being sent from Rome in his stead, should bear
away the honor of his brave Exploits, he advised the Carthaginians to a Peace.
But the Conditions that he proposed to their Deputies, were so hard, that they
resolved rather to hazard all. They therefore choosing for their General
Xantippus the Lacedemonian, Encountered with Regulus in a Battle, got the
Victory, and took him Prisoner with Five Hundred more, with whom he was Flying.
An undoubted Sign, says the same Polybius, of Fortune's Inconstancy, and of
the little trust we are to put in her flattering Smiles, seeing that he, who
but a little before, could not be moved to Pity, and had no Compassion of the
Afflicted, was soon after obliged to cast himself at their Feet, and to beg his
Life. Polyaenus adds further; That Regulus Swore to the Carthaginians, That if
they would suffer him to depart, he would persuade the Romans to make Peace
with them, and if he could not, he would return back to Carthage. But that he
advised the Senate to the Contrary, discovering the Weakness of the Enemy, the
Means whereby they might Destroy them; and that the Prisoners of the
Carthaginians, were Young, and stout Captains, whereas, he was Decrepid and
Old. This he Whispered, says Appian, to the Chief of the Romans. His Opinion,
says Cicero, so much prevailed, that they kept back the Prisoners; there was
no Peace made, and he returned to Carthage. It Is true, that his Departure was
attended with Mournful Circumstances; for Horace tells us; That at his Return,
he fixed his Eyes upon the Ground, like a Criminal, with a dejected
Countenance, rudely putting aside his Wife and Children, as they were
approaching to embrace him with Tears.

His Wife's chaste Kiss, his prattling Boys,
The former Partners of his Joys:
Now grown a Slave, thrown down by Fate,
And lessened from his former State;
He shunned with manly Modesty,
And on the Earth he cast his stubborn Eye:
Whilst thus by strange Advice, he sought
And fixed the wavering Senate's Vote.
Then through his Weeping Friends he ran
In haste, a glorious Banished Man.
What Cords and Wheels, what Racks and Chains,
What lingering Tortures for his Pains,
The barbarous Hang-men made, he knew,
And hightning Fame told more than true.
Yet he his Wife and Boys removed,
His hindering Friends, and all he Loved,
And through the Crowd he made his way,
That wept and begged a longer stay,
As free as if when Term was done
And Suit's at end, he left the Town;
And did from Business and Cares retreat,
To the cool Pleasures of a Country Seat.
Nevertheless, we must observe what Tuditanus Relates, That when he advised 'em
to make no Exchange of the Prisoners, he informed 'em, That the Carthaginians
had given him such a slow Poison, that he could only live until the Exchange
was made, afterward he was to pine away and Die.

We may also take notice of that which is to be found among the Fragments of
Diodorus Siculus. Now, Who will not disapprove the Pride and Vainglory of
Attilius Regulus, who not being able to support himself under so great
Prosperity, which seemed to him as an heavy Burden, deprived himself of the
advantage of a general Applause, and brought his own Country into eminent
Danger? For, when he might have concluded an Honorable and Advantageous Peace
to the People of Rome, and obtained the Glory of a remarkable Clemency and
Renown, he proudly insulted over the Afflicted, and required such harsh and
unreasonable Terms of Peace, that he not only drew upon himself God's
Displeasure, but moved the Conquered to such an implacable Hatred, whereby to
renew their Courage, and venture to fight afresh. By his fault, the Affairs
were changed in such a manner, that he and his whole Army were Routed; Thirty
Thousand of 'em being slain in the Field, and Fifteen Thousand taken Prisoners
with him, etc.

From whence we may surmise, That when Regulus considered, he could never make
sufficient amends for the Fault he had committed, and that he would be always
looked upon in Rome as a Rash and Proud Man, he chose rather to return to
Carthage, and preferred an apparent Danger (though he thought it not to be so
great, because of the Carthaginian Prisoners in the hands of the Romans) to an
undoubted Infamy, and to a Life which he saw was Languishing and very short,
because of the Poison which the Carthaginians had given him.

However, when Regulus had done nothing at Rome, but having returned back to
Carthage, that he kept his Word, doubtless he cannot be too much esteemed and
applauded. But when he dissuaded the Senate from what he had promised to
persuade them to, How can that be judged as a commendable thing, seeing it was
a manifest Perjury? If he had contented himself with the plain delivery of his
Message, without persuading or dissuading any thing, his proceeding might then
admit of some colorable Excuse: But thus openly to violate the Sacred Laws of
Oaths, how can this be Palliated? And when he did it in Secret, for fear says
Appian, lest the Ambassadors that came along with him, might come to understand
it, that also increases the Suspicion, and aggravates the Crime. Pretend not
the Welfare and Glory of his Country to excuse him. Truly, our Country is to be
secured by good Advice, by Strength and Courage, but not by wicked Artifices,
and by perfidious Dealing: And we ought not to approve our selves Citizens,
whereby to become good Men.

You may perhaps allege what we find in Euripides, That he swore with the
Tongue, but not with the Heart. Illum jurasse Lingua, Mentem gessisse
injuratam. But this is only to seek a Cloak for Perjury; for as Cicero says,
It Is not Perjury to Swear falsely, but not to perform what the Oath signifies,
according to the common intention of the Words.

Truly, if it were lawful without wounding the Conscience, to mean one thing
and speak another, it were to permit Lying in reality, and to deceive him who
hears us speak, and with whom we converse. This would cause the Faith of every
one to be suspected, and consequently would introduce a great Confusion in the
Transactions and Affairs of Mankind. You may also say, that this was lawful,
because the Carthaginians themselves had broke the Faith they had given him.
But if you be a Wicked Person, I ought not therefore to be less Honest;
otherwise, What difference would there be between you and me? We ought to deal
with perfidious Persons, either with a great deal of Precaution or with open
Force; but it is not lawful upon any account whatever, to violate our Faith. It
is an old Maxim, That either we ought not to Promise at all, or else to keep
it. But it seems, the Carthaginians put him to grievous Tortures, for no other
end, but because contrary to the Faith he had given them, he had dissuaded the
Romans from concluding a Peace, and the Exchange of the Prisoners. It is true,
as Tubero says, That the Noblest Prisoners were delivered into the hands of
Regulus 's Children, who put 'em to Death with the same Torments that Regulus
suffered. But pray consider, whether Regulus had any reason to prefer the
Destruction of those Prisoners, to the Lives of five Hundred Roman Soldiers,
who had been taken with him, and who for the sake of his Virtue, cruelly
perished in the same manner with him at Carthage.

But to return to our present purpose in relation to Happiness; I would fain be
resolved, how the Happiness of Regulus was greater than that of Thorius, when
he was Tortured in the manner that the forementioned Tubero relates? They kept
him a long time, says he, in dismal dark Dungeons; then they cut off his
Eyelids, and when the Sun shone brightest, they brought him forth and exposed
him to the Sunbeams, forcing him to hold his Eyes that way, knowing it was not
possible for him to shut them. Cicero informs us, that he was bound in an
Engine, and that after they had cut off his Eyelids, they destroyed him by
Watching. Seneca terms this Engine a Tub stuck through with Nails, in which he
was Enclosed. Sylvius presents us with this Description.

With desperate Rows they armed the sloping Wood,
And tor'tring Nails at equal distance stood:
Thus robbed of Sleep, by never sleeping pain,
He grows his own Tormentor, and in vain
Attempts his Limbs, by turning to relieve,
While only varied Wounds the varied Postures give.
But possibly you will say, That Thorius embraced Pleasure in an Effminate
manner, whereas, Regulus, for the good of his Country, preferred these Tortures,
and suffered them Courageously. First, Thorius was not so soft and Effeminate,
but that when the Welfare of his Country required, he did not decline the
Wars, but at last died fighting in defense of it, as Cicero himself testifies.

And though it be a great support in the midst of our Sufferings, to preserve our
Conscience Pure and Unstained, considering that we suffer in an honest Cause,
and for the Welfare of many, yet it don't thereby appear, that we are
therefore more Happy, than we should be by living Virtuously, Wronging no body,
but endeavoring to do all the good we can, and every way discharging the Duty
of a good Man, and an honest Subject, spending our lives in this manner in a
great deal of Pleasure, and little Pain.

In short, suppose a Man of the greatest Resolution and Courage, who would not
upon a good account, be daunted at the greatest Difficulties or Dangers; I say,
if it were offered to such a one, without any prejudice either to his Duty or
Reputation, to take his choice of the two kinds of Life mentioned by Torquatus,
Where is the Man, I beseech you, among all those, that thus exclaim against
Pleasure, and extol Virtue and Sufferings, that would give the preference to
the latter, and willingly embrace it?

But to confirm what has been said before, That Pain is the greatest Evil; for
that has been as the Antecedent, from whence we may conclude, by the Rule of
Contraries, That Pleasure is the chief Good. By the same Reason by which we
have proved, That Pleasure is the sovereign Good, which Naturally we seek,
Primum familiare seu accommodatum. And consequently the chief Good; By the same
Reason, it has been proved, That Pain is the chief Evil, which Naturally we
avoid. Primum alienum se incommodans, And consequently the chief Evil. For
Nature has not only given to all Creatures a natural love for Pleasure, but
has also fixed in 'em a natural hatred of Pain. Let us now take notice of two
or three Particulars. First, By the word Pain, we are not to understand only
those that we call the Pains of the Body, but also those which we term the
Pains or Inquietudes of the Mind, and which are far more anxious and
insupportable, than those of the Body, as we have already said. Secondly, That
as we have before observed, Virtue and Goodness have something within them
which naturally afford Pleasure and Delight; so likewise we may now affirm,
that Vice, or that which is Infamous and Dishonest, has that in it which
causes great Pain and Uneasiness. From whence it is, that as Virtue and
Goodness is attended by many and great Advantages, so Vice or Wickedness, is
succeeded by many and great Evils. So, that in short, among the things which
are to be desired, in order to obtaining our chief Good, Virtue is that which
we are chiefly to aim at; and among the things that we are to shun, in order
the better to avoid the greatest Evils, Vice and Wickedness, is that which we
are chiefly to fly from. Lastly, This Doctrine seems to be very conformable to
the Sacred Rules of Faith: By which, as we believe that our chief Good or
Happiness, consists in enjoying the everlasting Delights and Joys in Heaven: So
we believe, That our greatest Unhappiness or Misery, consists in being
tormented in Hell, with uspeakable Tortures in everlasting Flames.

CHAP V. That a Wise Man is only capable of enjoying Moral Virtue.
WE have hitherto treated of Pleasure, as it is generally understood: We shall
now speak of that particular specific Pleasure unto which a Wise Man confines
himself, as being in its own Nature not only very easy to be obtained, but
also most lasting and free from Repentance. In a word, that Pleasure that we
before called the Tranquillity of the Mind, and the exemption of the Body from
Pain, now we have great Reason to call it most Natural; for at this sort of
Pleasure Nature seems chiefly to aim, as not having regard to other Pleasures,
which are always shifting and in a constant Motion, any otherwise than to make
them useful in the obtaining this; as for Instance; It has appointed the
Pleasure of Tasting, to make the action of Eating more grateful, and by that
means to oblige us to the Act, whereby to satisfy our Hunger, which is that
pain we feel, and caused by the cravings of an empty Stomach. But in reference
to the satisfaction and tranquillity of Mind which we enjoy when Hunger is
appeased. This Nature has reserved as her last End, and designed it as her
chief Good: We have great reason to say, that it is very easy to be obtained,
because it is in every one's Power to moderate his Desires, by supplying
himself with things necessary for his Body, whereby to free it from Pain, and
thereby render his Mind calm and easy. I say, That it is very lasting, because
other Pleasures pass away in a Moment, and free from us, whereas this continues
the same, unless it be interrupted and perish by our own Miscarriages. Lastly,
I describe it to be very free from Repentance; for all other Pleasures may be
attended by some Evil, whereas, this is altogether innocent, and draws upon us
no such Mischief.

I know that Cicero at first quarrels very much with Epicurus, because he gives
the Term of Pleasure, to this Tranquillity and freedom from Pain, which he
pretends to be proper to nothing but that which consists in Motion, or to those
things which please the Senses. But methinks Cicero should not differ with him
about a bare Word; for suppose according to common Custom, we did not call this
Tranquillity of Mind and freedom from Bodily Pain, Pleasure, Why should we
hinder Epicurus the giving it that Name, and esteeming it so great a Pleasure,
that among all others that bear that name, none is to be compared with it? This
has been, and always will be allowed in cases of Opinion, especially here,
where Pleasure and that which is Good and Desirable, are the same thing.
Therefore this State or Condition of Life, which of all other seems most
desirable, may be very well esteemed and called Pleasure. Besides, we may not
only bring Aristotle here to control him in express words, That there is a
greater Pleasure in Repose, than in Action; but also St. Chrysostom, who thus
expresses himself, For what is Pleasure, but to be free from Inquietude,
Trouble, Fear, and Despair, and generally to be exempt from such kind of
Passions? Pray, which of these two may be said truly to enjoy Pleasure, He who
is furiously distracted by Passions, and so continually overcome with vicious
Lusts, that he has no command of himself; or He who is free from all these
Disturbances, and rests in Philosophy as a quiet Haven? I may truly call that
Pleasure, when the Soul is in such a State, that it is in no wise disquieted
nor disturbed by any bodily Passion. That which Cicero objects concerning
Children and Brutes, which are as the Looking-glasses of uncorrupted Nature,
and yet desire not that Pleasure which is in Rest, of which we have been
speaking, but only that which is in Motion, seems to make most against us. But
let his Judgment of the Brutes, and the Nature of Animals, be what it will,
though they came into the World uncorrupted, and are well instructed for the
obtaining their End, after they have satisfied their Pain, which is caused by
some Want, naturally they tend to Rest; contrary to several Men, who being
corrupted in their Imagination, constantly cut out and make to themselves Work,
by provoking the Appetite; and never stop at any thing. Whatever be the case of
the Beasts, we shall speak only of Men, of whom it is certain, whatever is
Objected, is easily Answered, by what we have already mentioned. For in the
first Place, Nature has appointed a fixed Pleasure for the chief End. And though
Action be designed as a necessary Means to obtain it, it makes use of the
Pleasure which is in Motion, that the Action might pass with more Delight and
Satisfaction. From whence it happens, That though Man, or any other Creature,
seems to be more apparently and expressly stirred up and inclined to active
Pleasure, nevertheless, this hinders not, but at the same time he really and
secretly tends to that which is stable, and that by the Instinct or Bent of
Nature, who looks upon it as her chief Aim and principal End. Besides, because
Man's Understanding in process of time is corrupted, vitiated, apt to make
diverse gross Mistakes, and as we commonly say, (...), to make that Principal,
which is but Accessory, he sets up a fleeting moving Pleasure for his principal
Mark, and by abusing this Pleasure by his Intemperance, he draws upon himself a
Mischief, when he loses that Pleasure which is more fixed and solid, and which
Nature has made the First and Principal; and this is succeeded by Sorrow and
Repentance. For this cause it is, that Epicurus advises, That Wisdom should
interpose, which teaches Man to govern his Pleasure; that is to say, to
consider and look upon the Assistant as Assistant, and the Principal, as
Principal.

In the mean while, we need not concern our selves much about what the
Cyrenaicks Object in Cicero; That this Pleasure of Epicurus, is like the
condition of a sleeping Person: For he has declared, That his Tranquillity and
freedom from Pain, is not to be Stupefied, but to be in such a State, that all
the actions of our Life might be done calmly and sedately, as we have already
said. As he allows not that the Life of a Wise Man should be as a Torrent, so
he don't approve that it should be like a still and stinking Pool, but rather
like the Water of a River, that glides along quietly and without Noise. This is
one of his Maxims; That when Pain is removed, Pleasure is not increased, but
only diversified and altered. As if he would have said, That when we have
attained to this quiet State, free from Pain, there is truly nothing to be
desired greater, or to be compared to it; but in the mean while, there remain
several pure and innocent Pleasures, wherewith this State, if not abused, is
Embelished in the manner of a Field, which becoming Fruitful, affords diverse
Fruits; or in the manner of a Meadow, which we see covered over with an
admirable diversity of Flowers, when the Earth is brought to be in a good
Temper: For this State is like a Spring, out of which all the Pleasures that
are Pure and Sincere, are drawn. For this cause therefore, it ought to be
esteemed as the chief Pleasure, in regard it is an universal Relish, by which
all the Actions of our Life are seasoned, and by which consequently all our
Pleasures are sweetened, and become grateful. And to speak all in a Word,
Without which, no Pleasure can be Pleasure.

In reality, What Satisfaction can there be, if the Mind be troubled or the
Body tormented with Pain? It is a Proverb, That if the Vessel be not clean, it
Sowers whatever is put into it.

Sincerum est nisi vas, quodcumque infundis acescit. Whoever therefore is
desirous of pure sincere Pleasures, he must prepare himself to receive them
without any Mixture or Alloy; that is, By attaining as much as is possible to
this State of Rest and Tranquillity that we have described. I add the words as
much as is possible; for, As we have observed already, The frailty of our human
Nature, wont suffer us to be absolutely and perfectly Happy; for so complete a
Felicity, altogether free from Trouble and Pain, and crowned with all manner of
Delights, belongs to God alone, and to them whom he calls to a better Life. So
that in this present World, some have a greater, some a less share of
Afflictions and Pains. He that will deal wisely, ought to endeavor as much as
the weakness of his Nature will permit, to settle himself in that condition in
which he may be as little sensible of Grief and Pain as is possible; for by
this means he will obtain these two Advantages, which chiefly contribute to his
present Happiness, and which Wise Men have acknowledged, to be almost the only
solid and desirable Advantages of Life, The Health of the Body and of the Mind.

Sunt Sanitas and Men's gemina vitae bona.
Optandum est ut sit Men's sana in Corpore sano.
And that Epicurus never designed that his Pleasure should extend to a
Sottishness, or a privation of Sense and Action, may be proved by what he was
pleased with in his Retirements, either in Meditating, or in Teaching, or in
taking care of his Friends. But let it suffice us here to say, That from that
state and condition of Life, did arise certain Thoughts, which of all things in
the World, were the most pleasing and delightful: Namely, when any shall call
to mind the Storms that he has courageously weathered, in which some are yet
tossed up and down; he fancies himself as it were in a safe Haven, possessing a
calm and a serene Tranquillity; which Lucretius in his Second Book pleasantly
sets forth.

It Is pleasant when the Seas are rough, to stand
And view another's Danger safe at Land;
Not 'cause he is Troubled, but it is sweet to see
Those Cares and Fears, from which our selves are free.
He tells us also, That it is very pleasant to look from a high Tower upon two
great Armies drawn up in Battle, without being concerned in the Danger.

It Is also Pleasant to behold from far
How Troops Engage, secure our selves from War.
But there is nothing so pleasant, as to see our selves by the help of Learning
and Knowledge, advanced to the Top of Wisdom's Temple, from whence, as from an
high Station, serene and quiet, we may see Men involved in a thousand Miseries,
without being concerned.

But above all, It Is pleasantest to get
The top of high Philosophy, and sit
On the calm peaceful flourishing Head of it:
Whence we may view, deep, wondrous deep below,
How poor forsaken Mortals Wandering go,
Seeking the path to Happiness; some aim
At Learning, Wit, Nobility, or Fame.
Others with Cares and Dangers vex each Hour,
To reach the Top of Wealth and Sovereign Power;
Whilst frugal Nature seeks for only Ease,
A Body free from Pains, free from Disease,
A Mind from Cares and Jealousies at Peace.
Of the Tranquillity of the Mind in particular.
BUt to say something more particularly of the Tranquillity of the Mind; let us
again repeat, That by this Expression, we don't understand a slow and lazy
Temper, nor a sluggish and languishing Idleness. But as Cicero Explains it out
of Pythagoras and Plato; Placida quietaque constantia in animi part rationis
principe: A sweet and peaceable Constacy of Mind. Or as Democritus says; An
excellent equal and sweet Constitution and Temper of Mind; which makes the Man
settled and unshaken in such a manner, and to such a degree, that whether he be
Employed or at Leisure; whether Prosperity favor him, or Adversity frowns upon
him, he continues always Equal, always like Himself, and will not suffer
himself to be Transported by an excess of Joy, nor dejected by Grief and
Sorrow. In a Word, he is at no time disturbed by suchlike Passions: Therefore
this Tranquillity of Mind was called (...), which signifies freedom from Trouble
and Disquietness, for in the same manner as a Ship is said to be in quiet not
only when it is becalmed in the middle of the Sea, but likewise chiefly when it
is driven by a favorable Gale, which indeed causes it to sail swift, but
nevertheless quietly and steddily: Thus the Mind is said to be in Tranquillity,
not only when it is at rest, but more especially when it undertakes great and
excellent Things without being disturbed inwardly, and without losing any part
of its Steddiness. On the contrary, as a Ship is said to be disturbed not only
when it is carried away with the contrary Winds, but when it is beaten by those
that rise out of the very Waters; thus the Mind is said to be disquieted, not
only when in its proceedings it is carried away with diverse Passions, but
likewise when in the midst of Rest, Care Grief and Fear are continually gnawing
and fretting it, and rendering it uneasy. These therefore, and such like, are
the Passions which by disturbing our Tranquillity, interrupt the Happiness of
our Lives. Cicero Speaks of them in this manner, The turbulent Motions and the
Disquietness of the Mind, which proceed from an unconsiderate rashness, and
oppose all Reason, leave no room for an happy Life; For how can it possibly be
but that he who always stands in fear of Death or Pain, the one being often at
Hand, the other always threatened, must needs be miserable? Thus in the same
manner, if he dreads Poverty, Shame or Infamy, if he apprehends Infirmity or
Blindness; in a Word, if he fears that which may happen, not only to every
Person in particular, but also to the most powerful People, I mean Slavery, Can
such a one be happy who is continually fearing such Things? Can he enjoy the
least shadow of Happiness? In what unhappy condition is that Mind, that not
only dreads Calamities, Banishment, the loss of Goods, the Death of Children,
but foreseing and apprehending them as already present, Dies overwhelmed with
Grief and Sorrow? Can we suppose that he who suffers himself to be born down by
so many tragical Thoughts and Apprehensions, can be any otherwise than
unspeakably Miserable? Again, when you see a Man furiously transported with a
violent Passion, coveting every thing with a greedy and immoderate Desire, and
still as he arrives to a higher and fuller degree of enjoyment of Pleasure, the
more eagerly he hunts after and pursues 'em: Have you not great Reason to judge
this Man very Miserable? What think ye likewise of another, who is always
fluctuating, and suffers himself to be transported by a foolish and immoderate
Joy? Don't such a one appear to you the more Miserable the more he thinks
himself Happy? As such therefore are Miserable, these are on the contrary
Happy, who are not frighted with Fears, who suffer not themselves to be
overcome with Sadness, who are not inflamed with Lusts, nor moved by immoderate
Joys; and on whom the powerful Charms and Allurements of these soft and
effeminate Pleasures have no powerful Influences. Hearken to Torquatus:
Epicurus, whom you say, was too much addicted to his Pleasures, declares, That
it is impossible to live Pleasantly, if we live not Wisely, Honestly and
Justly; and that we cannot live Wisely, Honestly and Justly, but we must of
necessity live with Delight: For as the Inhabitants of a City cannot be easy
during a Storm, nor a Family when the Masters are at odds, much less can a Soul
be happy when it agrees not with it self, or is hurried about by diverse
contrary Passions. It is not capable of any pure and free Pleasure, and sees
nothing but in a hurry and in a confusion. If the Distempers of the Body
interrupt the felicity of Life, how much more do the Diseases of the Mind? Now
the Diseases of the Mind are the vain and immoderate Desires of Riches, Glory,
Dominion, and of mean and sordid Pleasures. You may add to these, Discontent,
Fretfulness and Frowardness, which gall and fret the Minds of Men, who will not
consider that we should not afflict our selves for that which causes no
present Pain to the Body, nor it may be never will. You may add Death, which
threatens us continually, and hangs always over our Heads, as the Rock did over
that of Tantalus: You may add Superstition, which never suffers the Person to
be at quiet who is infected with it. Such never think upon the good Things
past, they enjoy not the present, and when they consider that what they are in
expectation of, is uncertain, Grief and Despair afflict them: But they are
exceedingly tormented when they think that they have begun too late to seek
after great Offices, Riches and Glory; finding themselves deprived of those
Pleasures which they had hopes of enjoying, and for which they have undergone
so much Pain and Trouble. Others have mean and low Spirits, always in despair
of every thing; others Dream of nothing, but how to do Mischief, are Envious,
Fretful, Pensive, Slanderers and Angry; others are unconstant and changeable in
their Love; others are Hasty, Cowards, Impudent, Intemperate, Wavering, never
continuing in the same Mind. This is the Cause, that during their Lives, their
Passions are in a continual Warfare without Cessation.

And therefore we cannot but mention the sincere Pleasure and Delight which he
must needs enjoy, who being freed from these Passions that tormented him,
understands his own happy State, and finds himself, as we have said before, in
Rest in a safe Haven, after he has been tossed and beaten with the Winds and
Waves of the Sea. But we shall have another occasion to speak of this
particular Pleasure, when we shall treat of the Virtues that are fit to calm
the Passions, and by that means to cause a sedate and peceable Temper of Mind:
Besides, that Sweetness and Pleasure may easily be understood by that esteem
which such a one has, who longs for it when he finds himself in Trouble or in
actual Disturbance. Like as that Person who is in the midst of a Tempest at
Sea, longs for a Calm, and a favorable Gale; or as he that is seized with a
violent Distemper, wishes earnestly for Health; for none knows so well how to
value these things, as he who looks upon them in a contrary State, and has the
Impressions still remaining: Therefore I shall the rather speak a Word of that
which I have already mentioned, That we may the better preserve this
Tranquillity of Mind, and by that means live Happily, not only when at rest and
out of the encumbrance of Business, but also in the midst of the greatest and
most important Employments.

Of Life, and of Active Felicity.
AS this supposes that there are two kinds of Life, and likewise two kinds of
Felicities, the one in Contemplation, the other in Action, wise Men have still
preferred a contemplative before an active Life: However, this does not hinder
those whom either their Birth, Genius or necessity of Affairs have engaged in
Business, from being altogether incapable of enjoying a Tranquillity of Mind;
for whosoever undertakes this, goes not Blindfold to Work, but after he has
for some time seriously considered, and taken a due prospect of the state of
human Affairs, not as from the midst of the Crowd, but as from a higher
Station; and understands, that in the active course of Life there may happen
many Accidents, that all the Wisdom of Man cannot foresee; provides, if not
against each particular, yet against the general Difficulties that may occur:
Such a one is always upon his Guard, ready to take Advice upon all sudden
Emergencies; he knows that he can command what is in himself, but cannot govern
what depends not upon his free Will; he acts according to his Power, and does
what becomes the Duty of an honest Man; and afterward, whatever happens, he
thinks that he ought to be Content and Satisfied; he don't flatter himself with
the certainty of a happy success of all his Undertakings, but thinks that
matters may sometimes happen contrary to his Desires and Endeavors, and
therefore prepares himself in such a manner, that tho he may experience
Adversity, he may nevertheless bear it with Constancy and Patience. Such a one,
I say, thus resolved and prepared, if he be engaged in a busy Life, may govern
himself, that in the midst of the hurry and encumbrance of Affairs he may
maintain in himself an inward repose and calmness of Mind: It Is what Claudian
so truly relates of Theodosius the Great, and which we, without Flattery, may
duly apply to our present Monarch, the true Model of a wise Prince.

-- Nec Te tot limina rerum,
Aut tantum turbavit onus, sed ut altus Olympi
Vertex qui spatio Ventos, Hyemesque relinquit
Perpetuum nulla temeratus Nube serenum,
Celsior exsurgit pluviis, auditque ruentes
Sub pedibus nimbos, and rauca tonitrua calcat;
Sic patiens Animus per tanta negotia liber
Emergit, similisque sui, etc.
Neither the projecting Thoughts of deep Designs, nor the heavy Burden of the
Kingdom, which he supports, can disturb the Peace of his Mind; but like the
high top of Mount Olympus, his Soul is always clear and serene, hovering above
the misty Clouds and storms of Thunder, and always free and undisturbed like it
self.

Servat inoffensam Divina modestia vocem,
Temperiem servant oculi, nec lumina fervor
Asperat, aut rabidas diffundit sanguine venas.
Quinetiam sontes expulsa corrigis ira,
Et placidus delicta domas, nec dentibus unquam
Instrepis horrendum, fremitu nec verbera poscis.
A divine Modesty graces his Voice, no offensive Words drop from his Lips, his
Eyes are never seen to sparkle with Anger, nor his Veins distended with boiling
Blood; he knows how to Reprove without being Transported, and calmly to correct
the Failings of others.

Nile softly glides along without vaunting of its Strength or breaking its
Bounds, and yet it is one of the most useful of all the Rivers of the World:
The Danube, which is yet larger and more rapid, keeps within its Banks, moving
without Noise: Yea, the Ganges, that vast River, passes along silently, rolling
its Waves into the Depths of the Ocean.

Lent fluit Nilus, sed cunctis Amnibus extat
Vtilior, nullas confessus murmr vires.
Acrior at rapidus tacitas praetermeat ingens
Danubius ripas: Eadem clementia saevi
Gurgitis immensum deducit ad ostia Gangen.
Let the Torrents roar among the Rocks, let them threaten and overturn Bridges,
and pursuing their Rage, let them overwhelm or carry before 'em whole Forests;
it is Peace and Tranquillity that have a commanding Power and Effect, far greater
than Violence and Fury, to force Obedience.

Torrentes immane fremant, lapsisque minentur
Pontibus, involvant spumoso vortice Sylvas;
Pax majora decet; peragit tranquilla potestas
Quod violenta nequit, mandataque fortius urget
Imperiosa quies --
Besides, when things are over and accomplished, a wise Man does not Vaunt and
Applaud himself if they succeed well, nor is he disturbed or dejected if they
happen amiss: He does not repent of the Measures he has taken, because every
thing being well examined and duly considered, it was most probable they should
succeed; and therefore he would take the same Course if the same Circumstances
did again occur. The Answer of Photion is remarkable, who when he had dissuaded
them from a War, which nevertheless afterward proved very successful: Though I am
very glad, said he, that the Event happened so Prosperous; yet I don't at all
repent of the Advice I have given. It comes very near that of Cicero's. It
becomes a wise Man, says he, to do nothing against his Will, or what may cause
him to Repent; to do all things sedately and deliberately, with a grave
Steddiness and constancy of Mind, neither supposing things to happen by an
unforeseen Necessity, nor to admire any thing as new and unexpected, but to
abide firm and steadfast in his Judgment. A wise Man ought not to despise the
Advices of other Men, and to trust too rashly to his own Opinion; but having
well weighed Matters, he ought not, out of too mean Apprehensions or Diffidence
of himself, to suffer the Opinion of the Vulgar to sway with him. For this
Reason, that Roman Temporizer deserves to be applauded, who preferred the
Safety of his Country before the Exclamations of the Populace. Photion was of
the same Temper; who because he could not be prevailed upon to rely on the
Strength of his Soldiers and their Courage, and head them on to Battle, they
accused him of Cowardice. But he made them this prudent Answer; My brave
Companions, you cannot make me Courageous, and I will not make you Cowards; it
is sufficient that every one should understand his own Business.

Whether a Contemplative Happiness is to be preferred before an Active.
BUt after all that can be said in Commendation of an Active Felicity;
Aristotle had Reason to prefer a Speculative: For Contemplation exerts the most
Excellent and Divine Part of our Selves; and besides, this sort of Action is
the most noble, innocent, and lasting, and the most easily set on Work. We
shall not here repeat what has been before said upon the first Part of Virtue,
to show wherein the Happiness of a wise Man consists, or the Satisfaction he
receives in a Contemplative Life; it will be sufficient to recite what Cicero
very learnedly observes: What Pleasures, says he, don't a thinking Mind enjoy,
who is employed Night and Day in Contemplation and Study? What extraordinary
Delight is it to observe the Motions and Circumference of the World, the
infinite number of Stars that shine in the Heavens; those seven Planets, which
being more or less distant the one from the other, according as they are higher
or lower, wandering and uncertain in their Motions, and yet never fail to
fulfill their Course in their appointed time? The Sight and Consideration of so
many excellent Things, persuaded the ancient Philosophers to proceed to new
Inquiries, to examine into the cause and beginning of the World, from whence
all things proceed, from whence they are engendered, what differing Qualities
are crept into their Composition, from whence Life and Death happen, how the
Alterations and Changes of one thing into another came to pass, by what weight
the Earth is supported, and how balanced, into what Concavities the Waters are
confined, and how every thing pressed by its own weight, naturally tends to its
own Center. Thus by discerning and continually meditating on these wonderful
Things, we at last arrive to that Knowledge which God heretofore recommended to
Delphos, namely, That the pure Soul having shaken off all Vice, should know it
self, and find it self united to the Divine Understanding or Being. This
procures it an everlasting and unspeakable Delight; for the Contemplations upon
the Power and Nature of the Gods, cause it to have a strong Inclination for
Eternity; and when it once perceives the necessary Consequence of Causes guided
and governed by an eternal Wisdom, it believes not it self confined to the
narrow Limits of this Life: Therefore it considers human Affairs with a
wonderful Tranquillity, it inclines to the Practice of Virtue, it inquires
wherein consists the chief Good, and the chief Evil, whither all our Actions
ought to tend, and what is the Rule of Life we ought to steer by.

Moreover, he who shall have considered the strong Revolutions of Things since
the beginning of the World, the Rise, Progress, Consistency, Declension and
Overthrow of Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Religions, Opinions, Laws, Customs,
Manners, and the present Ways and Methods of Living, now in Vogue, which our
Forefathers would have rejected, such as our Ancestors seriously followed, and
which we now laugh at, and such possibly as will hereafter please our
Posterity, yet could we but at present see them, we should laugh at and deride:
These Fashions and Customs though they change in some particular things, may in
general be said to be the same, and are only a Sign of the Frailty, Lightness,
and Inconstancy of Mankind. And thus it always happens, that Men by their
Lightness live continually miserable, being carried away by Ambition or
Covetousness, or some other Passion: They don't see how much it is their
Concern to free themselves from such Cares, to be content with little, to live
within themselves, and to spend their Life peaceably, without so much noise.
He, I say, who shall have employed his Mind in such Contemplations, will,
doubtless, feel extraordinary Delight, and will be very happy in his Thoughts,
especially if he considers all things as from that high and sacred Tower, from
whence, as we said, Virtue looks down upon the several Actions and Affairs of
Men, their Ambition, their Pride, their Vanity, their sordid Covetousness, and
the rest before hinted.

Of Freedom from Pain in particular.
NOw to speak something concerning Freedom from Pain: It seems not so much in
our Power to free our selves from Pain in our Bodies, as to ease our selves of
Troubles in our Minds; for though it is difficult to stop the Passions in their
full Career, and check their exorbitant Motions, yet if we except such as have
a Conjunction with Pain, such as are, particularly, Hunger and Thirst, which
create a desire of Eating and Drinking, it seems in respect of the others, as
they arise in us from Opinion; so they may, (if we keep our selves from the
Influence of that Opinion,) be checked and curbed. But in relation to the Pains
of the Body, though we may take care not to draw them upon our selves outwardly,
nor stir them up inwardly; yet it often happens that the Temper which we derive
from our Mother's Womb is such, that upon that very account we are liable to
many Pains during the course of our Lives. It Is not without Reason therefore,
that Esop feigned, that when Prometheus was to temper the Clay, with which he
was to make Man, made use of no Water but of Tears; for by that he had a design
to teach us that the Nature of our Bodies is such, that it is partly subject to
outward, and partly to inward Mischiefs; and seeing it is impossible but some
will often befall us, of necessity we must suffer some Pain. I should be endless
to enumerate the Particulars of this kind, that may befall us, either from
Tyrants, from Fools, from all sorts of Animals, from Heat, from Cold, from
Fevers, Gout, Defluctions, etc. I shall only observe, that such who have been
sometimes tormented with them, may tell with what earnestness they wished to be
freed, and how much they would have given to be delivered. Certainly there is
no Person that labors under an acute Distemper, and is grievously tormented
with Pain, but when he considers such as are in Health, esteems them very
happy, and wonders that they don't acknowledge the greatness of the Advantage
they enjoy, it being so considerable, that no worldly Enjoyments can stand in
competition with, or be accounted a valuable Exchange for Health. Wherefore in
all Ages, Men have highly extolled it. But as every Book is full of its own
Praises, I shall only take notice what an ancient Poet says, That the greatest
Benefit that can befall frail Man, is to enjoy Health.

Fragili viro optima res been valere. And as another says, Nothing can be more
advantageous to us, than to be free from Pain and Diseases.

Si ventri been est, si lateri est, pedibusque tuis, nil
Divitiae poterunt Regales addere majus.
Now what I have here observed is to prove, that it is not without ground what
I have asserted, That to be free from Sickness or bodily Pain, is part of our
Happiness. Truly, though light Pains and such as are of a short continuance may
be easily supported; and though we willingly undergo great ones, when they are in
order either to avoid greater Evils, or for the obtaining of greater Pleasures;
yet there is no Man so fond of Pain for Pain's sake, but would willingly be
quit of it, if it were not in order to the obtaining something better, which
could not be acquired without it.

Men commonly extol Zenon and Anaxarcas, for the constancy they expressed
against the Tyrants in their greatest Tortures: And Calanus also and Peregrinus
are much celebrated for freely offering themselves to the Flames. But supposing
it had been in their Power to have purchased as much Glory by any other Means,
I refer it to your self, whether they would have made this Choice. Cicero
likewise very much extolleth Possidonius, for that being grievously tormented
with the Gout, when Pompey visited him at Rhodes, he told him, That he was very
sorry that he could not hear him; to which Possidonius answered, You may if you
please, and I will not suffer so great a Person to come to me in vain. He tells
us that he began to discourse to him excellently, viz. That there is nothing
Good, but that which is honest. And when his Pains assaulted him often during
the Interview, he as often said, Thou will never prevail upon me, O Pain, though
never so grievous, to make me confess thee to be an Evil. But though Possidonius
patiently endured the Pains that he could not avoid; yet you cannot but imagine
that he would rather have been free from 'em, and been able to discourse
without 'em.

We may here add, That if, as we have already said, Pain is the chief Evil; it
necessarily follows, that a freedom from Pain should be the chief Good; and the
rather, because Nature seems to have bestowed upon us an inclination for
nothing else, but for this freedom: For when any Pain happens to us, whether by
Hunger, or by any other Desire, we are naturally carried to that Action, by
which we may remove that Pain; and if any Pleasure intervenes, we have observed
that Nature adds it as an Encouragement to the Action needful to obtain that
freedom from Pain: And probably we may consequently add, by what Means we may
obtain so great an Advantage. But, besides the diverse Remedies which may be
taken from the convenient Precautions, and from the Medicinal Art, which relate
not to Moral Philosophy, we may say, That the most general and easy Means to
procure this freedom from Pain, is Temperance and an exquisite Sobriety: For by
this Means we may, if not altogether remove, at least very much correct the
hereditary Diseases, avoid such as we contract by our own Miscarriages, and
free our selves from such as are already contracted. Let us observe only, That
he who enjoys a freedom from Pain, may without any bitterness possess the
different kinds of Pleasures, as well those of the Body, as of the Mind and
Health. As Plutarch very well compares Health to the Tranquillity of the Sea, in
regard the Sea gives an Opportunity to its Inhabitants to breed, and
conveniently to bring up their young; so Health affords to all Men a Means to
perform all the Functions of Life conveniently, and without Pain. Therefore,
says he, though Prodicus maintains, and has elegantly described, That Fire is
the greatest Seasoning of our Life: Nevertheless, some may correct his Fancy,
and enlarge upon it by saying, That Health gives a supernatural Relish, seeing
that neither boiled nor roast nor any other Meat, whatever Haut Goust they have,
can give any Relish to such as are sick, or to such whom some distemper has
put out of order; whereas in a healthful Constitution, every Morsel is pleasant
and grateful to the Appetite. Now the same may be said of the Pleasures, that
relate to the other Senses; for to a sick Body, the Delights which otherwise
are lawful and honest, displease; the Smelling is not refreshed with Sweet
Odours, the Ear cares not for Music, nor does the Sight rejoice in beautiful
Objects. Nay, our Entertainments, Public Shows, our Recreations in Walking,
Hunting, and other such like Divertisements cannot please, and are of no
service for want of this Seasoning; and without which, Pleasure it self, as we
have said, is no Pleasure: As all this is most certain, in regard of these
Pleasures of the Body, it is doubtless much more in respect of that of the
Mind; for it is apparent, that neither in Sickness, or under any grievous Pain,
no Man can study, read or meditate; for while the Soul is united to this crasy
and mortal Body, there is such a Union between these two Parties, that the Body
cannot suffer, but the Soul must feel it, and be drawn, though against its will,
from its most pleasing Objects; for the afflicting Pain employs all the
Thoughts and Attention of the Mind.

Happy therefore are they who by their natural Constitution enjoy a sound
Health, free from Pain, and consequently more capable in taking Pleasure in the
study of Wisdom. Happy are likewise such, who tho they have an infirm Body, yet
govern it with so much Prudence, and correct it with that Temperance, that if
they don't altogether avoid all Pain, yet they make it so light and easy to be
born, that it proves a small Impediment to the full enjoyment of the Pleasures
of the Mind. Therefore the First ought to take heed, how they disturb or by
their Intemperance weaken the sound Constitution of their Bodies, and the other
ought to amend theirs, and to bring it as much as is possible to this State of
Indolency. And both of 'em, should take care of their Bodies, if it were only
for the sake of the Soul, which cannot be well while the Body is sick: Here we
must truly acknowledge, that tho the chief part of Happiness consists in the
Tranquillity of the Mind, yet we must not despise the other part, which consists
in the freedom from bodily Pain.

I confess there be some who believe, that it is a crime, when it concerns the
chief good or the business of Man, to join the advantages of the Body to them
of the Mind; and consequently believe, That it is an unworthy Deed to join that
freedom from bodily Pain, with the Tranquillity of the Mind. But as these are
Stoics, or such as affect to follow them, I cannot but mention here, what
Cicero himself says against them, when addressing himself to Cato, he begins
with this Principle of the Stoics; That we are recommended to our selves, and
that the first Inclination, that Nature has bestowed on us, is
Self-preservation; that we may preserve our selves such as we ought to be; that
we are Men made up of Soul and Body; and therefore, according to our original
and natural Inclination, we must love these Things, and make them the end of
that chief Happiness, which consists in the acquisition of such Things as are
according to Nature. Now, says he, seeing these are our Opinions, and that you
assign that to be the End, to live according to Nature, show us now, how you
can maintain, That to live honestly is barely and absolutely the chief Good?
How have you so soon forsaken the Body and all those Things, that are according
to Nature? If we sought for the chief Happiness, not of Man, but of some other
Creature, which were all Spirit, that End that you speak of would not be the
only End of that Spirit, for it would desire Health, and to be free from Pain;
it would desire also its own Preservation, and whatsoever might tend to it; and
it would propose to it self to live according to Nature, which is, as we have
said, to possess all things agreeable with Nature, at least in some measure, if
not in the most considerable part. Virtue alone, say they, is sufficient to
render us happy, and the Goods of the Body are but as it were small Appendages,
which are not capable of rendering Life more happy. But truly a Man in grievous
Pain would be very much obliged to him, who would free him from it. And if a
wise Man were condemned by some Tyrant to encounter with Pain, his mortal Foe,
he would muster up all his rational Faculties to assist and support him in so
difficult and dangerous a Combat. And then goes on, Every Creature of
whatsoever Nature, loves it self, for where is that Creature, which forsakes it
self, or any part of it self, or the use of that part, or any of the things,
which are according to Nature, and its state and frame? Certainly no Person
has forgotten his first Constitution, but retains his first Faculty from the
beginning to the end. How can it therefore be, that only Man's Nature should
suffer Man to forget his Body, and should place his chief Happiness, not in the
whole, but in one part of himself? Wisdom has not begot Man, but has found
him begun by Nature. If there were nothing to be perfected in Man, but some
Motions of the Soul, that is to say, of Reason; Wisdom ought to have no other
aim but Virtue, which is the perfection of Reason. So also if there were
nothing to be perfected but the Body, its chief end would be Health, a freedom
from Pain, Beauty, etc. But here is a Question concerning the chief good of
Man, who is composed of Soul and Body; Why don't we therefore seek his chief
good, in relation to his whole Nature? They who place it in one or the other
part, act in the same manner as if they had only a great care of the right Hand
and neglected the Left: Because Virtue, as all the World acknowledges, holds
the first and chief Place in Man, and we esteem those who are Wise to have
attained a great degree of Perfection; will you admire nothing but Virtue,
dazzle your Eyes only with its Splendour and Glory? Truly Virtue is the best and
most excellent thing in Man, but you don't seem to consider your self enough; we
don't desire that Virtue should forsake Nature, but that it should keep and
preserve it. But according to your direction, it preserves one part, and leaves
the other. If the first Institution of Man could speak, it would tell us, that
the first beginnings of its Desire, were to preserve it self in that State,
that it appeared in at the beginning, etc.

Besides we are not ignorant of what we are wont to say, when we declaim
against Pleasure, That it is the capital Plague of Man, the mortal Enemy of
Reason, that it puts out the Eyes of the Understanding, and that it has no
correspondency with Virtue, that it is the source of Treasons, the ruin of
Commonwealths, the origin of all Crimes, that it wastes our paternal Estates,
blasteth our Reputation, weakens the Body and makes it subject to Diseases, and
that in short it hastens old Age and Death.

Not Heaven's high Rage, nor Swords or Flames combind;
Can bring such Plagues as Pleasure to the Mind:
On's mad with Dice, one melts in vicious Love,
But when the knotty Gout forbids his Joints to move;
How sweet an evil Luxury appears,
Which drowned in Flesh, and deaf to Heavenly Cares,
The sluggish Senses of their Force disarms,
And worse transforms the Limbs than Circe's Charms,
Without it chears the Man, within destroys,
Bears Serpents in its Gold, and Torments in its Joys.
But as we have often explained our selves concerning Pleasure, and as often
declared, that when we say Pleasure is the End, the Happiness and the chief
Good, we mean not hereby brutish and sordid Pleasures, but only a calm and
sedate Temper of the Mind, and the freedom of the Body from Pain. It is plain
therefore, that these Objections do not affect us.

CHAP VI. What Virtue and Advantage accrues by being contented with a little.
IT is not without Cause, that we have already declared, That the true and most
general means to obtain and preserve that Pleasure which makes an happy Life,
is to encourage Temperance, by which we may so moderate our Desires, as to
resist and cut off all unnecessary and useless Things, and may reduce our
selves only to such as are needful and natural, whereby we may accustom our
selves to be content with a little; for by this means, we may preserve that
Tranquillity of Mind, which makes up the principal part of our Happiness; there
being no need that he who has reduced himself only to the things necessary for
Nature, should disquiet and torment himself so much as is usual; for such
things are to be found every where, and are easily to be obtained. Whereas the
cares and disturbances of the Mind torment only such as are not content with
things necessary, but are always so eager in the pursuit of things superfluous,
that if they meet with Disappointment in obtaining of 'em, they are very much
disquieted: If they have acquired 'em, they fear losing 'em: When they lose
'em, they pine away with Grief; and if they continue with them, they are still
dissatisfied. So that they deal with their Mind, as with the Tunn of the
Danaids, they never give it any rest, but being provoked by some fresh
Appetite, as by some kind of Fury, they always seem to undertake new Labor.

This is also the sure way of obtaining and preserving that grateful Repose,
which makes up the second part of our Happiness; for he who is content with
things necessary, will never trouble himself with those unnecessary Pains and
Fatigues, which such are obliged to undergo, who eagerly, tho vainly, pursue
Things superfluous; he acts nothing to undermine his Health, he draws not upon
himself those encumbrances, which usually attend a voluptuous Life; for such as
live Frugally and on plain Diet, are rarely subject to Distempers, but rather
such who either Eat to excess, or else feed upon Meats, which are not natural,
or else corrupted by provoking Sauces or other Artifices of the Cooks.
Epicurus, no doubt, had a true Sense of the necessity and excellency of this
Virtue of Moderation, when he cried out; That the way to be truly Rich, is to
be satisfied with Things necessary. That Poverty, proportioned to the Law of
Nature, is a great Fund or Treasury of Riches. Now if you would be rightly
informed what those just Bounds and Limits are, which this Law of Nature
prescribes, they are these, viz. Not to Hunger, not to Thirst, not to be Cold;
Non Esurire, non Sitire, non Algere: It Is what he had experienced in himself,
if we will refer our selves to the Testimony of Juvenal.

If any ask me what would satisfy,
To make Life easy, thus I would reply;
As much as keeps out Hunger, Thirst and Cold;
As much as made wise Epicurus bless't,
Who in small Gardens spacious Realms possess't.
This is a commendable Thing, says he in Seneca, viz. a pleasant and contented
Poverty; but if it be Pleasant it is not Poverty, for whosoever is satisfied
with Poverty, is Rich; for he is not Poor, who enjoys but little, but he who
desires more. In short, as Riches are to be valued for the sake of their End,
which is nothing else but Contentment and Pleasure; so on the contrary, Poverty
appears by the want of this End. It is certain, that a pleasant Poverty is no
Poverty, but great Riches; and sorrowful Riches, are not Riches but great
Poverty. The Traveller, who sings on the Road, is in effect Rich, and he really
Poor, who being laden with Wealth, dreads the Pistol or the Sword, and shakes
for fear at the mere shadow of a Reed, which he perceives to move in a
moon-shiny Night. The Tradesman, while he is without Money, yet pleases his
Neighborhood with his musical Ditties; but stumbling on a Purse of Gold, at
the same time that he becomes Rich he becomes dumb, being possessed with the
fear of losing it. In short, I pray tell me which of these two dies the Richer,
who depart this World at the same time; he who never had those things, which we
usually term Riches, and nevertheless has lived very contentedly; or he who
being laden with 'em, has led a life full of Vexation and Discontent?

Cicero seems to be much delighted with this Virtue and Moderation of Temper,
which obliges us to live and be content with little; for after he had
instanced, in the Examples of Socrates and Diogenes, That the Burden of Poverty
may be made more easy, he alludes to the Words of Epicurus; O, what a little
does Nature desire, what a small matter suffices it! And Asserts, That Wisdom
is often discovered under mean Apparel. Nay, as if he had undertaken to write
the Praises of this Philosopher, he continues his Discourse in this manner,
What then? Those glorious Orators are they more Courageous and more Generous
than Epicurus in encountering Poverty, which troubles Mankind so much? Other
Philosophers seem to be as well prepared as he was against all Evils, yet there
is none whom Poverty does not terrify; but for his part, a very little
satisfies him, and none has ever better treated of Frugality than he: For as
he was altogether averse from whatever might cause the desire either of Riches,
of Lust, Ambition, of sumptuous Expenses or Delights, etc. Why should he take
care to obtain 'em, or be eager in the pursuit of 'em? What! shall Anacharsis
the Scythian be able to despise Riches, etc. and shall not our Philosophers be
able to do the like? See here the Contents of one of this Scythian's Letters.

Anacharsis to Hanno, Health,

INstead of rich and glorious Apparel, I use the simple Habit of our Country;
for Shoes, the bottoms of my Feet well hardened. The Ground is my Bed; Hunger
is my Sauce. I live upon Milk, Cheese and Flesh. Therefore if you come to see
me, you will find a Man very quiet; and as for the Presents which you have been
pleased to honor me, give them to your Fellow-Citizens, or offer them to the
immortal Gods.

All the Philosophers of what Sect soever, excepting those, whom a vicious
Nature has turned aside from right Reason, have been of this Persuasion. When
Socrates, at a public Rejoicing, saw much Gold and Silver carried about, and
exposed to public View; cried aloud, How many things are there, which I don't
at all desire? When Xenocrates understood, that the Ambassadors of Alexander
had brought him fifty Talents, which was a considerable Sum of Money at that
time in Athens, he invited the Ambassadors to Supper in the Academy, and caused
'em to be entertained with things moderate and convenient, free from Luxury and
Excess. The next day they desired him to tell them on whom they should bestow
that Money they had brought to him? What, said he, did you not take notice
yesterday by the Supper that I gave you, that I have no need of Money? But when
he perceived that his Refusal gave them Offense, he accepted of Thirty Minae;
that he might not seem to despise the King's Liberality. As for Diogenes the
Cynick, he treated him more freely; for when Alexander asked him, what he stood
in need of? answered, At present I need nothing, but that you would not
interpose between me and the Sunshine. This Cynick was wont to prefer his own
Happiness to that of the King of Persia; and to boast how much his Life and his
Fortune was more blessed than this Monarchs; he for his part wanting nothing,
whereas the other could never have enough: That he desired none of those
Pleasures, of which the King could never be satisfied, but that he was content
with his own, which the King could never be.

This that I have mentioned concerning Diogenes, minds me, what Seneca and
Maximus of Tire have written; for the first having shown, That great Estates
are often troublesome and the cause of Sorrow and Mischief; That the Rich
suffer not more easily the loss of Goods than the Poor; That it is far more
tolerable not to acquire than to lose. So that those whom Fortune never
favored seem to be more happy, than those whom it has forsaken. After he had
manifested this at large, thus he proceeds: 'This is what Diogenes, that great
Soul, understood, when he put himself into that Condition, that nothing could
be taken from him. 'Call this Poverty, Want, or give whatever disdainful Title
you please to this Tranquillity, I shall believe that Diogenes is not happy, if
you can find any body else, from who^ nothing can be taken. Truly if any
question the Felicity of Diogenes, he may as well question the Condition of the
immortal Gods, and whether they are less happy, because they have not
Possessions subject to the capricious Changes of Fortune, and which can be
taken away.

As for Maximus of Tire, he speaks to us in this manner, upon a subject of
Dispute, that happened about the Cynical Life, whether it was to be preferred
to any other. Diogenes, says he, was neither an Attick nor a Dorian, nor
tutored in the Schools of Salon or Lycurgus, for neither Places nor Laws
communicate Virtue; but he was born in the Town of Synope, in the botton of
Pontus Euxinus. When he had consulted Apollo, he forsook all the Occasions of
Grief and Trouble, he delivered himself from his Fetters, and like a wise and
free Bird, passed through the World without fearing the Tyrants, without binding
himself to any particular Laws, without applying himself to the Administration
of public Affairs, without being troubled in the Education of Children,
without being clogged by Matrimony, without turmoiling himself in the Manuring
of the Ground, without engaging himself in the Management of War, without
Trafficking by Sea or Land; for he laughed at all these sorts of Men, and at
their several stations of Life. As we commonly laugh at those Children, which
we see so intent to play with Trifles, till they often fall together by the
Ears, and hurt one another. He led the Life of an Independent, being free from
Fears and Disquietudes. In Winter Seasons he did not by long fatiguing Journies
approach the Babylonians, nor in the Summer the Medes; but his usual Stages
were from Attica to the Isthmus, according to the Season, and from the Isthmus
to Attica again. His Royal Palaces were the Temples, the Colleges, and the
sacred Woods: His Riches very large and secure, and which not being
circumscribed, were not easily to be surprised by Ambushes, being the whole
Earth with all the Fruits it bore, and the Fountains that it affords, more
excellent than the Wines of Lesbos and Chios. He used himself also to every
sort of Air as the Lions do, and would not avoid the changings of the Seasons,
appointed by Jupiter; neither did he study any Contrivance to secure himself
from them; but accustomed himself in such a manner to all Seasons, by this kind
of Living, that he secured his Health and Strength, without any assistance from
Physic, without experiencing the sharpness of the Iron, or the Fire; without
imploring the Help of Chiron, or of Esculapius or Asclepiades, and without
submitting to the Predictions of Soothsayers, or to magical and superstitious
Purifications, or to the Vanity of Conjurations: At the same time that all
Greece was in Arms and Uproar, and all the neighboring Nations were in War one
against another, he alone enjoys as it were a Truce with all the Earth, and as
having subdued Fighting, was without Arms in the midst of armed Men. Nay, even
the basest of Men, the Tyrants, and his very Slanderers had a Respect for him,
and would not in the least hurt him, though he reproved them, objecting and
representing before their Eyes their own Actions, which is a very safe and very
convenient way of Reproving, proper to re-call the Minds of Men to Peace and
Reason.

We may upon this occasion mention Seneca's Expression, as proceeding from the
School of Epicurus. That those Persons live the most agreeable and pleasant
Lives, who make Pleasure the least of their Care. And they enjoy the greatest
Riches, who stand least in need of 'em. For a magnificent way of Living
consists chiefly in the ostentation of Riches; he who thinks, that he does not
stand in need of 'em, and therefore fears not the loss of 'em, may without 'em
make a very pleasant Use of 'em; and the rather because he, who supposes he
cannot live happily without 'em, fears the loss of 'em, and while that Fear
possesses him, he cannot quietly enjoy 'em; it being impossible to enjoy any
thing we call Good, which brings Trouble and Disquietude along with it. The
miserarable Wretch, says he immediately after, passionately desires to
increase his Stores more and more, and while he is blinded with that Passion,
he forgets to enjoy 'em; he examins his Receipts, makes up his Accounts, goes
to the Exchange, turns over his Calendar, and of a rich Man he becomes a
Factor. We shall be Rich with much greater Satisfaction, when we shall
understand, that to be Poor is not so mischievous as we suppose. But let us
rest satisfied with this Instance at present. As it was a pleasant Remark of
Socrates, when seeing the great quantity and variety of the Wares that were
exposed to Sale, to be able to say, How many things are there, that I have no
occasion for? So likewise if any Person perhaps sees himself in Possession of
all those things, and at the same time, when he considers his Houses, his
Movables, his Attendants, his Table, his Clothing, and all other his
Enjoyments, he finds himself inwardly in a Temper and Ability to say, I have,
indeed, all these things, but I can live very well without 'em. I have not an
absolute need of 'em, I could live at ease in a House less Magnificent, and
meanlier furnished; I could well be without that great number of Attendants,
these rare and exquisite Dishes, this rich Attire. If any, I say, is in that
happy Disposition of Mind, he may doubtless enjoy with pleasure his Plenty and
Glory: For he will understand, that he may with ease want a great number of
things, for which, when we have a too earnest love and longing, they do rather
disturb the Peace of our Lives. And by this means he will be the more ready
patiently to bear the loss of 'em, upon any Misfortune happening; and the rather
because he will find that they are not absolutely necessary for him. Neither
will he take so much Pains nor undergo so many Fatigues and Troubles, as is
usual to increase 'em, when he shall consider that he can enjoy more of true
and solid Pleasure in a larger Measure, than he now possesses, when he enjoys
less. That what he may gather up more, will not be for his own advantage, but
either for his Heirs, or it may be for some ungrateful Wretches, or for
Prodigals, or for Flatterers, or for Thieves, and nevertheless that he must
disturb his Quiet, and cast himself into a Sea of Trouble, Pain and Sorrow, to
procure 'em for them.

And here we may also observe that Seneca had very good Reason to make use of
this Sentence of Epicurus, That if any Man having all the Necessaries requisite
for Life, and thinks himself not Rich enough, though he were the Lord of all the
World, he would still be miserable. For if any Man who is in a moderate State,
fancies that he cannot live as happily as others, who are in a higher and more
eminent Station, truly though this Man should not only equal, but outdo them in
their Splendor and Grandeur, he would not hereby become more happy, but would
still remain miserable, and never be satisfied; because of the restless Nature
of his Passions, which when they have once passed the Bounds appointed by
Nature, keep no measures and can never be satiated. As for that other
celebrated Maxim, That whatsoever is necessary for Nature, may easily be
obtained, and, that what is hard to be got, is not needful. This is a Sentence
that Stobeus and others have borrowed out of Epicurus; and which they mention
in other Terms: Let Thanks be returned to kind Nature, which has so ordered
every thing, that what is needful is easy to be obtained, and what is
difficult, is not of necessity. Cicero is of the same Opinion, when he makes
Epicurus say; That he judged, that Nature alone was sufficient to make a wise
Man Rich, and that natural Riches are easy to be got, for Nature is content
with little. And Seneca says, That according to the Opinion of Epicurus, Not
Hunger, not Thirst, not to feel Cold, are the Limits that Nature prescribes to
it self; That to satisfy Hunger and Thirst, there is no need of dwelling in
sumptuous Palaces, nor to lay any Restraint upon our selves, with that
supercilious and sullen Gravity; nor to venture on the Ocean, nor to follow
Armies. That which Nature requires is easily to be obtained, and obvious to all
the World. That Sweat is the Price of Superfluities, such as make the
Magistrates attend the Courts, the Captains their Tents, and the Pilots their
Ships in the midst of the dangerous and tempestuous Seas.

It Is the greatest Wealth to live content,
With little, such the greatest Joy resent;
And bounteous Fortune still affords supply,
Sufficient for a thrifty Luxury.
I confess, through the Tyranny and Cruelty of some Men, innocent Persons may
sometimes want the necessities of Life, and others by Accident, or by their own
Folly, may fall into that Condition, that things needful may be wanting to
them. But as for Dame Nature, certainly she is no niggard to Men, she who is
the common Nurse of all Creatures: If she has made them subject to Hunger, she
has likewise bestowed upon 'em her Fruits, her Corn and her Herbs, to appease
it. If she suffers them to Thirst, she affords them plenty of Springs in every
Place. If the Air be either Cold or Hot, Nature allows them a Skin thick and
hard enough to bear these Inconveniences, as it is experienced in the Skin of
the Face; and if the other parts of the Body are more tender and sensible, it
affords us the Shades of the Trees, of the Caves, and other cool Places, or the
Warmth of the Sunshine, the Fire, the Sheeps Wool, to preserve and defend us
against other Enormities.

It has also given us as much Foresight and Caution as the Ants, to provide
things needful for the time to come; though many times we despise the Providence
of that little Creature, that after the Winters approach, never ventures out of
its private retreat, but in a prudent and wise manner, enjoys quietly in
Winter, what it industriously gathered in Summer, as Horace observes.

Quae simul inversum contristat Aquarius annum,
Non usquam prorepit, et illis utitur ante,
Quaesitis Sapiens --
For when we behold the greatest part of Mankind laboring continually to gain
Riches, one would think, that we had forgot to use them, and that we were born
and designed for no other end, but to heap 'em up.

And if we consider Men in a Civil Society; you will scarce find any who uses
never so little Care and Industry, but is able to find enough to satisfy his
Hunger and Thirst, and to secure himself from the Inconveniences and Mischiefs
of the open Air. And if he has a plentiful Table, delicious Wines, rich
Clothing, a glorious Palace, Servants well clothed, and so of the rest; these
are Things, for which we are not to return thanks to kind Nature, as being
absolutely necessary. The use of those Things that are easily to be obtained,
is certainly no less pleasing than of those that are difficultly come at; and
it is a mistake to think, that none but rich Men can truly relish Joy and
Pleasure.

Nam neque divitibus contingunt gaudia solis. But we shall speak of this
hereafter; it will be sufficient in the mean while to take notice of that
excellent Passage of Seneca, which makes very much for this purpose.

Whatsoever is subservient to our good, God, says he, the common Father of
Mankind has put it into our Hands. He has not expected, that we should desire
it, he has freely bestowed it upon us, and of his own accord; and the things
that are able to hurt as, he has hid away far from us: So that we can complain
of none but our selves, because in spite of Nature, we are endeavoring to
fetch them out of the very Bowels of the Earth. We have cast our selves
blindfold into sensual Pleasures, which are the source of all Evils: We have
suffered our selves to be carried away with Ambition, Glory and Vanity. What
Advice therefore can I now give you? Nothing new; for they be not new only, for
which we seek a Remedy. The first thing that we should do, is to look into our
selves, and to distinguish well between Things necessary, and Things
superfluous. Necessary offer themselves in every place, there is nothing but
what is Superfluous, which gives Trouble and Vexation in the procuring it. Don't
think that you have any great cause to value your selves, if you have despised
soft Couches, rich Jewels and costly and stately Furniture. You will wonder at
your selves, when you shall have contemned things necessary. It is no great
matter to be able to subsist, without this great and Royal State, without being
repasted with the Brains of Peacocks, or the Wings of Pheasants, nor for the
other extravagancies of Luxury, which put us upon choosing some certain Members
of Animals, and despising the rest. I shall value you when you will not despise
a piece of dry Bread, when you shall be persuaded, That the Herbs grow not only
in time of need, for the benefit of the Beasts, but for Men also; and when you
shall have learned, That the Fruits of the Trees are sufficient to satisfy you.

O the miserable blindness of Mankind, says Lucretius! Don't we see plainly,
that Nature advises us nothing but that we our selves should aim at, a freedom
from Pain and a Tranquillity of Mind; That we should be content with little, and
that without these needless Dainties, we should spend our Lives quietly and
pleasantly.

O Miseras Hominum mentes, etc.
Qualibus in tenebris vitae quantisque periclis,
Degitur hoc aevi, quodcumque'st. Nonne videre
Nil aliud sibi Naturam latrare, nisi ut, cum
Corpore sejunctus dolor absit, mente fruatur,
Jucundo sensu cura semota metuque
Ergo corpoream ad naturam pauca videmus,
Esse opus omnino, quae demant quemque dolorem,
Delicias quoque uti nullus substernere possint,
Gratius interdum neque Natura ipsa requirit.
That Diet, says Epicurus, in Cicero, which is the most Natural, such as
Broth, Bread, Cheese, pure Water, affords as much Pleasure, and more Health to
the Body, than the most costly Dishes, and richest Wines.' And in Stobaeus he
speaks in this manner; 'My Body is abundantly delighted with Bread and Water,
and I renounce the Pleasures, that proceed from magnificent Tables. Elian
says, If I may have wholesome Bread and clear Water, I think my self as happy
as Jupiter himself. And in Seneca, he speaks thus, We must return to the Law of
Nature; her Riches are ready provided, and offered to all the World; for
whatsoever we stand in need of, is either freely exposed, or very easily
obtained. Nature requires Bread and Water, no Person becomes hereby the poorer,
and he who confines his Desires within these Limits, may secure his own
Happiness. Look to the true Riches, learn to be satisfied with little, and
speak out courageously: Let us have Water, let us have Bread, which are the
necessary supports of Life, and then we may vye with the Gods for Happiness.

If in your Night Revels your Chambers are not adorned and perfumed, nor
entertained with soft charming Music, yet you may upon the brink of a purling
Stream, under a shady Grove sweetly repose your self upon the Grass, and
without all this Noise, there take your small Repast, pleasantly diverting your
selves, with what variety Nature has decked the Earth.

Si non aurea sunt juvenum simulacra per aedes,
Lampadas igniferas manibus retinentia dextris,
Lumina nocturnis epulis, ut suppeditentur;
Nec domus argento fulget, auroque renidet,
Nec citharis reboant laqueata, aurataque Templa:
Attamen inter se prostrati in gramine molli,
Propter aquae rivum sub ramis arboris altae,
Non magnis opibus jucunde corpora curant;
Praesertim cum tempestas arridet, and anni
Tempora conspergunt viridantes floribus herbas.
Are you sooner cured of a Fever by reposing your self on a Down-Bed, in a
Chamber curiously Painted over, and richly Gilt, than by lying on a plain Bed,
with a convenient Coverlid?

Truly we must take heed of entertaining any such Fancy, That an Apricius takes
more Pleasure in his rare and exquisite Dainties, than a laboring Man in his
plain and ordinary Fair; for such a one being always full, finds his Appetite
continually palled, whereas the Labourer daily renews his Appetite, and
relishes the sweetness of every thing that he Eats: So that when the former
despises his Pheasant and his Mullet, the latter finds a savouriness in his
Nuts and his Onions. Truly, he scarce seems to have well experienced Hunger and
Thirst, who cannot be persuaded, that an ordinary Person may eat with as much
Pleasure and Delight as a Prince, only that he defers to sit at his little
plain Table an Hour later, than the Prince at his magnificent Entertainment. If
men could but once understand these Truths, they would quickly perceive that
there is no need to endeavor so much to get great and excessive Riches, to
indulge their Gluttony; seeing that they may without so much Toil obtain the
same Pleasures, and that these Pleasures are more Pure and Innocent. It seems
the Poet had this Fancy, when he advises to shun Grandeur; for it is certain,
That one may live more contentedly in a small Cottage, than Kings and Princes
in their Royal Palaces.

-- fuge magna, licet sub paupere tecto
Reges, and Regum vita praecurrere Amicos.
But let us understand from Porphyry, how far Epicurus has advanced a plain
and abstemious Life, even so far as to suppose it to extend to a total
abstinence from Flesh. Thus he says,

We have found what the common People will not believe, that the Epicureans
themselves, who hold Pleasure to be the End, for the most part are content
since the Days of their Chieftain, with Fruits, Pulse and Broth; and that the
chief of their Discourses tend to Teach nothing more, but that Nature is
satisfied with a little; that the plainest Food and the easiest attained to,
satisfies plentifully our Wants, and that what is over and above is only to
gratify our unsatiated Appetites, which is neither in it self needful, nor can
be occasioned by the usefulness of that, which being wanting, might cause the
ruin of the whole, but that it proceeds from vain and foolish Mistakes, with
which we are prejudiced.

They say also, That a Philosopher ought to have this Persuasion, That nothing
shall be wanting to him the remainder of his Days. Now there is nothing better
able to beget that Opinion in him, than to believe, by his own Experience, that
he has need but of very little, and that these things are common and easy to
be got; and what is over and above is needless, relating to nothing but Luxury
and Excess; and that such things are acquired with a great deal of Pains and
Difficulty. So that all the Benefit and Pleasure that might redound from
thence' don't compensate the Labor and Toil we must undergo in the obtaining
of 'em, and our continual Care to preserve 'em. Besides, when the Thoughts of
Death approach, we easily forsake little things, or such as are of a mean value
and common.

They say moreover, That the use of Flesh prejudices our Health, more than it
benefits; because our Health is preserved by those very things, by which it is
recovered, when we have lost it. Now it is recovered by a light Diet, and
abstinence from Flesh; it is therefore preserved by the same means. But it is
no wonder if the Vulgar believe, That the use of Flesh is necessary for our
Health, for they are persuaded that all the Pleasures which are in Motion and
Flattering, are assisting to it; the Pleasures of Love not excepted, which are
never good for any thing, but commonly very mischievous.

Horace also seems to have understood the Advantages, that a frugal and sober
Life procures, when he tell us; That there is nothing that contributes so much
to our Health as to Eat and Drink sparingly, and to be content with the
plainest Diet; and that to be persuaded of these Truths, we need but remember a
little sober and frugal Meal that we have formerly made; whereas when we glut
our selves with all manner of Varieties, part turns into Choler, Phlegm and
Humors, which causes Flatus's and Indigestion in the Stomach.

Acippe nunc victus tenuis quae quantaque secum
Afferat --
-- imprimis valeas been; nam variae res
Vt noceant homini, credas memor illius escae
Quae simplex olim tibi cesserit: At simul assis
Miscueris elixa, simul conchylia turdis;
Dulcia se in bilem vertent, Stomachoque tumultum
Lenta feret pituita. Vides ut pallidus omnis
Caena desurgat dubia --
Truly we have cause to wonder, that Men who in all other actions are Rational
and Discreet, have so little regard to the manner of their Eating and Drinking,
heeding this the least of all other Things.

For First, we ought to stay for the most necessary or convenient time of
Eating, for the which we need nothing but an Appetite to direct us; and as
Hunger is the most innocent, so it is the most relishing and pleasant Sauce.

Secondly, a plain and frugal Meal recovers the Strength of the Body, and adds
Vigor to the Spirits, which seldom happens when we are accosted with great
plenty and variety of Meals, which we generally meet with at rich Men's Tables:
And these Persons who thus indulge their sensual Appetites, their Pleasures are
commonly but of a short continuance, they thereby dulling their Spirits and
weakening their Bodies; and if at the same moment no Fevers, Gouts, or other
Distempers attend them, yet the Seeds of these Mischiess are hereby laid in the
Body, and afterward conveyed to the several Members by a corrupted Mass of
Blood, first occasioned by a superfluous indigested Diet.

Thirdly, That when our Hunger is satisfied, and the Table withdrawn, there
remains to him who has Eaten and Drunk moderately, this pleasant Thought, That
he has done nothing to prejudice his Health, his Moderation being his
Preservative and Safeguard. Neither is he dissatisfied not to have enjoyed that
Pleasure, wherewith a Glutton seems delighted, because such Pleasure is of
short continuance, leaving nothing behind, but cause for Repentance, unto which
he is not so subject as he who thus gormandizes and overcharges his Stomach
with variety of rich Dainties. Such a one repents soon, or thinks he shall ere
long have cause to repent; nay, he is sure at last to pay dear for his
Debauchery.

Fourthly, That it is a great piece of Wisdom to take heed, how and what we
swallow, for the sake of a little short-lived Pleasure, the Causes of so many
Diseases, so cruel and so tedious; which Causes we cannot be afterward freed
from, but by nauseus Potions and a tedious continued Course of Physic, which
weakens the Body, and might easily be prevented merely by Abstinence. So that
we should not be obliged to say as Lysimachus did, after he had surrendered
himself into the Hands of, the Getae, to allay the Thirst that troubled him and
his whole Army, O ye Gods! what a great Advantage have I now lost for a little
Pleasure of a short continuance?

Fifthly, If we except some few hereditary Distempers, and which may, if not be
perfectly cured, at least much alleviated, the Grounds of all other Diseases
are frequently occasioned by Irregularities, or Excess in our Eating or
Drinking: For though violent Exercise, Heats, Colds, and other such things, may
incline us to Diseases, yet this commonly happens, because they set afloat the
superfluous Humors which were before engendered in our Bodies by excess of Wine
and good Cheer.

Therefore it was observed during that great Plague, that spread all over
Attica, that none but Socrates by his extraordinary Sobriety escaped the
Infection: And we are not unacquainted with one in our days, who by the like
Method was secured from a great Pestilence. I might mention also a Person of
great Eminency, who was severely tormented with the Gout, but by my Advice,
yielding to live one Year very abstemiously, and scarce to Eat any Flesh
(according to the Custom of the Indians, who nevertheless are very healthy and
strong, and are rarely troubled with such Distempers) was perfectly cured. Thus
it happened heretofore to the Senator Rogatianus, mentioned by Porphyry, in the
Life of Plotinus. So real a truth it is, that Sobriety is an excellent Remedy
to avoid and free us from Diseases.

Sixthly, That for one Person who is sick by Fasting, there are twenty
Distempers occasioned by too much Eating. So that Theognides had Reason to say,
That Gluttony destroys many more than Hunger.

Perplures quam dira fames, satias male perdit,
Qui justo cupiunt amplius esse sibi.
And Horace, according to Epicurus, tells us, That a sober Man who Eats and
Drinks but little, is always strong and ready to perform the Duties of his
Function; whereas Wine makes the Body heavy, and clouds the Understanding, and
sinks down the Soul, that part of the Divine Being, to the very Earth.

-- quin corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis, animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aura:
Alter ubi dicto citius curata sopori
Membra dedit, vegetus praescripta ad munera surgit.
Besides, we might add this Consideration, That he who endeavors to indulge
his Palate in the midst of good Cheer, loses that very Pleasure he would
promote, which is easilier obtained by a plain and sober Diet for a constancy;
sometimes, though rarely, admitting of a more plentiful Repast, which at
particular times may be allowed by the best of Men, when as the Poet says, a
solemn Festival invites us to cheer our Spirits, and repair weak Nature,
decayed too much by Abstinence or Old Age.

Sive diem festum rediens advexerit annus,
Sive recreare volet tenuatum Corpus; ubique
Accedent anni, and tractari mollius aetas
Imbecilla volet --
In such Cases we are not to make the pleasing of our Palates our main
Business, but only by the By; for we shall find that a sober and frugal Life,
is better to most Purposes. Besides, it is most certain, that a wise Man ought
rather, as much as his State and Condition of life may permit him, always to
observe the same Manner, Rule and Course of Living; I say, as much as the State
and Condition of his Life will allow him: For though the manner of Living, in
which we are engaged, may sometimes so entangle us, as that it is no easy Task
to keep exactly to the Rule and Manner of Living, that we have prescribed; yet
there is no difficulty to keep pretty near to this Rule, if a Man has so much
Constancy and Resolution of Mind, as a truly wise and virtuous Man ought to
have. But if he be so weak and fickle, as at the first Temptation to suffer
himself to be overcome by his irregular Appetite, it is apparent that Wisdom
and Virtue have not taken Root deep enough in his Soul.

If we are perhaps sometimes obliged to be at well spread Tables, where we may
seem to be somewhat uncivil in not complying with the earnest Entreaties and
Solicitations that we meet with; it is at this time chiefly that we must show
our Resolution and Constancy; and if a Civil and Modest Excuse will not
suffice, we must free our selves from that Dusopia, or childish Bashfulness so
much condemned among the Greeks, and according to Plutarch's Advice, speak
plainly and boldly to any Friend, what Creon says in one of his Tragedies; It
is better that you should be now angry with me, than that I should be to morrow
distempered, for having complied with you.

Te praestat infesum, Hospes, esse nunc mihi,
Quam si obsequutus deinde graviter ingemam.
For to cast our selves, says he, into a Fit of the Colic, or into some
extreme Agony, merely to avoid being looked upon as a Clown, or Uncivil, is to
become both a Clown and a mad Man, and not to understand how we are to behave
our selves with Men, in relation to Eating and Drinking.

We must not here forget that excellent Expression of Epicurus; That a sober
and frugal Life, unto which we have by long use habituated our selves, makes us
undaunted against the Assaults of Fortune. For as Horace elsewhere says, Which
of the two may better trust to himself and to his own strength, in relation to
the Casualties and Mischances that may happen, He who has indulged his Mind
with vast Desires, and used his Body to a soft and rich Attire; Or, he who
being content with a little, and foreseeing the time to come, shall in a time
of Peace, as a wise Man ought, make Provision of such things as are needful for
War? Let Fortune vex such a one, and take from him all that she can, how much
can she diminish of that which is necessary?

-- Vter-ne
Ad casus dubios fidet sibi certius, hic qui
Pluribus assuerit mentem, corpusque superbum,
An qui contentus parvo, metuensque futuri,
In pace, ut Sapiens aptarit idonea bello?
Soeviat, atque novos moveat fortunna tumultus,
Quantum heinc imminuet? etc.
Nor are we to forget what Epicurus boasts of; That his daily Food did not
quite amount to one pound, and that of Metrodorus weighed but just a pound. Nor
must we omit that excellent Advice which Seneca has so well delivered; Thou
do not perhaps believe, says he, that in a spare quantity of Food there is
sufficient to satisfy Nature? There is, and to spare; for there is Pleasure,
not a light and transitory Pleasure, which we must recruit every Moment, but a
more fixed and lasting Pleasure without Interruption: For a Draught of Water and
a Piece of Barley Bread, are things not very pleasant to the Gust; but then it
is a great Pleasure that we can confine our selves to that, which an adverse
Fortune cannot deprive us of. The Allowance of a Prison is more Sumptuous and
Plentiful, and a Malefactor who is kept in Chains, condemned to Death, subsists
with a small Pittance. What an honor is it to condescend of our own accord to
that, which is not to be feared by them, who are reduced to the lowest State?
By this means we shall prevent the Treachery of Fortune, and stop all her
Avenues: For what Power can Fortune have over him, who reckons not as his own,
that which she glories in giving and taking away, and is satisfied with that
which depends not upon her, thinking it too mean to stoop to her proud Empire?

I Will here cite what Xenophon tells us of Socrates; That he lived upon so small
a Pittance, that there was no Handicraftsman, if he took never so little Pains,
but might get more than was needful to nourish him. That which has been
already said of Anacharsis, That he sent back the Money offered him, because he
needed it not to supply his slender Expenses. And it is reported of
Epaminondas, that he sent back the King's Ambassadors with the Gold they had
brought; and when he had entertained them at a plain Dinner, he told them, Go
and give an account to your Master of this Dinner, that he may understand that
a Man content with this, is not to be bought with Money. I might mention these
and other Instances of the like nature, to show that he who is sufficed with so
little, that even Poverty it self will afford, has no cause to fear the Frowns
of Fortune, or the Necessities of Want. But the better to prevent the dread of
Poverty, let us take care of what Bion says in the Writings of Theletes the
Pythagorian. These are his Expressions; If things could discourse as we do,
would they not, as I may so say, accost us to this purpose? Why do thou
dispute against me, O Man? Art thou for my sake deprived of any advantage of
Temperance, of Justice, of Fortitude? Art thou afraid that things needful will
be wanting to thee? What, are not the Highways full of Herbs, and the
Fountains running over with Water? Don't I afford thee all over the Earth Beds
to lie down upon, and Leaves to cover thee? What, can thou not rejoice with
me? See thou not Gradiaphyrtus a Beggar, Singing pleasantly, when he takes
his Repast? Have not I provided Sauce for thee without the least Expense or
Care, namely, Hunger? And does not he who is hungry relish his Meal savourly
without the help of any Artificial Provocation, just as he who is thirsty
drinks large draughts of pure Water with great Desire and Pleasure? Think
thou that Men are hungry for a Cake or thirsty for Snow? And are not these the
things, that the Luxury and the Debaucheries of corrupt Men require?

A Description of the Indian Diogenes.
IN relation to this Topic, I think I ought not here to omit, what I know
concerning the manner of the Eastern Indians Living, if it were only to show
that all these fine things that we have spoken of, are not only bare
Philosophical Speculations, but that there are whole Nations, who lead as
sparing a Life, and are satisfied with as little, either for Eating or
Drinking, or for Clothing, as all the Cynicks, Stoics, or Epicureans ever
were. In India there be many Fakirs, or Religious Idolaters, who as well as
Diogenes walk all Naked, and have no other Shoes to their Feet, but their
brawny Soles, no other Covering for their Heads but their long Hair, oiled,
tressed up, and wreathed upon the top of their Heads, no other Ornaments to
their Fingers but long Nails, turned like Claws, and sometimes as long as half
the little Finger; their Houses are the Galleries of their Temples, their Beds
are three Inches thick of Ashes, and when they go in Pilgrimage, they have the
Skin of a Tiger, of a Lion, or of a Leopard, dried in the Sun, which they
spread upon the Ground only to sit upon; their Drink is pure Water, and their
Food, when they are supplied by way of Alms, a pound of Kichery, which is a
certain mixture of Rice, with two or three sorts of Lentills, all boiled
together in Water, with Salt, upon which they put a little sorry Butter.

The manner of Living of the Brahmens, or Bragmanes, differs in nothing from
that of the Fakirs, either in Quantity or Quality; for their chief and most
substantial Eating, is always Kichery, never any Flesh; never any Drink but
Water. The most part of the Merchants, whom we name Banyans, if they be never
so Rich, live in the same manner. Their Food is neither more Plentiful, nor
more Delicious than that of the Brahmens, and nevertheless they live as
contented, as quiet, and pleasant as we do, and far more Healthy, at least full
as strong and lusty as we are.

THE Second BOOK OF VIRTUE IN GENERAL.
CHAP. I. Of Virtue in General.
IN the first Place we must take notice, that Aristotle, Plutarch, and others,
have observed three things in the Mind or Soul of Man, Faculties, Actions, and
Habits: The Faculties are the Abilities, from whence proceed the Actions; as of
Anger, for example, or Pity: The Actions are the Deeds or Acts themselves, as
to be actually Angry, to be actually Afflicted, or to have an actual
Compassion: The Habits, or the Facility of the Soul to produce such Acts, or
the natural Inclination or Tendency of the Soul to that purpose.

Secondly, As there are some Actions which are Vicious and Evil, as when we are
excessively Angry; some Just and Good, as when we keep within the Bounds of
Moderation; so likewise there are some Habits which are Vicious, and some Good.

Thirdly, That Virtue is neither a Faculty nor a bare Act, but an Habit, viz. a
virtuous Habit, that inclines and directs us to just and honorable Things.

Fourthly, As Aristotle divides the Soul into two Parts, viz. the one the
Reasonable, which we term the Understanding, the other the Sensitive Appetite,
which we call the Will; so he admits in the one and the other Part,
Faculties, Actions, and Habits, that both being capable of Habits, might also
be capable of Virtues.

Fifthly, That there is this difference between the first and the second Part,
that the Virtues of the first relate to what is true, or proposes Truth for
their End; but the Virtues of the Appetite or Will, look upon what is Good, or
have Goodness for their End.

Sixthly, That the Virtues of the first Part are five, Prudence, Wisdom,
Understanding, Science, and Art; and of the second three, Fortitude,
Temperance, and Justice.

Seventhly, And because some may not think it strange that Aristotle should
rank Virtue in the second Part; to obviate their Objection, he says, That this
part indeed has no Reason, yet it may be said to have it, because it hearkens
to it, and is in respect of the Reasonable part, as a Son in respect of his
Father, who governs him by his Instructions.

Eighthly, That the Virtues which are in the reasonable Part being named
Intellectual, because they relate to the Mind; but the others which are in the
Will, being styled Moral, in respect of the Manners of Men; we are not to be
concerned precisely with the first, but with the latter; I say precisely,
whereby to separate Prudence, which is the Guide of all Moral Virtues, and
which is so interwoven with our Manners, that it is not only reckoned among the
Moral Virtues, but the First and Chief of all the rest: For Aristotle says
very judiciously, That as Sagacity (he means that Faculty of Ability dexterously
to find out the means whereby to come to the End we propose) is accomplished by
Prudence. So natural Virtue, that is to say, a natural Propensity or
Disposition to Virtue, is made perfect by Wisdom or by right Reason, which
cannot be without Prudence. Therefore he terms all Virtues Prudence, not
properly, but because they cannot be attained without Prudence: For that Reason
also when the Philosophers give the Definition of Virtue, they say it is an
Habit conformable to right Reason, or rather that it is assisted by right
Reason; now right Reason is guided by Prudence, or it is indeed Prudence it
self. And therefore the Definition that Aristotle gives of Virtue, comprehends
in it right Reason or Prudence; for he says, that Virtue is an elective Habit
which consists in a certain Mediocrity, directed by Reason or Prudence; Virtus
est habitus electivus in mediocritate quae ad nos est consistens, ratione
definitus, aut prout vir prudens definierit.

Upon which we may observe, That all the Philosophers agree very well with
Aristotle, That Virtue is an Habit prescribed or regulated by Reason or by
Prudence. Therefore Cicero calls it a constant and even Temper of Mind, which
makes them deservedly praised in whom it abides, or rather a constant and
regular Reason. Seeing that a Man is accounted virtuous, or said to be adorned
with Virtue, not when casually, or out of Dissimulation, or unwillingly and
contrary to his Inclination, he does an Action worthy of Praise, but when he is
disposed in such a manner, that what he does proceeds from a strong Inclination
and constant Resolution of doing well; grounded upon serious deliberation, and
continued with a Delight and Satisfaction. They agree also, that we should name
it an elective Habit, because hereby it is distinguished from the Habits of the
Understanding, which don't require that the Acts should be produced by the
choice of the Appetite, as the moral Habits do, which indeed would not be moral
if our Acts were not in our choice, and done freely. But as to what they say,
That Virtue consists in a Medium, this has given occasion to several, and
chiefly to the Stoics, to contend and exclaim that he has lessened Virtue, by
placing it in the middle between Two contrary Vices, and by making it in that
manner to partake of both Extremes. And tho we have already mentioned this
matter, yet it is of that great Importance, that it deserves to be treated of
more at large.

In what sense Virtue is said to consist in a Medium, or to be placed in a
Mediocrity.
ARistotle observes, That in the object of Virtue one may distinguish two
Mediums, one he names the Medium of the Thing, Medium rei, which is from one
side to the other, equally distant from the Extremes; and this is the same in
the Judgment of all Men; as for Example, the number of Six between Two and Ten;
for it is distant from one and the other five Unites; therefore he calls that a
middle in Arithmetic, which is termed an Arithmetical Proportion. The other he
styles a Medium in respect of our selves, Medium quoad nos, or which is neither
above nor beneath what is convenient for us: From hence it is, that it cannot
be the same in respect of all Men, because the same thing is not equally
convenient to all; for Example, if to Eat six Pounds weight is too much, and
Two too little, the Rule therefore of the Athletes prescribes not six Pounds to
all, for it is too little for a Milo and too much for a Tiro. Wherefore this
Middle or Medium is commonly styled, the Middle according to Reason, Medium
Rationis, because it is appointed by right Reason, and because it consists in
that Reason or Proportion, which Aristotle ought to have named of Geometry, and
which belongs only to the wise Man to understand.

Aristotle therefore shows, that Virtue consists not in the Medium of the
Thing, but in the Medium in respect of us, Geometrically considered, with
relation to Reason; for as Virtue has the Passions and Actions for Objects,
for Example, such as are these, to Fear, to be Confident, to Desire, to have an
Aversion, to be Angry, to have Pity, and in short, to be affected with Pleasure
or Grief; I say, Virtue having for its Object the Passions and Actions, in
which there may happen to be Excess, Deficiency, or a due Medium between both;
here it belongs to Virtue to point out a Middle, which may be most proper and
convenient, both in respect of Time, Person and Place, or any other
Circumstance that may attend us.

He farther demonstrates, That whereas Virtue consists in prescribing a Middle
between two Extremes, it is it self that Medium or middle Habit between two
vicious Extremes, the one inclining to Excess, and the other defective, either
in the thing or in the Object. So that Virtue in its Essence and Nature, in
that it prescribes a Middle, is really it self also a kind of Medium; but in
relation to Excellency and Perfection, it is something elevated above all. This
causes them to make this common Distinction, The Middle in respect of the
Object, and the Middle in respect of the Essence; because the Middle in
relation to the Object, is nothing else but the Middle in relation to our
selves, or in respect to Reason, and which is placed or considered between two
Extremes: According to what Horace says, when he tells us, That there is a just
Mediocrity to be kept in things, and that there are due Limits and Bounds which
we must neither come short of nor exceed.

Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
The Medium, in respect of the Essence, is nothing else but Virtue it self
between two Vices; or as the same Author expresses it, the Middle of two Vices,
in respect of both Ends.

Virtus est medium vitiorum et utrinque reductum. He does afterward illustrate
and prove the Matter; for Fortitude is a Middle between Cowardice and
Presumption; Temperance, between Intemperance and a total Neglect; Liberality,
between Prodigality and Covetousness; Magnificence, between Niggardliness and
Gaudiness; Magnanimity, between Pusilanimity and a foolish Ostentation;
Modesty, between having a due regard to our Honor and Ambition; Clemency and
an easy and tractable Conversation, between a base Compliance and a choleric
Temper; Truth and Veracity, between Dissimulation and vain Boasting; a pleasant
Humor, between Rusticity or a clownish Temper; Amity, between Flattery and a
thwarting Temper; Moderation, between Stupidity and Impudence; a just
Indignation, between Envy and Jealousy, and Malevolence or Ill Will; Prudence,
between Folly or Stupidity, and cunning Craft or Knavery. For Justice, though
it is not properly between two Extremes, because there is nothing opposite to
it but Injustice; nevertheless, it seems to acknowledge a Medium in its Object,
because Justice being a Virtue that relates to others, or is between two
Persons, it belongs to it so to reduce the thing to Equity or Equality, that
the one may not have more, nor the other less than is due; so that Injustice
stands in stead of Excess in respect of one, and of Defect in respect of the
other.

He maintains also, That there are certain Vices that will not admit of any
Mediums, as Adultery, Theft and Murder, because there is always a Sin in the
very Act, and no Virtue can be found in it: For Example, to prescribe with what
Woman, at what time and how Adultery ought to be committed; for to seek for a
Medium there, is the same as to seek for one in Debauchery, in Cowardice, and
in the extremities of other Vices.

Lastly, he affirms, That the Extremities are not only contrary to one another,
but also to the Mediums; insomuch, that the Valiant and Courageous appears to
the Coward Bold and Presumptuous, and to the Audacious Mean and Cowardly; The
Liberal seems to be Prodigal to the Covetous Wretch, and to the Prodigal
Covetous, and so of the rest. Nevertheless, there are some Extremes that seem
to be more contrary and opposite to the middle than the other, and for that
reason sometimes one Virtue seems to incline more to Excess than to Defect, as
Fortitude seems to be more like Audacity than Cowardice, and sometimes nearer
to Defect than Excess, as Temperance seems to incline more to a privation from
Pleasure than to Intemperance. From hence he concludes, That there is a
difficulty to become truly Virtuous, because it is hard to find the Medium that
might be convenient in all respects; and therefore he advises them who propose
that Medium, to avoid chiefly that extremity, which is most contrary, and to
take heed of that Vice unto which we have most tendency, and to act as those
who laboring to make a crooked Stick strait, bend it in such a manner on the
contrary side, that at last they may reduce it to a perfect strait, which is
that of Right and Equity.

Of the Apathy, or the Insensibility of Stoics.
NOW as the Stoics differ from the Peripateticks in particular, that the
Stoics in the first place would have a wise Man be (...), without Passion,
whereas the Peripateticks distinguish the Passions or Affections into vain and
useless, and into natural and necessary. They say well, that a wise Man ought
to be free from the first sort, but that the latter should be kept in and
bridled in such a manner, that we may observe a convenient Mean and a just
Mediocrity. Secondly, whereas the Stoics will never allow a wise Man either to
complain or grieve, nay, in the midst of Pain he should keep up to such a
severe and rigid Austerity as may bespeak him almost insensible; but the
Peripateticks think that this was spoken out of an Excess of Vanity and
Ambition, and that it is more convenient to be moved with Tenderness, to let
fall a few Tears, Sighs and Groans, than to be wise after such a manner, to be
inwardly tormented, as says Crantor, by such a kind of Inhumanity and
Insensibility. As there is this difference, I say between the Stoics and the
Peripateticks, let us examine in few Words what Cicero says, who seems to be a
Defender of this Insensibility in answer to the Peripateticks. After he had
given such a description of a wise Man as we have already seen, thus he goes
on. Therefore we ought to look upon the Judgment of the Peripateticks, as weak
and contemptible, when they say, That it is necessary that the Minds of Men
should be tossed up and down and disturbed; but yet they appoint a certain
Moderation beyond which it is not lawful to pass: What, says he, will thou
assign a Moderation to Vice? Is it not Vice to disobey Reason? To desire any
thing passionately, and after we have obtained it to behave our selves Proudly
and Insolently; to be easily dejected, or for the very fear of Oppression to
grow furious, and deprive our selves of the use of our Judgment? Is it not a
great Fault and Error to be either too much Dejected or Exalted? Thus Cicero
argues. But to speak the Truth, the Peripateticks never had any such Fancy,
that Vice ought to be moderated in such a manner that it should still remain in
any respect a Vice; they held Virtue to be a Medium, not that it was such as
participating of the Extremes, as Lukewarm does of Heat and Cold; but that it
is between two Extremes, as the Center is between the extremities of a
Diameter, the strait Line between two crooked. Neither did they pretend that it
was no Vice to disobey Reason, for they would have Reason to prescribe a
Moderation: Nor did they allow a too eager or passionate Desire of Things, or
when obtained, to be too much exalted or puffed up; for they were persuaded,
that the power of Reason ought to give a check to all Fury and Insolence, and
to confine them within due Bounds: So that they denied not that it was evil to
be too much Dejected and Afflicted, or for fear of being so, to fall into such
Desparation and Fury, as to lose all, and be deprived of the use of their
Judgment; for they still thought that we ought to rouse up our selves, and keep
us free from Despair, and in a due and moderate Temper. Neither did they
believe that it was no Error in our Actions to express too much Grief or too
much Joy; for they taught, That we ought so to correct our Error, that there
might not appear either too much or too little in any thing.

He goes further on, and says, That he who seeks a Moderation in Vice, acts as
he who casting himself down headlong from a steep Mountain, endeavors to stop
himself in his Fall, but in vain; and to as little purpose, as it is for a Man
whose Thoughts are Distracted, and his Passions Predominant, on a sudden to
appease 'em and make a Calm. But they will deny perhaps, that where Mediocrity
or Moderation, in which Virtue consists, being observed, there should remain
any thing of Vice; nor will they allow of that Comparison, that where a Man
has once cast himself down headlong, that its not in his Power to retrieve
himself from Falling, to hold good in this Case; for he who is fallen into a
Passion has some Reason in him still remaining, which is able to repress or
check it, especially if he has the fewest Grains of Wisdom remaining, or the
least Inclination for Virtue, as such a one may have that we now instance in.

At last he concludes in this manner, Therefore if they approve of a Moderation
in Trouble, it is the same as if they allowed of a Moderation in Injustice, a
Moderation in Cowardice, a Moderation in Intemperance; for to apportion a
Moderation in Vice, is to approve of some part of the Vice. But Cicero insists
upon that which they will not allow; for he looks upon Virtue not as a Medium
between two Vices, but as a Vice moderated, which is quite contrary to the
Judgment of Aristotle; for he says, For to seek a Mediocrity in Adultery, or
any such like Vice, it is the same as to admit of a Mediocrity, Excess, or a
Deficiency in Injustice, in Cowardice, and in Intemperance.

Cicero afterward more at large mentions the Reasonings and Arguments of the
Peripateticks, with a design to oppose 'em, That according to their Judgment,
the inward Disturbances and Passions are not only Natural, but that they have
been allowed by Nature for good Uses; That they allow of Anger as a Whet-stone
to Courage, because the Assault of an angry Person, against a public Enemy, or
a treacherous Subject, is more Powerful than if he opposed him in cold Blood;
That severe Injunctions are not without a Mixture of Anger; That if an Orator
is not angry, he ought at least to pretend to be so; That a Man is not a Man,
if he cannot be angry, and that what Men call Calmness is a kind of stupid
Insensibility; That it is impossible to perform any great thing without some
Transport, witness Themistocles and Demosthenes; That without this Incentive,
the great Philosophers had never made so large a Progress in the Sciences, and
that without such an earnest desire, Pythagoras, Democritus, and Plato had
never traveled as they did about the World; That it is not without some great
advantage that Nature has appointed Displeasure and Grief, that Men might be
vexed and grieved for their Crimes, and troubled for their Punishments,
Reproofs, and Shame; That Mercy is useful to oblige us to assist the afflicted,
and that to be emulous is not altogether useless; And lastly, That he who will
take away Fear, takes away all Diligence, etc. He adds many other Particulars
which he seems to answer when he says, Nevertheless, they confess when they
Dispute of these Matters, that they ought to be cut off in part, but that they
cannot, nor ought not to be totally rooted out. So that they esteem Mediocrity
or Moderation to be requisite almost in every thing. And truly in relation to
what he objects; for Example, That it belongs not to a stout and generous
Spirit to be angry, but to a Fencer; that without this Anger of a Fencer, Ajax
will encounter Hector, and that Torquatus Marcellus the African, was free from
it, etc. They will answer, That it may be proper for a Fencer to be furiously
angry and beyond Reason, but the Anger of a generous Person is more Temperate
and hearkens to Reason.

And as to what he says concerning Mercy. Cannot we be Liberal but we must be
touched with Compassion and Pity? Seeing we ought not to afflict our selves for
others, but to strive, if it be possible, to raise them out of their
Afflictions. They will answer, That Mercy will cause us to be more inclined to
Liberality; and that the wise Man suffers not himself to be vexed and afflicted
for others, in such a manner as to be disturbed in himself, but it is a kind
sense of Humanity that obliges him to lend Assistance to others.

In relation to Jealousy or Emulation, they will answer, That the Jealousy of
a wise Man is nothing but a certain Motion or Desire that ingages him to strive
to attain to a degree of Glory, equal or greater than that of another.

As to what concerns Fear, they will willingly agree, That Timerousness or too
great Fear is to be condemned; and they will show, that this Life cannot be
without Fear, which causes us to provide beforehand against several
Casualties which we foresee.

Finally, in relation to what he says of Anger and Desire, they will prove
that it is natural to be angry, and have an Ambition: But to be angry without
measure, or to aim at any thing with too much eagerness, this proceeds from an
Error that we ought to correct; so that when they advise us to avoid or abstain
from all Excess, they advise us to extirpate and destroy whatsoever proceeds
from Error, but not so that what is natural or naturally planted in us, either
can or ought to be rooted out and totally defaced.

Of the mutual Connection of Moral Virtues.
NOw to speak something concerning the Connection or mutual Relation of Moral
Virtues, it is to be collected from two Particulars; First, That they are all
united with Prudence, as all the Members with the Body, the Streams of Water
with the Fountain from whence they run. Secondly, That Prudence and all the
rest are unseparable from a pleasant Life, for Life cannot be pleasant without
Virtue; and wherever Virtue resides, there Life must needs be pleasant. From
hence it appears, that the consequence of this mutual Conjunction of Virtues,
is grounded upon this Maxim, That things that are united in any third thing,
are united among themselves. Now it is not needful to speak any thing of the
second Particular, for we shall understand this Matter sufficiently hereafter,
when we shall consider the saying of Epicurus, That Virtue is not desirable for
its own sake, but for the sake of Pleasure. This has caused some to exclaim
against him. We shall be here satisfied by alleging a Passage out of
Aristotle, by which it appears, that he was in this Matter of the same Opinion
as Epicurus: As, says he, the thing beloved is pleasing to the Lover; the
Horse, for example, to him who loves Horses, the Theater and Shows to him who
loves them; so to him who loves Justice, the things that are just are grateful,
and generally to him who loves Virtue, the Actions that are Virtuous. I
confess, that the things that please the common People don't agree together,
because they are not so really of their own Nature: But such as are pleasing to
them who love honesty, are of themselves, and of their own Nature, grateful and
agreeable. Such are the Actions of Virtue, which are by consequence pleasing,
because they are of themselves so; their Life therefore has no need of
Pleasure, as of an addition, but it possesses in it self an inward Pleasure.
Nay, to go yet farther, he who delights not in honest Actions, is no just and
honest Man, nor can we denominate such an one a just and liberal Person to whom
just and liberal Actions give no Pleasure: And the like is to be understood of
the other Virtues. From hence therefore we conclude, That virtuous Actions are
of themselves, and of their own Nature, Pleasant and Delightful.

In relation to the first Particular, the Judgment of Aristotle is yet more
plain, for he gives this Definition of Virtue; An Habit that relates to
Mediocrity; Or, a Medium which Prudence has prescribed and directed. This
shows, that no Virtue can be without Prudence, and by consequence all Virtues
being united with Prudence, they have a mutual Correspondency: This answers the
Objection which some might make by saying, That sure Men are not fit for all
Virtues, and therefore he may be inclinable to one before he has attained
another; for he distinguishes and teaches, that this may happen in respect of
the natural Virtues, or of the Seeds of natural Virtue; For, says he, as soon
as we are born, we are qualified for Justice, for Temperance, Fortitude, and
other Virtues. But this cannot be so, in relation to such Virtues by which a
Man is styled a good and virtuous Man, because all the rest accompany Prudence;
and to speak properly, a good Man cannot be without Prudence, and a prudent Man
cannot be without Virtue.

Now we must observe, that this distinction may serve to resolve the Opinion,
that Laertius ascribes to him, That he was persuaded that all the Virtues had
not a mutual Connection, for it might happen that a Man might be Prudent and
Just, and yet might be Intemperate and Debauched; for he will reply, That those
who seem to be adorned with some certain Virtues, if they have not the rest,
have 'em in Appearance and Imperfect, because their seeming Actions of Virtue
are not inlivened with that inward Passion and general Inclination for Honesty,
whereby the Soul is influenced to act nothing without the direction of Reason.
It Is the same as if we should say, That they have a material Virtue, but not a
formal; for the Form or Perfection and Completion of all Virtue, is this
Affection and general Disposition of the Mind, by which a Man does nothing but
in a just manner, and out of a principle of Virtue; for according to the
Judgment of Aristotle, nothing but this Disposition can qualify Men to be
Honest and Just: So that he who is not rich, and consequently not in a
Condition to show his Liberality or Magnificence, yet may have a Soul so
qualified, that if his Estate increased he would do nothing but what is Just,
Honorable, and Magnificent; for though he has not the Habit of bestowing large
Gifts, yet he has a Propension of giving according to his Abilities, and is
not sparing of that which is in his small Power to give. Therefore the
Liberality of that poor Countryman, who having nothing else, presented Water
to the King which he had drawn out of the River, was as acceptable, as the
Gifts of Princes in rich and costly Vessels.

I shall not here mention the several Reasons that Alexander has collected,
nor with him stay to tell you, for instance, That it is impossible for a Man to
be just, unless at the same time he has all other Virtues; for if he be
intemperate, or fearful, or covetous, he will cease to be just, when an
Opportunity offers of Pleasure, Danger, or Hopes of Gain; and so it is with
other Vices, there is not any but is able to cause us to Violate and Corrupt
some part of Justice. I shall only take notice, that this Doctrine of the
Connection and Correspondency of Virtues together, is common not only to
Epicurus, Aristotle, Plato, St. Ambrose, and St. Gregory, but chiefly to the
Stoics, though these last add this Paradox, That Virtues are all equal. I add
the word chiefly, for among them these Opinions pass for Current; That a wicked
Man has no Virtue, and a just Man no Vice; That the first sins in every thing,
and the latter acts nothing ill; That whatsoever a wise Man does, he does it
assisted by all the Virtues, and if he did but wag his Finger without the
direction of Reason, he would commit a Sin.

Ni tibi concessit ratio digitum exsere peccas. A General Division of Virtue.
BUt as we are now to speak of the several kinds of Virtue, we ought here first
to lay down the common Division thereof. Not to mention here what Zeno taught,
that there were diverse sorts of Virtues, (which yet the Megarians would not
allow of, supposing 'em to be but one, under several Names:) Nor what
Apollophanes asserts, viz. That of Prudence only: That celebrated Division of
Virtue into four parts is sufficiently known, viz. of Prudence, Temperance,
Fortitude, and Justice. Nevertheless, Aristotle in his Morals, treats of these
four Virtues in the same manner as he treats also of Gentleness, of Liberality,
of the greatness of the Mind, of Magnificence, of Moderation, of just
Indignation, of Modesty, of Gravity, of Truth or Veracity, of Civility, and of
the rest, as distinct kinds of Virtue, not tying himself to any limited Number;
And so begins to discourse of Fortitude.

For the Stoics, though they have variously divided Virtue, nevertheless,
Possidonius, among the rest, holds to these four kinds; and therefore Cicero
seems to have taken this from the Stoics; Whatsoever is just and honest,
proceeds from one of these four Species; for either it relates to the
discerning of Truth and Falsehood; or the Preservation of the Society which
consists in the faith of Contracts, and in giving to every one what appertains
to him; or the strength and greatness of the Soul; or else in the Moderation in
all that we say or do: By which Words the four sorts of Virtue are described.
Now we must observe, that if since the days of St. Ambrose, and St. Jerome,
these four Virtues have been styled Cardinal Virtues, because they are looked
upon as the Hinges upon which the rest turn; it is doubtless in imitation of
the Stoics, who affirm, That among the Virtues some are Primitive or
Principal, the others subject and depending on the former; and that the first
are Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance and Justice; and the latter a greatness of
Mind, Continency, Patience, quickness of Apprehension, or liveliness of Spirit,
Subtilty, and sound Judgment, all which Cicero terms Companions, and Seneca
branches of the first Stock.

The Schoolmen call 'em Parts, and divide 'em into three kinds, that they might
refer all the Virtues called Moral to one of the four chief. Thus Thomas
Aquinas has dealt. Now these three Parts are, First, Such as are properly
called Subjects or Species. Secondly, The Integral Parts, or which have in some
respect the Parts which compose the whole, and ought necessarily to assist to
the perfect Act of a certain Virtue. Thirdly, The Potential, which like the
Powers of the Soul, are accompanying, but have not the Efficacy of a a
principal Virtue.

Thus the Virtues subject to Prudence, are the Private, the Oeconomick, the
Politic, the Military, and the Royal: The Integral, are Memory, Docility,
Sagacity, Reason, Providence, Circumspection, and Precaution or Foresight: The
Potential, which bear their ancient Greek names, are Ebulia, that is, Wisdom in
Counsel; Synesis, sharpness of Apprehension; Gnome, a prudent Elocution.

Thus the Subject Parts of Justice, are the General, the Legal, and the
Special, which have for Species, the commutative and distributive Justice: The
Integral, are the Precepts of the Law, as To do wrong to no Body; To give to
every one what belongs to him; and if we may make use of the words of Holy
Writ, To fly from Evil and to do Good: The Potential, are Religion, Holiness,
Piety, Charity, Obedience, Truth, Gratitude, Liberality, Affability, and Amity
or Friendship.

In like manner, the Subject Parts of Temperance, are Abstinence and Sobriety;
first in relation to Eating, the latter in respect of Drinking, Chastity and
Modesty; The Integral, are Bashfulness and Honesty; The Potential, are
Clemency, Humility, Modesty, Mildness, Mercy, Moderation, Decency,
Gratefulness, and Urbanity.

For Fortitude, as it is not usual to ascribe to it any subject Parts, because
of that chief Matter about which it is employed, so only four Parts are
assigned to it, which are reckoned to be Integral, when they are looked upon as
being employed about a difficult Matter; or Potential, if the Matter has less
difficulty. These parts are Confidence, Magnanimity or greatness of Courage;
Magnificence, Patience or long Forbearance; Constancy or Perseverance. The two
first are for an Aggress or Assault, the two latter for Defense and Support.

CHAP II. Of Prudence in General.
NOW to say something to the purpose concerning the four principal Virtues, and
about some of their chief Species: And we will begin with Prudence, which
Aristotle, Epicurus, and all the other Philosophers, not without Reason, call
the Head, the Fountain, the Mistress, the Queen of all other Virtues. But to
lay aside all Equivocation, though Prudence and Wisdom are often used
Promiscuously and to the same Sense, nevertheless, Aristotle distinguishes them
in such a manner, that he takes Wisdom for the knowledge of Things honorable
and worthy; but Prudence for a particular Virtue, which respects the Things
useful and convenient for the Life of Man. From hence it is, says he, that
Anaxagoras, Thales, and some others, may very well be accounted Wise, but not
Prudent; because we find that they were Ignorant of the Things that were
needful, and yet they understood several excellent, admirable, difficult and
divine Things; but useless for the good and happiness of Life. Now it is
certain, that we are not to speak of Prudence as it is taken for that high and
speculative Wisdom, but as it is a moral Virtue, which is to rule and govern
all the Actions of our Life; and which by distinguishing the good from the
evil, the useful things from such as are hurtful, points out that which we are
to Embrace, and that which we are to Avoid; and by that means leads and directs
Man to live well and Happily.

Therefore Cicero gives this definition of Prudence, The knowledge of the
Things that we are to desire or avoid. And Aristotle says, It Is an habit of
Acting according to right Reason, in the Things that are good or evil to
Mankind. Now we must observe, in relation to what he says, that it is an Habit
of Acting according to right Reason; that he don't understand but that a
prudent Man may sometimes be imposed upon by a colorable Reason, and which
does not exactly answer the event of Things; yet he ought to perform nothing
but with due Consideration; and after he has well examined every thing, and
has had a regard to the Place and Time of his Deliberation, he perceives no
Reason truer or more probable, than that which he resolves to embrace and
follow; but still at the same time, notwithstanding his serious Deliberation,
if a Reason more likely or probable comes into his Thought, he is more ready to
embrace it, and be led by it. This makes Prudence to be a very uncertain Habit,
full of Conjectures, by which it differs from Science, as Aristotle understands
it; for Science has necessary Things for its Objects, Things necessary, and
which cannot be otherwise; but Prudence looks upon Things that are contingent
and casual, that may happen or not, may fall out this way or the other.

We must likewise observe, That Aristotle understands by good or evil Things,
chiefly the Means, which are said to be good, as they are useful and convenient
for the purposes of Virtue, and evil as they are hurtful and prejudicial to
such purposes: For tho we deliberate about an End, it is not absolutely an End,
but it is really a Means to obtain another at a distance, and which also may be
looked upon as a further Means, until we arrive at the last of all, which is
Happiness, about which there is no deliberation, for there is no Body but would
be Happy, and we trouble our selves about nothing else but how to attain to it.
Therefore we have given this Definition of Prudence in general, That it directs
a Man to a good and happy Life; not but that it respects particular Cases also,
seeing it is the Duty of Prudence to dictate what we ought, and what we ought
not to do, on every particular occasion: But because it appears chiefly in a
certain prospect of a general Life that we propose to our selves, and which may
be such, that all our particular Actions mutually agree among themselves, and
tend all, without any opposition, to Happiness; or, as we have said, to live
Well and Happily; for that Reason, Prudence is usually termed the Art of
Living; and Plato calls it, the Knowledge which procures Happiness. And
Aristotle says, That it is the part of a Prudent Man, not only to consult and
maturely to deliberate upon particular Matters, such as Health, etc. but
generally about all things which may contribute to our living Well and Happily.

Of the general Offices or Duties of Prudence.
WE commonly divide the general Offices or Duties of Prudence into these three
Parts, viz. To Consult or Advise well, to Understand and Comprehend aright, to
Command and Prescribe. It Is what is usually expressed by these Words, (...),
which are termed in the Schools the potential parts of Prudence, though they are
really, and rather the acts of Prudence. The first then is to advise well, the
Particle [well] being here added because this belongs peculiarly to a prudent
Man; for rash and inconsidering People run headlong without ever examining the
Matter: But Deliberation, which regards Prudence, ought to be good, as
Aristotle says, and tend to a good End. So that if any by taking wrong
Measures suceeds, that cannot be said to be a good Deliberation; for tho he
obtains what he seeks to obtain, yet it is not by such Means as he ought to make
use of. Therefore Cunning or Subtilty that cares not what Methods it takes to
accomplish its Ends, whether Good or Evil, is placed as one of the Extremes of
Prudence. And therefore a subtle and cunning Man, having no respect to Honesty,
is looked upon by a prudent Man, just as a wicked Person is by a good Man. For
Malice, says Cicero, will often imitate Prudence.

The second Duty is to apprehend well, and understand the ways and means that
we are to make use of, after we have soberly and seriously deliberated and
advised. Aristotle, by this word Understand, seems to mean nothing else but an
easy Apprehension, or an Understanding quick and nimble; therefore he opposes
this Understanding to Stupidity, or a slowness of Apprehension. So that
according to his Opinion, a prudent Man being between the Subtle and Knavish,
and the Dull and Stupid, may be judged to be placed a Man between the evil
Spirit and a Brute; they are his own Words.

The Third is to command or prescribe the performance of the Things that have
been formerly judged or resolved on; or, which is in effect the same, to order
that the Means that have been thus resolved on, may actually be put in
Execution: For Prudence, says Aristotle, is of its own Nature (...),
Imperatoria, born and designed to Command; so that instead of (...), which,
according to Aristotle, signifies no other thing but a right Judgment, we ought
to have used the Word (...), which imports Commanding.

Of the Dispositions or Qualities needful for performing the Duties of Prudence.
THE Duties or the Acts of Prudence being such as we have already mentioned, it
is certain that some Dispositions, Qualities or Faculties, are requisite in the
Soul for their due Execution. These are properly the Faculties which are called
Parts Integrantes, and which are commonly comprehended under these general
Terms, of the recollecting of Things past, the right understanding of Things
present, and the foresight or providing against Things to come. For first it is
plain, that Prudence makes it absolutely necessary to call to Mind Things past;
for in the sequel of Affairs the Things that ought to be done hereafter, have
such a relation with what has been already done, that if we forget that which
has been done, in the manner as it has been done, that accordingly we may
effect what remains to be done, it often happens either that that which is
already done comes to nothing, or that which is to be performed rarely
succeeds, but crosses our Expectation. Besides, our Judgments are to reason and
judge according to our Knowledge, neither can they conclude upon more certain
Grounds than this, That from like Causes, probably may follow like Effects. Now
it is certain, that to be able to make this Comparison of one Cause with
another, it is absolutely necessary to remember Things past: Besides, as it
seldom or never happens that one thing is entirely like to another in all
Circumstances, we ought to have in our Mind and Memory several Occurrences
which are truly alike in most Things, and yet may be different as to other
Circumstances, that so in our Resolution we may have a regard to those
Circumstances. This caused Aristotle to say, That young Men may propably attain
the Art of Geometry, and become Masters of such like Sciences; but they cannot
so easily attain to Prudence, because this respects particular Things, whereof
the Knowledge is obtained only by Experience and Observation. Wherefore
Afranius says of Wisdom, that Use had begotten her, and Memory was her Mother.

Vsus me genuit Matter peperit Memoria:
(...) vocant me Graij, vos Sapientiam.
But this may properly be understood of Prudence, as Ovid seems to imitate in
these Verses, where he brings in Pallas in the Habit of a grave Matron, saying,
That Youth and even riper Years are ignorant of most Things which we ought to
avoid, and that a good and judicious Choice is not to be made, but by a long
tried and well seasoned Experience.

-- non omnia grandior aetas
Quae fugiamus habet; seris venit usus ab annis.
It is likewise manifest that the understanding and knowledge of present Things
is absolutely requisite, and that to act prudently we must very well understand
the nature, the qualities and circumstances of our present Affairs. For if it
happens that, for Example, any be obliged to take a Resolution, as we say, upon
a sudden, How can that well be done, if he knows not perfectly all the
Circumstances of the Business, so that he may run them over in a moment in his
Thoughts, if he sees not the Correspondency and Opposition that this Business
has with others, and if he knows not what will follow from this rather than
from that? Suppose that he has time to consider, yet if he understands not the
Nature, the State and Circumstances of the thing he is considering of, the Will
or Ability of those who may be Assisting or Prejudicial to the executing of it,
what dependence it may have with Matters that may either retard or hinder it,
or if he knows not his own Strength, or what he is able or not able to perform,
what good can such a one do, and which way will he propose to succeed? Let us
therefore take it for granted, that a Man is so much the more Prudent and more
able to deliberate, to judge well, and execute accordingly, the greater and
more exact his Memory is of the time past, for by that the greater and more
exact will likewise his Knowledge be of things present.

Lastly, All the World will acknowledge, that the Foresight of things to come,
as far as we can search into and apprehend 'em, is very requisite, that if any
Evil is impendent, we may endeavor to avoid it; and if any Good, we may the
better secure it, and may so adapt the means to its proper end, that all things
may succeed well. I say, as far as Men are able to foresee and apprehend; for
sometimes things so fall out that all human Art and Contrivance can no wise
foresee, so that all our Imaginations have been deceived and imposed, things
falling out quite otherwise than we have supposed, or our Reason could
foresee: From hence we may conclude, that our Prudence depends much upon
Conjectures, and admonishes us at the same time to remember our natural
Weakness, and to acknowledge that God only knows certainly what is to happen:
And here by the way, we ought to take heed of being imposed upon by Juglers and
Fortune Tellers, who take upon 'em to predict things to come. Yet,
notwithstanding Prudence has these three considerable Advantages, First, That
though sometimes it is mistaken, as namely, when an Accident intervenes, which it
was not possible to foresee, yet it often attains its End; whereas Imprudence
is often deceived, and seldom or very rarely compasses its End, except by
Accident. Secondly, That a prudent Man, considering the uncertainty of all
things, he proposes nothing so certain to himself, as if it ought infallibly to
fall out; so that hereby he prepares against all Casualties that may happen
contrary to his Expectation, and by this means fore-sees as it were the Event,
by being forewarned. Thirdly, Though Matters succeed to him contrary to his
Contrivance and Foresight, yet he never has just Cause to repent, because he
squares his Actions by the Rules of right Reason, and therefore without some
Casualty intervening (which is out of the reach of human Foresight to prevent)
he could not rationally expect to be disappointed. But on the other hand, an
imprudent Man is always wracked with Repentance, because he finds that he has
neither foreseen nor prevented what he might have done, but suffered such
things to befall him which a cautious and timely Foresight in all likelihood
might have prevented.

CHAP. III. Of private Prudence.
NOW to descend to the several Species or distinct Parts of Prudence; we have
already mentioned the ordinary Division of the Schoolmen who name five; the
Private, which they also call Monastic or Solitary, by which every one Governs
and Rules his own proper Manners; the Oeconomic, by which every one Governs his
Family; the Politic, which they ascribe to Subjects when they behave themselves
conformable to the Laws of the Society; the Military, by which an Army is
Governed; the Regal, by which a whole Nation is ruled. But Aristotle, whose
Method and Conception seems to be more reasonable in the Division of Prudence,
makes no mention of the Military, because it belongs to the Politic, nor of the
Regal, as being also a part of the Politic; but after the Private and the
Oeconomic, he acknowledges none but the Politic, which he supposes to be not
in the Subjects but in the Governors. Therefore we shall follow the Division
of Aristotle, as the most reasonable and the most convenient. I shall only take
notice of the first Species, that it is named Private, Monastic, and Solitary,
not because it is precisely designed to Moderate and Rule the Manners of one
who leads a private Life, and intermeddles not with public Affairs, or who
living in a solitary Place, separates himself from the Society of Men, as the
Hermits; but we make use of this Appellation to signify that every Person of
what Condition soever, ought to be endowed with a certain Prudence which
belongs to him alone, and regards his particular Person. So that though he may
Govern others, he must also Govern himself chiefly, according to the Dictates
of Reason, and so provide for himself that he may become an honest Man; that is
to say, a Man of good and laudable Manners. Therefore this kind of Prudence is
necessary as well for a Prince as a Master of a Family, for both are bound not
only to Rule others, but moreover to know how to Rule themselves, and not only
to be good Governors, but also to be honest and good Men. From hence it is
therefore, that this kind of Prudence is not only named Private or Solitary,
but also Ethic and Moral; for it ought to prescribe and appoint the Manners of
every particular Person, and adjust them to the Rules of Reason. For according
to the Opinion of Aristotle and his Followers, it belongs to Morality, or to
Moral Discipline, to look after every ones manner of living, thereby to render
his life better: So that by obeying its Precepts, a Man may become a just and
honest Man, viz. by living prudently, by subduing Anger and his other Passions
to his own Reason, by regulating their disorderly Motions, and not suffering
'em to act extravagantly; so that if he performs any thing, he may be always
ready to give a good Reason why he has thus proceeded, though none requires it
of him, and to give a check to himself, by examining his own Manners and
Actions, and inquiring of himself as Phocilides did, By what Course have I
steered? What have I been doing? What good have I performed or omitted?

Quanam transilii, quid feci, quid boni omisi? Rejoicing when he perceived that
he had judged aright, that he had acted according to Reason and done wisely,
and grieving when he found the contrary.

Of the Offices of private Prudence.
THe Offices of a private Prudence, are generally reckoned two; The first, is
to fix upon a certain course of Life, wherein to spend the rest of our days;
The second, to govern and direct all our Actions in that condition of Life,
according to the Laws of Reason and Virtue. It is evident, that the first
concerns us very much, and is not easily to be effected, especially if we will
not venture upon it without advising with our best Friends, and duly consulting
our Reason. For such is the Condition of our Life and of all human Affairs,
that upon what State soever we cast our Eyes, we shall perceive presently
several inconveniences attend it, which are so much the more troublesome,
because we cannot well discover their Events; for they appear to us as in a kind
of a Chaos, and their first Beginnings and Consequences are covered over with a
kind of thick Mist not penetrable to our Understanding.

The ancient Greeks have often painted out to us this Encumbrance or
troublesome Confusion; and Ausonius, after them, has left us an excellent
Picture in his Poem, where he tells us, That he knows not what to resolve, nor
what kind of life to choose; That the Bar is full of trouble; That the care of a
Family is uneasy; That a Traveller is always thinking of what is doing at
home; That a Merchant is continually subject to fresh Losses; That the fear of
Poverty hinders us from quietly enjoying what we have; That daily Labor
oppresses and wearies the Workman; That the Seas are dreadful because of the
many Ship-wracks; That a single Life has its Inconveniences; That the idle
Suspicion of a jealous Husband is intolerable; That the War is subject to
Wounds, Blood, and Slaughter.

Quod vitae sectabor iter? Si plena tumultu
Sunt fora; si curis domus anxia; si peregrinos
Cura domus sequitur; mercantem si nova semper
Damna manent; cessare vetat si turpis Egestas;
Si vexat labor Agricolam; Mare naufragus horror
Infamat; poenaeque graves in coelibe vita;
Et gravior cautis custodia vana Maritis;
Sanguineum si Martis opus, etc.
Now as there is nothing more unhappy than to be always wavering in
Uncertainty, which we see to be the Condition of many, and to spend all our
Life in considering how we should spend it, and in what Condition it concerns
us most to exert to the utmost of our Power, all our Faculties in considering
and deliberately choosing such a State and Condition of Life, as may be least
subject to Mischiefs and Inconveniences. Neither are we in this Case to slight
the Counsel and Advice of wise experienced Friends, Persons of a clear Repute,
and who aiming not at their own private Gain, may afford us sound and
profitable Advice. But every one ought chiefly to consult his own Nature, and
understand what his own Strength can perform or not; for we ought to be best
known to our selves; and we may discover in our selves, for the most part,
something which is hid to all the World besides: But we ought to know the
unsetledness of human Affairs, and the obscurity of the time to come to be
such, that we must in all things allow something to Chance, and hope that every
thing will succeed well. And because some things may happen which may make us
uneasy, we ought to fortify our Spirits against such Accidents, in such a
manner that we may slight them, bear them easily, and pass over them quietly.

What has been spoken is in respect to that State and Condition which our Laws
will not allow us to change, such as Marriage, a Monastical Life, or of that
State which we cannot change but for a worse, and with great disgrace: For as
for that which we may quit when we will to embrace another, there is no need of
so great Caution and Circumspection, though still we ought to engage in such an
one, as if we always did intend to abide in it. Otherwise the very Thought of
changing, will frequently disturb our Minds with various Imaginations, and
which being fixed to nothing but altering every moment, as we say from white to
black, we shall never remain fixed and resolved, according to that Expression
of the Poet; Aestuat, and vitae disconvenit ordine toto.

So that we ought not to change, except for some very weighty Causes; for if we
alter upon every light Occasion, the same mischief will attend us in all our
succeeding Conditions.

As for the last Office of private Prudence, as it is not distinct from the
Offices of other Virtues, we shall not trouble our selves to treat of it
particularly in this Place, and the rather because this Matter would be too
tedious; and it is as differing as there are differing Affairs and Actions of
Life, which are to be directed by Prudence: Therefore it seems there remains
for us nothing else to do but to mention this General Rule, To undertake
nothing rashly; or, as Cicero expresses it, of which we cannot render a
probable Reason. Now this Rule has diverse excellent Particulars belonging to
it.

First, That we ought to understand the Nature and Qualities of the Business
that we undertake: Because if we have not a clear insight into that, it will be
impossible to discover all the convenient Expedients, and consequently all our
Care and Diligence will be vain and useless; and therefore here we must chiefly
take heed that our Mind be not blinded with Passion, and so mistake Error for
Truth, but that we may give to every thing its due estimate.

Secondly, It is requisite that the Nature and Condition of those with whom we
are concerned be not concealed from us, for if we don't understand whether they
be honest Men or deceitful, wary or rash, powerful or weak, etc. we can
undertake nothing with any assurance, neither can we reasonably expect it. And
here it is, that we must keep to a certain Medium between Confidence and a too
great distrust, because as it is often hurtful to have too great Confidence, so
it is no less and as often to be too distrustful.

The Third, Is to consider our own Strength; because if we know not what we can
do of our selves, or by our Friends, or by our Riches, we cannot promise to our
selves to compass any thing. I confess we must yield something to Chance and
Destiny, but in the mean while, we must be enabled with Industry and Strength
to drive on to a Performance, or to divert the Casualties that oppose us.

Fourthly, We must have the Means and Instruments ready at hand, for there is
nothing more ridiculous than to undertake a Business and not know where to
begin it. And here the Circumstances, in relation to the Thing, or in relation
to the Agent, which may either further or hinder the execution, are chiefly to
be inquired into.

Fifthly, That we take care to make use of a fit Time and Occasion, for fear if
we be too hasty, we overthrow all, or by too long delay all our Counsels
become useless.

Sixthly, That when the Business has been begun, after a serious Deliberation,
we ought to proceed vigorously, for fear that if the Mind stops in the
execution, or wavers in considering and meditating upon the Resolution, it will
effect nothing. This has given occasion for that famous Sentence of Bias,
Aggredere tarde agenda, sed aggressus age constanter. Undertake deliberately,
but when you have begun, proceed with Vigor and Resolution.

Lastly, That we keep our selves steady and fixed in the Resolution we have
taken, never to deviate out of the Paths of Virtue and Honesty. Whatever
Temptation may be offered, we must never prefer Profit before Honesty, nor
Injustice before Justice, but we are to observe constantly this general and
excellent Rule of Morality, That it is better never to succeed in any Business,
by keeping our Conscience blameless and undefiled, than to succeed by polluting
it; for he that cannot tax himself with any Guilt, is not to be deemed
miserable, and he that is conscious of any Evil, cannot be counted happy.

That it is dangerous to undertake any thing against our natural Inclination.
WE ought here, upon the occasion of the first Particular, to examine if
Lactantius had any Cause to upbraid Epicurus with this supposed Crime, That he
advises in general, to follow Nature; and the rather because if this Saying be
rightly understood, and taken in a good sense, it seems very reasonable; for
seeing that Nature and Inclination differ in several Persons, what Rule more
general and more secure could be given, than to advise with our selves, and to
provide our selves a settlement in a certain condition and state of Life,
according as we find our selves either fit or otherwise? Should any Man in a
Business of so great Moment forget himself, I mean not remember his own Temper
and Abilities, and by that means cast himself into a necessity to be always
laboring in vain, as Sisyphus, or as the Giants, contend with the Gods to no
purpose. This Cicero calls striving against Nature. It is, without doubt, a
very dangerous Ambition to pretend to excel in any thing, out of a mere Fancy,
that by the same means others have been made Famous, though we are often
destitute of the same advantages of Mind and Fortune which others had. It Is by
this means that Parents make their Children Miserable, by putting them upon
Employments, without considering their Nature, Temper, and fit Qualifications,
but out of a foolish Ambition to raise them in the World, higher than their
Circumstances will permit. We need but hearken to Seneca upon this occasion.
Before all other Things, we ought to make a right Judgment of our selves, and
put a just and true value upon our Abilities; for commonly we fancy to have
more Strength and Merit than really we have. Some lose themselves by trusting
too much upon their Eloquence. Others spend more than their Estates will allow;
and some who have but infirm Bodies, have lain oppressed under too weighty
Employments. The Modesty of some will not suit with public Functions, that
require a bold and daring Countenance; and others have too much Pride, or too
little Complacency, to obtain any Suit at Court. Some can never be moved, and
others at the least distaste, are provoked to a high degree. Some cannot behave
themselves with any Decency and Civility, nor refrain themselves from offering
sharp Jests, whatever danger they incur. To all these kind of People it is more
convenient for them to live a private Life, than to be admitted to the
management of public Affairs; for a proud and hasty Temper ought to avoid all
occasions that might interrupt or obstruct its own Freedom. Cicero speaks
almost to the same purpose, when he says, We must behave our selves in such a
manner, that we may not act against our Nature in general, but follow our own
Disposition; for we must not oppose nor force Nature, or proceed in any thing,
as we say, Invita Minerva, that is, against the Grain. If there be any thing
Commendable, it is doubtless the equality and evenness of our Life and Actions,
which you cannot possibly observe, if you imitate the Tempers of others, and
neglect your own. Let every one therefore consult his own Genius, and judge
exactly of himself, of his Vices, and of his good Disposition, that the
Stage Players may not seem to excel us in Prudence: For they choose to represent
not always the most excellent Persons, but such as best becomes them. Now let
us hear what Lactantius objects.

The Doctrine of Epicurus, says he, has always been more famous than the rest,
not because it is more agreeable with Truth, but because he speaks more agreeable
with the Inclinations of every one; and by that means, he has drawn the common
People to his side. To him who is Slothful, he forbids Study; to the Covetous,
he admonishes to forbear Grieving; to the Effeminate and Slothful, to enter
into the managment of public Affairs; the Coward, he advises not to go to the
Wars; to him who hates Company, he praises a solitary Life. If any delights
not in Marriage or has unruly Children, his directions to him is to keep to a
single Life. He who is Stout and Courageous, shall be told that the wise Man is
Happy even under Pain. If any Fancies Honor and Preferments, he will counsel
him to be acquainted with Kings; but another who cant bear a repulse, he will
admonish to depart from the Court. These are the Objections of Lactantius.

In the mean while, if we may take the Words of Epicurus, in a plain Sense,
without any such Gloss, in my Judgment they will not seem so unreasonable: For
first, for the advice he offers to a lazy Fellow not to engage himself in
Study, he don't hereby blame Study absolutely, but rather he esteems and values
it highly; for he exhorts both Young and Old to the Study of Philosophy; and
for the sake of those who would apply themselves to it, he took the Pains to
make Abridgments of his own Works. But because Arts and Sciences are not to be
obtained without a resolute and continued Labor, if there be any that either
cannot or will not endure the Fatigue of this Labor, what harm is there to
forbid him to engage himself in it, seeing thereby he would do himself no good?
We have before cited this Sentence of Epicharmus.

Labor nobis cuncta Dij vendunt bona. But if this be true, in respect of other
Things, how much more in relation to the Sciences; which as they cannot be
bought with all the Gold of the World, they cannot be obtained but by a vast
Labor and Industry. And if in another place he advises the Covetous to be
sparing in his Bounty, he don't thereby condemn Liberality, or those Expenses
which are made for good and lawful Uses; but he means plainly, that if any
fears to fall into Want, that he should not be too lavish of his Estate, and
cast it away in such Liberalness, as belongs only to Princes, and such as
abound in Wealth. If he forbids them that are naturally Slow and Lazy to engage
themselves in public Affairs, it was not without great Reason, as we shall see
hereafter.

He forwarns a timorous Man to go to the Wars. But why should we not approve of
his Advice? As if we ought not to make choice of Men for the Wars, or as if we
should desire such to go thither who tremble and are afraid of the least
Noise, and whose Sword falls to the Ground at the sight of Danger: Are we not
sensible, that in an Engagement one Coward does more mischief with his idle
Fears, than a great many brave Men may do good with their Courage? And don't
pretend that we should rather encourage a fearful Spirit, and make him
Courageous; for if he be so of his own Nature, we know the common Saying, It is
not an easy matter to turn an Hare into a Lion; Or, of a slender Reed to make a
Lance.

He advises a wise Man to do all for himself. But we have already discovered
how that is to be understood, and that the wise Man acts for himself, tho he
puts himself upon Inconveniences, or even Dies for the sake of his Friend; and
yet what is there more dear and precious than Life?

He praises Solitariness, to him who naturally cares not for Company. How can
we blame this, without blaming the Retreat of many great Men, and the Rules of
Living of several Societies or Fraternities of ancient Philosophers and
religious Persons, who purposely shun the throngs of Men, for the better
improving of their Minds?

If he praises the single Life to such as decline Women, and the Happiness of
having no Children, to such as are troubled with Disobedient ones: He means not
that he who has a wicked Wife or perverse Children should shake them off; but
he would have him who thinks of Marriage, consider how he would endure his
uneasiness, if he had a troublesome Wife, or Children of corrupt Manners; so
that by apprehending the Mischiefs that may proceed from thence, he may the
better understand, that it is not convenient to have either.

CHAP IV. Of Oeconomick Prudence.
AS to Oeconomick Prudence, which consist in the due ordering of a Family, and
wha belongs to it, I shall not insist on it; for let us b^^ suppose private
Prudence, and it is easy from then^^ to learn what belongs to Oeconomick, if we
w^^^ but mind such as do generally exercise themselv^^ in it, or prescribe
Rules for it: Nevertheless, th^^ we may not seem totally to neglect this
Matter, it is necessary to observe; First, what we meet with in Aristotle, That
the Oeconomick Dominion is a kind of Monarchy or Principality, because every
House is governed by the command of one single Person. Secondly, That he who
governs in a Family is called Father, or Father of a Family, in respect of the
Children; Husband, in respect of the Wife; Master, in respect of the Slaves and
Servants; Owner, in respect of the Goods and Estate. Thirdly, That the Household
or Family, in respect of the Relation between Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, is called Natural, and first instituted by Nature; for there can be
none more agreeable with Nature. Fourthly, That for the Government between
Master and Servant, it is also agreeable with Nature, for among Men some seem
to be born to Command, and others to Obey; so that besides that Slavery that
the Laws or Rights of Nations have introduced, in respect of those who have
been taken Prisoners in War, or have been Sold; there is another certain
natural Slavery, by which, as the Soul commands the Body, and Men Brutes, so he
who excells in the Abilities of the Mind, commands over him who excels only in
Strength of Body, and the rather, because it is needful for the latter to be
ruled by another, as it is useful for Brutes to be tamed by Men. Fifthly, in
respect to the Right that we have over certain Things which we possess to our
selves; for tho according to the primitive Right of Nature, one thing is no
more mine than thine, nor thine more than mine; nevertheless, it seems
agreeable with Nature, That every one should have and possess to himself
something which is not lawful for another to take away, because there is
nothing more agreeable with Nature, than to preserve our selves safe and
secure, which would be impossible among the Quarrels and Violences, unto which
Men would be continually subject and liable, if all Things did so belong to all
Men, that every one might have Right over his Neighbor's Goods, and might
lawfully take them away at his Pleasure. Sixthly, That our Households, chiefly
those of Princes and great Persons, are far from the plainness of our
Ancestors, when Men reckoned among the principal Possessions of a Family, the
Wife and the Ox.

-- Vxoremque Bovemque jugalem. When a cold Cave was all the House which
contained the Fire; the domestic Gods, the Houshold-Goods, and all the Stock
under the same Roof.

-- Cum frigida parvas
Praeberet spelunca domos, ignemque laremque
Et pecus, and dominos communi clauderet umbra.
Lastly, That the Oeconomick Prudence is divided into four Parts; The Nuptial,
or that of a married State, in relation to the Wife; The Paternal, in respect
of the Children; The Lordly or Magisterial, which relates to the Servants and
Slaves; The Possessions, which respects the Goods, Possessions, and other
Enjoyments of the Family.

Of the Nuptial Prudence and its several Duties.
AS for what concerns, among other things, the Nuptial Prudence, it is most
certain that the first and principal Duty, is to choose a good Wife; for he who
endeavors to marry with Beauty, Nobility, or Riches, rather than Virtue, is
striving doubtless to load himself with a tedious and troublesome Cross. When
the Election is made, and the Marriage consummated, the Husband ought in such a
manner to labor to gain the Love of his Spouse by all the Expressions of
Affection and Respect, that she may easily see her own Happiness, and be
persuaded that she could never meet with a better Husband, a more honest Man,
nor a more suitable and more pleasant Companion. Yet this ought to be managed
with so much Moderation and Discretion, that no occasion may be given to her to
become Insolent; and that with the Love she bears to her Husband, she may not
forget the Respect that she owes him: For though there is an Equality between the
Husband and the Wife, there are a great many things in which the Husband ought
to have the Pre-eminence; and if in such Cases he yields by chance to the
Ambition of the Woman, he will quickly find himself under a most intolerable
Yoke, and with the loss of his Authority, he will lose also his Peace and Quiet.

He ought likewise to train her up and instruct her in such a manner, in the
Management of Domestic Affairs, that he may leave to her the ordinary Care and
Command of the Family, and may himself be better able to look after the
Concerns abroad. By this means she will share in the Government, and ease her
Husband of those Cares which are of less Moment, and within the reach and
capacity of the Female Sex.

He must also acquaint her with such of his Designs which he knows do not
exceed the capacity of her Understanding, and which he believes she will keep
secret if there be any need of Concealment; that she may thereby understand
that she is not slighted, and that her Husband desires that she may have a
share in his Affairs; and that if she is to be concerned in doing any thing,
she may perform it more satisfactorily and with greater affection. Besides, as
she is admitted to be a Fellow Laborer, she will add to his Joy upon good
success, and lessen his Grief upon ill.

I need not mention, that he ought not to violate his conjugal Faith that he
has plighted to her; for this were to do her a great Injustice, and to incline
her to return him the like; besides, this is apt to beget a certain Indignation
and Aversion in her, with a domestic Hatred never to be reconciled, attended
with perpetual Quarrels; not to mention something else which too commonly
attends the furious Jealousy of a Woman, Quid non possit foemina furens?

Lastly, if she has neither Modesty nor Manners, and after that the Husband
has applied all possible industry to make her better, if she remains still
untractable, it is not lawful doubtless to destroy her, as it was among the
Romans, the Greeks, and the Gauls, according to thee too cruel Laws of their
Country; but in such a case it is convenient either to separate, or to resolve
to submit with Courage, and to alleviate with Patience the Evil that we cannot
Remedy, especially if there be Children, that so the Follies and Infamy of the
Mother, and the Discredit of the Family may not be divulged.

But we must here acknowledge the Truth, That the brutish Temper and ill
Conduct of Men, oftener make Marriages unhappy, than the Lightness, Unconstancy,
Vanity, and Ambition of Wives. Therefore the modern Persians have a common
Proverb, That the Husband who has an ill Wife, don't deserve to be married.
They mean thereby, That a Man who dares venture upon Marriage, ought, besides
the certain knowledge of his bodily Strength, to know at the first beginning,
how to manage and order the Mind and Temper of his Wife, so as to make her
become good. Now if he be defective in this, it will be accounted his Fault,
his want of skill or complacency of Temper, and consequently his incapacity of
rendering Matrimony so easy and agreeable as it ought to be.

Of paternal Prudence, and its several Duties.
THE principal Office of paternal Prudence, seems chiefly to have regard to the
begetting of Children; because from hence proceeds the Temper of the Body, and
consequently the Disposition and Inclination, either to Good or Evil Manners.
It is not therefore without Reason, that this Reproach is so common, Genuit te
Parens ebrius cum foret. Thy Father was Drunk when he begot thee. But if we
should advise Men what Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, and others have taught
concerning the Age, the Season, the Manners of Living, the preceding Continency
and other things requisite, they would but little regard it, being carried to
the Act by a blind and lustful Fury; so that it is a hazard if the Offspring
thus engendered prove virtuous or otherwise; and Children thus casually
begotten, are educated such as they are born.

Therefore if we consider this Duty, the First thing will be to look carefully
to Children in their Infancy; to take a principal care that if the Mother has
not the Patience to suckle her Infant, and to give it the Breast, and that Milk
which Nature has bestowed upon her for that purpose, to make choice of a Nurse
of a good Disposition, sound Constitution, and good Temper; for certainly this
first Nourishment has a great influence upon the remaing part of our Life,
upon the health of our Bodies, and the disposition of our Minds.

The Second thing is to train 'em up in good Manners, and give 'em prudent
Instructions, which is of so great importance, that we cannot be too careful
and solicitous in providing 'em able and discreet Tutors. And here by the way,
I cannot but admire at the niggardly Thrift of some Parents in this particular;
not considering that this lays the foundation of their Childrens future
Happiness or Ruin. And if a Child shall perceive, when he comes to Age, that
any thing in that respect has been wanting to him, he will scarce ever forgive
them.

The Third, is to design 'em to a certain manner of Life, always with a regard
to their Condition, Abilities, and chiefly to their Genius and Natural
Inclination, for fear that we should engage them in an Employment which they
are not able to discharge with Credit, or to reap much Advantage or Pleasure by.

The last Duty is to admit them in such a manner into their Counsels, that they
may understand betimes the Business of the Family, and how it is like to go for
time to come, for fear that they should be altogether ignorant of it, and be
unable to bear the Burden, if the Father should happen to fail. It is
doubtless, a foolish and ridiculous kind of Envy in Fathers and Mothers, to be
unwilling to communicate their Concerns to their Children, as if it did not
behove them to be acquainted therewith; for if thereby they imagine the better
to support their Authority, they are very much deceived, not considering that
by this Concealment they lessen the Love that Children would have had for them,
and offer 'em Motives, if not to desire their death, at least to bear it with
less Concern. It Is true, a Father ought always to preserve himself in the
Esteem and Veneration of his Children, and as we commonly say, Command over his
Family till Death. But this Respect must be obtained in such a manner, as he
ought not to lose his Childrens Love, which cannot be better preserved than by
such Actions as may convince them they love them sincerely, and that they
labor only for their good. They ought to behave themselves after such a
manner, and with so much Prudence, that they may esteem themselves happy to be
the Children of such a Father, who is one of the best of Parents and
faithfullest of Friends that they could ever desire. These Expressions of
Affection are so much the more needful for Fathers and Mothers, because as it
has been always observed, Love never ascends as it does descend. The love of
Children to Parents, is commonly much less than that of Fathers and Mothers to
their Children, the latter seeming as it were much more natural than the former.

Of the Prudence of Superiors, and their several Duties.
ARistotle teaches, That the Prudence of a Lord has in it nothing great and
sublime, because it suffices, that the Master knows how to Command what the
Slave should perform. Yet according to his Opinion, there is a particular
Knowledge that regards the Government of Slaves: The First Office is to
distinguish and understand the Ability and Capacity of each Servant or Slave,
lest by a mistake we should employ one who is by birth fit to be an Overseer,
in mean and laborious Drudgeries, or on the contrary we should advance one who
is less capable, to a more considerable Post.

Secondly, so to behave our selves with our Servants, that they may not grow
Insolent, nor be cast down, or too much discouraged; for this purpose we must
show some Respect to such as are the best qualified, the most polished and most
civilized, and supply the meanest with a competent Subsistence; for that little
Respect that we render to the first, and the necessary Allowance that we give
to the latter, is instead of a Reward and Encouragement to them for their
Labor.

And though what we have said be commonly understood only as to Slaves, yet it
may also be meant of those whom we call Servants, in whose place many would
willingly have Slaves restored, for Reasons that are sufficiently known:
However, whether we use Slaves or Servants, we ought always so to behave our
selves toward them, that they may be inclined to perform their Duty with
Respect and Willingness, which may easily be obtained, unless it be sometimes
in Servants, because they have the liberty to leave and depart, and seldom will
endure Correction. But it is not sufficient that they serve with Respect, but
we should endeavor that Affection may accompany it, which can never be
expected, unless we make them sensible that we love them our selves, that we
have a care of them, and that whiles they perform their Duty, we shall never be
wanting in our care of their Welfare; and that at the appointed time, some
shall have their Freedom, others their Reward: At last, whether we promise them
any Reward, or whether they have any Reason to expect any, we must not suffer
them to be disappointed of their Expectation, not only because Equity requires
it, but also because Prudence is concerned, that other Servants and Slaves may
serve so much the more willingly, because they will expect to be treated in the
same manner, and will thereby understand that they have to do with a good
Master, and a very honest Man.

Of Possessory Prudence and its Offices.
LAstly, As to this sort of Prudence, its main Office it seems is to take care
that nothing necessary be wanting to the Family; for a Father of a Family
commands over all its Members, to the end that by his Prudence and Diligence,
he may mind that nothing be deficient, which they are to have with respect to
the Condition of the Person: For though absolutely, and according to the
Prescript of Nature, nothing is necessary but that which expels Hunger, Thirst,
Cold, and such like Inconveniences; nevertheless, civil Society makes several
other things needful, which are suitable to the Rank and Degree that we bear in
that Society. A consequence of this Duty is to take heed that our Expenses do
not exceed our Incomes, because the Debts contracted by degrees, will drain the
Fund and bring the Family to Penury and Want. We don't speak of idle and
ridiculous Expenses, which are never to be suffered, but such as Prudence will
permit, and which are to be regulated according to our Abilities and the clear
Rents and Incomes of our Estates; which cannot well be expected without this
second Duty, that seems to be of a greater Concernment than all the rest, That
the Master himself should understand his own Business; and if he cannot think
upon every particular thing, he ought not to trust so much to his Agents and
Stewards, but that he should well know in what his Estate consists, and be
perfectly acquainted with the state of his Incomes and Expenses. We commonly
see that all things go to wrack in great Houses when the Master understands not
his Affairs, but leaves 'em to the Management of Servants and Stewards, in such
a manner that they think they may do what they please without being called to
an account or controlled. It is known what Socrates and Aristotle relate of a
certain Persian, who being asked what it was chiefly that made his Horse so
fat, answered, The Eye of his Master. And we have likewise heard the answer of
that African, from whom they inquired, What was the best means to improve Land
and make the Fields fertile, answered, The Footsteps of the Landlord. From
whence we may conclude, that commonly a Business is never better managed, than
when those who are chiefly concerned, take care of it themselves.

Now because some would have the preservation and increase of an Estate
patrimonial, or an Estate otherwise obtained, to belong to this kind of
Prudence; this doubtless is to be understood, where our Estate is not so large
as to spend our Days in Ease and Leisure, and have sufficient to leave to our
Posterity. In such a Case, it is not only Honorable, but also needful to employ
our Cares to increase our Estate. But to think upon nothing else but how to
heap Riches, and to purchase Lands, to add Houses to Houses and Fields to
Fields, is to run into that Covetousness and unsatiable greedy Desire, of which
we have been Discoursing before.

But as there are Three expedients of gathering Wealth, Husbandry, Industry, or
honest Labor and Usury; Cicero tells us, that of all those means by which we
get an Estate, there is none better, more pleasant, and more suitable, and
worthy of a Freeman, than Husbandry. He Speaks of Merchandise, that if the
Traffic and Gain be small, it is Sordid and Base; but if great and large, and
gives an Opportunity of being Bountiful without Vanity or Presumption, it is
not to be slighted. But for Usury, says Aristotle and Cicero, it is hated not
without cause, but chiefly when it is excessive. For as the Poet observes,
constant Usury destroys the Poor.

-- Velox inopes usura trucidat. I know there are other Means to grow Rich; as
the Service of great Men, Flattery, etc. But it is not requisite that we should
speak of those that take these Courses; nor of such as purchase Offices, and
make Parties by Bribery; nor of such as going to the Wars, not contented with
their Pay, plunder and take the Goods of other Men; seeing such kind of Men
differ in nothing from those who make themselves Rich by Cheating, by Perjury
and Robbing: But not to stay too long upon this Master, let us examine Two great
Complaints that are made against Epicurus.

The First because he says, That a wise Man ought not to be Married, nor
trouble himself in the Education of Children; which seems not only to overthrow
the very Foundations of Families, but even of Commonwealths. The Second is,
they seem to charge him with having said, That there is no natural
communication among Men, and that the great Affection of Parents toward their
Children, is not the effect of Nature.

As to the First, it is certain that he never intended this as a general
direction to all Mankind, but only to a few wise Men; neither has he
prescribed, that wise Men may not nor ought not to Marry, if the good of the
Commonwealth, or some other weighty Consideration require it. Now how can this
be to overthrow the Foundation of the Commonwealth? Is not this, I pray, more
Holy and Religious than the practice of Aristotle, who promulg'd a Law, That
such Children as were deficient in their Members, should be destroyed, that the
number of such as should be brought up might be limited, and that as many as
should happen to be Born beyond that Number, should be exposed; but if any
Constitution of the Country prohibits such Practices, they should cause the
Fruit of the Womb to perish, before it comes to have Life or Feeling: And as to
the Reason or Excuse he pretends, of the privation or want of Sense and Life in
the Foetus, it is but a mere Mockery, for he cannot prove that when a Woman
Miscarries, the Fruit or Foetus has neither Sense nor Life; and that to
destroy any such Fruit, which would be alive in a very short time, if it be not
already, is the same thing as to destroy a Corpse or a Body, altogether
incapable of Life.

For the Second, it is true, Epictetus represents Epicurus exclaiming against
that vulgar Error, That there is a natural Communication between Men, and that
the Affection of Parents to their Children, is Natural or Born with them. Be
not deceived, as he represents him Speaking: Ne decipiamini O Mortales! Non est
ratione praeditis ulla inter se naturalis Communicatio; Amor Parentum erga
Liberos non est Naturalis. Mihi credit, qui secus loquuntur in errorem
inducunt vos, ac rationibus falsis circumveniunt vos. But doubtless the Envy
and Hatred against Epicurus has caused many to make him say things that he
never imagined: For certain it is, that he allows a natural Communication
between Nations, and among Men who live under the same Laws. Now if this be
granted, it is plain that there is more reason to allow a natural Communication
between those of the same Blood, and between Parents and Children who are
immediately united together by Blood and Nature. Epictetus himself acknowledges
that Epicurus was of Opinion, That we are naturally inclined to Communication,
and that when we have a Child Born, it is not in our Power not to Love it, or to
Slight and Disregard it. It seems they will have him maintain this Doctrine.

Nevertheless, I will say, That if they will absolutely make him hold this,
that the Love of Parents to their Children is not Natural, they should at least
give him liberty to interpret his own Words. His Meaning is, That this
Affection is begot in us, and increases by degrees, not so much by a certain
blind instinct of Nature, as by a persuasion of the Father that it is his
Child, and a part of himself; and by the Hopes that he shall be Beloved and
Honored, or Relieved and Supported by him; or because he judges his Name to be
eternized and conveyed to Posterity by this means, and that the plain and
ingenuous Conversation of a Child that promises much, rejoices his Heart.

Epicurus seems to have very good Reasons to be of that Opinion; First, because
we see many that have equal Affection for Children that are none of their own,
but Bastards, as they have for their own, if they believe them to be lawfully
begotten. Secondly, we find not that Love in those whose Children are lawfully
Begotten, if they are otherwise persuaded. Thirdly, we find as great a Love in
those who have adopted Children, when the Resolution or Will supplies the
defects of the Persuasion. Fourthly, That if the Fruit is Abortive, the Father
and the Mother are not so much afflicted, as if it had continued with them a
longer time, and been conversant with 'em; not so much when it dies a young
Infant, as when it departs in a more advanced Age; when it has many Brethren,
as when it is the only Child; if he has had already any Children, as if he
has none left behind; if he be Debaucht and Untractable, as if he were Wise
and Virtuous.

CHAP. V. Of politic or civil Prudence.
WE shall now speak of Politic Prudence, which Aristotle calls not only
Science or Ability, but supposes it to be the Lady and Queen of all the rest,
the knowledge of Morality being subject to it as a part of it; for he tells us,
That it belongs to a Politician to understand what may make for the Happiness
of the People, that he is properly the Master and chief Contriver of their
Welfare, and that consequently it belongs to him to take cognizance of Pleasure
and Pain, and of Virtue and Vice, which are the Springs of Pleasure and Pain.
Now the politic Prudence, is like the Oecononomick; for as the latter is to
regulate a Family, composed of several particular Persons; so the Politic or
Civil is to govern a City or Town composed of diverse Families. We ought
therefore, first to examine in whom this Prudence resides, or ought to reside,
as in its proper Subject: This appears not difficult to resolve, for it is
plain that it ought to reside in none more than in him who has the sovereign
Power, the chief Authority, or the absolute Right to Command, which Right may
be discovered chiefly by certain particulars, which Aristotle mentions: As to
be able to conclude Peace or War; to make Alliances, and dissolve them; to
establish and disannul Laws; to determine about Life, Death, Banishment,
confiscation of Goods or Restitution.

Of the first Origin of Sovereign Power, according to the Opinion of the
Ancients.
THIS Power is supposed by the Vulgar, to have first taken its beginning, when
Men, like Beasts, wandered up and down the Fields without any subjection, each
enjoying his full Liberty according to his own Will and Pleasure. Hereupon they
contrived to make up Societies, in which every one renouncing, in some measure,
his own Liberty, yielded to the Will of the Multitude, which by this means
claimed a Right and Authority over each individual Person; and provided not
only for their Safety and quiet way of Living, by giving a check to the most
Powerful and Robust, by hindering them from insulting over their weaker and
more peacable Neighbors, but also hereby they made a more equal Distribution
of the Products of the Earth, and likewise communicated to each other the
effects of their Arts and Labors, wherein any excelled another: For that
lawless freedom which they pretended to enjoy in those early Days, must
doubtless cost them dear, because every one having an equal Right over every
Thing, and no Man being able to appropriate any thing to his own use, which
another was able to take from him; they must needs be continually Warring and
Contending with one another. So that such a way of Living being full of
Quarrels, cannot be properly called a Freedom, because of the many
Inconveniences and Mischiefs that attend it. Therefore true and natural Liberty
is easier to be found in a Society, where Men being obedient to the Laws of
that Society, I mean those Laws that were enacted and approved for their
Benefit and Advantage, act in all other things as they please, and have a Right
to their proper Goods, so that no other can take them away, because of the
public Authority and Power that protects 'em.

For this Reason, Aristotle seems to disapprove of Plato's Commonwealth, in
which Women, Children, Estates, and all other Things were to be common: For if
we take away Mine and Thine, the Commonwealth is so far from being at Unity
thereby, and consequently more perfect and complete, that it is the only way to
introduce again that primitive Barbarity and brutish manner of Living; for what
we Fancy to be common to every one, belongs properly to no Body. This made
Colotes, a Disciple of Epicurus, to say, That they who have made the Laws, and
have settled the Government and the Magistracy in Cities, have thereby secured
Men's Lives, and settled them in a peaceable State; and that if we offer to
abolish them, we must return to live like Beasts, and devour one another. There
may perhaps be found some who in consideration to Virtue, and out of their own
good Inclination, may Rule and Govern themselves: But truly they seem Strangers
to the generality of Mankind, who Fancy that they will restrain from Acts of
Injustice by the Principles of Reason or of Honesty, rather than by the Terror
of the Magistrates or of the Laws.

But to return to our Matter in hand, I omit to speak of the sovereign Power or
sovereign Authority, translated by common Consent from particular Persons to
all the People. Now the People meeting together to deliberate and resolve upon
any Business, what was resolved by all, or by the greatest part, was taken to
be the Resolution of the whole Society. And because it is inconvenient that all
the People should meet, and that every private Person should declare his
Sentiment, it happened that all the People, of their own accord, made over this
Power to a certain number of Persons, or to one single Person, or it may be
that this one Person, or a greater Number, by Force or by Cunning have taken it
upon them. I observe only, that we understand from thence, why we commonly
distinguish according to the saying of Tacitus, Cunctas Nationes et Vrbes
Populus, aut Primores, aut Singuli regunt; Three kinds of Commonwealths, or of
political Governments, namely, Monarchy or the Dominion of a single Person,
when the sovereign Power resides in one who Commands all the People, and is
Commanded by no Body: Oligarchy or the Dominion of a few particular Persons,
when the sovereign Power is in a small Number: Poliarchy or the Dominion of
many, it may be of all the People, when the sovereign Power resides in every
private Person. Moreover, tho from these three Sorts we may observe and
distinguish two Kinds, one Good, Lawful and Praiseworthy, the other Vicious,
Unlawful and deserving Blame; yet common Experience has Taught us to call the
good sort of the first kind Kingdom, and the evil, Tyranny; but the good sort
of the second Aristocracy, or the Dominion of the Chieftains, and of the best;
the evil ought to be called Kyristocracy, or the Dominion of many wicked
Persons, but it retains the Name of Oligarchy. Besides, Plato, Xenophon, and
several others Teach, That the third kind is called Democracy, or Dominion of
the People: Aristotle nevertheless tells us, That the word Democracy is
ascribed to the vicious Species of that kind of Government, and that the best
is named Commonwealth; but according to the present Use and Practice, the
Three sorts or forms of Government are called Monarchy, Aristocracy and
Democracy.

Now it is not necessary that we should busy our selves in giving the Character
or Marks of each sort of Government, they are sufficiently known; I shall only
here observe Two or Three particulars: First, That to the two kinds of
Monarchy, namely, Kingly and Tyrannical, they commonly add a Third, which they
name Despotick; for the Kingly is when the Monarch Rules his Subjects, as a
Father his Children; and that as his Subjects are Obedient to his Commands and
Laws, he himself is Obedient to the Laws of Nature, suffering his Subjects to
enjoy as well their natural Liberty, as the propriety of their Goods. But the
Tyrannical is that where the Monarch commands his Subjects as Slaves or Brutes,
and trampling under Foot all the Laws of Nature, he deprives them of all
Liberty and Propriety, which he Usurps and claims to himself as his own. The
Despotical, they say, is where the Monarch Commands his Subjects, which have
been overcome by War, as a good Master of a Family does his Slaves. Secondly, I
shall observe, That it is not without Cause that the regal and tyrannical
Dominions are said to be contrary; for as the Regal aims at the common good of
the Society, and designs for its End the Security, the Tranquillity, the Plenty,
and in a Word, the public Happiness: So the Tyrannical aims at nothing but its
own private Advantage, and fills all Places with Fear, Trouble, Poverty and
Calamity. And as in the regal Government, not only the Subjects are Happy, but
also and chiefly the Prince, because of that Respect and Love which he knows
that his Subjects have for him, when he shows them that he fears God, that he
is Obedient to the Laws of Nature, and that he looks upon the welfare of his
People, as his greatest Interest; that he is wise in his Deliberations,
courageous in his Actions, moderate in Prosperity, constant in Adversity,
resolved in the Execution of Justice, faithful to his Promises, mild to good
Men, severe to the Wicked, supporting his Friends, terrible to his Enemies, in
a Word, that he is the Father of his Country, and a true Shepherd of his
People: Thus in the tyrannical Government all kind of Mischiefs, Griefs and
Anxieties oppress not only the Subjects, but more particularly the Tyrant
himself, who is not insensible of the secret Contempt they bear him, and the
implacable Hatred that his Subjects harbor in their Breasts against him, when
he makes them sensible, and feel by his tyrannical Proceedings, that he values
neither God, Nature, nor the safety of his People; for every one sees that he
acts nothing but by Subtilty and Violence; that good Success renders him
Insolent and Proud, as the Evil causes him to be Cruel; that he is full of
Injustice, Perfidiousness and Barbarity; that he hates good Men, that he
favors Wicked, in short, That he is not the Father of his Country, but a
public Enemy; not a Shepherd, but a Wolf to his People. Therefore being feared
and dreaded by all the World, he is himself in continual Fear and Dread, which
suffer him at no time to be at rest. For he fears both Friends and Foes, and
trembles at the shaking of a Leaf, yea, at his very Shadow. Therefore Cicero
and Seneca have very well remarkt, according to Epicurus, that it must needs
be, That he whom many fear, should stand in fear of many, which Seneca brings
in Labericus thus expressing, Necesse est multos timeat, quem multi timent.

Whether Monarchial Government is the best.
THe third thing that I have thought fit to observe, is, That of the several
approved sorts of Government, the Monarchical seems to be the best: For though
they have all of 'em their Inconveniences and Advantages; yet the Advantages of
the Monarchical are above the rest, and the Inconveniences fewer. For as in the
Monarchical, all Orders proceed from one Person, and relate to one; the state
of Affairs is more settled and constant; the necessary Orders upon all
occasions more easy to be given; the Resolutions more secret; the Execution
quicker, and all opportunities of Factions and Seditions prevented. Liberty
likewise and Security, which other Forms of Government pretend to, is greater
and larger, and so of other Advantages which are very well known. This is
sufficiently proved by the Government of a Family, which requires but one
Master or Father of the Family; or by that of an Army, which ought to have but
one General; and by the Government of the World that acknowledges but one
Sovereign Lord. Besides, the Annals inform us, That when the Affairs of a
Commonwealth have been reduced to the last Extremity, they have set up a
Dictator as the only Remedy. And though Aristotle in his Politics, seems to
prefer Aristocracy before Monarchy, he desires that we would consult the Genius
of the People; for some are more fit and inclinable to one Government than to
another; nevertheless, in his Metaphysics, he concludes without any Exception,
That Government by many is inconvenient.

Of the Duties of a Monarch in General.
BUt as we should be too tedious, and it is not convenient to treat here, what
belongs to the several Forms of Government, it shall suffice to mention
something of the Monarchical, which may be applied to the rest. Now as the Duty
of a Sovereign has chiefly respect to two times, viz. that of War and that of
Peace; there are certain things among others, which he ought principally to
mind. First, To understand well, and to imprint in his Thoughts this
Persuasion, That the Welfare, the Security and Advantage of his People; or as
Cicero calls it, the Happiness of his Subjects, should be the great Design and
End of his Government: That for this purpose he Rules, and upon this account it
is that he is respected and obeyed. For as the Pilate, says Cicero, designs a
happy and safe Navigation, the Physician the Health of the Patient, the General
of an Army Victory, so the Governor of a Commonwealth designs the Happiness
of his Subjects, which is secured by Riches, by Military Forces, by Glory,
Virtue and Honesty.

Secondly, To propose to himself no other Reward of his Cares and Labors, but
the Glory of Governing well, the Gratitude, the Respect and Affections of his
Subjects. How well was Trojan rewarded, when he heard the Applauses of all the
People, who cried out with a loud Voice, May the Gods love thee as thou love
us; for who can be happier than we, who need not wish that our Prince should
love us, but only that the Gods should bear us equal Affection as our Prince
does? Timoleon also owned himself sufficiently requited, when walking abroad,
he heard the like Acclamations of the People, full of Love and Veneration.
Therefore Princes act with little wisdom, or rather very imprudently, who being
desirous of Glory, endeavor to purchase it by any other Means than by doing
good to their People, and by deserving their Affections: For the Applause
gained by other Methods, is accompanied with Contempt, Hatred, and Execrations
of the Common People, and deserves to be called Infamy. Excellent and Admirable
was the Speech of Xunus Emperor of China to his Son Yaiis, who according to the
Relation of Martinius, lived Two Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Eight Years
before the Birth of Christ. Take, said he, when he was dying, this Scepter due
to your Virtue and Merits. Remember that you are the Father of your People,
that you are to deal with them as with your Children, that the People are not
born to serve you, but that you are born and designed to serve them; and that a
King is alone raised up above all the rest, that he might alone be able to
serve all. Seneca's Expression is likewise very admirable; The greatness of a
Prince, says he, is settled, firmly grounded and unshaken, when all the People
understand that he is as much for them as he is above them; and find by
experience that he watches daily, and takes care as well of the Welfare of
every particular Person, as of the general Safety of the State* They look upon
him then not as a wild and dangerous Beast that comes out of his Den, but as a
beautiful Star full of Divine Influence; they all strive to turn toward him,
ready to hazard themselves in a thousand Dangers, and sacrifice their Lives to
save his Life.

Thirdly, To excel all others in Virtue, as he excells them in Dignity: For
doubtless, it is not without Reason, that Cyrus in Xenophon, judges, That it is
not proper that he who is not more Virtuous than those over whom he is to
Command, should have Power to Command them. Truly he is obliged to encourage
Virtue for his Peoples sake, for it is certain that the Example of Kings is the
Pattern and Rule of the whole Kingdom.

-- Componitur Orbis,
Regis ad exemplum.
And the Condition of Princes, in the Opinion of Quintilian, Seneca and Cicero,
is such, that being in view of all the World, they can no more be concealed
than the Sun; they therefore, if they are vicious, expose their Vices to
public View, and do more Mischief by their Examples, than by their wicked
Actions. Now as he is bound to encourage Virtue for his Peoples sake, so
likewise for his own, that so he may gain the Esteem and Veneration of the
World, which he can never obtain if he be reputed Vicious: And among all the
other Virtues, he ought chiefly to encourage Piety and Religion, as well that
he may be blessed with Rewards from Heaven, and Abilities necessary to bear up
the weight of so heavy a Burden as the Government of the State is, as also to
make his Subjects the more Faithful, more Respectful and Obedient to him; for
they believe that he whom they see addicted to Piety and Religion, is beloved
and favored of God; and that when they are governed by such a one who is
beloved of God, they are governed by the very Spirit of God.

He must also have a special regard to the execution of Justice, for this
purpose, as it has been observed since the days of Hesiod, Kings were first
appointed; namely, for the Chastisement of the Wicked, and for the Rewarding of
those who deserve it, and to end the Differences that arise among his Subjects,
by causing every Man to receive his own. Therefore when a Prince devests
himself of this Virtue, he seems to profane the true and natural Duty of a
Prince; for of all the Titles of Honor, the most glorious and splendid
doubtless is to be styled Just.

There is also nothing that he ought more to heed than the keeping of his Word
which he has once given; and to observe punctually his Promises and the
plighting of his Faith; for the violation of this is more unworthy in him,
because he has the Power in his own Hand, so that there is nothing that can
easily excuse his breach of Promise; nay further, he is obliged as far as in
him lies, to hinder others from doing so. This quality is so much the more
excellent, because it is rare among Men, and requires a firm Resolution,
Constancy, and a greatness of Mind, chiefly when the Concerns are weighty and
considerable; we shall pass over Dissimulation in silence, which is too common.
I know some Politicians do permit of some kinds of Deceits in a Prince, if they
tend to the Advancement of the Public good. Plato, among others, maintains,
That they who Rule, are often obliged to lie and deceive for the Advantage of
their Subjects. But this is a difficult Question, which we shall examine
hereafter.

Fortitude and Clemency are also Regal Virtues, and every one knows that a
Prince cannot be excused from practicing them; for as Fortitude is needful to
strike an Awe and prevent any sudden Rebellion or Disturbance of the public
Peace: So Clemency is proper to beget in us a Love for the Prince, because of
his Readiness to pardon Offenders: This also creates an opinion of his Goodness
in us, when we find him naturally inclinable to observe that excellent Rule
which advises a Prince to be merciful to the Submissive, but to correct the
Stubborn.

Parcere Subjectis and debellare superbos. As to what relates to Modesty, it
highly concerns him to know how to temper it with Majesty; for fear that
forgetting his human Condition, and being puffed up with Glory and Pride, he
should become Insolent, and should draw upon himself unavoidably the hatred of
his People; or on the contrary, by abasing himself below his Dignity, he should
fall into Contempt.

There is no need that we should speak of Liberality, every one knows that it
is a Virtue which ought to be familiar to Princes, and the rather because there
is nothing that procures more the good Will and Approbation of the World, than
liberal and bountiful Actions. To this end the great abundance of Riches seems
to arise from all Parts, and at last to Center in the Treasury of the Prince,
and thence to issue forth again as from a plentiful Fountain. But these
Liberalities are to be bestowed prudently, with a regard to the Quality and
Merit of the Persons whom he intends to gratify; and also to his own Treasure,
lest by stirring up Emulation and Envy, he give too great opportunity to
abusive Tongues. As for Continency, Sobriety, and other Virtues, the more he is
endowed with them and practices 'em, the more glorious they will certainly
render him.

The fourth particular that a Monarch ought to apply himself to, is to
understand well the Nature and State of the Kingdom, if he comes to it by
Election or by Succession, if it be Ancient or Modern; what are the Fundamental
Laws of the State, what Evils and Mischiefs have happened either from the
Observance or not Observance of those Laws; what relation it has with the
Aristocratical or Democratical Governments; what Power the Grandees have; what
is able to stir up or to move the common People, and consequently what are the
Manners and Customs of both. He ought not to be ignorant of the Extent of his
Dominion, of its Confines, Situation and Riches, and whether the Traffic be
within or without his Realm. He must also know his Castles and Fortifications,
and the Neighbors who are able to break in upon him, or encourage Factions.
This will oblige him to be acquainted with Chronology, with Geography, and with
History, which derives its Beauty and Perfection from the two former Sciences,
and which is so needful to him, that without the Knowledge of this he can never
expect to become a perfect and an accomplished Politician.

Fifthly, He must be always furnished with those things, without which a
Kingdom cannot safely subsist; namely, a wise and prudent Counsel, that when he
himself cannot well understand, foresee and determine all things, he may make
use of such Counselors, whose Diligence, Experience, Wisdom, Integrity and
Faithfulness have recommended 'em to him; for he must remember what Cicero
says according to Hesiod, That he is truly very wise who knows of himself what
ought or what ought not to be done; but his Wisdom is next a kin, who knows how
to make use of good Advice, and to submit to it. Sapientissimum esse dicunt eum
cui quod opus sit veniat in mentem, proxime vero accedere illum qui alterius
been inventis obtemperet, which is comprehended in these two Verses, Ille
quidem eximius qui per se ipse omnia novit,
Sed praestans etiam, qui paret recta monenti.


Therefore he ought always to keep himself in that disposition of Mind, that
Truth may never offend him; that loving Uprightness and Sincerity, he may hate
all Flattery, which is the chief Plague and Bane of great Men; For fear, says
the same Author, that having tender Ears, he should be the last who should
understand the dishonor of his Kingdom, and that his Ruin should befall him
before he could become sensible of it.

He ought likewise to be furnished with worthy Officers; for as he alone is not
able to do all things, the several Offices of State ought to be possessed by
such as are able to support them; such are the Governors of Cities and
Provinces, the Generals of Armies, the Captains, Judges, Magistrates, and such
like, who are to be of Ability and known Integrity, otherwise there will be a
continual and unavoidable sequel of Mistakes, Wickedness and Mischiefs that
will attend.

There is no need to advise, that as Money is the Strength of all Affairs, his
Coffers ought never to be empty; that the Forces of the Kingdom may always
continue on foot, and that when a War happens or some other Occasion of great
Expenses, he may not be obliged to levy sudden, violent and extraordinary
Taxes. Neither is it needful to mention the General Deficiences of the State,
such as are the Fortresses and Castles, which ought to be well provided,
especially on the Borders, and on that side which the Enemy is to be feared:
The Military Forces ought to be in a constant readiness, that he may never be
surprised, but always able to repel a Foreign Invasion, and pacify a homebred
Sedition: As to Alliances, and chiefly such as are made with those People, who,
as Aristotle would have them, are Neighbors and Powerful, there ought to be
frequent and true Intelligence of all Things that happen, and of all the
Designs that are on foot among the Subjects, Neighbors or Enemies; for fear of
being ignorant herein, there might be some Contrivance against him unexpected,
whereby he himself may be oppressed or ruined. This will cause him to venture
something, as Plato says, or rather, spare nothing for the Maintenance of
Spies.

Of the great Concerns of Meum and Tuum, or of the Property of the Subject.
THe sixth Particular, which a long Experience in Traveling over Europe and
Asia, has discovered to me, is of no mean importance to a Sovereign Prince to
cause his Kingdom to flourish, viz. Not to make himself absolute Lord or
Proprietor of all the Lands of his Realm, as the Grand Segnior, the King of
Persia, the Great Mogul, are in the greatest part of their Dominions; but to
establish a Propriety, not only as in Poland, among the Nobility, but generally
among all his Subjects: For if we take away this great Foundation, we deprive
every private Person from all hopes of advancing themselves, or of securing
what at present they enjoy. In such a Case none is in a Condition to say, If I
labor it is for my self and my Posterity; I shall be the Owner of this little
Portion of Land that I intend to purchase; and I will leave it to my Children
after me, whereby common People become so negligent and lazy, that they scarce
labor but by constraint; and they are so careless of Husbandry, that the best
Lands are covered with Sand and Gravel, as in Egypt, by the overflowing of the
Nile; the most beautiful Hills are full of Brambles and Thistles, as in
Palestine, and those admirable Valleys of Alexandretta and Antioch, which are
become noisome Marshes and infectious Lakes; nay, all those excellent Plains,
rare Portions of Land and fruitful Hills of Asia Minor, are become Places
covered over with high and useless Grass and Woods; the wonderful Country of
Mesopotamia, that true Land of Promise, lies unmanur'd and totally forsaken: In
short, all Turkey, which is capable of being made the most fertile Soil in the
World, and stocked with the greatest number of Inhabitants, at present lies
desolate and neglected.

Besides, in a Government where Propriety is not regarded, there are no
Ministers of Justice, of sufficient Power to redress the Grievances of the
People at a distance from the Imperial Court, because all Governors in their
Provinces have an absolute Power and Authority, which inclines them to Tyranny;
and the more, because they are all Persons who have risen from nothing, or
miserable Slaves taken out of a Seraglio, and who have borrowed from those who
possess the Treasure of the Kingdom, as the Jews in Turkey, vast Sums of Money to
purchase their Governments, not to mention the Presents they are obliged to
make every Year to be continued in their Posts. So that all things being at the
disposal of the Governors and Jews, there is no Countryman, Handycrafts-man
nor Merchant, that can be secure, but lives in a continual dread and
apprehension of some Mischief befalling him, by some pretended Quarrel or
Design against him. From hence it is, that Arts which procure the Riches of a
Kingdom, are slighted in those Countries; and Sciences, which are the Glory and
Accomplishment of a Nation, are totally banished: For no body there has either
Courage or Hopes to rise to any thing considerable. Neither are there any
Offices or Places that require Learning, nothing but some pitiful Towns, that
is to say, certain Villages appointed for the Maintenance and Pension of
Soldiers, who draw out of them all that they can, without expending any thing,
either for the Repair of the Dwellings, or for Cleansing and Draining of the
Ditches, or for any other purpose; for they are never assured of any thing, and
they know not to Day, but that they may be absolutely dispossessed to Morrow,
or at least their Lands changed by their Masters.

For this Reason, I have sometimes given this Definition of a Turk; An Animal
Born for the Destruction of all that is Beautiful and Good in the World, and
even of Human Race it self. Not but that the true Turks are often of a kind and
good Disposition; but because their mistaken Policy, their Ignorance and
Negligence tend to take away and banish all Property; from whence proceeds, as
I have said, the Laziness of the People, the neglect of Husbandry, Tyranny, and
the desolation of their Provinces. All this is a certain Truth, and not the
Dreams of a fantastical Traveller, all those Countries not being now what they
formerly were: Above half the Land lies Unmanured; a Man may often Travel a
whole Day without meeting one Man; great Towns are generally half demolished
and forsaken; nay, the best and most populous Cities, as Grand Cairo,
Alexandria, Babylon, and several others, lie the third part at least in Ruins.
And there is no doubt that those Princes, tho very considerable, because of the
vast extent of their Dominions, are therefore the less Wealthy, and less
Powerful, than they would be if it were otherwise; for they don't see, that in
grasping at all, they have nothing, and by making themselves the only
Proprietors of all the Lands of their Empire, they make themselves Kings of
Wildernesses, of Beggars and despicable Wretches. So that if they daily get
Ground, and grow greater, it is through the Weakness and Discord of their
Neighbors; and because their Empire is, as I have said, of such a vast extent
in comparison of others, and because the Tartars (besides those who are taken
from the Breasts of their Mothers) supply them with Slaves from several Parts,
as from Russia, Circassia, Mingrelia, Armenia, and other Countries.

Of the Duties of a Sovereign in times of Peaee.
BUT to return to our Author, and to say something in a few Words, concerning
that which in some respect relates chiefly to the times of Peace, and that kind
of Prudence which the Latins named Togata.

The First and chief Duty is to have a Care that Religion and Piety toward
God, be inviolably observed in all parts of the Kingdom, that Heaven may be
propitious to him, and that his Subjects being awed with the respect and dread
of the Almighty Power of God, who is every where, and sees all Things, may more
readily abstain from those Crimes which he cannot hinder by his Laws. Now the
Experience of our latter Days has sufficiently discovered to us the Importance
and Truth of that Counsel that Mecaenas gave to Augustus, concerning Religion,
and the Divine Worship. You are, said he, to oppose and never let go unpunished
the Innovators and Authors of new Religions; not only because that the Gods
will not permit such as despise them, to perform any great Actions, but because
those who introduce some new Divinity, generally persuade the People to
alterations in Government, from whence proceed Conspiracies, Seditions and
secret Associations, which are doubtless very dangerous to a Monarchy.

Secondly, To have a care that Arts be encouraged; not only those that we term
Liberal from which the Kingdom receives a particular Accomplishment, but also
such as we call Mechanic, from which we reap great Advantage and Profit;
chiefly to have a particular regard to Husbandry and Navigation, because the
First is to supply us plentifully with the Necessities of Life, and the Second
encourages Traffic, by which we communicate to Strangers the Things that they
want, as they return to us the Things that we stand in need of.

Thirdly, To endeavor that the Kingdom may increase in Virtue and Riches, that
is to say, in all Things needful to make our Lives Innocent and Happy. And as
Debauchery does easily and insensibly insinuate it self, he ought to give a
Check to it by severe Edicts; and in the mean while, he ought to give order,
that such as abound in Wealth, may not suffer the Poor at their Gates to pine
away for Want: In short, he ought to provide in such a manner, for the several
Indigences of his Kingdom, that Happiness and Plenty may spread over all his
Dominions in every Corner.

Fourthly, He ought to provide for the security of the Peace, that the
Happiness of the Kingdom, which ought to be the first and chief Aim of Kings
and Governors, may be more fixed and permanent; to which purpose, the
particulars, before mentioned, will contribute; namely, To take care to prevent
all Invasions of Strangers, of home Factions and Seditions of his Subjects;
about making Alliances and Leagues, and to observe and preserve them as much as
is possible; nevertheless, to make the Allies privately sensible, that it will
be in vain for them to break them: For we must always suppose of Strangers,
that Force and Power is rather wanting to them, than a desire or a pretense to
Invade our Realm, and Conquering of it either in part or all. Therefore he
ought to keep his Garrisons well furnished, and to be as careful of secret
Ambuscades, and private Treacheries, as of open Assaults. He ought likewise in
the same manner, to have a convenient Number of Troops and Soldiers ready in
Pay; and as for his Recruits and new raised Regiments, he ought to cause them
to be trained up with care and exactness in all Military Exercises, that the
old Soldiers teaching the new, they may be all ready to do Service when
occasion requires.

The Fifth respects the Subjects, That is, to prevent the Conspiraces and
Factions of the Grandees, not only by a just and prudent Distribution of
Offices, but also by particular Expressions of Kindness, that they may have no
cause to complain; nevertheless, he must make them know that he is their Lord
and Master, and that he is quick-sighted enough to see into their Designs and
most secret Intentions: I shall not speak here of the Advice of Periander, who,
as Aristotle relates, gave no Answer by word of Mouth to the Ambassadors of
Thrasibulus, but only by signs; for he cut off the Tops of the highest Poppies
before their Faces.

Sixthly, He ought, as we have already hinted, to prevent the Mutinies and
Seditions of the People, not only by respect and fear; for there is nothing
that more inclines popular Spirits to Insolency, than when they see the Prince
fallen into Contempt, and that they are secure from all Punishment, but also by
an exact and regular Justice, which may free the weakest from the Oppression of
the most Powerful, and by easing the People, either by reducing their Taxes to
a small Proportion, or by taking them quite away; for there is nothing that
more stirs up the Peoples hatred, and makes them more impatient, than
extraordinary Taxes. But if the pressing Necessities of the State obliges him
to great Expenses, and consequently to raise large Sums of Money, he ought to
let his Subjects understand that such Levies are for the necessary support of
the public Security. So that if they desire their own Welfare, says Cicero,
they are to comply with Necessity: And besides, this is to be ordered with a
great equality, and with a respect to the Condition and Abilities of every one.
I shall not speak concerning that Advice, of sending abroad Colonies and
Parties out of the Kingdom when the People grow too numerous; nor of that other
Advice, of impoverishing the People, and making them grow lean, when there is
danger, by too great a Plenty, of growing over-fat, and so are apt to become
Insolent.

Seventhly, If there be any Factions begun, or any Seditions raised, he ought
speedily to pacify them by the Mediation of some Persons, whose Virtue, Merit
and Abilities have rendered them famous and acceptable: But if the Advices,
Reproofs and Counsels of those Persons don't prevail, he must have recourse to
Force and Arms, that he may extinguish an Evil in the beginning, which in time
might gather Strength, and become at last remediless: He must not be unmindful
in the mean while, if he has not time to raise Forces, and that the Case seems
dangerous, that it is the surest Method to yield and grant something of that
which gave the occasion to the Sedition.

Eighthly, If the Evil cannot suddenly be stopped, neither by Wisdom nor by
Arms; but if that proceeds to a Civil War, which is the great Plague of a
Kingdom: Let him in such a Case make use of these Remedies, either to yield in
some things, and to agree upon certain Terms, or to put an end to the War by
Victory, if there be any hopes, taking a good Courage, and saying resolutely to
himself in the Language of Aeneas, Nunc animis opus, Aenea, nunc pectore firmo.
He must also remember, after he has obtained Victory, or restored every thing
by his Authority, to punish none but the chief Authors of the Tumult, and the
most seditious Persons, and to Pardon the rest of his Subjects; that in
striking a Terror by Executions, he may prevent the like Disorders for the
future, and by his Mildness and Clemency, he may declare, That he acts as the
Father of his Country.

But here may arise a Question; If a Person of Quality, in a Civil War, may
withdraw himself, or keep himself private and retired, as we say, out of harms
way, without declaring for either side; or if he ought, according to that Law
of Solon, so remarkable in Aristotle, Plutarch and Agellus, declare for one
side or other. I answer, If he be a Person of Note and Figure in the Realm, and
if he be in some great Post, he ought not to leave his Station and stand idle,
but as a wise Pilot, he should govern the same Helm in the Storm which he held
in the Calm. But if he be a private Person, who seldom meddled with public
Affairs, he may seem to be excused from siding with any Party, but live quietly
and retire at his own Home, without affronting either Party. But if the Realm
be threatened with a Foreign War, he ought not to deliberate, but declare for
his Prince and Country.

Of the Offices of a Sovereign in times of War.
NOw that we may also speak as to what chiefly concerns the time of War, and
consequently of Military Prudence, which shows it self by undertaking, managing
and finishing a War. A wise Prince will never take up Arms rashly, whether he
acts as an Assailant or Defendant; but will first examine his own Forces, so
that if he finds them not sufficient, he will never adventure to make an
Assault, for fear of not being able to save himself upon this first Attempt;
and to prevent drawing all the Forces of the Enemy upon him, he will not expect
their coming, but endeavor to prevent them by sending Ambassadors of great
worth, and by yielding rather something of his own, than to draw upon himself
so considerable a Detriment. But if nothing can prevail upon the Enemy, whom he
finds too powerful, his only Remedy will be to gather together his own Forces,
and those of his Confederates; and placing his Confidence in the Divine
Assistance, and in the Justice of his Cause, arm himself with Courage and
resolve to undergo all Events, either stoutly to overcome with less Force,
which often happens, or as we often say, sell his Destruction at a dear rate.
Neither ought he to undertake any War but upon a just account, for a just and
reasonable End; as for Example, To oppose the Enemy that would not fail to
invade him; To retake something that the Enemy has wrongfully usurped, and
would never restore, though often solicited; To succor his Allies unjustly
oppressed, or to assist some other Nation, who being too weak and unjustly
assaulted, have requested his Assistance. The War will also be deemed just, tho
undertaken or maintained wrongfully, after that the Prince has made reasonable
Offers, and that the Enemy has rejected them. In all Cases, he is to look upon
War as a Sea of Calamity and Mischiefs, which is easily disturbed but not so
easily calmed, because of many unexpected Accidents happening; so that only
Necessity can be a lawful Excuse or Pretense to cover and secure the Prince
from those direful Imprecations which the People, oppressed by the Mischiefs of
the War, are wont to Vomit out against the Authors of it.

Now that he may sufficiently and prudently carry on the War, when it is once
resolved and concluded, he ought to take care that four things be not wanting
to him; Men fit and able for the Employment; convenient Arms; sufficient
Provisions, and as much Money as is requisite for his Men. It is certain also,
that he ought first to make choice of good Officers, and chiefly of a General;
and this General ought to be but one; for it has been observed in all Ages, as
Thucidides takes notice, That nothing is more pernicious than many Commanders
in chief. He ought to be of a tried Experience and a sharp Understanding, that
he may be able to resolve suddenly and with advantage; He ought to know the
Situation of the Country where he makes War, because the Victory or the Loss of
a Battle, often depends upon a very trivial thing, upon a narrow Lane, a stream
of Water, a Wood, or some rising Grounds, etc. Aristotle is of Opinion, That he
ought to be an honest Man; but that more respect is to be had of his Ability
than of his Manners. Besides, he must have Authority, and the Reputation of a
great Warrier; and ought to be successful, not only because that is a great
Encouragement to an Army, but because that makes the Soldiers ready, bold and
resolute, and strikes a Terror into the Enemy. The Qualifications necessary for
a General of an Army, which Cicero requires, speaking of Pompey, are
sufficiently known; He must be indefatigable in Labor, undaunted in Danger,
industrious in Re-encounters, quick in Execution, and a Man of an excellent
Foresight, Laboris in negatio, fortitudinis in periculo, industriae in agendo,
celertatis in conficiendo, concilij in providendo. A Prince must also look to
his Soldiers, that they be of a competent Age, strong of Body, for they are
designed for Labor and Fatigue; That they be of the same Country, rather than
Strangers, for such will be more faithful and less inclinable to Sedition; That
they be well Exercised and Disciplined, for otherwise they will stand in little
stead: We all know what success a rigid Discipline, strictly observed, had
anciently among the Romans. Now though the Infantry and Cavalry be both needful,
yet the Infantry are generally more useful in hilly Countries, and in besieging
of Towns; and often so in Battles, when well instructed and disciplined: For
Tacitus observes, That as the Horse fall on with speed, so they often as
speedily surrender their Victory. As for their Weapons, every one knows that
they must be fit and convenient both for Offense and Defense; and as for their
Ammunitions and Provisions, it is sufficiently known of what importance they
are, the want of which having caused many Armies to Perish, and their
Fortifications to be surrendered up without a stroke. And lastly, as for Money,
it is plain, that as it is the Sinews of a State, so it is likewise of War; That
Army that is not paid, becomes mutinous, and a company of Robbers rather than
Soldiers; That great things are accomplished by Money as well as by Force and
Counsel; and finally, that which Cicero relates of Philip is true, That there
is no Fortitification impregnable where a Horse laden with Gold can enter.

But some may expect that we should here treat of several Accomplishments and
Duties of a General, in marching of an Army, in Incamping, in Drawing it up for
Battle, in an Engagement, or in a Siege, or in the Defense of a City, etc. But
this depends upon his Ability, Capacity, Presence of Mind, Time, Place, and
many other Circumstances; that which may be said in general Terms is this, That
there is nothing more useful and more important for a General of an Army, than
to know well the Condition of his Enemy, to observe and understand perfectly
how to prevent them, and never to lose the Opportunity of an Advantage.

We might also here speak of Stratagems, but it will be sufficient to say, That
they have been approved of in all Ages, and judged to belong to War, and that
they tend to preserve an Army, and that we are always in danger of being
circumvented if we be not beforehand. Therefore Cyrus admired, among his
Friends, at the strange Qualifications requisite to make a complete General; He
ought to be Cunning, Subtle, a Dissembler, a Cheat, etc. Debere esse
insidiatorem, dissimulatorem, dolosum, deceptorem, furem, raptorem, ac omni in
re hostibus praevalentem. But we may easily understand St. Austin's Opinion in
the Case, who says, That the Orders that God gave to Joshua to lay Ambushes,
shows us that it is no Injustice to make use of them in a just War; That a
righteous Prince ought principally to take heed that the War be not unjust, and
if so, then it matters not whether we overcome by Subtilty or by plain Force
and Fighting.

Let us add one thing more in relation to the End and Issue of the War. If the
Prince becomes Victorious, he ought to neglect nothing, to hinder the Enemy
from gathering together his Forces, and putting himself in a posture of doing
farther Mischief: But he ought not to insult over him and his Misfortune, for
that is unworthy of a generous Soul; neither should he drive him to a
Necessity, lest being reduced to despair, he should make an extraordinary
Attempt and Ravish away the Victory already obtained. But if there be no fear
of Indulgence, it is certain that Moderation, Mercy, Kindness and Clemency to
an Enemy, shall always be recommended and esteemed. But if he be so unhappy as
to lose the Victory, it will be expedient for him to bear his Loss
courageously, and to look upon it as a Misfortune unto which our human
Condition is subject: But in the mean while he ought not to neglect his
scattered Forces, but gather them together; and complying quietly with the
Times, never to despair, but expect that Providence at another time and in
another juncture may become more favorable to him.

This Observation that I have mentioned before, That Conquerors ought not to
insult over the Vanquished, calls to mind the Reproaches that Bajazet offered
to Tamerlan, when he visited him in his Chains, and began to Smile on him:
Laugh not at my Calamity, said Bajazet to him, with a haughty Tone, insult not
over my Misfortune; understand that God is the Lord, and the giver of the
Empires of the World; and if now thou art raised up to the top Spoke of the
Wheel, thou may be to morrow cast down to the bottom. I know, answered
Tamerlan as well as thou do, that God is the Lord, and giver of Crowns and
Empires; if I laugh, it is not that I insult over thy Calamity, but when I
consider that these great Empires of the World must be very mean things, and
that this Sovereign Lord must esteem them of no great Value, seeing he has
given them to Persons so ill-favored; to a wicked and squint-eyed Fellow as
thou art, and to a wretched lame Person as I am. For Timur-leng, which by
Corruption we call Tamerlan, signifies a lame Prince, and Bajazet was ugly in
Face and squint-eyed. But this by the by.

If a wise Man ought to intermeddle with public Affairs.
IN this place we might answer several Objections which by means of this kind
of Prudence, seem to make against those unto whom this Rule of Epicurus, (That
a wise Man ought not to intermeddle with the Affairs of Government,) seems not
unpleasing. But we have already proved by the Testimony of Seneca, that this is
not to be understood absolutely without Exception, but only upon this
Condition, If nothing happens that does oblige him. He designs to advise us
plainly, that a wise Man ought to concern himself with the Affairs of
Government only when an occasion shall be offered, where his Wisdom and Counsil
are required and needful, but otherwise he need not engage himself; and that
Ambition, the desire of Riches, Offices and Dignities, should not draw him out
of his private Station. And if Epicurus would never take upon him any public
Employ, doubtless, it was not out of the Persuasion of Theodorus, and some
others, that Wisdom is too precious, and of too great a Value, to expose it
self to Toils, Labors and Dangers, for our Country sake, which commonly
comprehends so many Fools and ungrateful Wretches; but it was out of pure
Modesty, as Laertius has observed, and because he thought it not just to
thrust himself of his own accord into Business, unto which he knew that he was
not called; or to follow the practice of the Ambitious, who at last understand,
too late, that which Theophrastus complained of in his latter Days, when he
told his Disciples, That he had not any thing more to say to them, but only,
That the Life of Man suffered foolishly many Pleasures to escape, through
Vainglory and Ambition. That as soon as we begin to Live, we begin to Die; and
that there was nothing so inconvenient to Mankind, as Ambition, and the
excessive desire of Glory. An excellent Doctrine! which may make us understand,
that we ought not to defer the enjoyment of this happy Philosophical Repose to
a decrepit Age. We need but cast an Eye upon the Condition of Courtiers, or
such as are raised to high Places and Dignities, and encumbered with Business:
There is scarce any but is wearied with his manner of Living, and wishes for
the quiet repose of those whom he sees escaping as it were from out of a
troubled Sea, swelling with Storms and Tempests, to a secure and peaceable
Haven. Who is there that don't often think of retreating from the hurry of
Business, and endeavor to arrive to that retiredness from the World, wherein
he may compose his distracted Thoughts, and render the remainder of his Days
easy and happy? Pray tell me, should not we act much more Prudently, did we
never hazard our selves in this tempestuous Sea of Business, but withdraw our
selves as soon as we can from it, and begin to live happily from our very Youth
forward? Were not this a much wiser Design, than to allot to our old Age, (the
very Dregs of our Life, commonly accompanied with various Infirmities, and
which oftentimes we never arrive to) the Pleasure of living Happily. Doubtless
they are happy who have taken a firm Resolution to spend all their Life in such
a quiet State, in which others esteem themselves happy if they can spend but a
short, and the worst part of their Lives. Admirable was that Advice of Cyneas
to Pyrrhus, and worthy to be written in Letters of Gold; who when he was
designing to make War against the Romans: Well Sir, said Cyneas, And what shall
we do when we have overcome the Romans, conquered Italy, Sicily, Lybia,
Macedonia, and all the World besides? We will then live in Pleasure and Ease,
answered Pyrrhus, We will Feast and Rejoice, and spend the rest of our Days in
Peace and Pleasure. But I beseech you great Sir, replied Cyneas, What hinders
us at present, but that we may take the same Repose and Ease, Feast and enjoy
our selves, and live with as much Content and Happiness? We are in present
possession of what we could not otherwise attain, but by great Labor,
Bloodshed and Rapine, besides a Thousand ways of exposing our Selves and our
People, to infinite Hazards and Dangers.

I shall not here any longer insist upon this Subject, viz. The Advantage that
a wise Man reaps from his Tranquillity and Retirement, having been often
mentioned already. I will only mention, that Damocles had good reason to say,
That those who so earnestly seek after great Honors and Preferments, commonly
mind nothing but the outward Splendour, which dazles the Eyes of the Vulgar, but
never heed the griping Cares, I may say Furies, which torment those who are
already exalted to those high Places. Aristotle cites the Verses of Euripides,
in which he accuses himself of Folly, because that when he was able to live
happily as a private Man, indiscreetly made himself miserable by intangling and
incumbering himself with Business. Am I Wise, quoth he, to thrust my self upon
Trouble, when I could have easily been without it? But the ordinary Labors that
we commonly undergo in the management of our necessary Affairs, seem not worthy
to be taken notice of, if compared with the continual dread and terror of Mind,
which attends those who see themselves always walking upon Brinks and
Precipices in continual danger of falling so much the lower, by how much the
higher they have raised themselves. Sejanus, says the Satyr, knew not what he
desired, when he greedily longed for, and earnestly sought after the great
Honors and boundless Riches, which at length he was possessed of. For they were
as so many Degrees, by which he ascended to the top of that Pinnacle, from
whence he was to be miserably cast down. What ruined Crassus and Pompey? Was it
not that high Station for which they had so earnestly endeavored, that nothing
of Labor or Difficulty could hinder them in their Attempt; Such earnest
Petitions as these the Gods grant us in their Wrath.

Ergo quid optandum foret ignorasse videris
Sejanum? Nam qui nimios optabat honores,
Et nimias poscebat opes, numerosa parabat,
Excelsae Turris tabulata, unde altior esset
Casus, and impulsae praeceps immane ruinae.
Quid Crassos? Quid Pompeios evertit and illum
Ad sua qui domitos deduxit flagra Quirites?
Summus nempe locus nulla non art petitus,
Magnaque Numinibus vota exaudita malignis.
CHAP. VI. Of Fortitude.
TO treat of the several Virtues in their Order, we ought, next to Prudence, to
speak of Fortitude, which is as the first part of Honesty, as Temperance is the
Second. Not that other Virtues do not participate of Honesty, but because those
who behave themselves according to the Rules of Fortitude and Temperance are
principally and more especially said to act Honestly and Honorably. Now
Fortitude, in the Sense that it is here taken, is not ill described by Cicero,
viz. A considerable firmness and resolution of Mind, able to encounter Danger
and submit to Labor. Because this Definition points at the two chief acts of
Fortitude, the one undertakes, the other sustains and teaches to shun the two
vicious Extremeties, namely, Audacity and Timidity, into which we may run for
want of a mature Consideration. This Virtue seems also to be well defined by
Aristotle, A Medium, or Mediocrity between Fear and too great Confidence: And
Seneca says, It is the Knowledge how to repel, submit to and encounter Dangers.

However, tho Fortitude as it is a particular Virtue be such as we have
represented it, yet sometimes Men give to it too large a Compass, sometimes too
Narrow; too Large is allowed it, when they extend it as far as any Virtue
reaches, as St. Ambrose does, and before him St. Clement, when he says, The
Duty of Fortitude is not only to bear patiently human Casualties and
Misfortunes, but also to resist Lust, Debauchery, Pain and Wrath. They allow
too narrow a Compass, when they take it only for a Military Virtue, as if
scarce any were to be allowed Valiant, but such as show their Courage in War,
or Dye Fighting, and by this means become Illustrious, and ob^^in everlasting
Renown: But we see those who express no less Fortitude and Courage, either
under Distempers, or in Dangers at Sea, and on other Occasions, and Dye with as
much Resolution. However, Aristotle will have him to be termed properly
Courageous, who sees with an undaunted Spirit, an honest Death, and the
preparations to it, such as are principally those that we meet with in War.
This made Cicero say, That the great and noble Actions performed in War have
this belonging to them, that they are I know not how, more Praised and Extolled
than others. Nevertheless, he proves at large, by many Examples, and without
forgetting his own, That though Men put a higher esteem upon military Actions
than upon Civil, yet we must except against this Opinion; for if we will Judge
according to Truth, there are many civil Actions far greater and nobler than
the Military: From whence we may conclude, that tho those who behave themselves
with Courage in War may be esteemed Brave and Excellent, yet this Virtue of
Fortitude resides not in them alone, nor do they only deserve the Titles of
Brave and Stout.

Now to treat of Fortitude contained within its just Limits, two Things seem
generally requisite. The First, That it be an invincible strength of Mind,
against all Things that may be difficult, that is to say, against such Evils as
are difficult either to overcome or to undergo. The Second, That it be not rash
or unadvised, that it tends to a good End, namely, to the support of Honesty
and Equity.

In relation to the First, when I say that Fortitude is a certain strength of
Mind; doubtless we ought not hereby to understand, that this Virtue consists,
as some vulgar People may imagine, in the mere Strength and Vigor of Body; for
a Man of a weak and infirm Body may deserve the name of Brave, if he designs
the Justice of the Cause he undertakes, and continues resolute and unshaken in
his purpose, not knowing how to yield; nay, tho he meet with ill Fortune, if
his Courage never fails, but he proceeds on with the same Bravery and
Resolution of Thought. Much less do we suppose it consistent with a boasting
and vainglorious Humor, too much incident to some Persons; for if you remove
this Ostentation which puts them in pursuit after a dim Light of Glory, you
will find them Mean, Contemptible Cowards; nay, when it most concerns them to
encounter with real Dangers, they will draw back, their Courage failing 'em, and
very often seek to save themselves by a shameful Flight.

Again, when I say, that it is a firm, inflexible resolution of Mind, I hereby
observe that it ought to be such a firmness as ought never to yield, but to
continue so, not only in respect of the greatness of the Labor and Danger, but
also in respect of its long continuance and repeated Endeavors.

I say that this strength or firmness of Mind is to encounter all Evils;
because this Virtue of its own Nature, is as a Bulwark against all that is or
appears to be Evil in our Life, and that it properly has no other Post
assigned but this.

I say moreover, That the Evils that Fortitude designs to overcome, are to be
difficult; for tho this Virtue may extend to light, easy and common Ills, yet
it is very profitable to accustom our selves to encounter 'em and support our
selves under 'em, that we may thereby also the better begin to form an Habit;
for just as the Virtue of Temperance is not required that one should abstain
from doting on an old withered Hag, as it was objected to Crysippus, so
Fortitude appears not in little Evils, but only in great and difficult; such as
is Death, Pain, Ignominy, the loss of Friends or of Children, Poverty,
Imprisonment, Banishment, and others, that are able to terrify us at a
distance, or ready to overwhelm us when they draw near.

As to the Second thing requisite: Fortitude would not be a Virtue, if it were
foolish and unconsiderate, but it would be Rashness, and as Aristotle terms it,
a certain Brutality, or a brutish Effort, opposite to this Virtue which is
called Heroic and Divine, which is nothing else but a kind of noble Courage
and Bravery, which gave the very Name to Heroes, and caused their Deeds to be
styled Heroic. Such therefore ought not to be esteemed Brave or Courageous,
who being carried by a blind Fury, and trusting chiefly to their bodily
Strength, run head^ong upon any Undertaking, and as if they had bid defiance to
Dangers, seem to fear nothing so much as to appear fearful of any thing. But
those are truly Brave who understanding Dangers, neither loving them nor
provoking them Indiscreetly, behave themselves nevertheless with Courage, as
often as they ought, and in that manner that they ought; for Aristotle makes
this Remark, That a stout and brave Man, is not he who fears nothing, or is
resolved to bear all Things, or to undertake all Things; but he who acts thus
where he ought, for the end and purpose that he ought, when he ought, and in
that manner that he ought. Qui quod oportet, and cujus causa, and quando, and
quo modo oportet.

As therefore on the one Hand, he opposes to a brave Spirit the timorous Soul,
who for Fear undertakes not the thing that he should; so on the other the
Audacious and Rash, for want of Fear, or out of too much Confidence in himself,
undertakes what he ought not. Not to say, that according to his Opinion, such
may be termed Fools and mad Men, who fear nothing, neither Earthquakes nor
Storms, such as the Celtae were: For there are some Things that are truly to be
feared; as Shame, and Infamy which attends it; for as he says, it is Impudence
not to fear them, because Shame is an Evil. And as Seneca observes, Fortitude
is no inconsiderate Rashness, nor a Love of Dangers, but it is the knowledge
how to distinguish what is or what is not Evil. It is always Watchful,
Constant, Patient, etc. Neither would it be a Virtue, as it is manifest, if it
did not propose Honesty and Justice for its End: For that cause Aristotle will
have a brave Man to be undaunted, but still with an honest Intent. And for the
same Reason, after he has condemned those for Cowards, and far from Brave, who
destroy themselves for fear of Poverty, or for Love, or Grief; and after he
has declared that those may be esteemed Brave, who being tempted by Rewards,
or frighted by Torments, yet behave themselves resolutely, (which in some
respect may be said of Soldiers, who are reduced to the necessity of Fighting)
he says, That he who is truly Brave, ought not to be obliged by Necessity, but
moved by Honesty.

We add particularly this word Equity, because those who are commonly reputed
Brave, often abuse their Strength against the dictates of Justice, and speak
according this barbarous Dialect, Power is above all Things; the Right is in
the Conqueror. Hence it is that Plato judges Fortitude to be a kind of a Flux
or Torrent against the endeavors of Unjustice; and therefore blames
Protagoras, who esteemed those Men brave, who were most Profane, most Unjust,
most Intemperate, and the greatest Fools; because, says he, we are not to
judge of Fortitude by the Strength of the Body, but by the Constancy of the
Mind, and by an end that is Honest and Praiseworthy, in which Justice and
Equity principally appear. It Is also to be observed, That the Heroes have
always been the Protectors of the Innocent, and Enemies of the Wicked, of
unjust Men and Tyrants. And Agesilaus well deserved Praise, when being asked,
If Justice was better than Fortitude, answered, That if all Men were Just,
there would be no need of Fortitude. And because it is Anger that commonly
carries those who are thought to be Brave, to Unjustice, Aristotle advises us
to stand upon our Guard, and to have an Eye to that Passion, for fear that what
is as the Stone to sharpen Fortitude, should become as a Sword, to cut the knot
of Justice. He says moreover, That tho there is no greater Provocation and
Encouragement to encounter Danger than Anger, yet there is no true Fortitude in
it, unless it be directed by Counsel, and by the consideration of a just End.
It was this that made Taurus say, in the Writings of Agellus, The brave Man is
not he who out of a brutish Humor, Insensibility or Custom, Fights as a kind
of Monster against Nature, and goes beyond his just Limits; such as was
Caesar's Gladiator, who laughed at the Surgeons who cut his Wounds wider;
but true Fortitude or Bravery, is that which the Ancients have duly styled the
Knowledge of that which is, and of that which is not to be supported, which
discovers to us, that there are certain things unsufferable, and which Men
truly brave ought to abominate.

From all this, and what I have mentioned elsewhere, we may observe that we
have the Seeds of Fortitude truly springing in us; but that they may grow up
and become Virtues, Exercise and Learning are absolutely necessary.

Of the several kinds of Fortitude.
BY what has been here said, we may observe, that commonly Men do not reckon
several kinds of Fortitude, because they make this Virtue to be employed about
a very particular matter. But if it be true, that it respects all that may be
judged Evil in this Life, how much rather should this matter be General, and
why shall not we reckon as many sorts or kinds, as there are kinds of Evil in
our Life? And as there are some who bear patiently the loss of Riches, but not
the loss of Honor; and who suffer death bravely in War, but not on a Bed of
Sickness, and so of the like; why should it not be necessary for such diversity
of things to form to our selves diverse Habits, and so to distinguish several
kinds of Fortitude?

For as to what concerns those which some would have to be sometimes Integral
parts in difficult Matters, and sometimes Potential in less difficult, namely,
Magnificence, Magnanimity, Constancy and Patience; It is certain, first, for
Magnificence, that it belongs not to this Virtue, but to Liberality; because as
Aristotle tells us, it regulates the Expenses of Money, and chiefly the Expenses
needful in great things, as are the public Shows and Stages, the building of
Ships to defend the Commonwealth; and in short, all other things which have
something of Grandeur, and commonly strike the People with Admiration. And
therefore agreably with this Opinion of Aristotle, Cicero recommends to us this
excellent Definition, Magnificientia est rerum magnarum, and excelsarum cum
animi ampla quadam, and splendida propositione, agitatio atque administratio.
We ought also to take notice, that as Magnificence is a Virtue and consequently
a Mediocrity, Aristotle names the two contrary Vices, viz. On the one hand,
Proud, Extravagant and Superfluous Expenses; and on the other, doing things
niggardly and mean; parting with nothing but what is drawn from us by force,
against our free Consent; always grudging and repining at what goes from us.

As for what concers Magnanimy, or as we term it Generosity, it is likewise
manifest that it belongs not to this Virtue, or if it does, it is nothing else
but Fortitude it self under another Name. Indeed, as Fortitude is properly
concerned with difficult things, it is certain, that to undertake and endure
such things, we must have a great and generous Soul, or as Cicero says, We
must have a mind highly elevated and assured of it self, with a certain hope,
having a regard to things good and honest. Besides, when Aristotle says, That
Magnanimity or greatness of Mind consists in a Persuasion that we deserve much,
when really our Merits answer our Persuasion; it is evident that this opinion of
Honor that we deserve, relates to Justice, or to the convenience of
Temperance, and not to Fortitude, which consists in encountering Dangers, and
courageously undergoing Labors.

As for Constancy, or as the Holy Scriptures style it, long Forbearance or
Longanimity, it is nothing else but Fortitude it self, when it discovers it self
by a sequel of many repeated Acts, and by a long continuance of Time. For a Man
cannot be said to be brave, but rather weak and feeble, if he continues not
resolute in what he has undertaken, but after he has a while supported
himself, his Heart at last begins to faint and fail him. From hence it is, that
Constancy and Perseverance being synonimous, Cicero tells us, That Perseverance
consists in a continuing resolute a long time, and constant in the things that
we have proposed, after that we have maturely considered upon 'em.

Lastly, As for Patience, it seems to be scarce any thing else but Constancy,
unless it be that it consists in suffering, as the word imports, rather than in
attacquing. Therefore Cicero says, That it consists in suffering willingly and
a long time, difficult things, for the sake of Honesty or Profit.

Therefore not to insist any longer upon this Point, let us observe with
Epicurus, That a mean Soul becomes insolent in Prosperity, and dejected in
Adversity. Let us then conclude from hence, by the Rule of Contraries, That it
is the property of a noble and generous Temper, not to be insolent, lifted up
by good Success, nor to suffer it self to be abased in a low Estate, but to
bear and suffer the good and evil Fortune with an equal Mind, and in the same
manner. And because when all things prosper, it plainly belongs to that part of
Temperance which we name Moderation, to moderate and govern our Thoughts, and
to hinder 'em from rising too high; it follows, that when Crosses happen, it
belongs to Fortitude, to keep our Minds in a constant and even Temper. Now as
Calamities are nothing else but external Evils, we must remember that they are
not really Evils, but only as they are accompanied by Pain which they cause in
the Body, or by Grief which they produce in the Mind by the means of Opinion;
so that only this Pain and this Grief are the real Evils: Now it belongs to
Fortitude to hinder these from causing Pain, or at least obliges us to bear it
patiently when it comes, and to hinder it from oppressing and overwhelming the
Mind with a vain Grief; all which is to be effected by curing our Judgment of
vulgar Opinions or false Persuasions, without which it would have little or no
Power upon the Soul.

Whether Evils foreseen make the least impression upon us.
FRom hence it is, that we must observe in the second place, that there are as
it were two general Bulwarks against these sorts of external Evils: The first
is a good Conscience; for as Crantor says, It Is a great support under
Afflictions, to be free from Guilt: The second is to foresee, and to lay
before our Eyes the Mischiefs and Evils that may happen; for he who fore-sees
the blow, and is prepared to receive it, is not so easily beaten down, as when
he is struck unprovided; when he is armed with Resolution and Courage, as with
a kind of Breast Plate, he is not so soon wounded as when he is naked and
unguarded. Therefore a wise Man never trusts so much to his good Fortune, but
he thinks also upon his Evil; for Fortune has nothing fixed, neither is there
any thing certain or of a long continuance in human Affairs: He always
represents before his Eyes some Examples of the Vicissitudes of good and evil
Things, and knows that there is no Mischief that happens to any Body but that
the same may befall him. Therefore he don't wait till the time of War, then to
furnish himself with Arms to support it, nor till a Storm happens, then to
prepare to resist it. If a wise Man begets a Son, says Cicero, he knows that
he has begotten a Mortal, and brings him up in that Persuasion: If he sends
him to Troy to defend Greece, he knows that he don't send him to a Feast, but
to a dangerous War. This Consideration, says he, and this Meditation upon the
Evils to come, before they happen, qualifies and allays the Mischiefs that
befall afterward. So that I think Theseus cannot be too much commended for
saying in Euripides, I thought before upon the Calamities to come; upon Death,
Banishment, etc. that I might be the better enabled to encounter with adverse
Fortune.

It Is an undoubted Truth, that the Evils that are not foreseen, are much more
grievous; and that the Foresight and Preparation of the Mind, has a great
Efficacy to lessen the Pain. Let Mankind set always before his Eyes the
Casualties of the World; for this excellent and divine Wisdom consists in
having a long while perfectly known and considered human Affairs, and meditated
upon them; not wondering at any thing that happens, nor believe before a thing
happens, that such a thing cannot come to pass. He afterward commends the
Advice of Terence, That a Man in Prosperity should think with himself how he
should be able to endure Adversity, Dangers, Losses, and Banishment, the
Miscarriages of a Son, the Death of a Wife, the Sickness of a Daughter; that
all these things are common; that they may happen so; that nothing new ought to
surprise us; and whatever good befalls us beyond our Expectation, it should be
looked upon as so much Profit and pure Gain.

It was this kind of Meditation and Foresight that caused that Constancy of
Mind in Socrates, appearing always with a serene and pleasant Countenance;
truly, how could his Looks be otherwise, seeing his Soul was never moved nor
disturbed? Agrippinus proceeded yet farther, for he was wont to make a
Panegyric of all the Evils that befell him; of Diseases, when they seized upon
him; of Infamy, when Men slandered him; of Banishment, when he was driven away.
And when at a certain time he was going to sit at Table, a Message was brought
him from Nero, to command him immediately to be gone and to depart; he answered
nothing else but, Well, we shall then dine at the Town of Aricia. Ariciae ergo
prandebimus.

How we ought to support external and public Evils.
AS Evils are usually distinguished into public, such as is War, Tyranny, the
Ruin of our Country, Plague, Famine, and such like; and into private, as
Banishment, Imprisonment, Slavery, Ignominy, etc. It is not needful to speak
much of the public Evils, because they don't really concern us so much as they
are Public, but as they are Private, and come home to us in Particulars. It Is
true, when Public Calamities involve a great many Persons, this must needs
create much Noise, and they are reckoned so much the more unsufferable, because
our common Mother, namely, our Country is wronged and injured; but if we take
more particular notice, we may perceive that the Evil concerns every one no
otherwise than it strikes at them in particular.

And to demonstrate that this is no Paradox; That the Evil that is common to
many, on whom we have Compassion, is not more uneasy to be born; it would be
sufficient to instance in that which is in the Mouth of every one, and what our
Experience sufficiently verifies, That it is the comfort of the afflicted to
have Fellow Sufferers. But we need take notice but of one thing, and consider
that when a Neighbor's House is on Fire, none but the Neighbors run to
extinguish it; those who live in the same City, at a distance, are not at all
concered at it; for though they be all Fellow-Citizens, yet the Calamity don't
touch them so much as it does the others. So if the War be begun in Persia, or
if the Plague be hot in India, and makes there a great destruction, that don't
concern us, though they be Fellow-Citizens of the same World; because the Evil is
too far off to injure us: And though it may infect the Borders of our Kingdom,
either it moves us not; or if it does, it is by accident, in that it reaches as
far as us, and makes us sensible of the Evil.

But that I may not stop here: If it happens that we are involved in any common
Calamity, there are two things chiefly to be weighed: First, That such is the
Condition and natural Course of things which we cannot hinder; That it is the
Sovereign Lord of the World who has appointed such Alterations and Changes,
and he being most Wise, his Designs, though unknown to Men, may be, and are most
excellent; That it belongs not to us to quarrel at, or alter that Order that he
has established, but that we ought willingly to yield and follow the Paths that
his Providence has prescribed to us; And that seeing it is not in our power to
change Destinies, or rather the Decrees of the Divine Providence, it would
better become us to mitigate the Harshness and Trouble, by our own free
Consent, than to increase the Mischief by fruitless Opposition; That
Commonwealths have their natural Revolutions, and that it is needful that
sometimes they should be governed by Princes, and become Monarchies, sometimes
by the People, and devolve into Democracies, and sometimes by the Chieftains
and principal Men, and be changed into Aristocracies. This Cicero tells us,
which he had taken out of Plato, unto which he adds this excellent Passage,
which shows the Nobility of his Mind, and the extraordinary Greatness and
Resolution of his Soul, when he describes the lamentable State of the
Commonwealth; I have not hid my self, I have not cowardly forsaken, neither
have I extraordinarily afflicted my self, I have not behaved my self like a
Misanthropus, a Man provoked against the Times.

Secondly, If a wise Man escapes, with Health of Body and Mind, from a public
Calamity, he has no cause to complain against the ill Usage of Fortune, as if
it had treated him amiss, and stripped him of those things that really belong to
him. The excellent Saying of Bias is well known; after a general Conflagration,
he declared, That he carried with him all the Goods that he ever possessed. And
we may mention Stilpon, who having been driven away from his Country, lost his
Wife, Children, and all his other Goods of Fortune, gave this answer to
Demetrius, who had taken the City, and had asked him, If he had lost nothing?
answered, All my Goods are with me. He understood, says Seneca, Justice,
Virtue, Temperance, Prudence; and he reckoned not among his Goods, that which
could be taken from him. The wise Man accustoms himself to the Evils to come by
thinking upon them often, as others do by suffering them long. I knew not, says
the Fool; that I had so many Troubles to undergo. The wise Man understands that
all Evils remain yet behind, and says, I knew before, all that has happened,
and was prepared and provided for all that is come to pass.

Of external and private Evils; and first of Banishment.
AS for what concerns particular and private Evils, we shall at present mention
but few things, because we have spoken of them elsewhere: I shall only add that
of Banishment, that it is no real but a fantastical Evil, that depends upon
Opinion; for it is nothing else but a change of Place or Habitation, which many
of their own accord often desire and covet for their private Satisfaction. The
wise Man carries with him into a Foreign Country all his real and substantial
Goods, his Virtues, the Goods of his Mind, which he can always happily enjoy,
and by which he may make to himself Friends instead of them whom he has left
behind in his own Country: He has not so narrow a Soul as to fancy himself a
Citizen of one single Town, or of one Region; he thinks himself rather to be a
Citizen of all the World, and into what place soever he comes he thinks himself
to be as well as in his own Country. A Man of Courage finds every where his
Country, as a Fish in every part of the Sea, or a Beast in every corner of the
Earth: He still beholds Nature every where in the same Dress, the same Majesty:
He sees the same Sun, the same Moon, and the same number of Stars sparkling in
the Heavens: He finds every where the same Face of Things, Mountains, Plains,
Rivers, Trees, Towns, and all sorts of Animals, almost the same; and if perhaps
he sometimes meets with any Variety, it is not unpleasing to him, nor is he
satisfied till he has arrived to the full Knowledge of it; and this is that
which intices Travelers abroad, and gives them opportunity of much Knowledge
and Experience. Nor is he to place this among his Misfortunes, that he is
Banished by his Fellow-Citizens; for that has been the Case of many an honest
and good Man, such as Aristides, Thucidides, Demosthenes, and an infinite
Number besides, who may give the same answer as Diogenes did to one who
reproached him, That the Inhabitants of Synope had condemned him to be
banished. No, said he, you are mistaken, I have condemned them to remain and
live for ever in the bottom of Pont Euxinus.

He might consider that Banishment has been often the occasion of raising Men
to an high Station of Honor, which caused that Expression of Themistocles to
be so famous; I should have been undone if I had not been undone, perieram nisi
periissem. He might likewise remember that sometimes upon better considering of
things, an honest Man is called back from Exile with much Honor, as it
happened to Evagoras, Pelopid^s, Alcibiades, Camillus, Cicero, and several
others. And it often falls out that we live with more Content and Repose out of
our Native Soil than we can in it. This caused Marcellus and Rutilius to say,
That they never lived really, but during the time of their Banishment out of
their own Country. Finally, he will return Thanks to Providence, because his
Condition is become like that of Plato, Gallen, Zeno, Crantor, and diverse other
famous Travelers, who of their own accord had banished themselves a long time
from their own Country, and yet never repented of it; because by viewing other
parts of the World, they had furnished themselves with the Knowledge of many
things; and that by considering the differing Customs of Foreign Nations, they
were freed from many Prejudices, and become quite other Men than they should
have been had they continually lived at Home.

Of Imprisonment.
IMprisonment looks like a thing more grievous; but a wise Man thinks it not
so; for his Mind cannot be confined within any Walls, nor Bound with any
Chains. How can a Soul, which is always at liberty, and always enjoys it self,
be limited within a Prison, seeing it is not to be bounded by the limits of the
World? It can run over the spacious large compass of the Earth, and in it self
examine the Passages of every Age, and by that means search into Eternity it
self. His Body being confined and at Rest, gives greater Liberty to his
Thoughts, not being distracted with that variety of new Objects. It Is well
known that Anaxagoras, while in Prison, writ a most excellent Treatise of the
Quadrature of the Circle; That Socrates did not only act the Philosopher, while
confined, but composed also excellent Verses; that Boethius never writ with a
stronger Style, nor more Elegantly than when in Chains, for this requires a
Mind free from Hurry, Calm and Serene.

Moreover, some for the more exact composing of an excellent Treatise, have
confined themselves to their Houses, from whence they could not easily be drawn
out. A wise Man makes no great difference whether his Confinement be voluntary
or compulsive. Do but consider the multitude of Artizans and Scribes, who are
Daily confined to their Shops, and tied as it were to their Seats, seem not in
the least troubled or concerned, because they look not upon the place where
they are thus fixed as a Prison, but as their Dwelling and Abode. This
Consideration will cause a Man to undergo his Confinement more easily, because
he will look upon the Prison as his Dwelling, and not as a Prison. Besides,
when he reflects upon the many Religious who voluntarily confine themselves in
a Cloister, and there spend their Days very pleasantly, he will begin to
consider that a Confinement in it self is not so unsupportable as we Fancy. And
thus when he sees Men shut up in Prison against their Wills, who at first are
full of Complaints, and ready to be drowned with Tears, yet after a few Days
rejoice and take delight, sporting with the rest of their Companions; he would
think it very strange, that Wisdom should not have as great an influence on a
Man of Understanding, as Custom has over a Man of meaner Parts. I need not
mention here, that it is no new or extraordinary thing for good Men to be clapped
up in Prison; that there are many whose Virtue never appears more glorious than
in Fetters and under Confinement, and when they are freed they return with so
much Splendour and Advantage, that their very Confinement seems to be desired.

Of Slavery.
THE same may be said of Slavery. The Mind of a wise Man is too great to be
brought under the Dominion of a Master. His Body, the meanest part may indeed
be enslaved, but for his Soul this noble and excellent part it is too much at
liberty, and soars so high, that its out of the reach of any Fellow Creature to
catch at, to subject it to his Dominion. Every one knows how much Courage and
Constancy of Mind Epictetus manifested, when he was obliged to be a Servant.
And none can be Ignorant what answer Diogenes gave to those who came to Buy
him, and asked him what he could do? Said, That he knew how to command Men: And
turning himself immediately to the Crier, he bid him cry out, If any would buy
a Master: Afterward, when he came to Xeniades, who was the Buyer, he spoke to
him in this manner, Take heed what you do, for tho I am your Slave, you must
hereafter obey me, as the Patient obeys the Physician, the Child its Governor;
tho the Physician be Slave to the Patient, and the Governor to the Child.

Moreover, whereas the wise Man having long since considered and meditated upon
the state of Human Affairs, finds that he has not the Command of Fortune, but
as Unhappiness befalls others, it may also light upon him. He understands
likewise, that being Born a Man, he is subject to ^ll Human Casualties, and
therefore stands always ready and prepared to receive all the Shocks of
Fortune, so that there is none but he can with Patience submit to, and thereby
render it not only tolerable, but in some measure Easy and Pleasant. If the
Master commands, he obeys willingly; and as if he had undertaken the Task of
his own accord, it is much at one to him if he does it by another's Command or
out of his own Choice. He is glad he has Strength sufficient to undergo what is
commanded him, and an Opportunity offered of exercising a Faculty, which
otherwise might become benumbed and useless. He thinks himself happier than his
Master, being only in subjection to his Will, and having nothing else to do but
obey his Commands; whereas his Master remains under the Tyranny of many
Masters, more Cruel and Troublesome, his Ambition, Envy, Anger and other
Passions; so that in short, he must needs be much the happier, being freed from
a thousand Cares and Distractions, which the other is daily liable to.

I shall not mention how many have met with very good and favorable Masters,
under whom at last they have not only obtained their Freedom, and got great
Preferments, but have been made Heirs of their Estates; and how many having
fallen into the Hands of Masters who were wise and learned Men, have had cause
to desire their Slavery, as the Servant of Epicurus, named Mus, and Cicero's
Slave, called Tyro, and several others.

Of Shame and Disgrace.
A Wise Man will still more willingly bear Shame and Disgrace, when it is
thrown upon him, if he be satisfied of his own Innocence, and that he has no
way justly deserved it. For whether it consists in being deprived of some
public Office, Honor or Employment, even for this he may congratulate his
good Fortune, in having an opportunity of retiring and leading a private and
quiet Life, which otherwise he could not easily have obtained, tho perhaps he
earnestly desired it. Or if it consists in the Whisperings and Reports that
arise from among the People, he has too great and noble a Soul to value such
Rumors. He knows the Temper of the Populace to be very mutable, that they will
this Day applaud, what they will to Morrow decry, being never long pleased, but
as we say, more fickle and unconstant than the Moon. His Conscience stands him
instead of a thousand Witnesses; his satisfaction is, that he cannot justly
charge himself with any Crime, with any Guilt.

In short, if it consists in the Calumnies and Slanders of envio^^ ^^d
malicious Men, or in opprobrious and injurious Language; he is not of so mean a
Spirit, as to be cast down and discouraged; for he does not take them as
Injuries done to himself, but gives them only the hearing, as if they concerned
him not, as if they were related of some other, or of him who was the first
Inventer. Therefore he who first unjustly raised em, has more reason to be
concerned for falsely accusing the Innocent; nor will he be a little
dissatisfied when he finds his mischievous Intention thus disappointed.

A wise Man further considers the great number of Fools there are in the World;
and if he should once think himself offended hereat, he would be deemed one of
that Number, which must in no small measure disturb the quiet of his Mind.
Therefore he Arms himself beforehand, against all such kind of Affronts, by
overlooking them; and thinks that he ought no more to be moved at the Revilings
of evil Men, than the Moon is at the barking of the Dogs.

Of the loss of Children and Friends.
BUT what shall we say of the loss of Children and Friends, and in one Word, of
all that is dear to us? A wise Man will the less afflict himself, because he
knows that our Complaints, our Sighs, our Tears, and our Lamentations are
useless; and that it is in vain to deal thus with Death, who is not to be
prevailed upon, and never restores to us the Friends which it once snatches
from us. Therefore he prepares himself early for such Accidents which he knows
may happen, that when they do, he may bear them with Courage, and not be
afflicted in vain.

Besides, he observes, That when w^ are thus grieved for the loss of our
Children or Friends, it is not for their sakes, but for our own, that we thus
lament and are troubled: For to be grieved because they are safely arrived into
the Haven, and are no more vexed with the Evils and Miseries, unto which this
Life is subject, this savours of Envy and Cruelty; and to be troubled because
they don't enjoy certain Pleasures of this Life, is Weak and Ridiculous,
because they don't desire or stand in the least need of 'em, and therefore are
not at all displeased, or so much as sensible, of being deprived of 'em. It
makes therefore a very specious show, but at the same time is but a feigned and
dissembling sort of Pity, with which we adorn our Grief when we declare that we
are grieved for their sakes, seeing that in reality it is for our own, because
for the time to come we shall be deprived of their Company; because we shall
receive no more kind Offices as formerly, no more Honor and Respect, but be
deprived of every thing that might render them dear and acceptable unto us.
Therefore a wise Man will think it unbecoming him to grieve in this manner for
his own Interest, as if he would have had them live only for his private Ends,
and so long only as they might be useful and serviceable to him; and not so
long as the wise Disposer of all Things had thought good and convenient for
them to be.

Besides, He may remember the time that he had no Children, and if it was not
grievous then to be without them, so he ought not to think it so now he is
deprived of 'em, seeing in respect of him, they are as when they were not. And
if we grieve more for the privation of what we once possessed, than to be
without what we never had, this seems to savor a little of the Ingratitude of
the Vulgar, who instead of being thankful for what they once enjoyed, are still
murmuring and repining because they can enjoy it no longer. And he whom Death
deprives of his Son, may with more comfort support it, considering that he has
not lost his Son, but yielded him back to the Author of Nature, who had lent
him to him for a time and entrusted him with his Custody; not for ever, but for
a limited time. And if it be a Father who is dead, a wise Son will consider,
that he has left him enough to make his Life easy, and preserve him from want,
if he has left him only a Soul that can be content with little. And if it be a
Friend, he will suppose that he has still so much Virtue as to procure
another; so that he may think that he has not so much lost, as changed his
Friend.

Of the loss of an Estate.
WHat shall we say likewise of the loss of Riches? A wise Man will certainly so
much the less concern himself, for that he will consider, as we have elsewhere
observed, That no Man becomes so Poor as to be deprived of the absolute
Necessaries of Life, seeing Nature places them within our reach in all parts of
the World; and certainly he were much to be blamed that should torment himself,
for the loss of that which is not absolutely necessary to his well-being, and
which he may live very well and happily without. Let what we have remaining be
never so small, we may always find a great number of Persons, who have not so
much, or perhaps no more, and yet without troubling themselves, lead more
contented Lives than rich Men generally do. Let them be never so Poor they
Laugh and Rejoice, and their Pleasure is so much the greater, in that they are
freed from those Cares and Troubles which are inseparable from Riches.

But suppose a Man's Fortune be changed to the greatest disadvantage, so that
instead of a Palace, there remains nothing to him but a Cottage; instead of a
Silk Garment, one of Wool; instead of Partridges, nothing but black Bread;
instead of Wine, cold Water; instead of a Coach or Sedan, a Traveller's Staff;
instead of a Golden or Silver Cup, nothing but an Earthen Vessel, or the Palm
of his Hand, and so of the rest. Suppose I say all this, how many Examples can
we produce of those who have been satisfied with these mean Things, have
laughed and despised that deceitful Splendour, and have spent their Days with
more Pleasure and Content, than those who abounded with 'em?

And how many are there at present who live very contentedly and happily, after
such a change; nay, who willingly part with their Riches, to enjoy a more
retired and contented way of Life? We need not therefore here enumerate those
primitive Philosophers, who out of an Affection to Learning, and the Pleasure
of a free and contemplative Life, forsook their Riches, and embraced Poverty.
For we have of late discovered whole Nations, who having no need of those Goods
that we call Riches, lead an innocent Life, like to that of our first Fathers,
whose Times were styled the Golden Age, and supposed to be the happiest of all
Ages.

But if you Fancy that it is more grievous to fall from a great and high
Fortune, than to have always remained in a low Condition, it is easy to perceive
that this is nothing but an Opinion; for in respect of the thing it self, there
is no difference if you have been Poor a long time, or if you are become so of
late; unless perhaps you suppose that we are to think as Apicius did, who as
Seneca reports, having amassed a vast Estate together, allotted some Thousands
of Pounds for his Kitchen; but when upon making up his Accounts, he found that
he had not above an Hundred thousand Pounds remaining, poisoned himself to
prevent Starving.

Of Pain and of Death.
IN the next Place let us treat about Pain and Death, those two Particulars,
which in Cicero's Opinion, require an extraordinary courage of Mind to be able
to overcome them. For Pain, as it is almost the sole and only substantial Evil,
or which depends not as the rest, upon mere Fancy, no doubt there is much
Fortitude and a Greatness of Soul required, patiently to undergo it. A wise Man
therefore will here seriously consider, that he is born subject to many
Inconveniences of Life, and among the rest to Pain; that it is the Property of
Nature to be sensible of Evil, but it is the Property of Virtue to bear it with
Courage; and that when the Evil is not to be avoided, we ought rather to allay
it, by a patient quiet submitting to it, than to aggravate and incense it by
uneasy and vain Struglings. Also that Pain is not a thing altogether
intolerable, seeing so many famous Examples prove the contrary, not only among
great Hero's and Philosophers, such as Zeno and Anaxarches, but even among the
very Slaves themselves, witness him whom the greatest Tortures could not hinder
from expressing a joy upon his Countenance, for having revenged the Death of
his Master, by killing Asdrubal, who had Murdered him. Nay, whole Nations can
testify the like, as for Instance, the Lacedaemonians, whose Children were wont
to whip one another almost to Death, and yet never showed any sign of Pain
either in their Countenance or Speech, that so they might be rendered more
capable of undergoing any thing for their Countries sake. I shall not name that
other Person, who knowing that it was reputed no Shame among his Countrymen to
Steal, but to be caught in the Theft, suffered his Bowels to be devoured by a
little Fox that he had Stole and hid in his Bosom, without expressing any sign
of Pain, for fear of discovering the Theft.

He will also consider, That if the Pain be light, it is easy to be born; if
great, that it is so much the more Glorious and Honorable to endure it with
Courage, and that by frequent Custom it will become more supportable, or that
being of no long continuance, it will speedily put an end either to him or his
Suffering. If it cease, the Pleasure of being delivered from it, and the
health of Body that succeeds, with a perfect Indolency, are so pleasing and
delightsome, that we seem to be well satisfied with the Pain we have undergone,
from the Pleasure we enjoy of being freed from it. And if it takes away the
Sufferer, it brings him to the end of all Sufferings. So that this Suffering
brings at least this Advantage with it, that it makes our Life, which we must
needs part with, less pleasing, and Death less terrible; wherefore many care
not how soon they Dye, expecting thereby to be delivered from their Pains, so
that every Day they talk after this manner, Nor is Death Grievous, whilst it
ends my Pains.

Now as for Death, we have already alleged so many things to show that we
ought to expect it, and bear it patiently, that it is needless to insist any
longer upon this Particular. Let us therefore conclude with that kind of
general Consolation which Horace in few Words expresses: With equal Foot
impartial Fate,
Knocks at the Cottage and the Palace Gate.


And the French Poet Malherbius imitates him.

The Beggar in Straw,
Keeps the general Law;
And when Death gives the Word, must advance.
And the Guards that each Hour,
Take their Place at the Louvre,
Cannot defend the great Monarchs of France.
CHAP. VII. Of Temperance.
CIcero tells us, That Temperance makes up the second principal Part of
Morality. The Greeks style it (...), that is to say, the Protectrice of
Prudence, or as Plato terms it, the safety of Prudence; from hence a temperate
Man is called (...), that is, one who preserves Wisdom, or one who keeps his
Senses entire and sound; and herein he is opposed to (...), an Imprudent Man,
or a Fool; for he who is Intemperate seems to have lost all Prudence, to have
no due use either of his Sense or his Reason. This Virtue also is sometimes
taken in too large an extent, sometimes too narrow, and sometimes in a
mediocrity; and in this last Sense we shall now treat of it. Now that it is
taken sometimes in too large a Sense, as generally comprehending all Virtues,
or for all that is excellent and commendable in any other Virtue, even the Word
it self seems to import, for Temperance expresses a Mediocrity; and all Virtue
is a Mediocrity. Besides, it is, as we have said, the Protectrice of Prudence,
without which no Virtue can subsist, and according to the Opinion of
Pythagoras, it is the Life and Vigor of the Soul: Socrates names it the
Foundation of Virtue; Plato the Ornament of all good Things; and Iamblicus the
Breast Plate of all the most excellent Habits. That it is sometimes taken in too
narrow a signification, may appear when it is understood only for that Virtue
that gives a check to the Pleasures of Tasting and Feeling, and comprehends
only Sobriety and Chastity.

Lastly, It seems to be taken in a moderate Latitude and Extent, when we
understand not only hereby the regulation of the particular Appetites of
Tasting and Feeling, etc. but likewise such as puff up the Mind, and carry it
beyond the bounds of Decency and Honesty. So that we may say that a temperate
Man is not only such a one who lives Soberly and Chastely, but he also who
neither Speaks nor Acts any thing but agreeable with Justice and Moderation,
and which is accepted and approved of by all good and wise Men.

Of Modesty and Decency.
WHerefore among the several species of Temperance, Sobriety and Chastity are
not only to be reckoned, which we have before mentioned, but also many of those
which we name Potential, as are Gentleness or Mildness, Clemency, Modesty, and
some others. So that Modesty and Decency, which are said to be the integral
Parts, are of a larger Signification, as being too general Means, the one to
draw us from Intemperance, and the other to incline us to it: For Modesty, tho
Aristotle pretends that it is no Virtue, but rather a bashful disturbance, as
being nothing else but a certain fear of Infamy; nevertheless, this disturbance
tends to oppose that sort of Pleasure which we may take in too great
Confidence, which produces a great Displeasure, namely, that which proceeds
from Infamy and Disgrace. And Decency at least, as it is here taken, is nothing
else but a certain Convenience, (...), approved of, which prevailing upon us by
its Beauty, causes us to give a check to that daring Impudence, so that
thereby our good Reputation being preserved safe and sound, it procures a
certain Pleasure, much greater and more sincere.

Now tho it is commendable to shun Intemperance and to follow Temperance,
because of Decency alone and good Manners, it is likewise commendable for
Modesty's sake, or for fear of Shame, which would otherwise ensue. For as we
cannot hate Darkness but we must love the Light, so we cannot hate Shame and
Dishonor, but we must have a love for a good Reputation, and for an honest
Name. Therefore when Aristotle, in his Book to Nicomachus, seems to disallow
Modesty, he does not mean that Shamefacedness which appears in the blushing
Countenance of young Persons, who are apt to be too far transported by a
juvenile Heat; but he allows it not in aged Persons, who ought never to commit
any thing whereof they may be ashamed; for elsewhere in his great Treatises of
Morality, he places Modesty among the other Virtues, and gives to it this
Definition, A Mediocrity between Impudence and Insensibility; as if he should
say, That Modesty is a certain kind of Shame, occasioned not by the commission
of any base and dishonest Action, but proceeds to advise and hinder us from the
committing of it.

Of Sobriety and Chastity in general.
THese two Virtues seem to deserve a particular Tract at large, for they
constitue two principal kinds of Temperance; but we can scarce add any thing to
what has been formerly said, when we have mentioned the great advantages of a
sober Life, and when we have instanced that noble and celebrated Maxim of
Epicurus, Sapientem non esse amaturum; nunquam prodesse venerea. Therefore I
shall here only observe some things in general, and then more particularly. In
general, that the Praise and Advantage of these two Virtues seem for the most
part to consist not in the withdrawing our selves from living after the manner
of Brutes, in respect of Lusts and Pleasure, but rather to approach nearer to
'em. This will not seem so great a Paradox, if we do but consider that we are
very frequently more intemperate and worse than those Creatures that follow the
mere dictates of Nature, whereas we debauch and abuse Nature. For there is no
doubt but that that strong Inclination and Desire which we have for Eating and
Drinking is natural, seeing we find it equally in all Animals, and proceeds
from the institution of Nature, who has ordained, that by Food the Life of
every individual Creature might be preserved and lengthned, and by the use of
venereal Acts every Species of Creatures might by a succession of Propagations
be continued, and as it were eternised. Now this being certain, The Question
is, Whether Men or other Animals, which of them contain themselves most within
the bounds of Nature.

We see that the Beasts live upon very plain Food, provided for them by Nature;
whereas the Drink and Food of Men is changed, mingled and sophisticated in
diverse manners. We see also that when the Beasts and other Animals are once
satisfied, they neither Eat nor Drink any more, but stop till the next Hunger
and Thirst invites 'em; whereas Men are not satisfied to have filled themselves
with all the variety of Meats and Drinks, but still farther provoke their
Appetites by pinant Sauses and relishing Morsels, after Nature is satisfied. We
find also that other Animals have a set time for Copulation, and after
Conception they abstain; whereas Men have no time appointed for that purpose;
nay after that the Female has conceived they remain still inclinable to the
same Act, and with as much heat as before. Besides, none but Men are guilty of
the shameful and base abusing their own Sex against Nature. Are not therefore
Men in such Actions rather Brutes, and Brutes such as Men ought to be; and
consequently are not Men, in respect of the desire of Eating and Drinking and
of veneral Acts, to be sent to be instructed by the Brutes, that they might be
taught to live Temperately? Truly if to live according to the Rules of Virtue,
is to live according to the dictates of Nature, no Man will say, that to live
as Men do, is to live after the Rules of Virtue, but rather that we should
imitate the Beasts and other Creatures. It Is therefore a high Disgrace, not
that Men should be advised to live after the manner of Brutes, but when they
live worse than they, that they must be sent to be instructed by their Examples.

But to not insist any longer upon this particular, we will proceed to examine
that excellent Description of a temperate Man, recommended by Aristotle. After
he had Taught, That Temperance is a Mediocrity between Intemperance and the
want of Sense or Stupidity, and had proved, that Intemperance covets in such a
manner the things that bring Delight, that it suffers and is pained, not only
when it cannot enjoy them, but also while it desires them, and that the
insensible Person who is not moved with any Pleasure, is so far from all
Humanity, that such an one is scarce to be found; He proceeds to tell us, The
temperate Person keeps himself in a certain Medium, for he is not delighted in
such things wherein an intemperate Man places his Pleasure, but he is rather
offended at and abominates 'em. He takes no delight in that which is not Honest
and fit to be delighted in; and there is nothing that transports him so much,
but if he be disappointed in obtaining it, does any ways vex and torment him.
He desires nothing after so absolute a Manner, but his Affections are moderate,
never exceeding their just Bounds under all Circumstances. All that procures
Pleasure, and which at the same time tends to the Health of the Body, he
desires with Moderation, and as it is convenient; as also the other things that
are grateful so far as they are no Impediment to what we have mentioned, nor
are contrary to Honesty, nor above our Abilities: For he who is otherwise
affected, and desires these things with more earnestness than he ought, is not
Temperate, but he who desires and seeks them according to the Rules of Reason.
In which Passage of Aristotle you see, the temperate Man is not he who abstains
absolutely from all Pleasures, but from such as are not honestly to be
attained; such as those are that are contrary to Nature, that are prohibited by
the Laws, that prejudice Health, that blemish our Reputation or ruin our
Family; but he scruples not to enjoy moderately the Pleasures that have none of
these inconveniences attending. For in such there is nothing but what suits
with his Humanity, and according to Nature, who has not given us an
Inclination to them in vain.

This is the Picture that this Philosopher has drawn us of a temperate Person.
Therefore he reproves the Censoriousness of those who exclaim against the
Pleasures with which themselves are taken; it seeming in it self a
Contradiction; as if every one did not always carry his own Nature about with
him, which by word he may seem to deny, but in effect cannot.

Likewise, says he, for that reason it is no wonder, tho to live according to
Nature be to live Virtuously, and notwithstanding it is so easy to follow
Nature, there be nevertheless so few that pursue after Virtue, because the
Virtue that they praise is rather against Nature, than agreeable with its Rules.
It Is not but that there is a Virtue to deny our selves and abstain from such
Pleasures altogether, but this Virtue is not natural, but of another kind; it
may, for Instance, belong to Religion, that commands Nature, and constrains it,
being more excellent, and forces Nature to submit to it.

Of Sobriety in particular.
NOW to say something particularly of these two Virtues, Sobriety and Chastity,
let us observe only this difference between them, That we may so order and
govern our Life, that we may lessen the first Motives, and consequently may be
less inclinable to those lustful Desires, and in this State we may spend our
Life. But as it is not possible to hinder the natural Heat from consuming
continually the radical Moisture, so we cannot live but we must from time to
time recruit that loss by Eating and Drinking moderately. Now tho this
Moderation may have diverse respects, for Example, in reference to the Age, to
the state of Life, to the con^titution of the Body, to the Manners of the
Coun^ry, etc. Nevertheless it consists generally to have (...) regard to our
Health, and therefore in relation to Eating and Drinking, we must take care
that we ^ransgress not either in the quantity, which often ^appens, when we eat
and drink without Hunger and Thirst, or in the Quality, which is when we ^ake
any thing that either naturally or by art or mixture is too hot or too cold;
and not being fit ^or Digestion becomes a kind of Poison, causes Belchings,
Winds and Collicks; makes the Head ^eavy, disturbs our Sleep, attended with
many more ^uch inconveniences.

As to what relates to the Quantity in particular, we must take a special care
that we do not exceed what our Hunger and Thirst prompt us to; for as Nature
has given us an Appetite of Eating and Drinking, it has also given us Hunger
and Thirst, as the measure of what is needful to be taken, and what to be
refused. But because in the most part of the Meats, in Bread it self, and in
Wine, there is something Artificial, from whence proceeds that which provokes
Appetite, and makes it become greater than it would be naturally: Therefore
wise Men have fancied that it makes for our Health to give a check to our
Appetite, and stop betime. And because some might object that other Animals
that follow Nature, and consequently never do ought in prejudice of their
Health, Eat and Drink till they be fully satisfied; They answer, That the
Animals live upon Food purely natural, and which never stirs up Hunger nor
Thirst, as that does which Men make use of. This is plain in Drink, the most
natural, which is Water, and that we drink with great Pleasure, but as soon as
the Thirst is allayed we have no more Inclination to it. However, it is certain
that no Person repents to have risen from Table without being fully satisfied,
but we have often been sorry to have filled our Stomachs so full, that we were
able to eat no more. And doubtless it is not without Cause that Diogenes
wonders that Men will eat for Pleasure, and that they will not forbear Eating
for the same Reason, seeing there is so much Pleasure in being Healthy and free
from Diseases, and by this means will be ready the sooner to repeat the same
Pleasure with the more delight and Satisfaction.

In relation to the Quality, it seems also that then we have a regard to our
Health, when we shall nourish our selves with plain Food, easy to be digested,
and which we know to be proper and convenient. For this reason we see some
Country People who live upon nothing but Bread, Fruits and Water, and yet enjoy
a perfect Health, without any need of a Physician: Whereas those who feed at
plentiful Tables have but a weak Body, and are often forced to seek the
assistance of the Physician. Therefore there have always been some Sects of
wise Men, such as Pythagoras, who abstained from Eating the Flesh of living
Creatures, and contented themselves with the plain Products of Nature, and have
spent their Life in Health and Pleasure. I shall not here repeat what we have
said elsewhere, that Flesh seems to be no natural Food for Mankind, but as
Custom has made it so; we should consider at least that the use of Flesh is so
much the more Healthy, the more plainly it is prepared. And that the Arts of
Cooks, of Confectioners and others, who by their different Mixtures and Sauces
do as it were change our very Food, seem to have been intended for the
destruction of the Health of Mankind. Therefore we cannot but wonder why we
should with so much earnestness prosecute such as Poison, and yet hire and
entertain the Contrivers of our dainty Dishes, who by a deceitful Art destroy
no less their Life and Health. But how few are there that are not carried away
by the deceitful Charms of a liquorish Taste, and being bewitched with the
present Pleasure, never take heed nor apprehend the Mischiefs that follow? What
great Reason had Democritus to Laugh at those who make Vows to the Gods for
their Health, and yet by their debaucht and disorderly living, undertake to
ruin it daily? It Is a wonderful thing, says Diogenes, That Men have so much
care to cause their Bodies to be Embalmed after their Death, and yet all their
endeavors during Life is to become rotten.

Of Chastity in particular.
FInally, in relation to Chastity, I will only observe, that whereas this
Virtue is to struggle with the most violent of all the Passions, unto which
there is scarce any Body but submits; I shall here mention Two or Three
principal means that may serve as Bulworks to defend us from danger.

The First is a great Sobriety; for it will be in vain to attempt to give a
check to this unruly and imperious Appetite, unless you carefully cherish this
Virtue which tho encourged, it you will still have great difficulty to overcome
this Lust. Long before Terence was heard of, it has been said, That without
Wine and good Cheer Love grows Cold. Which is easily to be made out; for that
which encourages Love and stirs up Lust, is the increase of natural Seed, which
swells and moves in the Vessels, excites Nature, and obliges it to free it self
from that which is troublesome to it. Now as this increase proceeds from the
quantity or quality of the Food, if any Person be very temperate in his living,
and if he takes care to use no Meats that are too hot, or fit to augment the
Seed, he will take away the Fuel and the Oil, as I may so say, which serves to
increase and add Flame to this Fire. Therefore those who profess a chaste and
continent Life, ought not fully to satisfy themselves, but as we have said
before, retain always a Stomach for more, Citra satietatem vesci. Their Virtue
will not want a sufficient Reward, for they will become stronger and more
lusty, because the ejection of the Seed diminishes the Strength and Spirits,
which is the cause why other Animals, and even the very Trees, the more
fruitful they are, the sooner they grow Old.

The Second Means is some honest Employ, which may entertain and spend some of
the Spirits that make the Seed to boil up, and so give a diversion to the
Thoughts: For the Imagination, which fixes upon the beloved Object, and is not
otherwise diverted, is easily heated, and from a little Spark kindles and
becomes a great Flame. Therefore we ought to take a strong Resolution to resist
all base and dishonest Thoughts, to avoid all occasions which might cause them
to rise, whether by the Sight, or too intimate and private Discourses, or by
Reading, or Touching, or otherwise; and if casually any does arise, not to give
it time to take any deep root, but to banish it at first; and in so doing we
discover our Manhood; for the more you give way, the greater will be the
difficulty to stop your self in so slippery a Path: So that there is nothing
can be a greater Truth than what is commonly said, That it is a kind of Combat,
where the Victory is not to be obtained, but by flying away.

The Third is the custom of resisting and overcoming; for as we become so much
the more inclinable to Love, the more easy and the more often we yield and
submit to it, so we become so much the more Continent, the more courageously we
resist, and the less we are overcome by it.

I confess the violence of this Passion is great, but it often happens that the
weakness of our Spirit is such, that at the first Assault we suffer our selves
to be overcome. You yield upon the first Assault, without making any effort, or
exercising your Resolution in trying whether you might not have Strength enough
to withstand the Temptation, and so no wonder that the Passion triumphs and
gets the Victory over your Reason. But perhaps you will say, I have already
contracted an Habit. Well, Why don't you endeavor by forbearance to destroy
this Habit, and to bring in a contrary? For the thing is not impossible, if you
will strive with all your Courage. Learn by degrees to be Continent, and if you
cannot abstain one Day of two, at least abstain one in a Week; for by this
means it will happen that in a little while you will attain three Days of
Abstinence, afterward Six, and after that you will be Conqueror during whole
Weeks and Months. But above all things remember, that as it is almost
impossible but that many things must intervene, which may divert you from your
Design, so you ought to keep steady and fixed to your Resolution. You must break
through all Obstacles; You must proceed still on, and be continually going
forward; You must consider with your self, that it is a great weakness to
express so early a Repentance, and being a Man as you are, to show nothing less
than your Manhood. Consider what a satisfaction you will have when the Fatigue
will be over, and that you shall find that you have got the Victory; whereas if
you suffer your self to be meanly overcome, a troublesome and uneasy Repentance
will attend you; but otherwise you will applaud and approve of your Happiness
when you shall have bravely obtained the Conquest. You will also from thence
receive new Strength to help you to overcome again in a like Temptation, and if
you continue, you will find that by degrees you will alter the evil Habit, that
you will draw your self out of a cruel Bondage, deliver your self from a base
Tyranny; and instead of a dark and clouded Spirit it will become clear and
Serene; instead of a feeble and diseased Body it will become strong and
vigorous; and instead of a languishing and short Life it will become healthy
and long. Not to mention here the loss of Reputation and Goods, neither shall I
instance in those other odious Mischiefs which are known to all the World.

I shall not here trouble my self to inform you, That it is usual to subdivide
these two kinds of Temperance each into two Parts; so that they assign four
parts commonly subject to Temperance, whereof Two of them relate to the Taste,
namely, Abstinence and Sobriety; the First concerns our Eating, the Second our
Drinking; and the other Two relate to Venery, namely, Chastity and Modesty: The
First concerns the Act it self, and the Latter some Circumstances, such as are
Kisses, Approaches, Embraces, Looks and Discourses, etc. I shall not insist
here to prove that Modesty is either Chastity it self, and principally that of
Virginity, which being once lost, as the Poet says, can never be retrieved.

-- Nulla reparabilis art,
Laesa Pudicitia est; deperit illa semel.
Or if it be understood for that Virtue that gives a check to the Circumstances
that we have named, it ought not to be esteemed so much a part subject to
Prudence, as a potential part of Chastity. I will only observe in relation to
Modesty, (which is so called from the word Modest, being a kind of a Guard to
Chastity,) that tho Nature produces nothing whereof we ought to be ashamed as
an obscene Thing; (and therefore among Nations who own no Obscenity, neither in
the Members of the Body, nor in the Language or Names that are given to them;
for as to this we are to refer our selves to common Usage,) nevertheless among
those People who do own any such thing, we are to refrain from them, and we are
not to banish Modesty, which obliges us to forbear them; for let it be either
Nature, or Law, or Custom, which makes things to be esteemed Brave, Good or
Honest, it is always Nature that commands them to be observed, which is to be
obeyed for the common Good, in which the Happiness and Welfare of every private
Person, as due to him of common right, is comprised. Therefore Cicero
discourses excellently well upon this Point. We are not to hearken to the
Cynicks, who Laugh at us because we esteem things to be filthy and undecent in
Words, which are not really so indeed; and on the contrary, Things that are
really Wicked and Dishonest we don't stick to mention by their proper Names: As
to Steal, to Cheat, to commit Whoredom, which indeed is Unjust and Dishonest,
and yet is spoken without any Obscenity; To beget Children is an honest Act,
but yet to use the proper Term is Obscene and Immodest. For our part let us
follow the dictates of Nature, and let us abstain from all that our Eyes or
Ears cannot honestly endure; let our Carriage, our Gate, our Sitting, our Lying
down, our Countenance, our Eyes and our Hands, observe the Rules of Modesty.
And hear what he says in another Place: After he had shown that there is
nothing more indecent and unbecoming, than in serious and weighty Matters to
mix loose and light Expressions; Says he, Thus Pericles treated the Poet
Sophocles very wisely, who while sitting upon the Bench with him in open Court,
espied a beautiful young Damsel pass by; and not being able to contain himself,
cried out, What a Beauty is there before us! Pericles answered, O Sophocles,
it is becoming a Judge upon the Bench to be Modest and Grave, not only in
respect to his Hands, but in respect to his Eyes also.

Of Mildness and Gentleness.
WE shall now speak something as to the other parts of Temperance, which some
name Subject Parts, others Potential. But Mildness seems truly to belong rather
to Fortitude than to Temperance, in that it relates to Truth, which arises
because of Pain, and because it resides in that part of the Appetite which
derives its name from Wrath, namely, in the irascible part, therefore it seems
to deserve to be placed under Fortitude: Nevertheless, as it is the property of
Fortitude to raise and encourage; and of Temperance to check and depress; and
that in respect of Wrath the Mind has not so much need to be incited and
stirred up as to be curbed and kept in, for this reason it is commonly placed
under Temperance. However, Aristotle teaches, That Mildness or Gentleness
ought to be reckoned among the Virtues, because it is a Mediocrity or a Medium
between two Extremes; the one a Temper inclinable to Wrath, as when a Man is
either sooner or in a higher degree enraged, than he ought against one who
deserves it not, or for some frivolous Causes: The other a simple Meekness or
want of Anger, as when a Man is not angry, when, and against whom, and for such
Reasons as he ought to be angry; for he declares that under certain
Circumstances, it is not only lawful, but also requisite and needful to be so,
and that because Nature it seems has not only given Man an Inclination to
Anger, but also because that this Passion is as a Spur that stirs us up and
encourages us to repel, not only private Injuries, but likewise puts us upon
securing our selves against such public Dangers and Calamities as may affect
our Country, Parents, Relations, etc. and all good Men. By this means our
private and public Welfare is secured and maintained, and a Way is open to
great and generous Actions.

Nevertheless, the Stoics, not without some Color of Reason, seem to require
a total Suppression of Anger; and because it is impossible to be altogether free
from it, we shall therefore at least be so much the happier the less we are
subject to this cruel and troublesome Passion: I say, if it be not possible to
be altogether freed from it; for there is scarce any hopes that a wise Man
should be altogether free from Anger, as Seneca very well observes by this
discourse which he ascribes to Socrates, who yet was esteemed the wisest of
Men: I would beat thee if I were not in Anger. And by another Saying which he
assigns to Plato: Speusippus, Chastise for me that Slave, for I am now angry.
He tells us, That when Plato held up his Hand as if he were going to beat his
Slave, and that his Friend asked him what he ailed, and what he was doing,
Plato returned this excellent answer, Exigo poenas ab homine iracundo; I punish
an angry Man. Now that there is nothing more desirable than to be seldom or
never angry is plain and manifest, because there is no Passion that disturbs
all parts of the Body more, the Blood, the Heart, the Eyes, the Mouth, etc. nor
is the Mind less quiet. For that Reason Epicurus has very well expressed it,
That an extraordinary Anger turns a Man into a Fool. And Seneca says, That a
short Anger is a short Madness. And Philemon, That we all play the Fool while
we are angry, Desipimus omnes donec irati sumus. Therefore we cannot endeavor
too much to root out this brutish Passion; which is not to be thought requisite
to defend us from, and revenge Injuries, seeing that a calm and quiet Spirit
may do it much better, and without fear of Repentance, were it only to keep
Servants within the Bounds of their Duty; for in such a Case, a feigned and
seeming Anger is sufficient either to Punish their Crimes or to Chastise their
Failings; for we are not to be more angry than the Law it self; or than a
Physician, who without any discomposure orders his Burnings and Incisions: We
have already mentioned those excellent Verses of Claudian, who requires a wise
Man to be always Master of himself, and to punish Offenders without Wrath.

But as the Fancy that we have of being offended, is that which stirs up Anger;
we have already observed, (speaking of Fortitude,) That a wise Man ought to be
above all Affronts, and that he cannot revenge himself more honorably than by
despising 'em. I will here only add, That we ought to moderate and overcome
this eagerness of Revenge, and reduce it to a mild and meek Temper, which of
all other Virtues is most becoming a Man, and makes him beloved; for every one
has Affection for such as are naturally mild and full of Humanity, who are
easily appeased, and apt and inclinable to forgive. We receive thereby a great
Advantage; for by this means we free our selves from that Fretfulness which
consumes a revengeful Spirit, troubles our Mind, spends our Strength; and not
being satisfied with the Evil already received, he draws often upon himself a
greater Mischief, by endeavoring to take Vengeance. Can there be a greater
blindness or madness than that of some Men, who being affronted, challenge the
Offender in Duel, where it often happens that he who suffered the former wrong,
loses also his Life, and sacrifices it, if I may so say, to him whose Affront
he could not slight and pass by? Let us with due Thanks and Praises own the
steady and unshaken Justice of a neighboring Prince, who by his severe Edicts
has freed his Nation from this barbarous and inhuman Custom.

Of Clemency.
AS for Clemency, it differs from Mildness, in that the latter relates
generally to all Men; but Clemency only to Inferiors. Therefore Seneca says,
That it is not only a Moderation of Spirit in that Power that we leave to
revenge our selves; but also a gentleness in a Superior, in Punishing and
Chastising of Inferiors. It is likewise known, that as Meekness or Mildness
leans and inclines rather to the defect than the excess of Anger, so also
Clemency inclines more to the want than to the excess of Punishment: So that
Indulgence is not so much opposite to it as Cruelty of Mind, or that kind of
Inhumanity that appears in the extraordinary Punishment of Offenders. It Is not
without Reason that this Virtue is esteemed proper to generous and noble Minds.
It becomes all Men in general, who have Authority over those who ask Pardon for
their Faults; but it is more particularly the Ornament and Glory of Kings and
Princes. Therefore Cicero calls it a Royal Virtue: For as it is incident to a
weak, cowardly, and savage Nature, to show Cruelty to those who are overcome,
nay, though they have given no particular Provocation; so it belongs to a noble
and generous Mind to express Clemency to the Conquered. And as Cruelty renders
Men hateful and odious, so Clemency, procures them love, affection, and
respect; for as the same Author says, As it is a brutish Inclination to destroy
by Cruelty, so it is a Divine Temper to save by Pardoning.. In some Cases
indeed, we cannot well Pardon without bringing danger upon our selves, and this
is more properly termed Severity than Cruelty; but when there is no
inconveniency to be feared, but on the contrary there appears a likelihood of
purchasing to our selves the Kindness of others, and to make them more subject
and obedient by the Sense of Gratitude, it is not only glorious to save such as
you may destroy, but profitable and pleasant to deserve or experience the
Kindness, either of those who are obliged, or of others who will find by that
means a disposition full of Goodness and Love. It Is strange to consider, how
great Affection we have for those whom we read of in History to have shown
themselves very kind and merciful, and how we abominate those who have been
barbarous and cruel. This shows sufficiently what great difference there is in
the Reputation of those Princes who strive to deserve and purchase to
themselves the glorious and august Title of Fathers of their Country, and of
those who fancy this Motto which Seneca calls odious, Let 'em hate me so they
fear me.

Of Mercy.
SEneca tells us, that after Clemency we ought to inquire what Mercy is,
because this Virtue seems to be near a kin, and much resembles Clemency; nay,
is sometimes taken for Clemency it self: For though Mercy seems to be nothing
else but a certain grief or concern that we have for another Calamity; yet it
resembles Clemency, because the Misery of him who is fallen, even forces it
from us. Therefore sometimes it seems to be Clemency it self; and that in the
Judgment of the sacred Writers, who highly recommended it, as also among the
Philosophers; as Cicero, who making his Address to Caesar, tells him, Of all
the Virtues that attend you, the most esteemed of Men, and the most admirable,
is Mercy; for nothing makes us so like the Gods, as to give Life to Men: Your
Fortune has nothing greater than to be able, and your Soul and Disposition,
nothing better than to be willing to preserve many. And though Seneca says, That
Mercy is the weakness of a mean Spirit, that it is common to the most wicked;
and that we see none but old Women, and generally the Female Sex who are moved,
and pity the Tears of the greatest Villains, who if not strongly guarded, would
break their Prisons; Yet he confesses, That many extol this Virtue, and name
an honest Man a merciful Man. But he understands the matter as the Stoics do,
who pretend, That a wise Man is never moved with Compassion, nor Pardons any.

But though the Stoics will have the Mind of a wise Man not subject to
Displeasure, and consequently ought not to be moved with the Calamities of
others; nevertheless, the Peripateticks and all others, maintan, That he may be
moved moderately, that so he may thereby be excited to succor and assist such
as are in Misery. I confess it is no advantage to a Man in Misery, that others
should be moved or afflicted for his Calamity, for that is only so far
serviceable as to incline us to assist him, and therefore we are not to be
blamed for keeping our selves from an affliction which is hurtful and brings no
profit; however yet it tends to excite and further our assistance. Moreover,
it is also Human and Natural to be afflicted with those that suffer; nay it is to
be suspected that our assistance will be but slender and backward, if it be not
encouraged by an inward Motion: For that Reason we are not altogether to
condemn this inward Inclination, because we may have it in such a manner, as it
may not be a torment to us, but rather the natural effect of a free and
generous Propensity to acts of Humanity and Charity.

Of Modesty and Humility.
WE shall next speak of Modesty, which though it is of a large extent, yet
chiefly consists in moderating our Passions in the pursuit of Honor and Glory.
Now it is manifest that this Virtue draws nearer to a defect than to an excess,
in that Pride is rather opposite to it, than the contempt of Honor. I confess,
Aristotle calls him Modest only who deserves but little, and in reality Fancies
according to his Deserts; but the name of Modest seems likewise applicable to
him, who tho he may deserve much, nevertheless has no overwean'd Opinion of
himself, nor does he strictly exact all the Honor and Respect due to him; for
knowing the weakness of human Nature, and remembering his frail Condition,
begins to suspect that the Opinion that he entertains of his own Merit may
deceive him. And truly that Magnanimity so much extolled by Aristotle, seems
rather to consist in prompting us to aim at and attempt great Things, than
believe that we merit or deserve 'em. Besides, it seems not to be puffed up nor
boast of its deserts, by declining Honors, but at least admits and receives
them with Modesty: In a Word, our expressing our Modesty in our Actions and
Behavior, is as the crowning and completion of our great and noble Deeds.
Therefore it is not without cause that the Ancients have compared a Man of Merit
and Virtue, to an Ear of Wheat, which the fuller it is, the more it stoops. And
Demosthenes observes, That a Man who is solidly learned, is so far from
boasting of it, that he blushes when any one seems to Extol and Praise him.

But we must not therefore think that this Modesty is the same which we call
Pusillanimity, which he supposes to be when any one believes that he deserves
less than really he does; for this Pusillanimity or Bashfulness consists also
in having rather an apprehension and fear of undertaking great Things, than in
believing that we deserve 'em. Now as in a Man of great worth, Ostentation
lessens the Glory of his Merits, and darkens it very much; so it is an odious
and vainglorious Thing in a Man of no Merit to be puffed up with the
over-wean'd conceit of himself and his own Actions. Vainglory has this Evil
attending, that it is approved by none, but hated of all the World; whereas
Modesty has this advantage, that there is no Body but delights in it and loves
it.

From whence we may here observe, That this Modesty is not such a contempt of
Honor, as if there were no difference between Things honorary and Things
blameworthy; but only a contempt of Honor without Merit, or merely in
Affectation, and which differs much from that which is real in the Opinion of
good Men, and which we duly obtain, when we are judged worthy of it; which
seems to be so much the more agreeable with Truth, that it is manifest that an
honest Man undertakes great Things to deserve this Opinion; neverthelss he
observes the Rules of Modesty, to avoid the Shame and Disgrace that Vainglory
draws upon us. So that we may truly say, That the less we seek after Honor,
the easilier and the sooner we obtain it; it being more glorious, as an ancient
Author observes, to ask why a Statue has not been erected for such an one,
than why it has.

We may likewise understand, That Modesty hinders not those who are advanced to
a Dignity, to maintain the Honor of that Post; for it is the Interest of a
Commonwealth or Kingdom, that those who Govern should be Honored; for fear if
Contempt should creep in, the Government would suffer by it, and that the
preservation of the Honor of our Dignity is no vain Glory, but a real Act of
Justice, as the neglect of it seems not so much to be a private Modesty, as a
public Injury.

Now all that has been spoken of Modesty, may be said of Humility, as it is a
religious Virtue: For tho heathen Authors look upon it as proceeding from a
mean abject Spirit, nevertheless, it is with great Reason that the Holy Penmen
look upon it as a very great degree of Modesty, and it is to be judged so much
the more perfect, because it comes from a love of Piety, and supposing it be
true and sincere, and not feigned nor hypocritical, it removes and banishes all
Vainglory. For tho the Modesty of the Philosophers seems outwardly to despise
Honor, yet it excludes not all the other Passions, but this Religious Humility
ascribes to God all Honor and Glory. I say upon condition that it be sincere,
for there is sometimes Hypocrisy mingled with it. Therefore we need not wonder
that some have exclaimed against Diogenes and some other of the Philosophers,
That they had conquered one kind of Vanity by exalting another.

But it is not without ground what we said before, that this Modesty is of a
large extent, because it appears in all the things which we desire to draw from
Honor or Praise. And in Virtue it self, which doubtless can have no excess,
and in which there is nothing that might make us ashamed: I say in Virtue it
self this Modesty appears when there is no Ostentation of it, but we embrace
and practice it silently, without making it appear but when it is convenient,
and always free from Pride. Which is also to be said proportionably of Science
or Knowledge, unless it be that there is moreover a certain kind of Distemper,
commonly called Curiosity, to desire to know those Things which are not
lawfully to be pried into, or which are useless when known. This Modesty
appears also in our Discourse in several respects; for First, as there is
nothing so troublesome as a prattling Loquacity, so there is nothing more
commendable than a prudent Silence, or that Forbearance which makes us speak
only to those to whom we ought, and of such Things and at such times as we
ought. So that that Saying of Simonides is become a kind of Proverb; That no
Man did ever repent of being Silent; but very often off too much Speaking. And
Epaminondas, was commended because no Man knew more than he, and yet no Man
Spoke less. Wherefore, as Speech has been given to Man to unfold and express
his Thoughts, it will suffice to take heed that this be not used indiscreetly,
as it happens, when any speaks out of Season, or without being required, or
more than comes to his share, uttering all that comes uppermost, and scarce
permitting any Body else to put in a Word; when he Speaks, as we say, at
random, and that he utters all that comes first; in short, when he has such an
impatience of Speaking, that when he is forced to hearken to others, it is very
uneasy to him, never reflecting upon that wise Saying of Pythagoras, Either let
your Discourse be more profitable than your Silence, or else hold your Peace.
And as there are some who magnify Things too much, and others who too much
lessen 'em, so there is nothing more commendable than to speak plainly and
sincerely: For you may observe with Aristotle, That there is often a great deal
of Arrogance and Vainglory in thinking too meanly of our selves; as well as in
thinking too highly, and that we may hereby fall into a Folly like that of the
Lacedaemonians, who gloried in their Garments of a low and mean Price.

Lastly, as there are Two sorts of Jesting, according to Cicero, the one
Insolent, Saucy and Malicious; the other Civil, Ingenious and Pleasant: It Is
known that this last has been always as well accepted, and as he tells us,
That it is becoming a Gentleman; whereas the other is very ill received, and
not judged fit for any Man.

There are many other Things in which Modesty discovers it self, as in the
decency and plainness of our Habits, in our Mien and Behavior, etc. for in all
these Things there is a certain Mediocrity to be observed. These are Cicero's
own Words, Adhibenda est praeterea mundities non odiosa, neque exquisita nimis,
tanquam quae fugiat agrestem and inhumanam negligentiam. Eadem ratio est
habenda Vestitus, in quo sicut in plerisque rebus Mediocritas optmia est. Eadem
gestus and gressus. Nam and palestrici motus saepe sunt odiosiores, and
histrionum nonnulli gestus ineptiis non va^ant, and in utroque genere quae sunt
recta and simplicia laudantur. I think Horace has borrowed from this Passage
what he says of Tigellus, when he tells us, That he was a Man made up of
Extremes; That sometimes one might see him running as if he had fled from an
Enemy, and sometimes walking gravely and demurely, as if he were carrying the
Image of Juno; one Day he would have two Hundred Servants attending him, the
next Day scarce One; sometimes he would talk like a King uttering nothing but
what savored of Greatness and Magnificence, at other times he would play the
Philosopher and be contented with little.

Nil aequale homini fuit illi, etc. Cicero says moreover, That Modesty is
concerned in the Ornament of a House and all its Furniture, and that where
there is any Superfluity or Excess, it turns to the discredit of the Owner,
because it is above his Ability; for it is not the House that ought to Grace the
Master, but the Master ought to be an Ornament to his House. Eadem denique de
ornatu domus totaque supellectile, in quo si quid modum excedat, dedecori est,
quasi possessori incongruum; neque enim domo dominus, sed domino honestanda
domus. Lastly, he will have Modesty concerned even with the Goods of Nature and
Fortune, in the which it is very commendable to observe a convenient Temper, so
that they may be rather the Instruments of Virtue and Moderation, than of
Debauchery, Pride and Arrogance. Tractanda etiam in laudationibus haec sunt
naturae, and fortunae bona, in quibus est summa laus non extulisse se in
potestate, non fuisse insolentem in pecunia, non se praetulisse aliis propter
abundantiam fortunae, ut opes, and copiae non superbiae videantur, ac libidini,
sed bonitati, ac moderationi facultatem, and materiam dedisse.

CHAP. VIII. Of Justice, Equity and the Laws.
THere remains yet the fourth Virtue for us to Discourse of, namely Justice,
which consists in rendering to every one that which belongs to him; therefore
it is of a very large Extent, and esteemed as the source and root of all other
Duties. It Is Justice, says Cicero, which gives the name of Good as well as
that of Just; for Justice is a kind of Goodness, or an Inclination full of
Sincerity and Desire of doing right to all the World; for that reason there is
nothing that Men respect, reverence and love more than Justice. Aristotle tells
us in express Words, That Justice is the most excellent of all the Virtues,
that it excels the Morning and the Evening Star in Glory. For this Cause Men
have always given to it the name of a most precious Possession, and in all
times it is acknowledged to be the ligament of Societies, as Cicero calls it,
that is to say, That Tie without which Society cannot possibly Subsist;
insomuch, says he, that the very worst of Men, and they who delight in
Wickedness cannot live without some kind of Justice; for if one Thief openly
Robs another, or privately Steals any thing from him, he is not suffered to
continue in the Company of Thieves; or if a Captain of a Pyrate distributes not
the Prey equally, his Companions will either kill him or forsake him.

But this Virtue is sometimes taken more generally, sometimes more strictly;
for there be many that look upon it as the Complexion of all the other Virtues,
because there is no Virtue but Justice prescribes its Functions and Offices; as
for Instance, in the practice of Fortitude, when we are in a Fight it orders us
to keep our Rank, and forbids us to run away, or throw away our Weapons: In the
practice of Temperance it prohibits Adultery; in that of Gentleness it Commands
us to strike no Body, nor so much as to speak Evil of 'em; and so of the rest.

But not to insist too long upon this; it is not to be questioned but that the
two chief Offices or general Duties of Justice consist in hurting or doing
wrong to no Body, and in giving or rendering to every one that which he may
lawfully claim, which is commonly expressed in Holy Writ by these Words,
Declina a malo, and fac bonum, fly from Evil and do Good: This has given
occasion to the Lawyers to define Justice, A constant and perpetual Will or
Resolution to give or restore to every one his Right; that is to say, what
justly belongs to him. This Definition causes us to make two Observations,
First, That it is not without Reason that it is named a Will or Resolution; for
tho this Word may signify the action of the Will or the Faculty it self;
nevertheless, as they add further, that it ought to be a constant and perpetual
Willingness, they hereby understand the Habit it self of Willing, which
expresses the nature and true praise of Justice. For to deserve commendation
for this Virtue, it is not sufficient to perform some just Acts, seeing that he
who may do them without Knowledge, or for Fear, or for a Friends sake, or for
Gain, or for some other such consideration, cannot therefore be Just, nor be
said to do Justly, because the End ceasing, he would act otherwise; but to be
Just he must proceed willingly of his own accord for the sake of Justice.
Therefore Aristotle puts a difference between a just Action and an Action done
Justly; because it is the Will alone that makes the Deed to be Justly or
Unjustly done, and that he who only does no Wrong is not esteemed Just, but he
who notwithstanding his Capacity to act unjustly, yet will by no means do it,
as Philemon says, Sed qui facere licet potis, non vult tamen.

And he who aims at no private Glory, but desires rather to be truly Just than
to appear so.

Vult esse justus, quam viderier magis. Secondly, That it is not also without
Reason that they add, To render to every one his Right: Because these Words
comprehend the Function and the proper Act of Justice; and besides, signify
from whence this Mediocrity is to be taken, which Aristotle requires, to place
Justice in the Number of the Virtues. For Justice is not as the other Virtues,
between two Opposite Vices, for there is but one only contrary to it, namely
Injustice. But nevertheless it is employed in rendering that which is Right,
which is to be reduced to a Mediocrity or Equality, upon which Aristotle
observes in the first place,

Of Retaliation.
THat Retaliation, or as the Latins term it, Perpessio reciproca, a mutual
Suffering, is no Right or Equity, simply so taken, whatever Pythagoras's
Disciples pretend to, who seem to approve of the Justice that is ascribed to
Radamanthus, Aequum jus fuerit, si quae egit, quis patiatur; To make a Man
suffer the same Evil which he has committed. The Reason of this is, because
Retaliation cannot be found in distributive Justice, where a respect is to be
had to the Worth and to the Person. For Example, if a Magistrate strikes any
Body, he ought not therefore to be struck in the same manner; and it would not
be sufficient that he who should give a box on the Ear to a Magistate should
only receive such another for it, but he ought to be punished more severely. I
shall not here mention that a regard ought to be had chiefly to that which is
done willingly, and that which is acted against our Will. Neither has it any
room in that part of Commutative Justice, which respects the Actions, and which
is properly called Corrective; for if for a Tooth pulled out we only pull out a
Tooth, or an Eye for an Eye, we don't hereby do Right, because there is no
amends made for the Injury or Wrong done; but we must as much as is possible
recompense the mischief done, either by Money, or some other expedient which the
Judge shall think convenient. Therefore it may have place in the other part of
Commutative Justice, which respects the Things, or the exchange made in
recompense of it,

Aristotle observes in the second Place, That for this kind of Justice there is
nothing could be invented more convenient than Gold, Silver, or something of
like Value; for as human Society subsists by a necessary supply of one another
Wants, we cannot otherwise redress this defect than by exchange or commutation,
and that this is to be done by some equality that is to be found out. Now what
equality can we find between two Things so different (for Example) as a Horse
and Box on the Ear. As therefore we cannot find any equality as to the Thing,
nevertheless, as by Custom we have made Money an equivalent to every thing else,
by this as by a common Measure we may adjust to every Man his due Right.

Thirdly, A Judge ought sometimeis to do Right, not strictly as the Law
prescribes, but as we usually say, according to Equity, Ex aequo and bono. For
as the Law orders nothing but under general Terms, and that often there happens
particular Cases, in which, because of certain Circumstances none can judge
according to the strict Letter of the Law without great Unjustice; For that
Reason, says he, If a Legislator has omitted or failed in any thing which he
has absolutely enjoined, here we must supply what was defective in this
Lawgiver, and what he himself would have ordained by this Law if he had been
now present, or had known of it before. Nay, the Interpreters of the Laws go
yet farther, and say; If the Law had commanded that no Strangers should walk
upon the Bulwarks, we must not therefore put to death one who is gone thither
to defend the Town, and repulse the Enemy; for if the Lawgiver had foreseen
such a Case, he doubtless had made such an Exception. For this Reason it is
commonly said, That under strict and severe Laws we ought to implore the
Assistance of the Judge, to make a reasonable and equitable Construction.

Judicis auxilium sub iniqua lege rogato:
Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt ut jure regantur.
But to return to the Definition of Justice. As this part of the Definition,
viz. To render to every one his Right, obliges us to understand and seek more
at large what this Right is, and from whence it derives its Original: Let us
consider, first, that this word being taken in several senses, its primitive
Signification is, that Right is a Faculty to do something, to have something,
to enjoy, and to do ones self Right in something; from thence we say, to keep,
to retain, to recover, to pursue ones Right, to yield, to abate and surrender
ones Right, to enjoy ones Right, or to be at our own Command, Esse sui juris,
etc. It Is also from hence that the Law, by a Metaphor, is called Right, because
it declares and prescribes what belongs to every one as his Right, what
Authority, Power and Command every one has over any thing. And this by a like
Metaphor, That we call Right the Court or Tribunal where Right is done; that is
to say, where the Party injured has his Right restored or Justice done him.

Nay, we may go yet farther, and say, That Right seems by consequence to be
originally more ancient than Justice; for as Justice is the same thing with
that Affection or habitual Desire or Inclination which we have to wrong no
body, and that every one may enjoy their Right as we enjoy ours; it is certain,
that this Justice supposes that there is in other Men a Right, not depending
upon it, and which nevertheless would be, though it self were not in Being.
Therefore it seems in the first place, we ought to acknowledge the Right that
every one has, though it be different from what Nature gives, or though it be by
Contract or by Law. Secondly, That the Injury is nothing else but a Violation
of this Right it self. Thirdly, Justice, or the Will to render unto every one
his own, which repairs the Wrong, restores Right, and gives the Title of Just
to him who possesses it. Fourthly, The Proceedings or Work of Justice, or the
Right restored, which is also called Just, or that which is Just; Justice
giving it that Denomination. But because Epicurus, whom, both many of the
ancient and modern Authors have followed, has derived the very beginning of
Right and whatever is agreeable with Equity, from Utility or Profit; let us
listen to what he says in the four following Paragraphs. It Is in this manner
that he discourses of Justice in general Terms.

Of Justice in General, according to Epicurus.
AS Justice is a Virtue by which we render unto every one that which is his
due, and by which we take heed not to wrong any body; it is certain, that in
this respect it relates to, and respects other Men, and that it is convenient
for Man as he is a Member, and lives in Society, it being the common Tie,
without which it is impossible a Society should subsist.

It has this also in common with other Virtues, viz. Prudence, Temperance and
Fortitude, that it is not to be separated from Pleasure; not only because it
injures no body, but also because it settles the Mind at Rest, either by its
own natural Influence, or by the Assurance that nothing shall be wanting to us,
which our Nature, not corrupted, can desire.

And as Rashness, Luxury and Cowardice disturb and trouble the Mind, so from
that very instant that Injustice has taken Possession of the Soul of a Man, he
cannot be otherwise but troubled and uneasy: Insomuch, that if he has
undertaken any evil Action, though he has done it never so secretly, yet he can
never be assured that it will always remain so. And if there be any who by
reason of their great Riches, fancy themselves sufficiently secured from the
Inquisition and Justice of Men, yet they are always afraid of a divine
Vengeance; and they believe that this Uneasiness which Torments them Day and
Night, is a Punishment that proceeds from the Appointment of the immortal Gods,
who are offended and displeased with them.

And afterward, says he, As to the Advantage which we receive from evil
Actions, how inconsiderable are they to lessen our Griefs, or to support us
under the Troubles of our Life? Do they not rather increase 'em by the remorse
of Conscience, by the fear of the Laws, and by the hatred of our Neighbors?
Nevertheless, some are unsatiable as to Money, Honor, Authority, and prescribe
no limits to their Luxury, Debauchery and other Extravagancies, which the
ill-gotten Goods do augment and increase more and more, rather than lessen and
appease. Therefore it seems that all Rules and Precepts are useless to such
Men, and that there is nothing but Severity and Punishment that can restrain
them.

Reason therefore invites them who are of sound Sense and Understanding, to the
observation of Justice, Equity and Fidelity. Wicked Deeds are useful to no
body, and Riches are convenient for none but for honest Men, and such as have a
Mind tending to Liberality; for they know thereby how to gain Men's Affections,
and to make themselves beloved, which tends very much to the security and quiet
of our Lives; besides, there is nothing that ought to oblige us to unjust
Actions. The Desires that proceed from Nature are easily to be satisfied; and
for such as are vain, foolish and needless, we should not obey 'em. These
Desires procure nothing worthy of our Affections, and the Wrong done to others,
causes more Mischief than we obtain Advantage by doing that Injury. Therefore
if Justice of it self, and by it self is not desirable, it is at least desirable
for the sake of the great Pleasure and Satisfaction that it procures; for there
is nothing more Pleasant than to be beloved; because that makes up the Society,
and consequently the Delights of Life. So that Wickedness is not only to be
avoided, because of the Punishments and the Mischiefs that fall upon the
Wicked; but chiefly also because it never suffers our Minds to be at ease, but
Poisons all our Delights, and renders our Life miserable. What I have here
said, may seem to be sufficient; but I think I shall not do amiss to add
something concerning that which we call Right or Just, from whence Justice
derives its Name, that we may the better discover what the Origin of Right is,
among what Nations it has been received, and what are the Advantages that
proceed from thence.

Of Right or Just, from whence Justice derives its Name.
AS Justice has been contrived and appointed for the Public Good, it must
needs follow that the Right and Equity which it chiefly respects, is Good for
each individual Person that constitutes a Society: And because every one
desires naturally that which is Good for himself, it must needs be, that what
is Right or Just, is according to Nature, and by consequence must be styled
Natural.

Now it is not without Reason that I mention this, because it sometimes happens
that in the Government of Societies, some things are ordered as Right and Just,
which nevertheless are not Good, nor the true Interest of a Society; and
consequently being not natural, but against Nature, ought not to be reputed
Just, but only nominally so, or by mistake; that which is truly Right and
naturally Just being such as it is ordained, that is to say, effectively Useful
and Good. Therefore to speak properly, Right or natural Equity is nothing else
but what is marked out by Utility or Profit, or that Utility which, by common
Agreement, has been appointed that Men might not injure one another, nor
receive any wrong, but live in security, which is a real Good, and therefore
naturally desired of every one.

I suppose therefore, that which is Profitable and that which is Good, to be
but one and the same thing; and therefore to the making up of what is Just and
Right, two things are prerequisite: The First, That it be Useful, or that it
has Usefulness on its side. The Second, That it be prescribed and ordained by
the common Consent of the Society; for there is nothing perfectly Just but what
the Society by common Agreement or Approbation has thought fit to be observed.

It Is true, some are of Opinion, That what things are Just, are of their own
Nature and unchangably so; and that the Laws do not make 'em Just, but that
they only declare 'em and ordain 'em to be according to what they were
naturally before: Nevertheless it is not so, but herein it is as in other things
which are useful, such as are those that concern our Health, and a great many
more such like, which are useful to some and hurtful to others, and consequently
vary from the End both in general and particular. And truly, as every thing
ought always every where, and to every one appear such as it is by Nature,
because Nature never changes and is unalterable in all Occurrences; pray tell
me if the things that some name Just, be every where, at all times and in
respect of all Persons, really Just? Are we not to consider that what is
ordained and established by Laws, and what is consequently Lawful and Just, is
not ordained nor admitted among all Nations, but that some look upon 'em as
indifferent, and others reject 'em as prejudicial and unjust? Are there not
some who hold generally for useful that which nevertheless is not so; and thus
receive things which are not generally convenient, only because that they seem
so to them, or to their Society, and appear to have some general Utility or
Advantage belonging to 'em?

We may then say, for the most part, that that is universally Just or agreeable
with the Nature of Just, which is useful or conformable to the Notion of Just
that we have now given. For to speak more particularly, as Utility is
otherwise, and differing among the several Nations, so likewise what is Just
differs in the same manner; so that what we fancy to be Just, others look upon
it as Unjust. This being so, when we enquire whether Just and Right is the same
among all Nations, I answer, that universally it is so; that is, something that
is useful in the mutual Society; but if we look to Particulars, and consider
the several sorts of People, and the diversity of Circumstances, we shall find
that it is not the same every where.

In a word, a thing is and ought to be reputed Just, or to have the Qualities
of Just in a Society, if its Usefulness respects all the Individuals
associated; but if it be not so, it is not properly to be called Just, nor
deserves to be so esteemed. So that if a Thing or an Action having been useful
in a Society, if by any Accident or by any Alteration this Usefulness begins to
cease, that thing will also cease from being Just, it being no longer so than
only while it continues useful and profitable to Society. And thus I suppose
every one will judge, who suffers not himself to be misled and blinded by vain
and frivolous Discourses, but has a general Respect to all things.

Of the Origin of Right and of Justice.
BUt to begin the Matter a little higher, and trace it from its first Source.
Right, Equity or Justice seem to be as ancient among Men, even as mutual
Societies are.

For in the beginning, when Men were Vagabonds, wandering up and down like
Brutes, and suffered many Inconveniences from those salvage Creatures, and the
Rigor of the Seasons, some natural Inclination which they had for one another,
by reason of the similitude and mutual Resemblance of Bodies as well as Souls
or Manners, inclined 'em to unite together in small Societies, the better to
prevent in some measure such like Inconveniences, by Building Cottages, and so
thereby strengthening themselves against the Cruelty of wild Beasts and the
Severity of the Weather. But because every one more regarded his own private
Benefit than that of another, this begot many Quarrels in reference to Eating
and Drinking, and upon the account of Women, and other Conveniences of Life,
which they daily robbed and forcibly deprived one another of, until such time
as they began to consider that they could not subsist quietly, or live securely
and conveniently, unless they made some Contracts, and agreed among themselves
to do no Injury one to another; so that if any wronged his Neighbors, the rest
were to punish him for it.

This then was the first Knot or Tie of Societies, which as it supposed that
every Person might have something belonging to him, or what he might call his
own, either because he was the first possessor of it, or because it was given
him, or because he had it by way of exchange, or because he acquired it by his
Industry; I say, this was the first Knot which confirmed to every private
Person the possession of that which he thus challenged as his own. Now this
Knot or Agreement was nothing else but a common Law which all were bound to
observe, and which was to secure to every one his Right or Power to make use of
that which thus appertained to him. And thus upon this account the Law became
the common Right of Societies. I shall not here mention how a whole Society at
length transferred their power of punishing to a certain select number of the
wisest and honestest Men, or it may be to one Person, who was looked upon as
the wisest of all the rest. I shall observe only two or three Things. First,
That such in the Society were esteemed Just or observers of Justice, who
contenting themselves with their own Rights, never invaded the Goods of others,
and by this means wronged no Body. And such were deemed Unjust or doers of
Wrong, who being not satisfied with what was their own, usurped the Rights of
others, and thus wronged 'em either by Robbing of 'em, Beating, or by Killing
'em, or the like.

The Second relates to the preservation of Life, as the thing that was the
dearest to 'em of all, and the strong confirmation of their Agreements, or of
their common Laws; for the wise Legislators taking a particular Care of what
best secured their Lives, and minding also what usually happened among
Societies, declared, That it was an horrible and abominable Crime to kill a
Man, and that a Murderer should be looked upon as a most infamous Person, and
be shamefully put to Death; for there was nothing more unreasonable than to
kill his Fellow Creature; for which Act we ought to have the greatest aversion,
and the rather, because thereby accrued no advantage to Life, and that this
Deed could not proceed but from a Wickedness in Nature.

Thirdly, That those who at first took care to promote the Utility of the Laws,
had truly no need of any other Ground but to hinder them from doing Evil, or
from Transgressing: But those who had not so much Ingenuity as to take notice
of the importance hereof, desisted from Murdering one another, merely out of
the fear and apprehension of the grievous Punishments to be inflicted on
Offenders, which we see still at present to be our Case.

Between whom Right and Justice takes place.
AS after all that has been said, it may be questioned among whom Right and
the violation of Right, and consequently Justice and Injustice, which are
Opposites, take place: This, in my Judgment, is to be understood by comparing
Men with other Animals.

Therefore as there is no kind of Right and Injury, of Just or Unjust between
the rest of Animals, because it was not possible to make any agreement between
them, that they should do no Mischief to one another: So there ought not to be
between the Nations which could not or would not make any such Compact, to do
no wrong one to another.

For Just or Right, the observance whereof is named Justice, is only in a
mutual Society, therefore Justice is the Tie of that Society; so that every one
of its Members might live in Security, and free from the apprehensions of
Dangers and Disturbances that a continual fear of being Assaulted or recieving
damage may raise in us. So that all Animals, whether Men or others, who cannot
or will not enter into a Society, and consequently be concerned in such
Agreements, are deprived of this advantage, and have not among themselves any
obligation of Right and Justice, to make them live in Security. So that there
remains to them no other means of Security than to prevent one another, and to
treat them so hardly, that they may not have Power to do them any Mischief.

For this Cause, as among those Animals that have agreed upon nothing among
themselves, if it happens that one injures another, one may say that he who
does the Evil to the other is Mischievous, or hurts the other who is injured,
but not that it is unjust in this respect, or that it does wrong, because there
is no manner of Right, no Agreement, no Law precedent to restrain 'em from
doing Mischief; so among Men who have made no Compact, nor are not entered into
any Society, if any treats another rudely or barbarously, one may say that he
does him Damage, or does him Mischief, but not that he is unjust to him, or
that he wrongs or injures him, because there is no Law to bind him to do no
Mischief to such an one.

But between Men and other Animals can there be any Justice? None at all. It Is
true, That if Men could with other Animals, as with Men, make Agreements and
Contracts not to kill one another, we could then between them and us demand
Justice, for that would tend to a mutual Security; but because it cannot be,
that Animals that are without Reason should be obliged or tied to us by any
common Laws, therefore we cannot take any more security from the other Animals,
than from the inanimate Creatures. So that to secure our selves, there remains
for us no other means than to make use of that Power that we have, either to
kill them, or to force them to obey us.

You may perhaps here by the by ask why we kill those Creatures also, which we
have no reason to fear? I confess we may do this sometimes through Intemperance
and Cruelty, as by Inhumanity and Barbarity we often abuse such sometimes who
are out of our Society, and of whom it is not possible that we should apprehend
any danger of Evil. But it is one thing to offend against Temperance, or any of
its Species, viz. such as Sobriety, Gentleness, or Humanity and a natural
Goodness, and another to offend against Justice, which supposes Agreements and
Laws. Besides, of all Animals which are not injurious to humane Race, there is
no kind but may be so if we suffer 'em to increase and multiply beyond measure.

As to what at present concerns the pretended savage Life of the first Men,
it is not Epicurus who was the first Broacher of this Fancy, for the most
ancient Poets make mention of it, and say, That it was Orpheus, that sacred
Interpreter of the Gods, and Amphion, the Founder of the City of Thebes, who by
their sage and eloquent Discourses, withdrew those Men from their unsettled and
wandering way of Living, changing their cruel and barbarous Customs and Manners.

Orpheus, inspired by more than Human Power,
Did not (as Poets feign) tame savage Beasts;
But Men as Lawless and as Wild as they,
And first dissuaded them from Rage and Blood.
Thus when Amphion Built the Theban Wall,
They feigned the Stones obeyed his Magic Lute.
Cicero himself, as if having almost forgotten that he had so highly exalted
the dignity of the human Nature, declaring it to be altogether Celestial and
Divine, yet acknowledges, That there was a time when Men were wandering like
Vagabonds about the Fields, in some manner resembling the Brutes; That neither
Reason, Religion, Piety nor Humanity were then known among them; That they were
Strangers to Wedlock and a lawful Issue; That they neither used natural nor
civil Right; That they were in a gross Ignorance, and that their unbridled Lust
put 'em upon exerting the Powers and Abilities of their Bodies, to satiate it
self, every one possessing more or less, according as he was able to take away
and keep from another. But, says he, afterward some Men were found to be of a
better Temper and more Judgment and Reason than the rest, who reflecting on
this miserable way of Living, and withal considering the tractableness of
Mankind, were resolved to represent to their Companions how advantageous it
would be to join together in Societies. And by this means, by degrees, they
reclaimed them from their first barbarous manner of Living, and reduced them to
a civil Behavior; who inventing both divine and humane Rights, gathered Men
into Companies, erected Towns and Cities, made Laws, and afterward constituted
Kings and Governors to check the Insolent and to protect the Feeble and Week
against the Stronger.

Others are of Opinion that the first Age began with the famous Golden Age,
which was so happy, that Men were not then bound up by any Laws, nor frighted
with the fear of Punishment, but lived together innocently, having regard to
Piety, Justice and Equity.

-- When Man yet new,
No Rule, but uncorrupted Reason knew;
And with a native bent did good pursue,
Vnforc'd by Punishment, unawed by Fear,
His Words were simple and his Soul sincere.
No suppliant Crowds before the Judge appeared,
No Court erected yet, no Cause was heard,
But all was safe, for Conscience was their Guard.
Seneca renders it thus, according to Posidonius, They were not yet Corrupted
nor Debauched in their Principles, but followed the dictates of Nature, which
directed and awed them from doing ill. In the Choice of their Governor they
neither respected his Strength nor outward appearance, but his Temper and
Goodness. O happy Nations! where none but the honestest Man was to bear sway,
for he can do what he pleases, who does nothing but what he thinks he ought to
do; 'Twas therefore in this Golden Age that the Government was committed to the
Wisest. They prevented Quarrels, protected the Weak against the oppression of
the Stronger; they advised, dissuaded and represented what was most useful, and
what not. Their Prudence provided for the necessities of those who were under
their Conduct, their Valor drove away all Dangers, and their good Deeds
purchased daily new Subjects. To Command was more a Burden than a Profit, and
the greatest threatening that a King could then offer to such as were not
Obedient, was to forsake them and depart the Kingdom. But since Vice and
Corruption had changed Rulers into Tyrants, hence sprung the necessity of
having Laws, and wise Men were the first contrivers of them.

But without standing to examine these several Opinions which Lactantius looks
upon as frivolous. O ingenia hominum indigna quae has ineptias protulerunt!
Miseros atque miserabiles, qui stultitiam suam literis memoriaeque mandaverunt:
Let us rather consider, That the Laws according to Epicurus's Judgment being
established for the public benefit of Mankind, that every one might enjoy his
Right, might live peaceably and securely; and seeing there is nothing more
agreeable to Nature than this, I think none has reason to upbraid him, quod
Leges and Jura a Natura sejunxerit, That he separated from Nature the Laws and
Right, seeing that he had rather joined them inseparably together, by the Tie
of common Interest, which is the firmest Bond, according to the Rules of
Nature. Nor does there seem any reason to blame him because he has rather
derived the Laws and Right from Profit than from Nature, seeing he could never
have derived them from Profit, but at the same time he must needs derive them
from Nature. Nay, let us go further, What cause have we to reprove him, seeing
there is no Person but will allow that both the primitive and modern
Legislators had always this thing of Profit or public Advantage still in their
Eye, and that no Laws can be just and useful but what tend to the public
Benefit and Advantage? Civil Societies, says Aristotle, seem to have not only
their Rise, but their Continuance also, in this Foundation of Profit; the
Lawgivers still aimed at this End, and generally termed that Right, which was
found to be useful. Cicero retained the same Opinion, We must, says he, intend
all our Laws for the public Good, not interpreting them according to the
strict Letter, but what suits best with the public Good and common Benefit.
For our Ancestors always used this Wisdom and Prudence, that in making their
Laws they still chiefly proposed to themselves nothing more than the Safety,
Welfare and Advantage of the Public. The Safety of the People, says he in
another Place, is the supreme Law, Salus populi suprema lex. He says further,
That all Magistrates and Rulers ought to stick close to these two Maxims of
Plato; the First, To be so careful of the benefit of their Subjects, that they
ought chiefly to aim at it in all their Proceedings, forgetting even their own
private Profit and Advantage, when it comes in Competition. Secondly, To take
heed in their Governments, that they lose not one part, by endeavoring to
preserve the other.

Truly Cujas acknowledges that the civil Right, or the Right of every
particular Government, is derived from the common Benefit; but he denies it to
be so in relation to the Right of Nations, or of all Mankind in general, for he
supposes that proceeds from Nature. But since he owns that this Right, which
is common to particular Places, proceeds from Interest, which also is common to
them all, why may not he admit that the Right which is common to all Men, is
derived also from that Profit which is common to all Men? So that natural Right
is as it were the Genus Generalissimum, of which the Right of Nations or of Men
is an inferior Species, and likewise this Right of Nations, as a Genus more
contracted, whereof the civil Right or the Right of every City is a Species.

As to what Epicurus says, That a true Law supposes a mutual Compact, or every
Law is a kind of an Agreement, it is no more than what Plato, Aristotle,
Demosthenes, Aristides and several others assert. Nay, the divine Law it self
(so far as it concerns our Fellow Subjects, may be reputed the noblest part of
the civil Right) is nothing else but a Covenant between God and Man. There is
nothing more common in Holy Writ, than to hear them speak of the First and
Second Law, both the Old and the New, as of a Covenant and an Agreement. There
is nothing more frequent in the Holy Scriptures, than to read that God makes a
Covenant, as with Noah, Abraham and Jacob, who likewise engage reciprocally to
God who had made this Promise to him; I will be with thee and keep thee
wheresoever thou go, and I will bring thee back into thine own Country, etc.
Unto which Jacob answered, If the Lord be with me, and will keep me in the way
that I go, and will give me Bread to Eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I come
again to my Father's House in Peace, then shall the Lord be my God, Erit mihi
Dominus in Deum.

We need but mention the mutual Compact and Agreement between God and the
People of Israel, when God was pleased by the Mediation of Moses, to proclaim
the ancient Law. Thus God speaks, If you hear my Voice and keep my Covenant, I
will look upon you as my peculiar Treasure, and will have more care of you than
of all other People. And the People answered, We will do all that the Lord has
commanded. In relation to the new Law, this is the Prophesy of Jeremiah, The
Days shall come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the House
of Israel, and with the House of Judah; not according to the Covenant that I
made with their Fathers, in the Day that I took them by the Hand to bring them
out of the Land of Egypt, which my Covenant they brake, etc. But this shall be
the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel after those Days, says
the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their
Hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People. But not to insist
longer on this, let us only observe, That tho from what has been said we may
conclude, that to speak properly, There is no Law of Nations, and consequently
no Right of Nations, because there never has been any Covenant or Agreement
between all Nations; nevertheless we may say that this common Precept, Thou
shall not do to another, what thou will not that another should do to thee,
ought to be esteemed as the first natural Law, or according to Nature; not only
because there is nothing more Natural, or more according to Nature than
Society, and Society being not able to subsist without this Precept, it ought
also to be esteemed Natural: But also because God seems to have imprinted it in
the Hearts of all Men, and that this Law contains in such a full manner all the
other Laws of Society, that no Man can invade the Right of another, but he must
violate this Law; Therefore this Law alone ought to be looked upon as the Rule
of all our Actions that concern our Neighbor.

And truly as every one desires that his Right may be Religiously preserved to
him, so that no Man may attempt upon it, he need but think the same thing of
others, and to put himself in their Place and Condition, to understand what he
ought or what he ought not to do.

Therefore as there is nothing nearer at Hand, and more ready nor more
infallible than our own Conscience, every one may consult himself, and he alone
may be his own proper and true Casuist. So that he who seeks for others, seems
not so much disposed to be willing to do to another, what he would not have
done to himself, as to not dare to do it if he has not some Body upon whom he
may cast the Blame. And upon this Point Cicero treats very well in his Offices,
That those who prohibit any thing to be done, whereof there is a Question
whether it be Just or Unjust, cannot prescribe any Rule nor Precept more useful
and reasonable, because Equity here appears and is plainly discoverable, and
that our doubting is a sign that we think or design to do Evil. Been
praecipiunt qui vetant quidquam agere quod dubites aequum sit an iniquum;
aequitas enim lucet ipsa per se, dubitatio autem cogitationem significat
injuriae. Upon this Subject I remember what Monsieur de la Moignon, first
President of the Parliament of Paris, a wise and learned Judge, said to us one
Day as we were walking in his shady Retirement, in the Wood de Baville, That
that Maxim of Cicero, if it were duly practiced among Men, would be of a
wonderful use, and that for what concerns those who have such sort of doubts,
and trouble themselves to seek for Casuists to support them, he had read an
excellent Saying in a Spanish Author, That such Persons seek to pick a Quarrel
or to play the Cheat with the Law of God. Quieren pley tear contra la lay de
Dios.

Let us observe more-over that the Holy Scriptures have said very well, That
the Law was not made for the Just; because he who is truly Just observes it,
not out of fear of the Punishments that the Law threatens, but out of a love
for Justice it self, and out of a respect for it; so that if there were no Law
nor Magistrates, he would notwithstanding still live in Obedience to Law and
Justice. Therefore that excellent Expression of Menander is thought
praiseworthy, If you be Just, your Manners will be to you instead of Laws. And
the Answer of Aristotle is remarkable when he was questioned, what Profit he
had found and received from the study of Philosophy? To do, said he, of my own
accord and without constraint, what others do for fear of the Laws. This
obliged Horace to say, That we ought not to do any thing for fear of
Punishment. Nihil esse faciendum formidine poenae. From whence we may remark,
that Corrections and Punishments are not only ordained for the Wicked and
Criminals, that they may perish and be extinct, but that by their Destruction,
they may also terrify and restrain others, as Seneca observes; and according to
Lactantius, who brings in Plato, saying, That a wise and prudent Man punishes
not because it is a Crime, for he cannot make that which is already done to be
undone, but that others may not commit the same Crimes. But let us hearken to
Epicurus, discoursing of the great Advantages that there are in observing
Justice.

That there is great Reason to live up to Justice.
Justice having been established by a common Agreement, every one ought to
think that he is born and admitted into the Society whereof he is a Member,
upon this Condition, either express or understood, That he shall do wrong to no
Man, nor no Man to him; and thus we must either keep to this Agreement, or
depart out of the Society, seeing that he is suffered there but upon the same
Condition that he was admitted: From whence it follows, that as naturally he
don't desire to be evilly dealt withal, he ought not to deal ill with others,
nor do to others what he would not that others should do to him.

This being granted, we may say, that the Laws have been established in favor,
and for the sake of wise Men, not to hinder them from committing Injustice, but
to prevent others from doing them wrong; for of their own accord they are so
inclined, that if there were no Laws they would injure no body; for they have
limited their Desires, and confined them to the necessities of Nature; to
supply which there is no need of doing Injustice, for there is no Pleasure
Nature allows of which will cause us to wrong any body; for those exorbitances
and irregular Desires which proceed from our vain and unruly Passions and
Lusts, are the only Causes of Mischief.

The Truth is, the Products of the Earth, such as Corn, Fruits, Water, etc. are
to be obtained without any great difficulty, and the enjoyment of these as
often as Hunger and Thirst excite us, afford us no small Pleasure and
Satisfaction, without being hereby tempted to Riot and Excess, or to commit
Robberies or other enormous Crimes upon our Neighbors, which Men are more apt
to become liable to and guilty of, when they indulge their extravagant Lusts in
living splendidly and sumptuously, and by unjustly heaping up of Riches to
maintain such their Extravagances. Nor shall I here stand to take notice of
Particulars, such who are not satisfied with decent Habits, with one
Habitation, nor one Wife, and so of the like, who passing the Bounds that
Nature has appointed, are daily hurried away by their Passions and endless
Desires beyond all Limits.

Moreover, as the wise Man acts all things for himself, and for his own Good
and Satisfaction, there is nothing that will contribute more to this purpose
than in carefully observing the Rules of Justice; for when he renders unto
every one what belongs to him, and that he does wrong to no Man; he preserves
and supports as much as in him lies the Society in which his own Safety is
involved; he provokes no body to do him Injury, neither does he fear the
Penalties and Punishments which the Public Laws threaten: So that his
Conscience being free from Guilt, he is at quiet and ease within himself,
without any private Checks or Gripes, which is one main design of Justice to
procure, and the most excellent and greatest Advantage that we can reap from it.

But we must not fancy that he who has secretly broken the Laws, unknown to
Men, may enjoy as much Peace and quiet of Mind as he who is truly Just. For, as
I have already said, though he has acted in the dark, yet he cannot be assured
that the Fact shall always remain concealed. Though Crimes may indeed be done
secretly, yet this is no Security; neither does it advantage a Man who commits
a wicked Deed, to conceal himself, for though he has had the good fortune of
keeping the Fact concealed hitherto, yet he has no Assurance that it shall
always so continue.

Though a wicked Act may at present seem to be quite forgot, and as it were
buried out of sight; yet it is uncertain whether it will remain so till death;
few Wickednesses are so secretly acted, but they give some cause of Suspicion;
for though at first they are only privately whispered, yet soon after they are
publicly talked of, and then Fame spreads them, and then a Process is begun
and the Sentence suddenly follows: Nay, many there have been who have
discovered themselves, either in a Dream or in a Frenzy, or in Drink, or by
letting fall an unadvised Word by the by. So that though a wicked Man deceives
(as we say) both the Gods and Men, yet he must always remain uneasy and in a
fear that his Wickednesses will at one time or another be detected.

From hence it is, that though Injustice of it self, and in its own Nature, be no
Evil, because what is Just here is reputed Unjust elsewhere; nevertheless, it is
an Evil because of that Fear that it stirs up in us, which causes a wicked Man
to be continually tormented with remorse of Conscience; so that he is still
suspicious of something, and apprehensive that his Wickednesses will come to
the Knowledge of those who are appointed to punish them. Wherefore there is
nothing more conducive to our Security and our living Happily, than to live
honestly and observe inviolably those Contracts which we have entered into for
the Preservation of the public Peace.

Therefore a just Man seems to stand in Opposition to an unjust; for as the one
is free from Troubles and Apprehensions of Evils, so the other on the contrary
is continually alarmed by 'em. What is it therefore that can be more
convenient and profitable to us than Justice, and more hurtful than Injustice?
Can constant Troubles and perplexing Fears be pleasant and diverting to any Man?

Since therefore that Justice is so great a Good, and Injustice so great an
Evil, let us sincerely love and embrace the former, and altogether abominate
the latter. And if by chance our Mind should happen to be sometimes in an even
Balance and doubtful what to do, let us have always before our Eyes, and in our
Thoughts the Example of some good Man whom we may propose to imitate, as a
Pattern, and so live as if he were a constant Inspector of our Actions, and
Privy to our most intimate Designs.

This Advice will be of use to us, not only to keep us from committing
Injustice, but also from doing any thing in secret inconsistent with honest
Dealing. This just Man that we placed before us, will serve to keep us in some
awe, and make us more watchful over our Actions; we shall continually have some
regard to him, and say to our selves, I would not do so if he saw it, and why
should I dare to do so in his absence; he would blame me for it as a wicked
thing, why should I not fly from Evil of my own accord? Do then every thing as
if some body still looked upon you; for if you have this Veneration for any
Person else, you will quickly have it for your self.

Cicero treats excellently upon this Subject: If every one, says he, for his
own particular Advantage, should be always ready and prepared to entrench upon
his Neighbor's Right, and strip him of his Goods, we should quickly perceive
the ruin of human Society, which is so agreeable to Nature, just as if each
particular Member should fancy that by attracting the Blood and Spirits from
its Member, it would be the better able to support it self; but hereby we
should find our selves much disappointed; for certainly this would at length
much weaken and decay the whole Body. And thus all Societies and Communities of
Men must needs be destroyed, if every one, the better to support his own
Interest, should violently take from, and strip his Neighbor of what is his.

Indeed, this may be said to be lawful, and no ways to infringe the Bonds of
Society, viz. to be more careful and industrious in acquiring the things
necessary and useful for the convenience of Life; but to use Fraud or Violence,
to dispossess another, and endeavor to enrich our selves by our Neighbors
miseries, is more contrary to the Laws of Nature, even than Death it self, than
Poverty, than Pain, than all the most dreadful things that may befall us.

There is nothing truly useful but what is Just and Honest, and nothing Just
and Honest but what is truly useful; these are reciprocal, and whosoever
endeavors to separate 'em offers at the most pernicious thing that can befall
human Life; for from thence spring Murders, false Witnesses, Thieveries, and
innumerable other Mischiefs. They judge of the usefulness of things by a wrong
Medium, and though they escape the Penalties of the Laws which they break, yet
they escape not the Disgrace and Infamy which, to a generous Mind, is far more
grievous and intolerable. They consider not that of all other worldly Goods,
the most important and considerable is the Reputation of an honest, of a just
and of a good Man, and that there is no Profit or Advantage that can recompense
this loss.

The Life of an unjust Man is full of Troubles, Jealousies and Fears, Gripings
of Conscience and Anxiety of Mind; and what Good, what Profit can there be in
such a Way, that if he were deprived of it, he would be honored and respected
by all the World? It Is therefore impossible that true and real Profit should be
separated from Justice, and that it should accompany or be joined to Injustice.
Now as Justice and Injustice are contrary, the first being free from Trouble,
the other always encompassed with it, what greater Advantage can an honest and
good Man desire to attain to than that which Justice affords him? And what
greater Mischiefs can a wicked Man dread than that which Injustice is attended
with? For what Profit or Satisfaction is to be had from Cares, Fears and
perpetual Inquietudes?

Whether we may wrong any Man without doing him an injury.
AS it is one thing to do an unjust Act, another to do an injury, seeing that a
Man may do an unjust Act, and not believe it, or perhaps fancying it to be
Just: So it is most certain, that we can do no injury but when we have a design
to do it, and so he who does it hurts wilfully; that is to say, knowing to
whom, in what manner, and how he injures. From whence it follows, that because
it is one thing to suffer an unjust Act, or to receive Damage, and another to
suffer an injury, a Man may willingly suffer an unjust Act but not suffer an
injury. For that Reason Aristotle observes that we define a Man who does an
injury; He who hurts, knowing to whom, in what manner, and how he hurts; yet
that is not sufficient, but we must add this particular, Against the Will of
him whom he hurts. This being supposed in the first place, it is impossible that
we should do injury to our selves, or that a Man should receive an injury from
himself; for a Man may do a damage to himself and act against his own
advantage, but not do an injury, because the same Person is both Agent and
Patient, he acts and suffers willingly. But we must nevertheless remember what
we have already said, and shall have occasion to mention again hereafter, That
he who wishes Evil to himself, as he who desires his own death or kills
himself, wishes for it not as an Evil; he desires not death, as it is the
destruction of Life, but as it is some Advantage; that is to say, as it is the
end of the Evils from which he desires to be delivered, and so he looks upon it
as a considerable Benefit. It is likewise certain, according to that kind of
Maxim, Volenti non fit injuria, that no injury can be done to him who consents
and approves of it. For as we have already said, no man can suffer an injury
but against his Will, because as the injury is in it self an Evil, it cannot be
looked upon as Good or the cause of any Good. It Is true, it may be a Crime in
him who takes the Goods of another, though this other by mistake may seem to be
consenting to it; as for Example, If he be frightened into a Consent under some
pretense, if he be deluded into it by fair Promises, if he be flattered into it
by Craft, if he works upon his Weakness or the easiness of his Temper, or if he
conceals from him the true Value of the thing, without afterward informing him
of his Error, and so of the rest; but as for him who knowingly and willingly
gives away his Goods, consents that they may be taken; this Man cannot be
judged to receive an injury, but a damage.

But since both doing and suffering injury is an Evil, if you inquire which of
the two is the worst, Aristotle will readily resolve you, that it is in doing
an injury, for that cannot be done without Injustice. Therefore Plato gives us
this Advice, That we should be more careful to avoid doing an injury than
suffering it. Besides, though he who receives any damage, though he receives it not
against his Will, he who does the mischief or wrong, if he designs to do an
injury, is not in such a case excusable, because it was not for want of his
Will that the damage did not prove an injury. Seneca explains this matter very
well: It may happen, says he, that a Man may offer me an injury, and that I
may not receive it; as if any one should put into my House what he had taken
out of my Farm, he had been guilty of a Theft, and yet I may have lost nothing
thereby. If any one lies with his own Wife, and believes her to be the Wife of
another, he is an Adulterer though the Woman be not. Some body has given me
Poison, but as it happens to be mixed with other Ingredients, it has lost its
Operation; he who has administered the Poison is a Murderer, though no mischief
is done by it. All designed Crimes are in respect of the Sin, done and effected
before the act is accomplished.

CHAP. IX. Of the Virtues which accompany Justice, namely, of Religion, of
Piety, of Observance, Love, Bounty, Liberality, Gratitude: And first of
Religion.
THere are two main Causes or Reasons why God ought to be Worshipped and Adored;
the First is the supreme excellency of his Nature; the Second his Bounty to us:
First, they who style him most Good and most Great, Optimum, Maximum, had
doubtless these two Reasons in view, because as he is most Good, he is the most
liberal and sovereign Benefactor; and as he is most Great, he is supremly
Excellent. So that we may very well approve of Epicurus's Maxim, and say, That
God ought to be Honored purely for himself without any further Expectation,
but only because of his supreme Majesty, and of his sovereign Nature; for that
that is most Excellent deserves to be Reverenced and Honored. But yet with him
to acknowledge no other Cause, and notwithstanding to disown his Bounty, is
what cannot be too much blamed; for as Seneca tells him very well, Thou do
not acknowledge the Favors and Blessings of God, but supposest that as it were
at a far Distance and out of the noise of the Affairs of the World, he enjoys a
profound Rest and interrupted Felicity, without being concerned for the good
Deeds of Men any more than for the evil. He who teaches this Doctrine, does not
consider the Sighs and ardent Desires of those who pray from all parts of the
World, and with Hands lifted up toward Heaven, make Vows either public or
private, which certainly would not easily be, nor is it easily to be supposed,
that the generality of Mankind would of their own accord fall into such a
stupid Madness, as to address themselves to deaf and senseless Divinities, to
no purpose. They ought to have understood that the Gods sometimes deny and
sometimes grant our Requests out of their bountiful Goodness; and that often
they assist us so powerfully and so seasonably, that they divert the great
Mischiefs and Calamities that threatened us: Where is that Man so miserable, so
forsaken and under such unhappy Circumstances, who has not at some time
experienced this great Bounty and Liberality of the Gods? If you look upon them
who lament and grieve for their ill Fortune, and tire themselves in
complaining, you will meet with none but Heaven has bestowed upon him some
Favors, some Drops of that large Fountain of Goodness have fallen upon him. Ay
but, God, says he, does us no Good. From whence then comes all those things
that thou possessest, that thou bestowest, that thou refusest, that thou
keep, and that thou receivest? From whence proceed that vast number of
grateful Objects that delight thine Eyes, thine Ears, and thy Mind? He has not
only provided things needful, his Love has proceeded farther, to furnish us
with things Pleasant and Delightful; with many pleasant Fruits, wholesome Herbs
and nourishing Meats for Food, which succeed one another, according to their
Seasons. The most careless ever and anon stumble upon some of 'em, without
labor or toil. It Is God who has created for us all the several sorts of
Creatures, either upon the Earth or in the Waters, or in the Air, that all
parts of the Creation might yield and pay to us a Tribute. It Is by his
Appointment that Rivers, like Serpents, do sometimes wind and turn about the
fruitful Valleys, for the more easy Transportation of things necessary for our
Life; and that others, by an unaccountable wonder, swell suddenly, but
regularly, in the height of Summer to water the Grounds, which otherwise would
be subject to be parched up by the scorching Beams of the Sun. What shall we
say of all those Medicinal Springs, both Hot and Cold, which issue from out of
the Bowels of the Earth; in such a manner, that the Hot seem sometimes to
proceed from the very Bosom of Coldness it self?

If any Friend should bestow upon you some Parcel of Land, or a Sum of Money,
you would presently call this a liberal Act, and think your self obliged; And
cannot you acknowledge that these vast extents of Earth, and all the Mines of
Gold and Silver, are also Liberalities and good Deeds? O ungrateful Wretch!
From whence comes to thee this Air that thou breathest in, this Light which
serves to guide thee, this Blood which runs in thy Veins and contains the vital
and animal Spirits, these exquisite Favors, and this Rest, without which thou
would perish? If thou had the least sense of Gratitude, would thou not
say, That it is God who is the Author of this thy Rest and Ease?

-- Deus nobis haec otia fecit. We have within us the Seeds of all Ages, and of
all Arts, and God the Sovereign Lord, draws them out secretly, and produces
them as he pleases. You Will pretend it is Nature that gives you all these
things; alas, don't you perceive that this is only changing of Names, viz. that
of God into that of Nature. For what can you imagine this Nature to be, if not
God himself, and the divine Understanding which is infused and spread over all
the World and in every Part? You may give him what other Name you please,
Jupiter most Good, Jupiter most Great, Thundering, Lightning, etc. You may if
you please give him the Name of Destiny or Fortune, seeing that Destiny is
nothing else but a Concatenation of Causes that succeed one another, and that
God is the first cause upon which all the other depend. You get nothing thefore
by saying, That you are not indebted to God for any thing, but to Nature,
seeing that Nature cannot be without God, nor God without Nature, and that God
and Nature are the same thing, the very same Being; for these different Names
are only different Titles of the same God, who exerts his Power after several
manners.

But here let us leave Epicurus, and withal let us suppose the Existence of
God, his Providence, and all his Attributes, which are the Foundation of the
highest Acts of religious Worship; here it seems to be proper and seasonable to
demonstrate, that the Holy Religion that we profess, is the only true and
lawful Religion. But as this is a particular Subject which ought to be handled
solidly and to the purpose, we shall leave it to the Divines, who are best able
to manage it in its due Circumstances, suitable to the Dignity that it
requires. It shall suffice here to mention only what the Light of Nature
discovers: God, says Lactantius, has made the Nature of Man to be such, that
he has an Inclination and a Love for two things, which are, Religion and
Wisdom. But Men are deceived, either because they embrace Religion, leaving
Wisdom, or because they study Wisdom alone and leave Religion. Whereas the one
cannot be true without the other. They follow diverse Religions, but which are
false, because they have forsaken Wisdom, which might direct and teach them,
that it is impossible that there should be many Gods; or they apply themselves
to Wisdom, which is false and mistaken, because they have left the Religion of
the Sovereign God, which would have instructed 'em in true Wisdom. Thus they
who embrace one or the other simply, err from the right way and run on in that
which is full of grievous Errors, because the Duty of Man, and all Truth is
inseparably shut up in these two Heads. After that Lactantius has thus
explained himself, and afterward taught in what manner, and with what
Sacrifices we must honor God; he continues to tell us, This Holy and Sovereign
Majesty requires from Man nothing else but Innocence; he who who presents it to
God, offers a Sacrifice Pious and Religious enough. And after he has
disapproved of diverse superstitious Ceremonies, he adds, The Celestial Religion
consists not in things corruptible, but in the Virtues of the Mind, which
proceed from Heaven. The true Worship is that in which a clean Soul, without
blemish, offers it self in Sacrifice; whosoever is obedient to his heavenly
Precepts, he honors God truly, whose Sacrifices are Meekness, Innocence and
good Works: And as often as he does good and pious Acts, so often does he
perform his Sacrifices to God; for God requires no Offerings of Beasts, their
Death and Blood, but he will have the Heart and Life of Man for an Offering.
This Sacrifice is to be performed without Herbs, without the Fat and Sinews of
Beasts; vain and foolish things; but with Expressions that proceed from a
sincere Heart. God's Altar is not to be adorned with Man's Blood, but the Heart
of Man is to be adorned with Justice, Patience, Faith, Innocence, Chastity and
Abstinence. This is the true Worship, this is the Law of God, as Cicero has
said, that excellent and divine Law which never Commands any thing but Just and
Honest, and Prohibits whatever is Wicked and Dishonest. The chief Worship of
God is the Praise that is offered to him by the Mouth of a just Man; but that
this Praise may be pleasing to him, it ought to be accompanied with Humility,
with Fear and with a great Devotion, lest Man should rely upon his own
Integrity and Innocence, and fall by that means into Vainglory and Pride, and
so lose the Reward of Virtue. If he will be favored of God, he must have a
Conscience clear from all Guilt, he must implore continually his Mercy, and
must ask of him nothing but the pardon of his Sins. If any Good befalls him, let
him return God thanks; if any Evil, let him bear it patiently, acknowledging
that it happens because of his Sins. In Calamities let him not fail to be
thankful, and in Prosperity humble and contented; that so he may have always
the same settled and unshaken Mind. Neither is it sufficient to perform this in
the Church, let him remember to do it in his House, in his Chamber, in his most
secret Retirements. By this means he will always have God consecrated in his
Heart, for he himself is the Temple of God. If in this manner he serves God,
his Father and Sovereign Lord constantly and devoutly, he will attain to an
entire and complete Perfection of Justice, for he who remains unshaken in
Justice, has obeyed God and followed the Rules of Religion and fulfilled his
Duty.

Cicero also discourses admirably upon this subject, thus, Right Reason
doubtless is a true Law agreeable with Nature, and bestowed upon all Men; a
constant, immutable, eternal Guide, inclining us by an inward impulse to our
Duty, and by secret Prohibitions turns us out of the way of that which is evil
and deceitful. It Is a Law that needs not be proclaimed, nothing can be
retrenched from it, nor can it be abolished. Neither the Senate nor the People
can free us from our Obedience to this Law, nor need we any other Interpreter
but our selves: It varies not at Rome from that at Athens, nor does it differ
at present from that which shall be hereafter, but shall always be constantly
and unchangably the same amongst all Nations and in all Times, and God alone
shall be the common Lord and chief Commander of all Men: He is the Contriver
and Maker of this Law, the Interpreter and Lawgiver. He who will not be
obedient to this Law, must act against himself, and despise the Nature of Man;
and though he may escape outward Punishments, yet shall be grievously tormented
inwardly.

Seneca speaks no less excellently well, There is, says he, something greater
which we cannot conceive. There is a Divinity that we acknowledge by our
living; let us obey his Will and Commandments. A secret and reserved Conscience
is of no use, all things are open before God. Will you, says he afterward,
represent to your selves God great, as he is full of Majesty, and withal kind,
tender and affectionate, and always ready to succor you? It Is not with the
bloody Sacrifices of Beasts, and with the abundance of Blood that you must
honor him, for what pleasure can there be in cutting the Throats of innocent
Creatures? but by a pure Conscience, which has always a respect to what is
Good and Honest. The Sacrifice that every one performs in his Heart, is more
acceptable to him than all these glorious Temples and large Edifices of Stones
heaped one upon another. After this manner he speaks in another place; The
first Worship of the Gods is to believe that they are, and that they have one
Existence. We must next acknowledge their Sovereign Majesty, and ascribe unto
them the Attribute of Goodness, without which there would be no Majesty: We
must believe that they Govern the World, that by their Power they rule and
dispose of all things; take care of Human Race; insomuch, that sometimes they
concern themselves with the Affairs of particular Persons: That they do no
Evil; that they have no Evil in them, but that they chastise and punish Mankind
under an appearance of Good. Would you have the Gods propitious to you? study
to be good: He honors them sufficiently who imitates them. As for what
concerns Prayers, Seneca truly is not of the number of those who believe that
we ought not to pray to God: But he will have us pray to him in such a manner,
as if all the World heard what we said, and that no body but would approve of
our Prayers; Know, says he, that you shall be free from all vain and idle
Desires. When you shall come about this, ask nothing of God but what you may
ask before all the World: This is what you ought to pray for, that he would
bestow upon you the Health of the Mind with that of the Body.

To what does not the Fury and Folly of Men proceed! They secretly offer up to
God such filthy and corrupt Prayers, that if they should perceive any to listen
to, or understand 'em, they would stop and be silent, filled with Shame and
Confusion. They have the impudence to ask of God, what they are ashamed that
Men should know. Follow therefore this wholesome Advice, Live with Men as if God
saw you, and speak unto God as if Men understood you. It Is sufficiently known
how Satyrically the Poets have expressed themselves against these Whisperers
and secret Desirers of others harms.

In private thus he Prays, -- When will thou Jove,
My wealthy Uncle from this World remove?
Or -- O thou Thunderer's Son, great Hercules,
That once thy bounteous Deity would please
To guide my Rake upon that chinking Sound,
Of some vast Treasure, hidden under Ground!
O were my Pupil fairly knocked 'oth' Head!
I should possess the Estate if he were Dead.
The famous Satyrist of our time could not but mention them in that learned
Epistle which he directs to his spiritual Friend, Monsieur Guilleragues.

Que si cet hyver, un rhume salutaire,
Guerissant de tans maux mon avare Beaupere, etc.
O would some Rhume from these kind Winter Rains,
Cure my good Father-in-Law of all his Pains;
Wrap him in Lead well shriev'd and full of Prayers,
And grace the Miser's House with welcome Tears!
How gladly my last Gifts would I bestow,
Nor grudge the Charges of the pompous Woe!
This some Months since was all the Talk and Care,
Of the King's Farmer's honest, humble Heir;
Who plagued with Hunger and unkind delay,
Spent Forty wretched Years in hastening one good Day.
As concerning these unworthy and ridiculous Prayers, the Answer that Socrates
made when some inquired why the Oracle was more favorable to the Lacedaemonians
than to the Athenians, is not to be omitted. Because, said he, the Prayers of
the Lacedaemonians are more pleasing to the Oracle than those of the Athenians;
and they are more pleasing, because they desire nothing else from the Gods,
neither in public nor private, but that they would grant them what is Good,
Honest and Just. Lastly, it is well known what Epicurus said to this purpose,
That If God granted all the Prayers that were made to him, Mankind would
quickly Perish, because they are continually asking Things which are useful to
some, but pernicious to others.

As for Superstition, Cicero advises us to distinguish it from true Religion.
For we must not, says he, imagine that by taking away Superstition we take
away Religion. It belongs to a wise Man to keep to the Institutions, to the
Mysteries and Ceremonies of his Ancestors, and to acknowledge this excellent,
everlasting and wonderful Nature, which the beautiful Fabric of the World, and
the order and regulation of celestial Things force us to own. Therefore as we
ought to endeavor to increase Religion, which is unseparable from the
knowledge of Nature; so ought we to root out Superstition, and to cast away all
its Relics, for it follows and pursues us every where, and to what side
soever you turn, you will always meet with it; whether you hearken to a
Diviner, or to a Discoverer of Things to come, or whether you sacrifice a
Beast, or whether you observe the flying of a Bird, or whether you look upon a
Fortuneteller, a Chaldean, or those who Prophesy by the inspection of the
Intrails of Animals, or whether it Lightens or Thunders, or the Thunderbolt
falls from Heaven, or whether some Monstrous Creature is born, or whether some
thing has been done, or happned, which commonly and necessarily ought to come
to pass. So that we can never have our Mind well at Rest. Our very Sleep the
usual retreat of all the Labors of the Mind, by its extravagant Visions and
Dreams Frights us with terrible Apprehensions and Inquietudes.

What we have now mentioned of Superstition, minds me of a Scruple of some of
the Ancients, who blamed the old Philosophers of their time, who countenanced
the superstitious Ceremonies of Religion, tho in their Heart and Mind they did
not approve of them, which practice of theirs seems to be contrary to the
sincerity and uprightness of the Profession of a Philosopher. It Is true, says
our Author, speaking of Epicurus, and endeavoring in some respect to excuse
him upon that Account, That Sincerity in Actions as well as in Words is
commendable; but what shall we say if we consider a Man out of the true
Religion, in which we ought to have a perfect Conformity in Thoughts, Words and
Deeds? At that time it seems to be the Duty of Wisdom and of Philosophy not to
think as the common People, but yet to speak and act as they do. Epicurus was
present at the superstitious Ceremonies, because the civil Right and the
public Tranquillity obliged him to it. He approved not of them, because there
is nothing that can constrain the Mind of a wise Man to believe whatever the
Vulgar believes. Inwardly he was free, but outwardly bound to the Laws of
humane Society. By this means he acquitted himself at the same time of that
Duty he owed to others, and of that which he owed to himself.

Of Piety.
WE must next speak of Piety, which relates to our Parents, as Religion relates
to the worship of God: For as God is said to be the Father of all Things,
because he has made all Things, so Children ought to consider their Parents as
the Instruments of God to bring them into the World. And truly next to that
Obligation that we owe to God, there can be none greater, or of more force,
than that which unites us to our Parents: As to other Persons, we may be
indebted to them for some sorts of Benefits, but to our Fathers and Mothers we
are indebted for our selves, and for what we are. And if it be so agreeable
with Nature to love our selves, how agreeable ought it to be with the same
Nature to love those by whom we, who thus love our selves, subsist, and from
whom we have received that which we love, namely our selves? If it be suitable
to the Rules of Nature to love those who love us, can there be a more fervent
Love than that of Parents to their Children? And can provoked Nature
consequently produce a more abominable Monster, than a Son who loves not his
Father or Mother, or is ungrateful to 'em? Truly, if such there be, what quiet
of Conscience can they enjoy? Nay they must certainly be very uneasy and
torment themselves Day and Night for such a Crime. Whereas on the contrary, how
much Satisfaction does a dutiful and affectionate Child enjoy, who from his
Heart sincerely Honors his Father and Mother, and is not transported with any
thing so much as to show to them his Gratitude, by all manner of good Deeds,
either by expressing to them his Respect, or by evidencing to them his Love,
and who enjoys no greater Content, than to give them some Satisfaction, and
principally in this, to be glad of having begotten such a Son. O how Delightful
and valuable was the Burden of him, who in a public Conflagration, despising
all other Things in comparison of his Father's Life, carried him away safe and
unhurt upon his Shoulders through all the Flames and Darts of the Enemy!

For Him a thousand Dangers have I sought,
And rushing where the thickest Grecians fought,
Safe on my Back the sacred Burden brought.
Which the Poets have related of Aeneas. And Elian tells us of two Brothers of
Catania, who in the furious Burning of Mount Aetna, saved their Father from the
scorching Flames, which casually, or by a divine Appointment, opened a way, as
they say, to let them pass through. It Is with great reason that Solon judged
Cleobis and Biton happy, not only because of the happy end of their Life, but
chiefly because of that great Joy, that they felt when for want of Oxen they
freely Yoked themselves, and drew the Chariot where their Mother was sitting.

I cannot but make here a little Digression, and wish with Martinus (who has
left us a rare and excellent History of the Kings of China) that the Piety of
Christians to their Fathers and Mothers, were equal to that of the idolatrous
Chinese to theirs. This Piety, says he, is yet observed among the Chinese
with an incredible Respect, and most wonderful Expressions of Grief. Three
Years complete Children lament the Death of their Fathers. They first begin by
retiring from those public Employments which at other times they follow; they
never go out of their Dwellings; they change their Apartments, their Food and
Furniture, to make use of some plainer; they never sit but upon some low Form;
they drink no Wine, nor eat any delicious Meats, but confine themselves to feed
upon certain Herbs; their Clothing is very course, of some thin Linen Cloth
of a white Color, (for that is the Color they mourn in) their Bed is very
uneasy; nay they change their very Tone and manner of Speaking, the better
expressing thereby their Grief and Affliction. He who thus Mourns takes no
other name but wretched and ungrateful Son, as if he had neglected by his good
Offices and Care to prolong the Life of his dear Father, or as if he had
hastened his Departure by his negligent and undutiful Behavior. If he writes
it is only upon Yellew or Blew Paper, both which among them are Colors
betokening Sadness. But this we cannot too much commend, that this wonderful
Piety of the Chinese appears not only in their Mourning thus after the Decease
of their Parents, but also in the Reverence, Obedience and good Deeds which
they perform to them during their Lives. Insomuch that many seeing them
decrepit with old Age, leave all to afford them their personal assistance; they
resign their Employments to the Emperor; who seldom refuses to accept of 'em,
and grant them this Favor, for they know that in such a Piety there is nothing
of Ambition, Pride or vain Glory. But this by the by: Let us now return to our
Author, and to the indispensable Duties of Children to their Parents.

The First is to have not only a great esteem for them, and to look upon them
as the Authors or Instruments of their Being, and supplying God's stead in
relation to them; but also to show that Esteem and inward Veneration which they
have for them by outward signs of Honor and Respect, and evidence to all the
World that they really respect them, and consider them as infinitely above
them. It Is in this manner that pious Cimon behaved himself, who, when he had
not wherewithal to obtain leave to bury his Father, sold himself, purchasing
that Liberty with the loss of his own.

The Second Duty is to comply with their Wills and be obedient to their
Commands, for that is the chief part of the Respect and Reverence that we owe
them; and on the contrary, to be Disobedient is a sign of Disrespect and
Contempt. I confess, we are not bound to obey them when they command any thing
against God, against the welfare of our Country, and contrary to Right and
Justice; but it is very seldom that Fathers or Mothers lay any such Commands on
their Children: Nor ought a Child rashly and inconsiderately to make an
uncharitable Construction of his Father's Commands; but if for plain and
convincing Reasons he finds himself forced to disobey him, this ought to be
done with such respect and Deference as becomes him. From hence it follows that
Children should undertake nothing of moment against their Wills, but in all
Matters of the greatest Concern, such as Matrimony, etc. they should be
directed by 'em; for as it is supposed they best understand, so likewise they
most desire their Childrens Welfare and Happiness. We must also conclude from
hence, that if there be any thing in the Behavior of Parents to their Children
that savours of Austerity or hard Usage, they ought to undergo it patiently,
and to be so far from aggravating or complaining of it, as not to endure their
Names to be reproached or ill spoken of by others.

The Third Duty is, to help them in all their Necessities, and to remember the
Cares, Pains and Trouble which we gave them in our Infancy, and in the
following course of our Life, and not to forget that excellent Sentence of
Aristotle, That there is more Honor and greatness of Mind to think upon the
Authors of our Being, than upon our selves; and that we are bound to Honor
them, as we do the immortal Gods. Let us remember the Divine Commandment, which
promises a long and happy Life to Children who shall Honor their Fathers and
Mothers. Honora Patrem and Matrem si vis esse longaevus super terram: Which we
may call a Commandment, and a moral Precept proper to all Ages.

Senes Parents nutriens diu vives. It Is not improper here to mention a Word of
that Piety and Love we owe to our Country, which doubtless ought to be yet
dearer to us than our Parents themselves: We cannot excuse our selves from
speaking of it, and the rather, because we have already taken notice, that it
is even lawful to accuse our Parents themselves, where they have been found
guilty of betraying our Country, or endeavoring to invade it and become
Conquerours of it; when all our Prayers and Entreaties to desist from such a
wicked Purpose prove ineffectual, and we cannot persuade them to right Reason.
It Is not without just Cause doubtless that we have mentioned and maintain this
Opinion, for as the Love that we bear for our Country is named Piety, because
our Country is as the common Mother that brings us forth, nourishes and
maintains us, it is plain that our Country, which is as the Parent of our
Fathers and Mothers, of all our Relations and Friends, ought to be dearer to us
than all the rest. It Is what Cicero proves very well; Can there be any
Parentage nearer to us than our Country, in which all Parents are comprehended?
If our Fathers, our Mothers, our Children, our Relations and Friends are dear
to us, how much more should our Country be dearer, which contains them all? Is
there any honest Man that ought not to venture his Life for his Country, if he
can render to it thereby any Service? Is there any Evil more abominable than to
destroy it, or to endeavor to ruin it, as some have attempted to do?

Of Observance, or Respect.
THE Third Virtue that belongs to Justice, is that which Cicero calls
Observance, by which we are inclined to reverence and respect those who are
raised above us in Dignity, exceed us in Age, or excel us in Wisdom. For as
Dignity or Beneficence are the occasion of Reverence and Honor, and that those
who are promoted to Dignities are deemed worthy, and seem as it were born and
designed for the public Good, either by governing or conducting the People, or
by composing their Differences and Suits, or by defending them from the Enemy,
or by procuring the public Safety or Plenty; by this it is certain that we
ought to Honor and Respect them, and the rather, because if this were not
performed, there would be no body to take upon 'em the necessary Cares and
Troubles of managing the public Concerns, which would be at length the cause
of confusion and disorder, which in this case by paying a due deference and
respect, may in a great measure be prevented.

It Is unquestionable also that old Age is of it self Venerable, because it has
the experience of Things, and consequently has that Prudence, that it is able
to advise young People, and direct 'em for their good. Young Folk, says
Sopater in Stobaeus, ought to Honor them who are their Elders, make choice of
the honestest and most experienced, follow their Counsel and rely upon their
Authority. It Is for this Cause that the great Captain of the Greeks had always
a greater respect for Nestor than for the rest, and rather wished to find out
Ten like Nestor than like Ajax. But old Age will be so much the more worthy of
Honor and Veneration, when it shall not only be adorned with gray Hairs, but
with Wisdom and Prudence; when it is able to afford good Advice, and that it is
become commendable by its Virtues, and by its good Deeds.

Lastly, It is manifest that we ought to have Respect and Veneration for those
who are Wise or Virtuous, seeing that Wisdom or Virtue is the true and solid
Foundation of all Honor that is rendered. Indeed Virtue alone, as they say, is
its own sufficient Reward: But tho those who are Virtuous seek not to draw from
thence Honor and Respect, yet they who know them to be such, are obliged to
pay this Deference to 'em, otherwise they would not do Right and Justice to
their Merits, and give a due estimate to that which of all Things in the World
is the most valuable, Potior est illa Argento Auroque purissimo. This the wise
Man ascribes to Virtue; it is of more worth than Gold and the finest Silver;
it is more precious than all the Pearls and Jewels; yea, than all that is
desirable: There is nothing to be compared with it.

Of Friendship.
WE cannot but say something of Friendship, unto which such are obliged who are
reciprocally beloved. Of all the things, says Cicero, according to Epicurus,
which tend toward the making our Lives happy, there is nothing more
considerable and advantageous than Friendship: For indeed there is nothing in
the Life of a wise Man more pleasing, than when, like a Philosopher, he may say
to a Friend, of whose Sincerity he is fully persuaded, as Cicero in another
case spoke one day to his Brother Quintius, We are alone; we may without Envy
go on in pursuit of Truth: Or that which Lelius relates of the Friendship he
enjoyed with Scipio, Of all the things that Fortune or Nature has bestowed
upon me, I have nothing that I can compare with the Friendship of Scipio; we
can freely unbosom to each other our most intimate Thoughts and secret Designs:
I never offended him, that I know, in the least, neither did I ever hear him
speak any thing to displease me; we lived under the same Roof, we eat and drank
together, and we enjoyed all the Sweets and Pleasures of Life: For what shall I
say of that common Passion of always desiring to know and understand things?
What shall I say of those retired Studies, where, at a distance from the
troublesome Crowd, we spent many pleasant Hours in search after Truth? If the
remembrance of all our Discoveries and Discourses had perished with him, I
could not easily undergo the loss of so dear a Friend; but these things are so
far from being dead, that on the contrary they revive and daily increase in my
Mind.

Epicurus speaks excellently well to this Point, and I think none goes beyond
him: Friendship, says he, is a very great Support, a secure Bulwark against
Injuries and Affronts, and is that which gives the greatest Pleasure and
Satisfaction of our Life; for as Hatred, Envy and Contempt are very Offensive,
and interrupt the course of our Pleasures, so Friendship raises the Pleasures
of Life, and causes us every day to find something new and pleasing. Indeed,
Solitariness, or one who lives without Friends, is subject and exposed to a
great many private and unforeseen Dangers, and is never free from Fears: Reason
it self advises us to procure such Friends as may settle our Mind, confirm our
Hopes, banish from us all Fear, and establish in us Joy and Quiet.

And because some pretend that Friendships are contracted for the Advantages
that we receive from them, as we usually sow the Ground in hopes of a Crop or
Harvest; he therefore thus proceeds, It Is true, that the first beginnings of
Friendships are made in consideration of the Advantage and Benefit that are
expected from them; but after a long settled Acquaintance and Familiarity, there
is nothing but Love that prompts us on; so that though there be no farther
Advantage, Friends nevertheless still love one another for their own sakes. In
truth, if we love and affect certain Places, Temples, Towers, Colleges, a
Country House, Dogs, Horses, etc. For having been long acquainted with or
accustomed to these things, how much more will this Use and Costom work upon us
and prevail with us in relation to Mankind?

But, says he, we ought to make a discreet and wise Choice of Friends; for
according to the Proverb, We ought to take more care with whom, than what we
Eat: And though eating and filling our Paunch alone, is, if I may so say, to live
like a Lion or a Wolf, or some other Beast of Prey; nevertheless, we ought not
to yield or admit of the next that comes, but we ought to choose such a Friend
whose Discourse and Conversation is pleasing; one, who esteems nothing more
than Sincerity, Integrity and Fidelity; who is not of a morose and uneasy
Temper, always full of Complaints, but such a one whose sweetness and easiness
of Conversation, whose pleasant and agreeable Temper of Mind hightens our
Expectations, and adds to the Pleasures of our Life.

Now though Friendship consists in a mutual Participation of Pleasure, and of
such Goods which we are permitted to enjoy while we live; nevertheless, it is
requisite that the Riches of Friends should be deposited in Common, as he
imagined who said, That all the Goods of Friends are Common, because that
excludes all Jealousy; for such as are Jealous can never be Friends; they
ought therefore to have a confidence in each other, so that either may take
what his Occasions require, being persuaded that what they have thus in Common,
is not less theirs than if they were each in Possession of the whole.

I confess, that mean Souls are apt to wonder at this; but we must not trouble
our selves with such, for there is neither Assurance nor Constancy in the
Friendship of this sort of People; they are not at all capable of these things,
nor of any part of Wisdom which deserves Praise; they understand not what is
useful either to themselves, in particular, or to the generality of Mankind;
they cannot well distinguish between good and evil Actions: We here therefore
speak only of wise and honest Men, among whom there is a kind of an Agreement
to love their Friends, no less than they themselves, which we know to be
feasible and practicable in the course of our lives. So that it is plain, that
if we intend to live pleasantly, there is nothing more conducible to to it than
this Union: We are therefore to conclude from hence, that not only Reason is
not contrary to Friendship, if we place the sovereign and chief Happiness in
Pleasure, but that without Friendship it self this chief Happiness is not to be
attained.

The reason of this is, that without Friendship we cannot at all times keep up
a constant pleasantness of Life, nor preserve Friendship if we love not our
Friends as much as our selves: Friendship indeed is inseparable from Pleasure,
and we rejoice at the Welfare of our Friends as much as at our own, and are as
much grieved at their Afflictions.

Therefore the wise Man will treat his Friend after the same manner as he would
himself, and the Labors that he would undergo for his own Pleasure, he will
undertake for the Pleasure of his Friend. And as when he is sick, he would be
glad to have some body present to help him, and when in Prison or under
Poverty, to have some good body to relieve and assist him; so he will rejoice
when he has some body that he may afford help to when sick, and relieve when
cast into Prison, or become indigent: Nay, he will go beyond all this, for he
will be ready to endure very great Extremities, and perhaps Death it self, if
occasion should require it.

And here we must observe, that it is not without reason that Aristotle will
have Friendship relate to Justice; for Friendship is a kind of Equality; for
where there is a true Love and Friendship, can there be a greater Equality,
seeing that the Affections of Friends are alike amongst themselves; and that
Friendship, as Cicero says, is a participation or Community of all things, of
Counsels, Studies, Opinions, Wills, etc. It Is true, there are some Friendships,
where one of the Friends may be of a higher Rank and Degree than the other; but
either these are not true Friendships, or if they be, he who is above the other
in Power and Dignity, will out of a generous and virtuous instinct humble
himself to make some Equality. Scipio, in our time, says Lelius, how high
soever he was in Power and Authority, and exalted in Dignity, would never
presume upon that account to take place above Philus, Raphilus, Mummius, and
other his Friends of a meaner Degree. But as Aristotle observes, It is a rare
thing to find such kind of Souls. Nevertheless, says Cicero, we are to
consider that as Superiors among real Friends ought to equalize themselves with
their Inferiors; so Inferiors ought not to be troubled or concerned that they
are exceeded in Riches, Fortune, Wisdom or Dignity by their Friends; I say,
where there is a real Friendship; for there are certain false and deceitful
Friendships, or as Aristotle says, such as cannot properly be termed
Friendships, but rather resemblances or likenesses of Friendship: For true
Friendship depends not upon a sordid Gain, or upon filthy and dishonest
Pleasures, but is grounded upon Justice and Virtue.

We must likewise observe, that Friendship being only truly found among
virtuous Men, it is not without reason that Aristotle does hence infer, that the
firmness and constancy of Friendship does consist in this, That they never act
nor desire any thing that may be prejudicial or inconvenient to each other, but
on the contrary they prohibit and oppose it; for it is the part of a truly
honest and good Man not only to do no ill himself, but also not to suffer his
Friend to do any. Let the first Rule of Friendship, says Cicero, be to require
nothing base nor dishonest from his Friend, and likewise never to perform any
such thing if his Friend require it. The Second, To do for a Friend all that
honesty can require, and not to stay till he be desired and entreated. The
Third, That there be no Hypocrisy nor Dissimulation between Friends, because
there is more ingenuity in an open hatred than in a feigned Friendship. The
Fourth, That we should not only slight and reject all evil Reports of our
Friends as false and malicious, but also should not fo much as entertain the
least Suspicion of their being guilty of so much baseness and unworthiness. The
Fifth is, That there be a moderation and sweetness of Temper among Friends,
which does very much promote and encourage Friendship; and let all Sadness and
Severity be totally banished, The Sixth, That we take heed that there be not
too much reservedness in our Friendship, for that is apt to hinder that freedom
and pleasantness which is, as it were, the chief Tie. The Last is, That Friends
may sometimes reprove one another, and mutually bear with each others Reproof,
because this proceeds only from a fervency of Affection. Nevertheless, we must
take notice of what Cicero remarks upon this Saying of Terence, Obsequium
amicos, veritas odium parit. That Complacency begets Friends, but Truth begets
Enemies. Truth, says he, is uneasy and displeasing; for from hence arises
Hatred, which is the Poison of Friendship; but yet such Complacency, as by
winking at his Friend's Faults, suffers him to fall into a Pit, is much more
intolerable. Therefore in this case it behooves us to behave our selves with a
great deal of Candor and Circumspection, and take care that our Advice be
moderate and discreet, and that our Reproof be not too sharp and choleric. As
to what concerns Complacency in Friendship, there ought to be a goodness and
sweetness of Temper, but no Flattery, which nourishes and encourages Vice; for
we must not treat or deal with a Friend as with a Tyrant. But there is no
longer any Hopes of him whose Ears are stopped to Truth, when it proceeds from a
true Friend.

Why might not we here make use of the Counsel that a famous Author among the
Persians thought of great moment to preserve Friendship? We are commonly, says
this Author, unjust to our Friends; we usually desire from a Friend more than,
according to the Laws of Human Nature, we ought; we will have him in all
things, at all times, and on all occasions, that he should be what we our
selves are not; that he should be firm and faithful, and never alter in the
least* as if we were not all naturally molded up with Weaknesses and
Imperfections, and equally subject to changes. There is no Diamond, says he,
without its Flaws, and there is no Man but has his Infirmities: Let us be
indulgent and favorable to our Friends; in a word, let us purchase a Friend
with all his Failings. However, let us not here omit a Question which has been
much controverted among the Ancients.

The Philosophers have made it a doubt, whether in favor of a Friend, we may
not sometimes forsake or recede from Right and Justice, and in what Cases, in
what Circumstances, and how far? Cicero in his Offices, says, That if a
mischance should happen, whereby we should be obliged to yield Assistance to
the unjust Desires of a Friend, we may in such a Case swerve from the Rules of
Right, where a great Shame or Loss is like to ensue upon it; and this the Laws
of Friendship ought to pardon. But Agellius is of Opinion, that Cicero passes
over this Matter too hastily, and that Pericles speaks more fully and to the
purpose; Who, when he was desired by a Friend to take a false Oath for his
sake; he answered him, That he ought to serve his Friend as far as the Gods,
or, as we say, as far as the Altars. Opitulari me Amicos oportet, sed ad usque
Deos, sed usque ad Aras. He adds, that Theophrastus speaks plainer, That we may
incur a high Shame or Infamy if any great Advantage will thereby accrue to a
Friend, because the inconsiderable Loss of the wronged Justice is recompensed
by a greater and a more important Act of Justice, which is to give Assistance
to a Friend. That when the Advantage of a Friend, and our Honesty and Justice
stand upon a Level, in such and the like Cases, doubtless, Honesty and Justice
ought to be preferred; but if the Advantage of a Friend be very great, and that
which concerns our Honesty, be about a thing of small importance, that which is
useful and advantageous to a Friend ought then to incline us.

There is another Question that is commonly proposed, which Agellius says is
somewhat difficult. If new Friends, which are otherwise worthy of our
Friendship, are sometimes to be preferred to our ancient Friends, as we prefer
usually a young Horse before an old? Agellius answers in a word, That it is a
scruple or a question unworthy of an honest Man. That we are not to be tired
with Friendship as with other Things; for it is with Friendship as with Wine,
the older the better: And though Novelties give fair Hopes of some Advantages,
yet we ought not to slight our old Friends, but still respect 'em.

Of Beneficence and Liberality.
BEneficence is usually and generally taken for tha^ goodness of Nature which
is employed in giving assistance to others, either by our Care, or by our
particular good Offices, or by our Estate and Wealth; whereas Liberality is
understood in a stricter Sense, and more especially for that which consists in
bestowing particular Gifts of Goods and Money. We have already seen before, that
Aristotle understands Liberality in that Sense, and Cicero seems also to
restrain it commonly to the free and liberal Gifts of Money and Riches; but
nevertheless he sometimes joins Beneficence and Liberality together, so that he
takes them for one and the same thing, But, says he, he who has a double
intent of assisting the Necessitous, either by good Offices or by Money; the
latter, says he, is the easier for such as are Rich, but the first is more
commendable, more glorious and worthy of a generous Mind. For tho in both there
is a free and liberal Disposition to gratify or do good, nevertheless there is
this difference, that the one is taken out of the Coffer, and the other
proceeds from Virtue; that the Gifts that are made out of a private Estate,
drains the very source or Fountain of Beneficence, so that the oftener we
practice it, the less we are capable of continuing it. Whereas such as are
liberal of their Cares, and do Service by their Virtues and by their Industry,
the more they bestow upon others, the more they have still in Stock. Besides,
by often giving they get an Habit, and are more ready and prepared to oblige
all the World.

Now Aristotle is of Opinion, That there is nothing to hinder us from taking
Liberality to be a Medium between Covetousness and Prodigality, tho he supposes
Covetousness to be much more contrary to Liberality than Prodigality. Therefore
he Esteems a prodigal Person to be little better than a Covetous one, not only
because the Prodigal does good to many, and the Covetous to none, no, not to
himself; but because the Prodigal may be easily persuaded to Reason, either by
Age or Time that may correct him, or the necessity unto which he may be reduced
may constrain him, whereas the Covetous is so far from being cured by Time,
that with his Years his Distemper increases; like a Dropsy, which instead of
extinguishing his Thirst, increases it. So that it is not without cause that
Aristotle says, That a covetous Man is Sordid, Base, etc. Parcus, Tenax,
Sordidus, Turpis, Lucri Cupidus, Parvas impensas faciens, Deceptor, Depilator.

I shall not concern my self about what Aristotle holds, That the property of
Virtue is rather to do good than to receive, and generally to do Things just
and honest, than to avoid the doing Things vile and dishonest. I shall only
take notice of the three Cautions or Conditions which Cicero requires in
Beneficence and Liberality. The First is, That our Beneficence be neither
hurtful to those whom we seem to gratify, nor to any other: For to do a
Pleasure which may be prejudicial to the Party, this belongs not to the part of
a Man who really designs to do good, but rather of a dangerous Flatterer. And
to hurt some to gratify others, which very often happens, that is as unjust as
if you took another Man's Goods to appropriate them to your self. The Second
is, That our Beneficence must not exceed our Abilities; for otherwise the
Fountain of our Goodness may be soon exhausted; an Injury may be done to our
Parents, whom we are rather bound by Justice to assist, or to whom we have a
greater reason to leave our Goods; and often Men are thereby provoked to grasp
at all Things by indirect means, that they may have wherewith to supply and
furnish their extraordinary Bounties. The Third is, That their good Deeds be
according to Discretion conferred on due Objects, for if they be bestowed on
the wicked and undeserving, then, that which Ennius said may here hold true,
That good Deeds misplaced, will become evil Deeds, as he expresses it,
Benefacta male locata, malefacta arbitror. And as it is better to do good to
honest and good Men, who are under scanty Circumstances, than to those who have
Plenty; Beneficence doubtless ought rather to look upon those who are in
necessity, than those who do abound, and whose plenty has no need of a further
supply. It Is chiefly the Duty a generous Person, says Cicero, to help him who
stands most in need. Yet most Men act otherwise, for the more they expect from
a Man the more they will endeavor to oblige him, and show themselves most
officious, tho he stands in no need. I will add what Seneca very judiciously
expresses, That there is a great difference between the matter of the good
Deed, and the good Deed it self. For the good Deed is neither the Gold nor the
Silver nor any such like Thing, but it consists in the Will of the Giver; for
if any, as Aristotle observes, gives by chance, or by constraint, or in hopes
of receiving thereby some advantage, or if he prevents not the indigent, or if
being desired he performs not the Deed willingly, speedily and without
hesitation, without Witnesses to report it abroad, which rather lessens than
amplifies a good Deed; how can such a Man be said to be Bountiful, and a doer
of Good? We meet, says Seneca, with a great many ungrateful Persons, and make
many more, because we upraid and require back again our good Deeds in a rude
manner; sometimes we are so inconsiderate, that we have no sooner done a good
Act but we are ready to repent of it, and sometimes we complain of, and exclaim
against Things of the least Moment. So that we not only spoil all our Kindness
in doing a good Deed, but likewise after it is done; for which of you, I
beseech you, is satisfied by a slender or single entreaty? Who is there, who
when suspecting a Courtesy to be asked of him, has not showed a displeased
Countenance, turned aside his Head, pretending some other weighty Business? Is
it possible that you can be grateful to a Man who in a disdainful manner has
made you stoop to take up his Courtesy, or colerickly thrown it at your Head;
or who being tired by your Entreaties has yielded to your Importunities?

Of Gratitude.
NOW, let us say something in the last Place of Gratitude: It Is not without
cause that Cicero insinuates, that it alone comprehends Religion, and the other
Virtues that we have mentioned; for this Passage we read in his Oration for
Plantius, Truly, says he, I would willingly be endowed with all the Virtues,
but there is none that I would more earnestly desire than to be Thankful. This
Virtue is not only the principal, but also the Mother of all other Virtues; for
what is Piety but a kind and grateful Inclination toward our Parents? Who are
the good and generous Citizens, who in times of War and Peace offer themselves
for their Country's sake, but they who are mindful of the Obligations they owe
to their Country? Who are the true and real Saints, the observers of the Laws
and Religion, but those who never forgetting the favors of the immortal Gods,
yield to them the Worship and Honors due to 'em? What Pleasure can there be in
Life when Friendship is banished, and what Friendship can there be among the
Ungrateful? This being granted, we must consequently suppose Gratitude to be
our chief Duty: For tho he who gives pretends to nothing else than giving,
nevertheless he seems to expect that he who is thereby obliged should
acknowledge the Favor; and if he don't, he will be unjust. In Truth, tho the
Donor expects no reward, yet he who receives the Kindness is not therefore free
from the Engagement that lies upon him to recompense his Benefactor by all good
Offices. Certainly if Hesiod will have us return, as we say, with Usury, the
Things that have only been lent us for a time, With how much greater Reason,
says Cicero, ought we to be thankful when we have received more signal
Obligations? Ought we not to imitate those fruitful Fields, that return much
more than they receive? And if we are Officious to them from whom we expect
good Deeds, how much more ought we to be to them who have already been kind to
us and obliged us? There are two sorts of Liberality, the one is to give, the
other to restore; it is in our Power to give or not to give; but not to restore,
is a thing not to be allowed of in an honest Man. But suppose a Person is
incapable you will say: Seneca answers, That he who is willing to return a good
Deed, does in effect do it, for his good Will is a sufficient discharge of his
Obligation. He says moreover, That they who are obliged, may not only equal
but also surpass in good Will and Generosity, those who give; we may reward
also the greatest Princes, Lords and Kings; either by affording to them
faithful Counsel, or by a constant attendance, and by a pleasing Converse free
from Flattery, and yet delightful, or by a serious Attention to what they
propose when they consult about difficult Affairs, or by a constant Fidelity
when they entrust any Secret. Propose the richest and the happiest Man in the
World, I will tell you what he wants, viz. a cordial Friend to whom he may
impart his most secret Thoughts. Don't you perceive how great Men by confining
the liberty of those who attend 'em, and limiting their Trust to certain
slavish Offices, lose and cast themselves away, because no Body about 'em dares
freely impart their Thoughts, either to incline them to what is for their
advantage, or to persuade them from what tends to their hurt. There is no
Mischief nor Calamity but they are liable to, from the very Moment that they
are barred from hearing the Truth. You may ask, What good you can do to a
prosperous Person? Persuade him not to trust to his Prosperity. Will it not be
a good Office that you do him, when you shall cause him to quit this foolish
Confidence, and let him see that this Power that he has, may not always
continue the same. And that the Things that Fortune bestows are flitting and
inconstant, oftener flying away faster than they come. You don't understand the
value and true worth of Friendship, if you don't perceive that in bestowing a
Friend, you bestow the most excellent Gift the World can afford, and who is
never more useful and necessary than where all Things are in great plenty and
abundance.

But not to insist longer upon this: Aristotle offers two or three Questions
upon this Point. First, Whether Beneficence is to be esteemed or valued
according to the advantage of him who receives, or according to the Liberality
of him who bestows it. He Answers, That in the Kindnesses that are done for
advantage, and which are grounded upon Profit, these are to be valued by the
advantage of him who receives 'em, because he is in want, and he who does them
performs 'em but upon Condition to have the same returned. But in Friendships
and Kindnesses that are established upon Virtue, we must measure or compute the
good Deed by the good Will of the Donor, because where Virtue is concerned, the
intention is chiefly to be considered; therefore whether any gives much or
little, the Gift or Kindness is to be esteemed great, for the great Affection
or extraordinary good Will of the Party giving.

The Second Question, Why those who give, have a greater affection for the
Party they give to, than the other has for the giver. To this he Answers, That
the cause is not as some suppose, for that the Donor is as the Creditor, and
the other as the Debtor, and because the Debtor wishes for the Death of the
Creditor, but the Creditor the Life and Health of the Debtor; but because the
Benefactor is as the Artificer, who loves more his own Works than they should
be otherwise beloved again if they were alive, which is to be seen among Poets,
who love the Offspring of their Brain as tenderly as the Offspring of their
Body. And they who receive a good Deed, are as it were, the handy Work of him
who gives.

The Third, Why there is no Law to indite an ungrateful Person? This Crime,
says he, which is universal, is truly punished by none, tho disapproved by all.
But as the valuation of an uncertain Thing would be very difficult, we have
only condemned it to an universal dislike and hatred, leaving it among those
Things which we have referred to the Justice and Vengeance of the Gods.
Besides, it is not convenient that all ungrateful Persons should be known, lest
the vast number of those who are stained with this Vice, should lessen the
Shame of the Crime; and lastly, it is no small Punishment, that an ungrateful
Person dares not desire a good turn from another whom he has disobliged, and
that he is taken notice of, and condemned by all the World.

As to what remains to be treated of here concerning Affability, sweetness of
Temper, Civility and such like Virtues, they may be sufficiently understood by
what has been mentioned already about Gentleness and Mildness. We shall finish
this Treatise with a Passage out of Seneca, which contains the Sum of all moral
Duties. What do we do, says he, what Precepts do we enjoin? What a small
matter is this, not to hurt him whom we ought to serve! This is a worthy
business indeed, for a Man to be kind and loving to his Fellow Creature! Shall
we make Laws for a Man to hold out his helping Hand to one Shipwreckt and ready
to sink; or to direct him that is wandering and has lost his Way; or to divide
our Bread to him that perishes for Hunger? To what purpose is it to reckon at
large what is to be done, seeing I can comprehend the whole Duties of Mankind
in few Words? This great All which thou see, and which contains all Things
divine and human is but One; we are the Members of this great Body. Nature has
made us all Related and a Kin, by bringing us forth from the same Principles
and of the same Elements. It Is Nature has given us a mutual Affection and
Love, and for the same Ends. It Is Nature has established what is right, just
and equitable to its Law. It Is a greater Evil to be the cause of Wrong than to
suffer it. Nature commands that our Hands should be always ready to afford
assistance. Let this be always in our Heart, and at our Lips, Homo sum, humani
nihil a me alienum puto. I am a Man, and think my self obliged to all the
Duties of Humanity

THE Third BOOK OF Liberty, Fortune, Destiny and Divination.
CHAP. I. What Liberty or Free Will is.
AFter we have examined the moral Virtues, we must speak something of Destiny,
Fortune and of Free Will, which some esteem to be Causes, others to be Modes or
manner how certain Causes act, and others to be nothing but empty Names, vain
and imaginary Notions; we must, I say, speak something, and the rather, because
according as they are received or rejected, Virtues and Vices will be allowed
or not allowed, and consequently our Actions may deserve praise or blame,
rewards or punishments; for it is most certain that there is nothing either
commendable or blameworthy, but what is done freely and with deliberation; and
that what ever is done by Chance or out of Necessity, is neither to be
commended nor condemned. This being unquestionable, the first thing that we
have to do, is to examine wherein Liberty or Free Will consists, what is Fortune
and Destiny, that so we may the better understand how Fortune and Liberty
either contradict, or may agree with Destiny.

To begin therefore with Liberty: And here it is to be understood, that we mean
not precisely such a Liberty as is taken in opposition to Slavery, that which
relates properly to the Body, and is described a power of living as we please;
but we mean that which the Greeks were wont to name (...), id quod in nobis,
seu penes nos, nostrove in arbitrio potestateque situm est, that which is in
us, within our Power or Free Will; namely, something which is in the Soul, and
is not under Bondage to any external Master; or if I may make use of the words
of Epictetus, That which cannot by any means be hindered, (...), as if we
should say, A full and entire Power or Liberty to do any thing. The Latins, and
chiefly the Divines, call it commonly liberum aribitrium, Free Will, and
sometimes liberale arbitrium.

Upon which we must observe, First, That this is given to Reason, or which is
the same thing, to the Understanding; because Reason is looked upon as an
Arbitrator between Parties, or as a Judge, to examine, to consult and
deliberate, and at last to decide as the Judgment is swayed, upon what we ought
or ought not to do in a doubtful Case.

Secondly, That as soon as the Consultation and Deliberation are concluded,
Reason has indeed elected and chosen one thing preferrable before another,
which she has conceived or believed to be the best; the Appetite or the
Function of the Appetite, will immediately follow.

Thirdly, That by this word Appetite, I understand the reasonable Appetite, and
that which is peculiar and proper to Man alone, as Reason is, because we shall
hereafter indifferently make use of these Terms, Will and Appetite, meaning the
reasonable Appetite.

Fourthly, That because the Action of the moving Faculty, which is properly the
pursuit of that which is good, follows the Appetite, or as we commonly speak,
the Will, the Faculty being taken for the Action; that Action of the moving
Faculty is for that reason termed Voluntary, as if one should say, willingly
undertaken; that is, with Deliberation and Consultation.

Fifthly, That Reason or Free Will is supposed in Man to be so free, that of
the several things which come under his Deliberation, there is nothing he
chooses but he has at the same time an equal liberty of refusing it and making
choice of something else.

Truly, we usually ascribe this Liberty to the Will, or to the reasonable
Appetite, which signifies the same thing; for we all agree, that the Original
of Liberty is in Reason, which we commonly call Understanding, that is to say,
in the intellective Power; for we usually hold, that the Will is a Faculty or
Power of it self blind, which cannot incline to any thing till the
Understanding goes before and holds forth, if I may so say, a Light before it:
So that it is the Property of the Understanding to precede and enlighten, and of
the Will to follow. So that it cannot easily be turned out of the Path it has
taken, until the Understanding first turns the Light, which directs it, that
way. Liberty therefore seems by consequence to be first and primarily in the
Understanding, and secundarily or dependantly in the Will.

To open the Matter a little more clearly. The Nature of Liberty seems, first,
to consist in an indifferency, by which the Faculty which is named Free may
incline or not incline to any thing; and this is called Liberty of
Contradiction; or incline in such a manner to any thing, as it may equally
incline it self to the contrary; and this is called Liberty of Contrariety: And
in truth, as we cannot imagine any Liberty without a Faculty, free to choose,
it is certain that there neither is nor can be any Choice but where there is an
indifferency, because where there is but one thing proposed, or where the
Faculty is resolved and determinated to act or to pursue any certain thing,
there can be no Choice nor Election; which supposes at least two things,
whereof the one is to be preferred before the other.

I know some are of Opinion, that the Will is then principally and altogether
free, when it is so fixed and resolved on any certain thing, suppose, for
Example, the sovereign or chief Good and Happiness, that it cannot be bent or
diverted to any other thing, that is to say, to Evil; because, say they, the
actual love, the pursuance, the enjoyment of this Good or Happiness is
altogether Voluntary, and by consequence altogether Free. But I know not
whether they take notice enough, that there is this difference between a
willing Action and a free Action; for a willing or spontaneous Action is
nothing else but a certain propensity or impulse of Nature, which impulse may
be effected without any Reasoning; whereas the free Action supposes and
depends upon some Reasoning, Examination, Judgment or Choice preceding.

And to prove that a spontaneous Action is a certain impulse or propensity of
Nature, they instance in Children and Brutes, unto whom they never attribute
the use of Reason or Liberty, yet they perform many things sponte; and this is
said also of things inanimate, as of a Stone, that it falls down sponte, of its
own accord; or of Fire, that it ascends sponte; so that fiery sponte and fieri
natura seem to be the same thing.

Thus as the Appetite inclines of its own Nature to Good, it is no wonder that
we should say that it is carried sponte of its own accord: For as a Stone,
because it falls sponte, or of its own Nature downward, cannot of it self rise
upwards: So because the Appetite is carried of its own Nature to Good, it
cannot of it self incline nor lean to Evil: Besides, as the Stone, because it is
settled to a Motion downwards has not an indifferency for such a Motion, or
for a Motion upwards: So the Appetite, because it is fixed on Good, is not
indifferent to what is Good, nor indifferent to what is Evil. Lastly, as the
Stone, for want of that indifferency to either of the Motions, is truly said to
move sponte, of its own accord, but not freely or with liberty downward: So the
Appetite, for want of this indifferency to Good or Evil, is truly said to move
sponte, of its own accord, but not with liberty to what is Good in General.

Therefore if you suppose that the Will is in such a manner fixed, for Example,
on the Sovereign Good or Happiness, that it cannot by forsaking it, be turned
aside to follow another Object, it will be truly reputed to be inclined to it
sponte, but not freely, because it is not indifferent to that Good or to
another; and that it is not in its Power to incline to another and forsake that.

It Is certain, that it inclines willingly, volens and without Reluctance and
Opposition; but this kind of Will which we might name Volentia, if it were
lawful to make use of this word, bespeaks not Liberty, but Propensity,
Complacency, libentiam, collubescentiam, and consequently an exclusion of all
Constraint, Violence, Repugnancy or Opposition. So that if the Pursuit or
actual Love and Affection for this Good is said to be altogether Voluntary, we
must not therefore infer, that it is altogether free, but only that it is sum
libitus, if I may be permitted to make use of this Term, or libens altogether
willing, because libentia may be without any indifferency, but not libertas.

Now it behooves us to consider that what is usually spoken among the Divines,
That it is impossible that the Will, such as is that of the glorified Saints,
which enjoys fully and knowingly the Sovereign Happiness, should forsake that
Good to embrace another; it concerns us, I say, to make this Observation,
because it seems this may discover to us what that indifferency is, in which
the Nature of the Liberty or Free Will of this mortal Life consists.

We took notice before, that the Understanding bears the Light before the Will;
and it is certain, that this Torch or Light is nothing else but the Judgment
that the Understanding makes upon things that are Good or Evil, declaring that
this is Good and that Evil; that of these two Good or Evil things, this is the
greater, that the less. So that when the Will is said to be diverted from the
one and inclined to the other, this happens because the Judgment is sometimes
for one and sometimes for the other, and that the Flection of the Will is
conformable to that of the Understanding.

Thus, because the Understanding is often unconstant in its Judgment, the Will
is often unsettled and wavers in its Inclination or Appetite; so that as the
Understanding judges to day that one thing is Good and to morrow Evil, the Will
to day loves this thing and to morrow hates it: And as it judges to day that we
ought to embrace a certain thing because it is Good, and to morrow it esteems
that we ought rather to embrace another, because that other appears to it
better; thus the Will is inclined to day to one thing and to morrow to another.
In a word, it seems that according to the Notions that the Understanding has
of things, or according to the Judgment that it makes of them; so the Will
either pursues or avoids the same.

In the same manner, because among the Good things, as among the Evil, some are
true and real, others seeming or apparent, Good is sometimes disguised with the
Appearance of Evil, and Evil with that of Good. By this means the Understanding
often makes a wrong Judgment; for being moved with the Appearance of Good, it
judges Evil to be Good; or being moved with the Appearance of Evil, it judges
Good to be Evil. In the same manner, the Will often mistakes its End, because
in aiming at Good and pursuing after it, it happens upon Evil; and in flying
from Evil, it is disappointed of some Good. Thus also the Understanding
mistakes the lesser Good for the greater, and the greater for the lesser; the
Will by following after the greatest Good gets the less, and in flying from the
lesser Evil falls into the greater.

Seeing then the Will is thus bound to follow the Understanding or its
Judgment, there is no question but that the indifferency which appears in the
Will, proceeds merely and absolutely in the same manner as the indifferency of
the Understanding. Now the indifferency of the Understanding seems to consist
in this, That it is not so much tied up to any Judgment that it has made of a
thing which has appeared to it true, but that it may leave it and incline to
make another Judgment of the same thing if there appears in it a greater
likelihood of Truth: For the Understanding is not of the number of those
Faculties that are fixed to a thing, as weight in things without Life, the
Faculty of Generation in the living Creatures, and so of the rest, but is
naturally so flexible, that having nothing else for its Object but Truth, it
may judge of things now in this manner, anon in another; and according to the
Judgment it makes, may sometimes take this, sometimes that for Truth.

Therefore the Understanding may be looked upon as a Balance; for as a Balance
is indifferent to incline either of the Scales, and bends toward that which is
most laden; so that where there is the greater Addition of weight, it still
inclines that way; thus the Understanding is indifferently inclined to one or
other of these contrary Opinions, but is still overpoised according to the
greater or less apparency of Truth. This Comparison is borrowed from Cicero,
where he says, That in the same manner as the Scale of a Balance is weighed
down by the weight that is put into it, thus the Mind yields to things that are
plain; we cannot approve of a thing that is not plain nor manifest.

This is designed to make us comprehend that the Understanding being
indifferent to follow one Judgment or another, it is not nevertheless
indifferent to leave a plain manifest Truth to follow after another less
manifest, or to leave the Judgment that seems the truest, to embrace that which
has the less likelihood of Truth; because as a Scale weighed down by a greater
weight, can never be raised by a less weight put into the other Scale, but only
by a heavier, which weighing down this, shall cause the other to be lifted up:
Thus it is not possible that when some evident and experienced Truth has
prevailed upon the Understanding to consent, that it should alter its Judgment
unless upon some more weighty Reason succeeding. This chiefly appears in that
we sometimes remain in suspense, pondering in doubt and in uncertainty; for
this happens only because on both sides there seems to us as it were an equal
weight of Truth, the equal Balance of the one Scale hindering the rising or
falling of the other, which causes that the Understanding leans no more to the
one side than the other.

Thus if it seems to bend sometimes more to one side and sometimes to the
other, this is caused by the greater Attention that it gives sometimes to one
weight and sometimes to the other; and that the one draws to it as long time as
the other appears not the same, but this other nevertheless draws in the same
manner when it appears more strong; just as when we have poised a Balance even
with equal weights, if you now add to one and anon take away from the other
some little weights. So if the Understanding leans at last more to one side
than the other, this must needs be, because something has moved it more of
that side than of the other, or rather because the Attention alone, more
constant, assisted by impatience, may have procured a greater weight.

It Is true, that sometimes the Understanding leaving the Judgment, which of it
self is the truest, or absolutely true, embraces that which of it self is not
so true, but absolutely false; yet that which moves the Understanding, is
always the Appearance of Truth which it considers in every thing; and because
this Appearance may be either true or false, it happens that what is true in it
self is capable of being disguised by the Appearance of Falsehood, or not so
true, and that which is false of it self may be covered over with an Appearance
of Truth, or not so false: It happens, I say, that the Understanding may be
also carried to Falsehood or to that which is not so true, whiles the Falsehood
is veiled over with an Appearance of Truth, or of not so false, where the Truth
is covered over with an Appearance of Falsehood, or not so true. Therefore as
often as the Understanding being tied to a true Judgment, leaves this Judgment
to follow a false one, there must have intervened something which has taken
from the Truth its true and natural Guise, and which has given to the false a
counterfeit Luster, which has caused the alteration in the Judgment.

And if it be generally so, it is certain that this confirms what has been
particularly spoken of the alteration of our Consent or of our Judgments,
whether in respect of the Good or in respect of the Evil; and consequently that
the Judgment that we make that a thing is good or better, remains in the
Understanding as long as the Appearance either true or false, which causes the
thing to be reputed so, is in being and admitted, and that it is altered as
soon as this Appearance is changed.

It Is Likewise certain, that there being a necessity that the Understanding
should precede the Will, it is in vain to endeavor that the Will should change
its Inclination, unless we first endeavor to oblige the Understanding to alter
its Judgment; as we labor in vain that the Will should continue in its
Inclination or Appetition, if we take no care that the Understanding should
persist in the same Judgment.

Also it is for this cause that he who designs to embrace Virtue and prefer it
before all other Excellencies, ought to take heed that no Deceit creeps in,
which imposing upon the Understanding may make him imagine there is something
more excellent than Virtue. And as he shall have esteemed the highest Virtue to
consist in causing his Will to be agreeable with the Divine Will, he ought to
imprint deeply in his Mind that he cannot desire any thing more excellent than
what God will have. Saying to himself with Epictetus; I have brought my Desires
in subjection to the Will of God; if he will have me Sick, I am content; if he
will have me undertake any Thing, I will undertake it freely; if he will have
me accomplish any Thing, I will effect it accordingly; wont he have it so,
neither will I; will he have me to Dye, I am willing.

Finally it is certain that while we live here below, we are very Feeble and
very Weak, and that we cannot promise to our selves a constancy, either of
Judgment or of Will, and of Resolution; because of that Indifferency by which
the Understanding and the Will may pass from a Thing that is true, to another
that may appear more true; from a Thing that is good, to another that may
appear better. It Is certain that only in the Life to come this Indifferency
shall have an end, because in our future State the highest and most perfect
Truth, and the sovereign Good are easily known without mistake; and because
nothing truer will offer it self to the Understanding, nor nothing better to
the Will toward which it might bend, it is impossible but that we must continue
fixed most constantly, unchangeably, most necessarily, and most willingly;
Summa cum libentia. And this is what we have undertaken to explain.

Now that we may not seem to insist too long upon Things supernatural, let us
return to our Matter in Hand, and say again, That Liberty or Free Will is in
Man no longer than this Indifferency that we have mentioned continues in him.
For he is Free or at Liberty, First, That when Good or Evil be offered to him
he may choose either the Good by that appearance which inclines him, or the Evil
if it be disguised and covered over with the appearance of Good, which seems
more inviting, and consequently draws and moves him more powerfully than the
appearance of real Good. Secondly, That when two Advantages are offered to him,
he may follow the greater, if its appearance moves him, or the less if its
appearance be more attractive and tempting than that of the greater. Thirdly,
When he has two Evils before his Eyes, he may avoid the greater, being
dissuaded from it by its appearance, or the lesser, if its appearance seems
more troublesome and grievous.

This being supposed, this Passage out of Plato makes very much for our
purpose, That no Person of his own accord is inclined to Evil, and that it is
not in the power of Man's Nature to be willing to incline toward that which he
judges to be Evil, and decline that which he judges Good. So that if of two
Evils it be needful to choose one, there is no Person when he may choose the
least will take the greatest.

But because what Ovid makes Medea speak seems to be an Objection, viz. I see
what is better, and approve of it, yet I embrace what is worse.

-- Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor.
For this Reason we must observe the Question that Aristotle makes when he
inquires whether it is possible, that he who knows Things well and has a just
estimate for them, such as they may deserve, cannot forbear; Qui fieri possit
ut qui de rebus recte aestimat, incontinens sit^? For it is not without cause
that Socrates said, That it is not possible that in him who has Knowledge, any
other thing should bear sway contrary to that Knowledge; and so it is
impossible but that he who knows and values Things as he ought, should do that
which is best to be done, because if he acts otherwise, this proceeds from
Ignorance. From whence it seems that that common Saying is taken and used in
answer to the Words of Medea, viz. Every Man that Sins is Ignorant. Omnis
peccans est Ignorans.

To resolve the Doubt, and answer the Question Aristotle makes a good
distinction. For, says he, we may know Things either habitually or actually,
Habitu aut actu; For a Man may have a Knowledge that he makes no use of, as
when his Mind is employed about other Things than what he knows, if he be
asleep, in a Passion, or in Drink, and he may have such a Knowledge which he
exercises, as when his Mind is busy about what he understands. Now if a Man,
says he, knows a Thing actually, and has his Mind fixed on the Thing he
knows, and that his Thoughts are not otherwise at that time diverted, it is
impossible that he should act any thing contrary to his Knowledge, and
consequently when he percieves the excellency of Virtue, for example, and the
folly of Vice, that he should forsake Virtue and follow Vice. But if he knows
any Thing only habitually, or if he makes no use of his Knowledge, in such a
case he is in the same Condition as if he had no Knowledge at all, or were
Ignorant of the Thing; and then he may do Things contrary to his Knowledge, and
thus tho he knows habitually how beautiful Virtue is, and how abominable and
filthy Vice, yet that hinders him not from neglecting Virtue and embracing Vice.

But you may say, Does it not often happen, that he who Sins, really sees and
considers the beauty of that Virtue which he slights, and the filthiness of
that Vice which he pursues? Aristotle answers, That such a Man is like one full
of Wine, who by a certain Custom repeats some Verses out of Empedocles; or like
Children that read what they understand not, or but very little; or like
Stage Players that represent Persons unto whom they are not like; for in every
one that Sins there arises a Passion either of Lust, or Anger, or Ambition, or
Covetousness, that disturbs and disorders the Mind and Knowledge in such a
manner, that all the good that there is in Virtue, and all the evil that is in
Vice is obscured and covered over with a kind of Mist, so that it is hid or
scarce appears; whereas all that is Evil, that is to say, Painful in Virtue,
and all that is Good, that is to say, Grateful in Vice, is discovered, and
appears clear as at noon Day. By this means what is good in Virtue works but
feebly upon him who is viciously inclined, and the evil which is in Vice does
but faintly displease him who is virtuous. Thus a Man that Sins may very truly
say, that he perceives and sees the Things that he quits are better, and what
he chooses are worse, for that at another time according to the Habit which
makes him remember but confusedly and lightly, yet he was sometimes of another
Opinion. But yet at that very time that he Sins he cannot say so, for then he
holds for best what he embraces, and that for worse which he leaves. So that if
he should say that he approves then as best the Things that he had formerly
approved of, he would tell an apparent untruth, and would contradict himself,
for he certainly approves and allows as best the Things that he then pursues.

And tho he does this not without some kind of remorse and displeasure, yet
that proceeds doubtless from a Sense of the loss of some advantage thereby, or
of drawing upon himself some Evil. But that which nevertheless shows that this
displeasure is inconsiderable in comparison of the pleasure that prevails upon
him, is that he does not seriously, but only lightly consider the loss of the
Good, and the purchase of the Evil. This is so much the more easily to be
understood, if the Punishment, the Pain, the Shame, and the other Evils, which
he neither sees, nor perceives, nor fears, but only lightly and confusedly,
were more seriously and plainly considered; not as at a distance, or absent, or
to come, or doubtful, but ready to fall upon his Head present and certain, and
as if they were immediately to succeed and follow the wicked Action at the
Heels; he would certainly then forbear and desist from doing it, and would not
perish in the Vice.

Again, tho he that Sins and chooses the worst, should say, that he sees and
approves the best, nevertheless the want of consideration, or his inadvertency
which hinders him from seeing or considering all the Circumstances that are in
the Thing, or from seeing them as they ought to be, and should be, is
Ignorance. For this Reason, he that Sins is said to be Ignorant, for he would
not Sin if he were not so, and acted in that manner.

We must nevertheless consider, that he ought not therefore to think himself
excusable when he acts ignorantly, because he follows after that which appears
to him Good, and because it is not in his Power to hinder it from appearing in
that manner to him, under a pretense, that we are not the causes of the
appearance of Things. For tho among the common excuses for Sins, Men are wont
to reckon Ignorance, yet that Ignorance is, or ought to be a simple, absolute
and invincible Ignorance, such as was for Example that of Cephalus when he
killed Procris, who was lurking among Brambles and Thorns; I say, when he
killed Procris, whom he took for a wild Beast, and could not imagine that it was
his dear Wife. Whereas that Ignorance that is here pretended, proceeds from
neglect and a want of due Care and Consideration, as Aristotle tells us, Per
incuriam negligentiamve paritur, and for that reason is named a gross and
willful Ignorance, Affectata, supina: For he that Sins is ignorant, either
because he is himself the real cause of his Ignorance, or because he never
troubles himself, nor endeavors to know more; that is to say, because he does
not take sufficient care to consider every thing as he ought.

A drunken Man, says Aristotle, is Ignorant according to the first Case; for
he himself is the cause of his Ignorance, and of his Drunkenness, and 'twas in
his Power not to be Drunk, and so not to be Ignorant of what he does;
therefore, says he, this Ignorance don't excuse him, but on the contrary it
deserves a double Punishment. First, Because he made himself Drunk. Secondly,
For Sinning when he was Drunk. The same Thing may be said of him who from the
beginning makes no resistance to a light Passion, but suffers it to gather
Strength, so that it prevails more violently: And generally so it is of those
who suffer things to come to an Habit, which at the beginning they might easily
have overcome, but afterward it is beyond their Power to resist 'em. It Is in
this Case, says Aristotle, as with him who casts a Stone which he cannot
recall nor cause to come back, but 'twas in his Power not to cast it; or, as
with him, who living like a Glutton, becomes unavoidably sick, yet 'twas in his
Power also to have lived more abstemiously.

Again, a Man who is hurried and transported by his Passions, may also say,
Video meliora, proboque; because it is then likewise in his Power to mind the
Evils, or to consider seriously what and how great Mischiefs will attend; which
if he did, he would not be guilty of 'em: I say, that it is in his Power, for
it often happens that when he is just going to commit an Evil, and there comes
a Person of Wisdom or Note, or one of Authority, in whose Power it is to
revenge and punish this evil Action; upon this he presently forbears; nay,
there are some who stop in the midst of their Passion, and have so much Power
over themselves, as not to suffer themselves to be overcome. Besides, the use
of the Laws, of Precepts and Exhortations, are not in vain. We may take heed,
and if the Mind be attentive, it may overcome the appearances of Things, and
proceed in such a manner that they will appear really such as they ought to
appear.

Truly, every time that we may say, Video meliora, proboque, it is manifest that
the Action is not done without Deliberation, and that consequently it is in our
Power; for we cannot say so when it is done rashly and unadvisedly, as when at
the first moving of Anger, we are carried away with Revenge; from whence
proceeds the ordinary Excuse, That the first Motions are not in our Power.

And we cannot say as the Hegesiacks in Laertius, That Sins ought to be
pardoned, because no Man sins but he is forced thereunto by some Passion which
disturbs his Mind, Neque enim quemquam volentem, sed pertubatione aliqua
coactum peccare: For at least it is certain that till we give an occasion of
the Disturbance, there is no constraint nor force.

Nevertheless, because there are certain natural Disturbances, and certain
Desires which proceed from our selves, and arise against our Wills, Aristotle
holds that they are so much the more pardonable, because they are commonly
incident to all Men: And to show that there are some Passions that are born in
us, and that we derive from our Ancestors; he cites the Example of him that
excused himself for beating his Father; For my Father, says he, beat his
before me, and his Father beat his, and here is my Son will beat me when he
comes to be of Age. He alleges again the Example of him who being dragged by
his Son, commanded him when he was come to the Door to drag him no farther,
because, said he, I never dragged my Father beyond this place.

But here I find my self obliged to take notice, that whatsoever has been
hitherto said concerning the great Inclination of the Will to follow the
direction of the Understanding, ought to be understood with some Caution and
Circumscriptions: For though it be certain that we never desire what is unknown,
ignoti nulla cupido; and so the Will never acts until the Understanding
inclines it beforehand; and as we commonly say, holds a Torch before it to
enlighten it: And though it is also no less certain, that the Will is so
depending upon the Understanding, in following it, that of two unequal
Advantages proposed, it usually takes the most beneficial; yet, nevertheless,
when it is just ready to act, it may notwithstanding this direction, and without
the intervention of any other, leave that which is more, and embrace or follow
that which is less profitable.

It seems also that the Will does sometimes exercise this Power; for if we will
consult our selves, we shall find it true, that there are some Moments wherein
we mind and take notice of the goodness and excellency of Virtue; that we
discover it plainly, and agree, that it is to be preferred before the Pleasures
and Delights that Vice can afford us: So that if we did really drive at our own
Interest, we should decline Vice and embrace Virtue: Do we not experience, I
say, that sometimes notwithstanding we have these Notions and Considerations,
yet still we cling to Vice and forsake Virtue, forego the greater and make
choice of the less good? In a word, we see what is better, but take up with
what is worse, as Medea says, Video meliora, proboque; deteriora sequor.

Now this being so, it seems we should give more scope to the Power of the
Will, and that we ought not to suppose it so bound up or enslaved to the
directions of the Understanding, but that it may forsake them; and that if we
will save our Liberty without suffering any scruple to remain, we ought not to
make it so much to consist in the indifferency of the Understanding, that
limits the Will, as in the indifferency of the Will that limits it self: So
that when all things needful to act are supposed, it may either act or not act,
follow what is good or not follow it, embrace that which appears more or less
advantageous: So that it is not with the Will as with a Balance or Beam, which
is forced to lean on that side where there is the greatest weight; but like a
Balance that determines and inclines it self by its own Strength, sometimes on
that side where there is the least weight, where there is the least reason, and
least appearance of advantage.

Let no Man object, that a lesser advantage, in comparison of a greater, is
reputed an Evil; and as the Will cannot incline to Evil as Evil, it cannot by
consequence incline to a less advantage: For we may absolutely deny that a less
advantage is an Evil, in comparison of greater; for let it be never so little,
it is always an advantage: Besides, we may answer and say, That when the Will
leaving a greater Good inclines to a less, it inclines not to Evil as Evil,
because it looks not upon it as Evil but truly as Good, though by chance it may
be found to be a less Good; certainly if when two advantages are proposed to
the Will, it has Power to refuse 'em both; it will doubtless have the same
Power to take the one or the other, and consequently to choose the less.

However, it is certain that though we should appeal to the Judgment of Plato and
Aristotle (which is what our Author seems to have the greatest esteem for) so
that we should make Liberty to consist in the first place and originally in the
indifferency of the Understanding; yet, I say, it is certain, that in this
Supposition, we may still save our Liberty, in that, when we are ready to act
and prepared, it is always in our Power to stop and desist from acting, and to
consider seriously of things; so that if we distinguish the real advantages
from those that are counterfeit, we should cause the false Reasonings in the
Understanding to be rectified; and by that means cause this Propensity that is
in the Will to be enlightened, and so consequently not to seek after an apparent
good instead of what is real, Vice instead of Virtue.

CHAP. II. Of Fortune and Destiny.
THOUGH according to the Opinion of Cicero, Folly, Mistake, Error, Blindness and
Ignorance of Things seem to have introduced and brought in fashion the Names of
Nature and Fortune, and that therefore Fortune cannot be without Ignorance:
Nevertheless, it is not generally agreed upon, that this is only a foolish, vain
and imaginary Name, seeing there are many that hold that it is not only a Cause,
but a Divine Cause; which occasioned these Verses of Juvenal.

Fortune was never Worshipped by the Wise;
But, set aloft by Fools, usurped the Skies.
That it is not really so, Plutarch, according to Plato, holds, That it is a
Cause by accident, which unexpectedly follows things acted according to
Counsel. And agreeable with this is Aristotle's Opinion, That it is a Cause by
accident in things done for a certain End, and that this Cause is uncertain and
changable. For this example is alleged as a common Instance; he who digging in
the Ground with an intent to Plant a Tree, found a Treasure which he never
thought of; now, the Discovery of the Treasure is an Effect by accident, that
is to say, that it happened beyond the Expectation and Intention of him that
acted: So that he who dug being the cause of the Pit made in the Earth, is
also the cause by accident of the Discovery of the Treasure.

It Is in this manner that the Notion of Fortune is commonly explained.
Nevertheless it may seem by this Name that something else, I know not what, is
understood, and that they call not proprerly Fortune, either him who digs, or
his action. Therefore often we call a casual thing by the name of Fortune, or
that which happens unexpectedly. And it seems by this Name of Fortune, we are
to understand, The concurrence of several Causes that happen without any mutual
dependence or advice; so that from them proceeds an event or an effect called
Casual, which all the Causes, or some of them, or at least he to whom it
happens, had never in his Mind and Intention. So as by the casual Discovery of
the Treasure, it is not only requisite that some should dig in the Earth, but
that some other body should first hide the Money: It Is manifest, that Fortune or
the cause of the Discovery, is the concurrence of the hiding of the Money and of
the diging in the Earth in that place.

I say, without any mutual dependence or advice, and beyond or besides the
Intention of all or some of the Causes: Because, though one or many of the Causes
may have designed it and intended it, it is no less Fortune in respect of that
Cause that never was thought upon: As if one hides a Treasure, with a design
that he whom he foresees will dig in the Earth, should find it. In this Case,
the Event is not truly Casual, in regard of him who hid the Treasure; but it
will be nevertheless in regard of him who was ignorant that any thing had been
there concealed. Thus that which happened at the opening of the Sepulcher of
Nitocris was not absolutely a Hazard or Casual, in respect to Nitocris; for he
imagined that some King would come to open it, being induced by this
Inscription; If any of the Kings of Babylon that shall come after me be in want
of Money, let him open this Sepulcher, and let him take as much as he please;
but let him not open it unless he has need, for in such a Case it will avail
him nothing. But the Event was a Hazard or Casual, in relation to Darius,
because instead of Money he found this written within. If thou were not
unsatiable of Money, thou would not have opened the Sepulchers of the Dead.
We must nevertheless acknowledge, that we call that properly Fortune, that of
all the Causes which concur together, not one of them foresees what will happen
from thence. An eminent Example of this is instanced in delaying the death of
Socrates, after Sentence had been pronounced: For the cause of this delay
happened thus; The day before the Sentence was given, it happened, according to the
yearly Custom, a Ship was Crowned in order to be sent to Delos; and in the mean
while, till its return, it was not lawful to execute any Person. But here,
neither, the Priest in Crowning of the Ship, nor the Judge in Pronouncing the
Sentence ever thought, by this accident, to delay the death of Socrates.

Now it is not without cause, that Epicurus persuades us so much, that we should
not acknowledge Fortune as a Goddess; for the weakness of Men is such, that
they don't only admire that which they understand not, but they fancy it also
as some divine Thing, and above Nature: So that when they had perceived that
sometimes Fortune was favorable and sometimes adverse and contrary; they
adored it under several Shapes, and erected Temples to it under these several
Titles, Fortunae Bonae, Malae, Blandae, Averruncae, Calvae, Equestri, etc. This
has given occasion to the Complaints of Pliny, That all over the World, and at
all times, Men address themselves to Fortune; so that she alone is called upon,
she alone accused and condemned; she alone is praised and blamed; that she
alone is worshipped with Scoffs. Many fancy her uncertain, unconstant, blind,
favoring those who deserve it not, etc. From hence is that common Expression;
The May Game, or Sport of Fortune. And this has caused the life of Man to be
likened to playing at Dice or Cards, which is equally hazardous to the
Gamester, whether he understand the Game or not.

It Is true, that as the Play and the Life of Man are managed by Industry, a
skilful Gamester and a a wise Man commonly succeed best; but this happens not
always, for often the ignorant Gamester, is more fortunate than the skilful,
and the weak Man more successful than the wise; and very frequently Fortune
has as much or more a hand in things than Wisdom. This caused Plutarch to say,
That Fortune and Wisdom, though very much differing, often bring forth very
unlike Effects. And as there are but few Men who make Profession of Wisdom,
that know well how to manage and govern the Proceedings of Fortune,
Theophrastus has been so bold as to say, That it is Fortune, and not Wisdom
that governs our Life.

Vitam regit Fortuna, non Sapienta. And Lucretius speaking according to the
Vulgar, says, That Fortune often attends those who do not greatly seek it, and
as often flies from those who eagerly pursue and hunt after it: So true is it,
says he further, That there is some secret hidden Power that overrules human
Affairs, and seems to delight and sport it self with over-turning Crowns and
Dignities, and trampling 'em under Feet.

Vsque adeo res humanas vis abdita quaedam
Obterit, and pulchros fasces, saevasque secures
Proculcare, and ludibrio sibi habere videtur!
Of Destiny.
AS to what concerns Destiny, Homer speaks more plainly of it than of Fortune;
for he makes Hector say, That if the Destinies don't appoint nor order it,
nothing is able to take away his Life beside; but no Man can avoid his Destiny.

Nam nisi Fata vocent, nemo me mittat ad Orcum:
At Fatum vitat nemo, mihi creed, virorum.
Now though Cicero fancies that Fate and Destiny is but a foolish, idle, and
superstitious Name, Anilis plenum superstitionis fati nomen; and Epicurus, That
it is only a fantastical Name, and that nothing is done by Destiny:
Nevertheless, as there have always been Maintainers of Destiny, some taking it
in one sense, others in another, we must here endeavor to understand the
several Opinions into which they have been divided.

Among these Opinions there are two Principal; for some will have Destiny to be
Divine, others a mere Natural thing. The First, were the Disciples of Plato,
and the Stoics; according to whose Opinion, Plutarch, Chalcidius, and some
others, look upon Destiny or Fate in two manners; First, As a Substance, which
they took for God himself, or for that eternal Reason, which from all Eternity
has ordered all things, and has so joined all Causes, both Superior and
Inferior together, that all that happens, either Good or Evil, happens persuant
to these Causes. They bestowed several Names upon this Divine Substance or
Reason; for sometimes they termed it, as Plato, The Soul of the World; The
Reason and the eternal Law of the Nature of the Universe. And sometimes, as
Zeno and Chrysippus, The moving Virtue of Matter, a spiritual Virtue, and the
Reason of the Order that Governs and Rules all Things. Sometimes God, Jupiter,
Understanding or Intellect, as Aristotle and Seneca; And sometimes with
Heraclitus, The Reason that penetrates into all Things; And sometimes, as
Pythagoras, The governing and ruling Cause of all Things, both Universal and
Particular.

Secondly, As an Act; namely, in part for the Decree it self, or for the
Command by which God has established and ordained all things, and partly for
the Order it self; that Consequence and Concatenation of Causes at first
appointed, in which it pursues its course without varying in the least from the
Rules and Methods at first prescribed: For thus they spoke of it when they
called Destiny, The Law of Nature, The Companion of the Whole, The Daughter of
Necessity, The Order that includes and comprehends all other Orders; Or, as
Chrysippus says, A certain eternal and immutable sequel of Things, etc.
Sempiterna quaedam and indeclinabilis series rerum, and catena volvens
semetipsa sese, and implicans per aeternos consequentiae ordines in quibus
apta, connexaque est. To which Lucan seems to allude in these two Verses, At
simul a prima descendit origin Mundi
Causarum series, atque omnia Fata laborant.


And Hesiod, when he speaks distinctly of the three Parcae which Spin the Life
of Man, the first is named Atropos, because the Time past is irrecoverable,
which is as the Thread spun and wound in the Spindle: The second is called
Clotho, because of the Time present that runs, which is as the Thread in the
hand of her who Spins: The third is Lachesis, because of the Time to come, or
the hazard, which is as the Wool or Flax that is not yet twisted. Lachesis, in
Plato, is said to govern the Time past, Clotho the present, Atropos the future:
That which is added of Lachesis, that she receives the celestial Actions of the
two other Sisters, that she joins them together, and that she distributes them
here below upon the Earth; shows the Opinion of the Astrologers, who bind the
Fate of Mankind to the Stars, and make it to depend upon them, and come from
them, according to Manilius; Fata quoque and vitas hominum suspendit ab Astris.

An Opinion among the Astrologers more certain than that of the Sybils, and the
Oracles which were said to utter forth the Destinies: For to hear them speak,
they seem to be no less acquainted with the Designs and Decrees of Heaven, than
the Oaks, which Plato tells us came forth from Voices of the Enchantresses, as
Virgil observes, Quam comitabantur fatalia carmina quercus.

Moreover, as the Disciples of Plato, the Stoics, and the other Patrons of
Destiny, seem consequently to defend Necessity, which Seneca styles a Necessity
of all Things, and of every Action, which no Violence can break or alter: For
the Destinies, says he, exercise their Right and their absolute and
uncontrolable Power, without favoring any, and without being moved either with
Prayers or Compassion, they observe their fatal course appointed and
irrevocable; like as the swift and furious downfall of the Waters from some
steep Places which neither go back nor stop for those Waters which follow, but
continually thrust down the first; thus the constant sequel of Destiny makes
the order of Things under this first and eternal Law, to submit to the
irrevocable Decree. As therefore they seem to maintain, I say, a Necessity,
which altogether destroys the Liberty of human Actions, and leaves nothing in
our Free Will; for that reason these Objections are opposed, proceeding from
the Inconveniences that will ensue.

The Chief of these Inconveniences, is, That if our Souls, as they are placed
and ranked in the sequel of Things, be governed by the Destinies, and being
deprived of all Libery, they act always out of an immutable and unavoidable
Necessity; the Liberty and ordinary Conduct of the Affairs of human Life fails,
and all Consultations are useless; for whatever you resolve upon, there shall
nothing happen but what has been decreed by the Destinies, Thus Prudence will
become idle and needless, the study of Wisdom frivolous, Legislators and
Tyrants will be equally ridiculous; because they command things that we must
unavoidably do, or what we can by no means perform: So that there will be
neither Vice nor Virtue, nor any thing that will deserve either Praise or
Blame, seeing that they alone are reputed worthy of Praise who might do ill but
behave themselves well, and those worthy of Blame who might do well but behave
themselves ill. In this case, no body will deserve Reward for any good Deeds,
as no body will deserve Punishment for any bad, because the first cannot but
act well, and the latter has not the Power to forbear and abstain from what is
ill: Finally, if all things proceeded from an unavoidable Necessity, in vain
should we offer up our Prayers, our Vows and Sacrifices, etc.

It Is therefore upon occasion of this Doctrine of the Stoics, that Lucian
brings in Cyniscus very pleasantly, upbraiding Jupiter: That he dreads not his
Thunderbolts, if the Destinies have not designed that he should perish in that
manner, seeing that Jupiter himself, and the other Gods, are bound and subject
to Destiny: So that both Gods and Men are but the Servants and Ministers of the
Parcae, or rather mere Tools or Instruments, as an Ax or a Sithe; insomuch,
that Jupiter with his great Power was not able to deliver his own Son from
Death, his beloved Son Sarpedon.

Tot nati cecidere Deum, quin occidit una
Sarpedon mea Progenies.
This Doctrine of the Stoics made Seneca to say, That God truly prescribed the
Destinies, but that he himself is bound to obey them: Ille ipse omnium Conditor
and Rector scripsit quidem fata, sed sequitur; semper paret, semel jussit.

That we are carried away by the force of Destiny, unto which we must willingly
yield; That nothing is able to prevail upon the inexorable Lachesis, or to make
her unwind her Spindle; That all that the Mortals do or suffer comes from
above; That all things proceed in a certain settled and appointed Course, and
that each Day presses on the former.

Fatis agimur; cedite fatis.
Non sollicitae possunt curae
Mutare rati stamina fusi
Quidquid patitur mortale genus;
Quidquid facimus venit ex alto;
Servatque suae decreta colus.
Lachesis dura revoluta manu,
Omnia certo tramite vadunt,
Primusque dies dedit extremum.
Manilius speaks almost the same Things, and says plainly, That the Destinies
govern the World, that we Dye as soon as we are Born, and that our End takes
its date from our first Beginning.

Fata regunt orbem, certa stant omnia lege,
Largaque per certos signantur tempora cursus;
Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet.
Lastly, Those Philosophers who hold that Destiny is a thing altogether
natural, and that it depends not upon any Decree, are divided into two Sects;
The first have supposed a sequel of natural Causes, linked and tied together in
such a manner, that the last always is depending upon the first, and so
successively each by the other, so that they cannot but do what they do; and
from hence follows that Necessity which can by no means be avoided, and which
is altogether agreeable with that which is deduced from the first Opinion, or
at least differs not much, but only in this, that in the first Opinion the
sequel of Things runs and proceeds from an eternal Decree of God, but according
to this latter Opinion, they run of themselves, and of their own accord. The
others truly suppose a sequel of natural Causes, tied and joined together, but
yet in such a manner, that the last Causes depend not in such a manner upon the
First, or are not moved by them so much, but that they may be hindered from
doing that which they would otherwise do. I say that they may be interrupted
either by Things casual, or by Things that act freely.

Among the First are reckoned Heraclitus, Empedocles, Parmenides, Leucippus,
Democritus and some others; but I shall only mention Democritus, because he was
the most famous of 'em all. This Philosopher maintains, That Nature cannot act
otherwise than it does, because the first Principles, or as he calls 'em Atoms,
from whence all Things have their Beings, and are made, have a natural and an
unalterable Motion by which they must of necessity be carried and moved. The
compounded Beings that are all made of Atoms, cannot but be moved by the same
Motions that move the Atoms. And from thence he gathers this supposed
Necessity, by which he will have all Things done, and by which the World it
self is made in that manner that it now subsists; because the Atoms, as he
says, which casually have here met together, have had such and such Motions,
that they could not gather together in any other manner, nor make any other
Form or Shape; and that when this Form was once laid, they cannot but proceed
in that Motion that they are in, and by these Motions all Things are
accomplished: So that this Necessity, in his Opinion, is nothing else but the
motion, the percussion and repercussion of the Matter, that is to say of Atoms,
out of which all Things are formed.

Thus it is easy to see what he means when he says, The necessity by which all
Things are made, is the Destiny, the Justice, the Providence and the Contriver
of the World, etc. For he supposes that the sequel of Things, in which the
nature of Destiny consists, cannot be otherwise than it is, and that it depends
upon this sequel that such a thing should be, or should be thought Just, and
another Unjust; that the World should be governed in the manner that it is, and
that in the beginning it was so made, etc. He refers all Things to the natural
Motion of Atoms. And upon this Supposition he believed, First, That the Soul it
self, which he fancies to consist chiefly of globular Atoms and well polished,
moves several ways of its own accord, because of their differing Motions, for
Example in the Sad and Mournful in one manner, in the Choleric in another, and
otherwise in those who have a good and mild Temper. Secondly, That it is
diversely moved and carried by the different movement of these Atoms; whereof
the Images or sensible and intellectual Shapes are joined and intermingled. So
that it cannot but be attracted if these Shapes be agreeing, and cannot but be
repelled if they be disagreeing. Thirdly, That if at some time it is not drawn
by some alluring Shape, this proceeds from that there are others on the same
side more powerful that resist; likewise if it be not driven by some that
naturally resist, it is because on the same side there arise and move some more
powerful that draw at the same moment toward the same Place. Fourthly, That
consequently he cannot but be inclined to Good, or to that which intices, and
flatters, and attracts, while he perceives it not mingled with any Evil, nor
cannot but fly from Evil, or that which hurts and begets an Aversion, while he
sees no Good mingled with it. Fifthly, That of two Advantages proposed, he
cannot but be carried to the greater, because he is drawn to it more
powerfully, and of two Evils he cannot but fly from the greater, because he is
the more strongly driven away. Lastly, That through the Ignorance and Blindness
of the Spirit of Man, he sees not often all the Evil that is consequent to the
Good, nor all the Good is consequent to the Evil, he is really deceived, and
often carried to an Object from which it were to be wished that he were
diverted, and flies from that which is really to be wished that he should
follow after; but in the mean while Things happening in this manner, and not
otherwise, he cannot but be carried whither he is carried, nor cannot but be
driven from what he is driven. So that there remains nothing else for him to
desire, but that the Shapes of Things might come to him such as they ought, to
make them appear as really they are, and that the Evil might not impose upon
him under the disguise of Good, nor the Good under that of Evil.

He fancies further, that certain Things seem truly to be in our Power, seeing
that we try, that we advise, and consult, and that we freely choose without
constraint one thing before another: But nevertheless that is nothing in
reality, because the occasion of the Consultation or the representation of
several Things, which make us almost, equal, and keep the Balance steady,
holding our Spirit in suspense, cannot but be made to us, because of the sequel
of Things which proceeds from a higher Principle; the Mind remaining in an
uncertainty until the usefulness of the one appears to exceed that of the
other, and then the first usefulness draws and fixes it. As if election were no
other thing but a pursuance of what is best, or of that which seems best, and
which is done without Constraint or without Aversion, because we naturally love
Good of our own accord, and willingly seek after it. So that in his Opinion
Liberty is nothing else but Libentia.

Moreover he holds, as all others do, who are Defenders of this Doctrine of
Fatality, and namely Manilius, viz. That to treat now of Fate or Destiny, and
to examine its Laws and Nature as we here at present do, that this is according
to the Laws and Course of Destiny.

Hoc quoque fatorum est legem perdiscere fati,
Hoc quoque fatale est sic ipsum expendere fatum.
Because if you suppose any kind of human Action, he will have its nearest
cause to have been so moved by some other going before, and this by another,
and that other by one preceding that, and so on to Infinity; that such a
Series of Causes has been appointed, and that such and such Actions could not
but follow. Such as is, says Cicero, the Desire of Ennius; Would to God that
never any Ax had out down those unhappy Trees of Pelion. He might have taken
his Rise a little higher in this manner, Would to God that never any Trees had
grown upon Mount Pelion; nay, further yet, Would to God that Mount Pelion had
never been; and so by ascending still higher to wish, That the Ship had never
been made, and that Medea had never departed from her own House.

Among those who have truly allowed of a natural Necessity, but nevertheless
not absolute and unavoidable, the chief are Aristotle and Epicurus. In respect
of Aristotle, he will have Destiny or fatal Necessity to be nothing else but
Nature it self, or if you please, every Cause as it acts according to Nature,
or according to its natural Course.

As for Epicurus, he was of the same Opinion as Aristotle, and accordingly he
took away the absolute and unavoidable necessity of Things, but he has this
Conceit particularly to himself, that he has invented for that purpose another
Hypothesis, and has fancied this long series of Causes, or this mixture of
Atoms mentioned before, that there might be something to break off the
necessity of Destiny, and might preserve the liberty of the Will, which he
says is free and not subject to the Fates.

-- Et fatis avolsa voluntas. That is to say, out of that sequel or series of
Movements, which according to Democritus follow one another by an absolute,
everlasting and unavoidable Necessity, as if Experience and Reason had drawn
this Truth from the Mouth of Epicurus, contrary to his own Principles.

Besides, did all Things move in a direct Line,
Did still one Motion to another join,
In certain order, and no Seeds decline,
And make a Motion fit to dissipate,
The well-wrought Chain of Causes and strong Fate;
Whence comes that perfect freedom of the Mind,
Whence comes the Will so free, so unconfined,
Above the power of Fate, by which we go,
When ere we please, and what we will we do?
But Democritus, as Cicero has afterward done, would but make a Jest of that
Hypothesis or Supposition, not only because it is a mere Imagination, but also
because it is of no use to Epicurus nor to his design; for says he, This
declining Motion of Atoms being as natural as the perpendicular, all Things
will be done always in the same manner as by Destiny, seeing that which will
happen will happen always by the same necessity according to the difference and
diversity of the Causes of these Motions which follow one another, as in a kind
of Chain by a certain continued Series; because he supposing the Spirit of Man
to be corporeal, or composed of Atoms as other Things are he draws it not out
of that everlasting Chain of Motions, which are of themselves natural and
necessary, as he makes all the Atoms generally to be.

It can never be, says Democritus to Epicurus, That the Mind of Man can show
or exercise this Liberty, by which he desires, as suppose, for instance an
Apple: He ought first to have the Idea or visible Shape of the Apple in his
Imagination, which Idea passing through his Eyes, moves his Understanding to
know the Apple: And that the Apple may be able to transmit that Idea to the
Eye, it ought to be put into such a place by one who has gathered it from the
Tree, or that he has had elsewhere. Now the Tree, besides the Sunbeams, the
Moisture and the Earth, which have made it grow, ought to have had a Grain of
Seed from whence it had its beginning: This Grain must have proceeded from
another Apple, that Apple from another Tree, which Tree was set in that place
and in that time, and not in another; and thus going back to the very beginning
of the World, in which time the Earth and all Earthly Seeds were generated, as
he says from a general Meeting or Concourse of these Atoms, which that they
might be able to meet or gather together in such a place, and in that manner
ought to come from thence and not from any other place, from that World and not
from another, and so of all the foregoing Eternity. Besides, if, as he
pretends, the Spirit is made up of Atoms, these Atoms ought to have been
continued in the Seed of the Parents; they ought to gather there together, from
certain Food, from a certain Air, from a certain Sun: Such and such Food ought
to have been taken and no other, their Causes and all other Causes ought to
have been so, and to proceed from such Causes and from no other, and so from
all Eternity. So that these Causes have from all Eternity been so bound to the
other Causes, that when these last have met together; the Mind could not but
desire and wish for this Apple.

This is what Cicero seems to have in his Fancy, when he laughs at this
Declension of Atoms, as a thing altogether whymsical and fantastical, and of no
use to save our Freedom and remove the absolute Necessity of Things; for if the
right and perpendicular Motion of the Atoms proceeds from a Necessity of
Nature, that of the Declension will also be of the same Necessity. So that though
we may say that Epicurus deserves to be commended for having endeavored to
preserve human Liberty, we may also say, that he has not succeeded well in it,
and that he could never do it by continuing in his own Principles and Doctrine:
Therefore we shall take our leave here of Epicurvs, with his Clinamen
Principiorum, and endeavor to explain it by some other Means.

CHAP. III. How Destiny may be reconciled, or consist with Fortune and Liberty.
HAving explained the several Opinions of the Philosophers, concerning Destiny,
we must now examine whether we are to allow it or not, and in what manner, and
how we may reconcile it with Liberty. First, The Opinion of Democritus ought to
be rejected, because he takes from God the Creation and Government of the
World; nor is it consistent with the Doctrine of our Faith: Besides, it is
repugnant to the Light of Nature, which shows us by our own experience, that we
are Free and at Liberty. That of Aristotle and Epicurus may be allowed, as to
this, That it makes Destiny and Nature, or natural Causes to be the same thing,
and that it endeavors to preserve our Liberty; but it ought also to be laid
aside as to this, That it allows not in God the Knowledge of Things, and that
it supposes that there is neither Creation nor Providence: So that there
remains none but Plato's Opinion, and that of the Stoics, unto which we may
adhere; and the rather, because they hold, that it is God who has created and
disposes, and governs the World.

But now as the chief Difficulty, which appears here, is to reconcile Destiny
with Liberty, it will not be very needful that we should reconcile it with
Fortune; for in a word, we may say, that Destiny and Fortune may be allowed,
upon Condition that we agree that Destiny is the Decree of the Divine Will,
without which nothing is done; and Fortune, the Concourse or the Event, which,
though it is not foreseen by Men, has been nevertheless foreseen by God and
placed among the Series of Causes. We shall not therefore so much busy our
selves to reconcile Fortune, as to make Freewill agree with Destiny: It seems
that we cannot better proceed, than by supposing, with St. Thomas, That
Destiny, in respect of Men, is nothing else but that part of Providence that
the Divines term Predestination; for by this means we shall reconcile both
Predestination and Destiny with Liberty. We shall say, That God has created
necessary Causes and free Causes, and that both are so subject to the Divine
Providence, that they all act after their own manner; the necessary in a
necessary manner, and the free freely: But we meet here with two great
Difficulties.

The first Difficulty, is that which proceeds from the Foreknowledge or the
Divine Prescience, which Ammonius says is so obscure, that it has obliged
many learned Men to reject that which we name Contingency: For it is not only
among the Divines, that this way of Argument is in Vogue, viz. Either God knows
infallibly and certainly that Peter will deny him, or he knows it not: We
cannot say, that he knows it not, for he foretold it, and is no Liar; and if he
knows it not, he would not know all things, and consequently he would not be
God; he therefore knew it infallibly and certainly. It could not therefore
otherwise happen, but Peter must deny him; for if it could have otherwise been,
and that making use of his Liberty, he had not really denied him; we might then
say, that God's Foreknowledge had been deceitful, and his Prediction false.
But if that cannot be, he was not free either to deny or not to deny; he had
therefore no Free Will. I say, it is not only among the Divines alone, that this
way of Reasoning is usual; we have the like among the Philosophers: In this
manner they speak in the Writings of Ammonius; Either the Gods know infallibly
the Event or Justice of things that are contingent; that is to say, which of
the things shall happen, or they know not: We cannot say, etc.

Know then that the Divines solve this Difficulty by distinguishing two sorts
of Necessities, the one absolute, the other conditional or upon supposition;
for Example, it is absolutely necessary that two times two should make four, or
that Winter should be past; but yet it is not necessary that you shall lay the
Foundation of a Building, or that you should depart out of Town; however if you
will suppose that you are to Build, or that you should be in the Country, then
it is required that you shall lay Foundations, or that you should go out of
Town; but this Necessity is still a Necessity upon Supposition, which takes not
away our Liberty; because he who lays Foundations, might choose whether he would
lay them or no, as he who goes out of Town might not go out if he pleased. So
in respect of Peter, it is true, say they, the denial of Peter which God
foresaw, shall be infallible; but it shall only be through a Necessity upon
Supposition, which, as we have said, injures not our Freedom. And it is
doubtless no wonder, say they, that this Necessity is not repugnant to Liberty,
because it don't precede or go before it, but follows after, and that it is not
so much in the Thing as in the Circumstance of the Time: For when we say, that
it is necessary that Peter should have denied, we don't understand that there
was any thing in Peter antecedently, to constrain him to act so, but only that
now there is something in the Time which has caused him to act in the time; I
say, which as it is past and cannot but be past: So the thing that has been
done, in what time, in what manner soever it has been done, cannot but be
done: So that all the Necessity falls upon the Time past. Now as God knows all
things, he truly foresees that Peter would deny him; but the foreseeing of this
Denial, follows the foreseeing of the free Determination: So that he only
foresees plainly that Peter would deny him, because he foresees that Peter
would determine himself, or freely resolve to deny him: From whence it is, that
we commonly say, That Peter will not deny; because God foresaw, but God foresaw
because Peter will deny.

In truth, all Knowledge is outward and exterior to the thing known, and that a
thing borrows not what it has from that Knowledge, but it has it of it self,
or from its Cause. As the Snow is not white, because it is known to be white,
but it is known to be white because it is white.

I confess, that there is this difference between the Divine Knowledge and
Ours, that ours cannot extend to things that are contingent, but only to the
things that are present or past; whereas the Divine Knowledge reaches to the
time to come: Nevertheless, as the things that are now past were formerly to
come, and in the same Condition as those that are now to come; and that we
understand that the things that are now to come shall hereafter be past, and in
the same Condition as those that are now past; so it is certain, that as the
Knowledge either of God or of Men makes not the things which heretofore have
been, to be past, because they are known to be past, but they are known to be
past because they are now past; and thus those that are to come are not to
come, because God knows them, but because they are to come.

Thus, for Instance, If Peter could have not denied, and that upon using his
Liberty, he had not denied; there would then have been in God's Foreknowledge
and Foretelling a deceit. This we deny; for at the same time we don't agree,
that God would foreknow or foretell that Peter should deny: For if it had been
so, he had foreseen and foretold that he would not have denied; because in this
Case there would be a Supposition contrary, namely, that Peter would freely
resolve to not deny: Now we agree, that Peter will deny, and that God foresees
and foretells that truly because Peter being able to resolve either to deny or
not to deny, he will resolve rather to deny than not.

The second Difficulty is taken from that kind of Question or Sophistical
Argument which is called the Slothful Reason, because if we obeyed and followed
it, says Cicero, we should remain always with folded Elbows, and never attempt
or endeavor any thing in our Life; Either I am predestined, or I am not,
that is to say, either I am elected from all Eternity to an everlasting Glory,
or reprobated and designed for perpetual Torments. If I am predestined, then
whatsoever I do, I cannot be damned; but if I am a reprobate, then whatsoever
means I use, and whatsoever pain I suffer, I cannot be saved; now one or the
other must necessarily be true: Therefore whatsoever I do, seeing I cannot
advantage my self, what need is there that I should take care about any thing?
From thence some draw this Conclusion, That they may boldly go on in a course
of Vice and Wickedness; for we often hear People reasoning in this manner; If I
am predestined, neither my Crimes nor my evil Deeds can damn me; If I am a
reprobate, my Piety and Sanctity will profit me nothing, but I am one of them:
Therefore I need not trouble my self, I may do what I please.

In the same manner, in the Works of Cicero, we find certain Philosophers of
his time arguing thus; If it be your Fate that you should be cured of this
Distemper, whether you desire the Physician's Assistance or no you will be
cured. And if your Destiny be that you shall not be cured, call the Physician
or call him not, you cannot be cured; but one of these two must be; therefore
it profits nothing to call for the Physician's Assistance: We may also,
without using the word Destiny or Fate, alter the words in this manner, and say
thus, If from all Eternity this has been true, That you shall be cured of that
Disease, call for the Physician or call not for him, you shall be cured. And so
if from all Eternity this has been true, You shall not be cured of that
Disease; whether you have a Physician or no, you shall not be cured.

This Difficulty has caused among the Divines two famous Opinions; in either
of which there is always this to be noted, that after they have been both well
examined, we are still forced to confess, of what Persuasion soever we are,
That this Mystery is above the reach of human Judgment; and to say with the
Apostle, That the depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God is
great, his Judgments incomprehensible, and his Ways past finding out: O
altitudo divitiarum sapentiae and scientiae, Dei; quam incomprehensibilia sunt
judicia ejus and investigabiles viae ejus!

The first Opinion maintains, That God from all Eternity has predestined and
chosen out from among the Generations of Mankind a certain number of People, to
whom out of his mere Bounty, and without any consideration of their Merits, nor
any foresight of their good Actions, he has decreed their everlasting
Happiness, and that he has reprobated or condemned all the rest to everlasting
Torments, considering nevertheless, and foreseeing their wicked Actions.

The second holds, That God has also predestined some to Glory, but with a
respect to their good Deeds foreseen, as he has reprobated all the rest, with
a respect to their evil Deeds foreseen: For in this manner the Matter being
conceived according to Man's Judgment, may be thus explained.

God from all Eternity has decreed to create the World; and in this World,
Men, who being left to the use of their Reason and Liberty, might be capable of
Rewards and Punishments. He has also decreed to grant to all Men a
supernatural Assistance, that is to say, a sufficient Grace, to the end that
those who according to their Liberty should make use of this Grace to do well,
should be destinated or designed for Glory; and that those who should abuse and
neglect it, by doing Evil, should be designed for Torments. Lastly, because he
has foreseen that some would make a good use of his Grace, and should die in
that State; whereas all the rest would make but a bad use of it, and would
never reform, not even at the very hour of Death; for that Reason, he has
decreed to the first Glory everlasting, and to the last everlasting Punishments.

Now either of these Opinions answer and contradict the slothful Arguments or
way of Reasoning; the last has this advantage, that it may answer it more
easily than the first; for truly it is very difficult for the first Opinion to
preserve Liberty or Free Will in those who, by an efficacious decree of God,
without any regard had to their good Works foreseen, have been predestined to
Glory; for as this Decree preceeds all the Motions of the Will foreseen, how
can the Will be free to do any thing from whence may ensue everlasting
Damnation? For if it should do it, then the Decree of Election would be void
and frustrated, neither is it less difficult to preserve it in the reprobate;
for if we suppose them not to be elected, they cannot, whatever they do, be
admitted among the Elect.

I know there are some who offer here a seeming difference, when they allow to
God a certain conditional Knowlede and that of Means. And they require good
Works in such a manner, if not for the Decree of Election, at least for the
Execution; so that no Body arrives to this Glory without Works and without
Merits preceding, at least without the Merits of a Savior; but as the
difficulty is not thereby removed, the Truth is, that they acknowledge no other
Liberty but that which we understand commonly by this Word Libentia.

Nevertheless they bring this reason against them who would make use of this
slothful reasoning, That there is a very good cause why a Man should endeavor
to do Good rather than Evil, because tho the Decree is unknown to us,
nevertheless it is certain that no Man shall ever be promoted to Glory if he
has not done good Works; neither shall he be banished into Torments if he has
never done Evil.

They say moreover, that it concerns us very much to attain as much as we are
able to a certainty of our Election by good Works, rather than of Reprobation
by Evil, that so we may be able to allay the Fears and apprehensions in which
we must otherwise spend our Lives, and that we may act and proceed on with this
assurance, that while we do well we have no reason to dread any Evil from God,
who is most Good and most Just.

But in the mean while that no Person might glory that he ought to be elected
because of his good Works, and that none should complain because he was not
comprehended in the Election, and that it was none of his; Fault against him
that boasts they make use of this Expression, O Man! What is it that
distinguishes thee? If any one happen to complain; They tell him; Who art thou
that dare contend with thy God? Shall the Earthen-Vessel say to the Potter,
Why have thou made me thus? Is it not lawful for the Potter to make one Vessel
of Honor and another of Dishonor? And to them who are too curious to seek
after the Secrets of God, they make use of the Words of the Holy Doctor; Judge
not why he draws this Man and not that Man, if thou will not err; Noli judicare
quare hunc trahat, etc.

As for the other Opinion; its Defenders seem to be better able to refute him
who makes use of the unactive Argument. Either I am Predestined, say you, and
elected for Glory, or reprobated and condemned to Torments. This is what must
be granted; but we must at the same time add, That now it is in your Power
either to be Predestined or Reprobated, for now you are in that Condition in
which God has foreseen that you should be enabled with a sufficient Grace, and
this depends upon your Freewill, whether he has foreseen you a good Man or an
Evil. So that in consideration of this foresight he has either Predestined
or Reprobated you. Thus you see that it belongs to you and concerns you to do
good now, and to crave assistance of the Divine Grace, that God foreseeing from
all Eternity this assistance that you should crave may have Predestined you;
for if you act otherwise, in consideration of these very wicked Actions, God
will have reprobated you.

Pretend not that God knows from all Eternity, if you be Predestined or not,
and therefore you must needs unavoidably be what you are or ought to (...) be,
seeing that the Divine Knowledge cannot be deceived nor changed; for God has
truly known it from all Eternity, but consequently to his Decree, and he has
not made his Decree, but by foreseeing what you would do. Therefore this Action
of your Will preceeds God's Foresight, both the Divine Decree of your
Predestination or Reprobation, and the Divine Knowledge of your everlasting
Happiness or Misery; not that these antecedent and consequential Decrees still
relate to time; but according to our humane way of Speaking, we conceive and
declare them to be so, when we consider the Nature of Free Will and the Nature
of God, who is Just, and cannot but act justly.

And although we might hence infer that there is here no antecedent Will which
might hinder our Will from being free, nor do what it pleases, nor be able to
carry its Hand either to the Fire or Water, yet you cannot therefore pretend
that it is in your Power to frustrate the Divine Decree, because that Decree was
made but upon this Supposition of what you were to do, and its unchangeableness
proceeds from a necessity of Supposition, which does not in the least deprive
Man of his Liberty of acting freely.

But possibly you may say, if God in consideration of the good Works that I
perform at present, has Predestined me, I shall be beholding to none for my
distinction, but to my self. This don't follow: For it is not of your selves by
the power of your own Virtues and Strength, that you are thus distinguished,
but the Grace of God, without which you cannot do these good Works. Thus it
will not be difficult to say, why this Vessel has been thus fashioned, this a
Vessel of Honor that of Dishonor; why this Man should be drawn, and that Man
not; seeing that sufficient Grace being allowed to all in general, the
Resolution and Determination pursuant to that Grace is the Cause.

I confess this may seem to look a little hard when we consider how God has
made some Men for Honor, and others for Dishonor; and that all suffer not
themselves to be freely and willingly drawn, nor Cooperate with the Divine
Grace, seeing that he might have made them all in such a manner, that they
might have been all designed for Honor, and none for Dishonor and Contempt,
and that all might have Co-operated with the Grace of God. And truly as the
Choice of Virtue and Vice that we embrace, and that God has foreseen in
Predestinating or Reprobating Men, depends upon the Notions and Representations
of Things which appear to us, we have always a great Cause to cry out as we
before did, O the Depths, etc. because it don't depend upon us that such or such
Objects appear so to us, and consequently that we should be possessed with such
or such Notions or Imaginations; but from the Series, the Concatenation and
disposition of Things, which God has established according to the adorable and
unsearchable course of his Wisdom. It Is therefore also that tho this Opinion
seems to be the easiest, it seems nevertheless to leave always some difficulty
or doubt behind, and we cannot so plainly discover all Things here, but we are
obliged again to recur to the Saying of the Apostle, O Altitudo divitiarum
Sapientiae, etc.

But having Traveled through many Nations where People have been strongly
possessed with the Opinion of Predestination, I shall freely speak my Thoughts,
as to what I have seen and known, That the first Opinion has strong
Consequences, and that it appears to me very dangerous and pernicious to
public Society; for it is either able to oblige Men to all manner of Vices, or
to cast them into Despair. But not to insist upon the Reasons of Divines, nor
to listen to that Persian Author, who supposing that by destroying Liberty or
Free Will, you at the same time destroy all Religion, for this is The Sponge,
as he calls it, to blot out all Religions. How think ye that a Turk, for
example, will excuse his Vices when a Dervise undertakes to admonish him, How
now Dervise, says he, do thou not know as well as I, that all is written
above, and that these are Characters not to be blotted out, but everlasting and
irrevocable Decrees? Do thou not agree with me, that this supposed Liberty,
this pretended Power, either to act or not to act, to do Good or to do Evil, is
a foolish Fancy of the Jahours or Infidels, and that consequently we have in us
nothing but the Will, but the Inclination and Propensity, which is very much
differing from that we call Free Will and Liberty? Are not these thy Doctrins
as well as mine, and do thou yet tell us that God does Predestinate us, and
Save us without the consideration of our good Works, without any regard to our
Merits; but that he does nevertheless Damn us with a respect to our Crimes and
our Demerits? As if this were not a plain Contradiction: As if thou would
make us believe that we are free to one, but that we are not free nor at
liberty to the other: Or as if we could deserve an everlasting Punishment, but
cannot merit the least Reward. Forbear Dervise, forbear then to speak in this
manner; if thou will discourse after thine own Principles and mine, God Damns
us as he Saves us. I tell thee again, All Things are written above, and
according to thy Doctrine these Names of Choice and Liberty are but foolish
Fancies and Chimeras. If I do Well, it is because I cannot do Evil; if I do
Evil, it is because I cannot Well; If I am designed for Happiness, I shall by a
mere necessity die a Saint, as Ali; If thou art designed for Misery, Necessity
will force thee to hang thy self in despair, as Yahoud.

Horrid blasphemous Expressions! which shows a wilful blindness and despair, a
hardness of Heart like that of Pharaoh. Now these being the Discourses and
Opinions, or rather the Blasphemies of these Mahometans, which have often made
me tremble when I have either read their Books or heard it from their Mouths;
Pray tell me what Wickednesses are not such Men capable of, who argue in this
manner; chiefly if they are in Power or of a Temper that inclines them to
Cruelty, to Revenge, or any other Vice? Is there any Crime or any act of
Tyranny that can offend them? Their poor Subjects and People under them are
made too sensible of it: And is there any debauched or filthy Pleasures in
which they are not ready to plunge themselves? It Is easily to be observed by
those who have lived but a little while among them.

Besides, is there any thing more dreadful and terrible than this Doctrine, and
these ways of Worship, to a Man who is naturally tender, and not as yet
altogether hardened in a wicked Course of life? For according to this Belief, he
cannot look upon God any longer but as a powerful and unmerciful Tyrant; he
will have no longer any hopes in his Bounty and Mercy, no longer hopes to
prevail upon him by Prayers, by Alms-Deeds, or by Repentance; he will have
always before his Eyes Hell open to devour him, and if he runs not headlong
into Destruction, he will lead but a miserable life, distracted by a multitude
of dreadful dismal Thoughts, because he will be deprived of that sweet Cordial
and chief Consolation that I have just now mentioned, viz. of the Assurance
that he may have in the Bounty and infinite Mercy of God. I have therefore many
times spoken it, and say it again, This Opinion seems to me to be so dangerous
because of its Consequences, that if it were impossible to be true, I know not
whether, for the Welfare and Safety of Mankind, it were not convenient to
suppress, it, or at least to forbid it to be spoken among Men. It Is not but
that we must press upon the Minds of the People the fear of God, and to make
them sensible of his Judgments; but we must take great heed not to cast them
into despair, by taking from them what I cannot too often repeat, viz. the
Assurance that we have upon God's divine Goodness and Mercy, which is the only
Relief and Consolation of the poor, sick and afflicted Sinner, who is sensible
of his former Sins and Miscarriages, and resolves unfeignedly to repent and
return to the right way: Besides, if we would awe the People and keep them
within the Bounds of Duty, it is the highest Concernment to instruct them that
they have a liberty of acting freely. That God's Foreseeing forces no more than
Man's foresight would do, or that of an Angel, which we might suppose to be as
certain as that of God's; that they are predestined or reprobated only in
respect of their good or evil Actions, and that they have all the Means and
Assistances needful to do well, and that consequently they only are in fault if
they live otherwise: So that if they act wickedly and damn themselves, they
ought not to complain of God but against themselves, against their Wills, of
their own wilful Neglect or Obstinacy.

From what we have said, judge whether I have any Reason to believe this
Doctrine so destructive to human Society: Certainly when we consider that they
be chiefly the Mohammedan Nations who are infected with it, and that it is
principally among them, that it is now entertained and encouraged; I might very
well imagine that it was the Contrivance of some of those Tyrants of Asia, as
Mahomet, Enguis-Kan, Tamarlane or Bajazet, or some of those other Plagues of
the World; who, to satisfy their restless Ambition, endeavored to possess
their Soldiers with this Opinion of Predestination, that they might more
freely encounter the greatest Dangers, run boldly headlong, on occasion, into
the Breaches of a besieged Town or City, and so serve as a Bridge for the rest
to pass over into it.

I know very well that some may perhaps say, That this Opinion is mistaken, and
not well understood by the Mahometans, and that they have not the true
Considerations of the Corruption of our Nature by original Sin, such as we
should have. But however, what can we reasonably expect from a Doctrine which
may be so easily mistaken and ill understood, and that may either by mistake or
otherwise have such pernicious Consequences?

For my part, if I could prevail, we should mention it but very seldom, or not
at all, not busying our selves to stir up those Difficulties which are of no
use, but to entangle the Minds of Men; and which the Apostle himself esteems
too deep to be searched into and discovered by our human Understandings, but
truly to acknowledge our own Ignorance, and be contended to say with him, O
infinite and unfathomable Depth of Wisdom and Knowledge, how incomprehensible
are thy Judgments, and thy Ways past discovery to Mankind! Quam
incomprehensibilia sunt judicia ejus and investigabiles viae ejus!

CHAP. IV. Of Divination, or the foretelling of future Contingencies.
AS Epicurus could not understand how two contrary Propositions, which regard a
future Contingency, the one could be certainly true and the other infallibly
false, and that notwithstanding Man could continue his Free Will and be at
liberty to make his Choice; and of two Things proposed to do one or to other,
though there could be but one determined to be done; he therefore was of Opinion,
that there could be no Divination or certain Prediction, in relation to things
to come, which were of themselves contingent: And that therefore there was no
Art to Divine, nor any true Divination; and if there were, the things that were
foretold and should come to pass would not be in our Power: For if what were
predicted were absolutely true and unquestionable, it could not be otherwise
but it must happen accordingly, and consequently the contrary could not: So
that there would be a necessity for the doing one, and no liberty left for the
other. But we have already proved that the Foreknowledge and Foresight of God
may very well agree with the Free Will of Man, and therefore the Truth of the
things which have been foretold by the Prophets, inspired from above and
contained in the Holy Scriptures, remains entire.

Therefore we shall only mention that Divination which was so famous among the
ancient Heathens. Cicero says, that of all the Philosophers, there is none
that has more despised and ridiculed it than Epicurus, Nihil tam ridet
Epicurus quam praedictiones rerum futurarum. And when he speaks of the Stoics,
who were addicted to, and protectors of this Opinion, he says, that he was
sorry that those who were of his Sect had given occasion to the Epicureans to
laugh at them; Doleo Stoicos nostros Epicureis deridendi sui facultatem
dedisse; non enim ignoraes quam ista derideant. And elsewhere he says, if we
should give heed to those Discourses, we should commit an Act of Superstition,
we should adore all those Soothsayers and Fortune Tellers, Tanta imbueremur
superstitione, ut Haruspices, Augures, Harioli and Conjectores nobis essent
colendi. Epicurus, says he again, delivered us from all those Fears, and set
us at Liberty; His terroribus ab Epicuro soluti fuerimus and in libertatem
vindicati, etc.

Epicurus gave no Credit to Dreams, as Eumolpus says in Petronius, This gives
us to understand, says he, that Epicurus was an excellent Man, for he
ridiculed all those sorts of Fooleries. And Tertullian, Vana in totum somnia
Epicurus judicavit. Cicero, Insolenter credo ab Epicureo aliquo inductus
disputat somniis credi non oportere.

He laughs in Lucretius for the Interpretation that was made of those Prodigies.

But not by reading Tuscan Books enquire
The Gods Design by this celestial Fire.
He had no greater Opinion of the Oracles; if we may credit Origin and
Eusebius, who inform us that Epicurus and all his Disciples laughed at 'em. And
Plutarch brings in a certain Boethian, an Epicurean, who found fault with the
Verses of the Sybils, as weak, simple and senseless, without, quantity or
measure, and as having nothing Divine in them, Tanquam principio truncos, medio
elumbes, fine claudicantes, etc. and that the Style was so flat that there was
no Poet that would offer to imitate them. Besides, the same Plutarch observes,
that Colotes suspected the Oracle of Apollo concerning Socrates. And Lucretius
commends Empedocles, and other Philosophers, for having given Answers savouring
more of Sanctity and Certainty, than those of the Delphick Oracle.

-- For some rare Inventions justly famed
Which they have left as Oracles more sure
Than from the Tripod spoke, and less obscure
Than those the Ancients from the Pythia heard.
And because Epicurus saw that commonly Men suffered themselves to be carried
away with a persuasion, that this kind of Divination was effected by the means
of the Gods or of the Demons; and that those who made Profession of this Art,
were as it were inspired with a Divine Fury when they were ready to prophecy or
foretell future Events, as may appear by these Verses: Now to the Mouth they
come; Aloud she cries
This is the time, enquire your Destinies
He comes; behold the God! --
Greater than Human Kind she seemed to look
And with an Accent more than Mortal spoke
When all the Gods came rushing on her Soul, etc.


And as may be seen in that Passage of Apuleius, where one may see the Relation
of all those Fopperies of Antiquity, which the common People received for
Truths, and the wiser for Cheats. Among the Demons, every one has his distinct
Office, some have the care to adjust and interpret Dreams; others to make
certain Remarks on the Bowels of Beasts; others to govern the flying of Birds,
and to teach them the augurial Notes or Chirpings; others to inspire their
Prophets; others to manage the Thunderbolts, and cause the Lightning to burst
out of the Clouds; and thus of other Circumstances, by which we understand the
things to come, which depend only upon the Will and Power of the Celestial
Divinities; but are discovered to us by the Means, Mediation, and care of the
Demons. Thus by a Dream Hannibal was advertised of the loss of an Eye. The
Soothsayers were Empowered to foretell Flaminius the danger he was in of losing
a Battle; Accius might by a Miracle cut asunder a Whetstone with a Raizor that
there might appear the signs of the alteration in the Royalty; that an Eagle
should continue over the Head of Tarquin to shadow him; and that the
Countenance of Servius Tullius should look as if enraged: In a Word, that all
the Predictions of the Soothsayers, the appearances of Lightnings, and the
Verses of the Sybils, etc. Because I say Epicurus saw that Men suffered
themselves to be commonly imposed upon by these things which he looked upon as
childish and as most unreasonable; he therefore denied the being of Spirits,
and fancied that all those Events were to be ascribed rather to Fortune or
Chance than to any unknown Cause; and the rather because if we should agree
that there were any Demons, we ought not therefore to believe that their
Understanding is so large as to penetrate into things to come, or to foresee
and foretell the certainty of future Events.

By the same Reason he denied that Divination which they commonly proved by the
things that these Spirits foretold, when they appeared to Men; for after that
Brutus had discerned that famous Apparition of his Genius or Ghost to Cassius,
a Disciple of Epicurus, answered him plainly, You are deceived; it is not to be
believed that there are any Spirits, and if there were, they cannot have any
human Shape or Voice, nor any thing answerable to our Senses: Yet I would to
God that these things were true, that so we might not only rely upon our Arms,
our Troops and our strong Fleets at Sea, but also upon the Succors and
Supports of these Demons and Spirits, we who are the Generals of so Holy and
Religious a Party! Now this Opinion of Epicurus ought not to be condemned,
because he laughed at that too great Credulity and Superstition of the
Heathens, as well in Relation to Divination as in Relation to the Demons; but
it is to be blamed, in that at least he has not believed in general the being
of Spirits; seeing that not only Religion, but Reason assures us of their
Existence, as it did really persuade those Philosophers, amongst whom Plutarch
reckons principally Thales, Pythagoras, Plato, the Stoics, besides Empedocles
and some others, who affirmed that there were Demons who are living Substances;
and there are also Heroes, who are Souls either Good or Evil, freed from their
Bodies: For though they have erred as well in Relation to their Substance as to
the Qualities that they attributed to their Demons, yet however they judged
aright when they believed that there were such. But seeing we are to discourse
of Divination, perhaps it will not be amiss to speak first something of the
Demons, unto whom it was commonly ascribed.

Of Demons or Spirits, according to the Opinion of Antiquity.
LET us suppose that they are those unto whom the Holy Writ gives usually the
Titles of Angels, and sometimes Demons, Devils or Satan, when it speaks of the
Apostate Angels. The Heathens call them not only Demons, but also Genii; though
amongst them they were reputed to be of a Divine Nature, or of a Nature little
lower than the Divine. They were also named Gods and Demigods, and Sons of
Gods, but yet Bastards, as being born of Nymphs, etc. Not to insist upon the
saying of Aristotle, that they were separated Substances, because not
Corporeal, and according to his Disciples, Intelligences, because they have
Understandings, Intelligences in Latin signifying the same as (...) in Greek,
if what Lactantius and Macrobius, after Plato, have taught us, is really true.

This being premised, now that we may the better understand what notion
Pythagoras, Plato, and the rest of 'em had of Demons, we must call to Mind what
has been said of the Soul of the World: For they who have received this
Opinion have fancied that these Demons as well as our Souls, were nothing else
but Particles or small parcels of the Soul of the World. And because they
believed also that the Soul of the World was the same as God, they imagined
that the Demons were Particles of the Divine Nature; and from them seveveral
Heretic have taken occasion to discourse of Angels in the same manner, in the
infancy of the Christian Church, for they fancy them to be taken out of the
Divine Substance.

These Philosophers therefore thought the Soul of the World to be like a vast
and bottomless Ocean, from whence proceeds Angels and the Souls of Men, upon
Condition to return back again, and reunite at last, after a time, as so many
little Streams that run into the Sea. Plotinus seems to compare them to the
Body of a Tree, whereof Demons and Souls were as the Branches, the little
Twigs, the Leaves, the Flowers and the Fruits: Thus they fancied that in the
same manner as the Water that runs through the Earth carries with it something
of the Substance of the Minerals through which it passes, so the Particles of
the Soul of the World clothed it often with the Substance of the most subtle
Bodies, unto which they remained chiefly fixed and tied.

And as they judged that this Soul though it is diffused through all the World,
it resided nevertheless more particularly in the upper Region, and consequently
amongst the Stars, and chiefly in the Sun; So they believed that when the
Celestial Bodies spread abroad their Influences to revive and entertain the
earthly Beings, that they proceed from Heaven as so many Beams from this Soul
that revives all things, and that they Incorporate or become Bodies in a
differing manner in their Passage, clothing themselves with a kind of Airy
Habit, and remaining afterward some in the Air, and the others proceeding as
far as the Earth: So that they have believed that these kind of Substances
which are thus composed of a thin Body, such as is the Air, and of a Particle
of the Soul of the World, are the Demons and the Souls: Demons when they
continue free from any mixture of the grosser Bodies of this Earth.

I shall not examine their other Fancy, That if the thin Body with which the
Particles of the Soul of the World is clothed, be found to be of a sweet kind
and favorable Composure, then in their Opinion they happen to be good Demons
or Spirits; but evil when it is sharp and malicious. Neither shall I take
notice of their other Imagination, That when our Souls are departed out of our
Bodies, they become again Demons, not immediately, nor equally, because
retaining some Relics of the Human Body, they could not be Demons until they
were entirely stripped, but only Heroes or Demigods. Let these be mentioned only
in reference to the Opinion of those who chiefly follow Hesiod, who as Plutarch
relates, has made mention of four sorts of Beings that are endowed with
Reason, the Gods, the Demons, the Heroes and Men; I say those who follow
Hesiod, for Plato, Pythagoras and others, who believe these last to be the
greatest Protectors of Demons, have divided Rational Beings into three sorts,
namely Gods, Demons and Men.

Moreover we may show by several Passages that they fancied these Demons to be
of a certain middle Nature, between the Gods and Men, or as they speak, upon
the Confines of Immortals and Mortals: But no Man better explained this Opinion
than Apuleius; for after that he had said that it is by their Means and
Mediation that there is a Correspondence between the Gods and Men; and as the
other Regions of the World have their Beings to inhabit and live there; so the
Superior Region has the Stars; the Fire the small Animals mentioned by
Aristotle; the Sea Fish; the Earth all our Terrestrial Animals: So the Air
ought not to be without its Inhabitants, which are the Demons. In this manner
he explains himself, The Bodies of the Demons, says he, have very little
weight which hinder them from ascending to the highest Regions; nor are they so
light as to fall down to the lowest. They are Creatures of a third Nature,
suitable to the middle Region, where they dwell. They are between the Gods and
Men, being immortal as the Gods, but subject to Passions as Men; for as they
are, as we, subject to Anger and to Mercy; and like us suffer themselves to be
overcome by Prayers and Entreaties, by Gifts and Honors; so they are like us
stirred up to Wrath by Injuries and Contempt. In a Word says he, Daemones sunt
genere animalia, ingenio rationabilia, animo passiva, corpore aeria, tempore
aeterna.

Where you may observe what he says of Eternity, cannot agree with the Opinion
of others, who make them subject to Generation and Corruption, unless we
understand a long time for Eternity: For as these last say; Man is said to be
Mortal because of the Dissolution of that part by which the Soul is tied and
joined to the Body, tho the Soul by that means never perishes; so the Demons
ought to be reputed Mortal, because tho that Beam of the Divinity which makes
up the principal and intelligent part of their Being never perishes, yet this
part is separated from the thin Body, unto which when it is united, it is
reputed a Demon. This is likely to have given occasion to what we have before
spoken of their Opinion, That the Demons did sometimes become Gods, as
heretofore the Egyptians believed concerning Isis and Osiris, Hercules, Liber
and others, as Plutarch observes. And by that we may understand what Jupiter
speaks in Ovid, That he has Demigods; Their dwells below a Race of Demigods,
Of Nymphs in Waters and of Fauns in Woods;
Who, tho not worthy yet in Heaven to live,
Let them at least enjoy that Earth we give.


But tho all this be full of fabulous Inventions, however we may thereby
perceive that the ancient Philosophers allowed the existence of Demons, and
that several have treated about 'em, and declared them to be of a Nature
differing from the Divine Nature. But if they have fancied them to have Bodies,
this Opinion is to be excused among those Philosophers, because it is but of
later Ages that we have been better instructed, that God alone was a Spirit
without Body, they being persuaded that Angels and the Souls of Men were made
of a very fine and thin Substance, and for that reason there is nothing to
hinder the assigning to them Images, tho they are persuaded also, that they are
Immortal by the special favor of God.

The Reason that induced these ancient Philosophers to believe that there are
Demons, seems to be grounded upon the Notion they had of the Divine Providence;
for tho they believed that God takes care of all Things, yet they fancied
nevertheless that it did not become his glorious Majesty to extend his Care to
every particular Person by himself, and without some Ministers that might
execute his Orders. They therefore imagined that God keeps his Court in Heaven,
is attended by Ministers and Servants always ready to obey him, by whose means
he provides for all the World, but especially for this inferior World: They
called these Ministers (whom they acknowledged to be very nimble and active
Beings, and to us invisible) Demons; but they assigned the name of Genii to
those whose chief office is to take care of Men.

Now tho we cannot but acknowledge that they have hit upon a real Truth, seeing
it is certain that there are Spirits and Angels in the World who are God's
Ministers, and who give their assistance especially to Men; nevertheless this
Opinion is to be understood with caution; for to speak absolutely, it is not
unbecoming the Majesty of God to do all Things, and provide for all Things of
himself; for it is from him that all his Ministers have received all their
Strength and Power, and it is he who is present at the doing of every Thing, and
assists every particular Action by his Divine Influence. So that God makes use
of Ministers, not because it is below him not to make use of 'em, or because he
is not able to govern otherwise: But because, we suppose the State of the World
to be such as he will have it, and that he has thought it convenient thus to
order it.

But let this be as it will, their Fancy appears not only conformable to this
distinction of the Hierarchies and celestial Orders taken out of the Holy
Scriptures, but to those Doctors also and learned Divines, who hold, That God
has ordained particular Angels to watch for the preservation of diverse kinds
of Beings, of several sorts of Animals and Plants, etc. And who judge that
there is no Absurdity, that there should be sometimes in the Air Demons or
Spirits, who by the permission or command of God do wonderful Things; as to
cause Showers of Blood, of Stones, Thunder and Storms, or extraordinary
Earthquakes. And truly if we may believe Philo, Those which the Philosophers
call Demons, are the same with those whom Moses names Angels, namely Souls that
fly about the Air, that the Air might have its Creatures, as well as the Earth,
the Water and the Fire have theirs. Besides in Holy Writ we read of certain
Powers of the Air: Nay, some use Enchantments against Demons, who mix
themselves in the black and thick Clouds, from whence we usually apprehend the
coming of Thunders, Hail and Storms.

That which these same Philosophers speak of Genii, namely that there is one
Chief who governs a whole Nation, and therefore called the Genius of the People
or Nation, and a particular Genius for every Man, which is chiefly and properly
styled his Genius, is also agreeable with what we say in other Words, The
protecting Angel of a whole Nation, and the Guardian Angel of every private and
particular Person; For God, says Epictetus, has given to every Man a tutelar
Genius that watches continually, that never Slumbers, and cannot be deceived; O
Mortals! when you have shut your Doors upon you, and closed your Windows, and
that you are buried in Darkness, never fancy your selves to be alone, and take
heed of acting any thing unjust. You are not then alone, God is in your
Chamber, and your Angel is there; they have no need of Light to see what you
are doing and contriving. Plato speaks almost the very same Thing, and is of
Opinion, That every one of us have our Guardian, from whom we can conceal
nothing, and who is a constant Witness of every thing that we do, whether it be
Good or Evil, and for whom we are to have a particular Respect. These
Philosophers also were persuaded that there were good and evil Genuii, whom we
name good and evil Angels; for they thought that the good Things came from the
Good, and the Evil from the mischievous Angels. Now that God suffers evil
Angels or Demons to be the Enemies of Men, and to endeavor to destroy them,
this relates to the general Providence of God, who has done nothing but for
just and reasonable Ends, tho not known nor discoverable to Men. And we may say
in a Word, that God suffers them, as well that good Men might be exercised, and
that by their Sufferings and Patience they might deserve more, as that the
Wicked by their means might be Punished.

That which we ought here to add is, That tho we are sometimes tempted by the
Devil, that we are not therefore to pretend that to be a sufficient Excuse for
the Evil committed, as if it were only the Work of the Devil, for the Holy
Scripture declares, That every one is rather tempted and drawn by his own
Lusts. Hereby we ought to understand, that we have no reason to fear so much
the Devil as our selves, and that we ought to accustom our selves to allay the
Fire of our Concupiscence and Lust, by Temperance, that so we might the easier
frustrate all the Devils endeavors.

-- Or do the Gods inspire,
This Warmth, or make we Gods of our Desire?
They have also been acquainted with that abominable Art of Enchantment and
Conjuration, which is acquired and practiced by a familiarity with the Devils.
I suppose there may be and are fabulous Relations in this Matter, especially
when the Poets Hyperbolize and are upon their high Flights, as when Horace
makes Canidia say in Anger that she can at her Command make the Images of Wax
to walk, pull the Moon out of the Heavens, and make the Ashes of the Dead to
revive.

An quae movere cereas imagines,
Vt ipse nosti curiosus, and Polo,
Deripere lunam vocibus possim meis,
Possim crematos excitare murtuos? etc.
As when Ovid introduces Medea, imploring the assistance of Diana, of the Gods
of the Forests, and of the Night, by whose help she made the Rivers to turn
back to their Spring Heads, scattered the Winds, made the Vipers to burst, the
Forests and Trees to walk, etc.

Thou Night, my Spells too faithful to betray,
Ye Golden Fires, whose Reign succeeds the Day;
Thou triple Hecate with all thy Forms,
The Witness and the Partner of my Charms.
Ye secret Arts, Ye magic Lays we sing,
Ye Potent Herbs, Ye Countries where they spring;
Ye Mountains, Lakes and Streams, Ye Winds and Airs,
Ye Gods of Woods and Night, come all and aid my Cares.
By your Assistance, to their Fountain's Head,
Often from their wondering Banks have Waters fled.
Winds at my Will and Clouds, I raise or lay,
And move the smooth, and smooth the moving Sea.
My Verse seals up the Vipers poisonous Jaws,
And living Rocks, and Earth's wide Entrails draws,
And Forests at my Call, the groaning Ground,
Improves the Voice, and trembling Hills resound.
The frighted Ghosts forsake their dark Abode,
And thou, O Moon, forget'st thy Heavenly Road.
The same thing may be said of a great many Stories that we continually here
concerning the like Matters. If you remove the Cheats and Cosenages of
Impostors, the Mischiefs caused by Poysonings, and the Tales and Dreams of old
Women, and the easy credulity of the common People, you will scarce find any
Truth remaining.

And here it seems we might speak in like manner of that abominable Magic, by
which some wicked Wretches fancy themselves to be carried about the Air upon
Goats, or transported by flying Serpents, after that they have anointed
themselves with Narcotick Ointments, and thus by a strong Imagination, have
thought themselves conveyed to, and present at the wicked and dreadful
Assemblies of Devils and Witches.

Thus it is with them who fancy themselves turned into Hobgoblins. When the
melancholy Humor is Predominant, and works upon them, they become fanciful and
froward, and are possessed with diverse foolish Fancies of the like nature.

As for those who are said to be really tormented or possessed by the Devil, we
must acknowledge that there are some such, seeing that Holy Writ testifies as
much, and that the Practice of the Exorcists proves the same: But we know also
what Caution we must use to distinguish between a real Possession and a deluded
Imagination; what may proceed from Weakness or the Malice of the Sex, the
Effects of a Disease or a designed Cosenage among Men, who commonly understand
one another, etc.

But now let us return again to Divination, whereof we must speak somewhat.

The Gentiles believed that sometimes there was a Divination by the assistance
of the Demons. Truly, though in this particular, there has been a great deal of
Superstition and Cosenage; nevertheless, there must needs have been sometimes
something of Truth to have obtained Credit, and given Birth to so general a
Belief; for as Cicero says, I find no Nation whatever, whether Learned or
Ignorant, Civil or Barbarous, but has been persuaded that there are some Signs
and Prognostics of future Events; and that some Men have been able to
understand and interpret them. The Difficulty consists in this only, when the
Prediction has been performed by the means of the Devil, or by the cunning and
subtilty of the Soothsayers, or by the credulity of those who make the
Inquiries: For as God has foretold many things by the Angels, which are
contained in the Holy Scriptures; likewise he has suffered that many things
should be foretold among the Heathens by the means of the Devil: This has
caused the Fathers and the holy Doctors to exclaim against the Heathens,
because they suffered themselves to be persuaded and cheated by the Devils. And
Historians as well as Poets, tell us, That some of these Devils were become
Dumb, and were forced to be silent, as well at the appearance of Christ in the
World, as at the Presence and Command of certain holy and religious Persons.
But sometimes these things were only mere Fancies, Dreams, Delusions and
Impostures, which were ascribed to the Demons. But let us insist upon this no
longer.

Let us rather observe, that when it concerns Divination or the Foreknowledge
of things to come, we understand not that Divination, by which we foresee and
foretell things; whereof the Causes are natural necessary and not to be
hindered, as are the Eclipses, the rising of the Stars, and such like
Phenomenon that depend upon a certain disposition and a constant Motion of the
Celestial Bodies. Neither do we understand that which is taken for a simple
Conjecture grounded upon likely Causes, that every one according to his
Capacity, and according to his Cunning or happens in guessing well to foretell.
In this sense Euripides, and after him Cicero have said, That he is the best
Prophet whose Conjectures come to pass.

Qui conjicit been, ille V^tes optimus. Thus Thales might have been looked upon
as a Prophet, when he foretold the great quantity of Olives, by natural
Prognostics, which we have mentioned before. In the same manner Pherecides,
when he saw the Water that was newly taken out of the Well, declared that an
Earthquake would speedily ensue: And generally whosoever is expert in his Art
may be esteemed for a Prophet; for we may say with Cicero, No Man can better
tell by what Tempest the City is threatened than the Governor, nor what is the
Nature of the Disease than the Physician, nor how we must behave our selves in
the War than the General of an Army. We mean not therefore that kind of
conjectural Divination, but such as relate to things merely casual, that is to
say, those kind of Events that have no Causes that may be seen, and that are
such that their dependence upon their Causes is not known; as that Eschylus
shall be killed by the fall of a Tortoise, which an Eagle shall cast upon his
Head, and such like Events.

This being pre-supposed, it follows, that all Divination is performed either
artificially or naturally. The artificial is that which glories to have taken
its rise from Experience and long Observation, tho it can give no Reason, nor
tell the Causes of those things that are foretold; such is that unto which the
Augures, among the Romans pretended, who predicted by the flight or chirping of
Birds; The Haruspices by looking into the Bowels of Animals; The Sortilegi by
Lot; The Interpreters of Dreams that were dubious and obscure; The Interpreters
of Thunders, Monsters and Prodigies; Those skilled in Physiognomy and
Palmestry, and such as pretend by the Lines of the Hand to foretell certain
particular Events, attended with the Circumstances of Places, of Times, of
Persons and Things. As to what concerns the Temper and natural Inclinations, no
doubt but there are signs of them in the Body; but yet these signify not, that
such and such things shall come to pass at such and such a time, and that in
such and such a manner.

As to that other sort of Divination, which is not performed by Art or by the
help of Signs or long Observation, this is effected by some Apparition, or a
discourse with Ghosts or Spirits, or by a certain Agitation or Fury of Mind,
either supernatural or caused by the Devil: Such is that which we believe to
have been in the Sybils, and such as have been in an Ecstasy, of those whose
Understanding, sometimes when they have been awake and other times in their
sleep, has been so moved and exalted beyond its ordinary Station, that it sees
many things that in a natural and peaceable Temper it sees not.

As for artificial Divination, it is not needful that we should busy our selves
to refute it, seeing by that what we have said concerning judicial Astrology,
it is certain, that if this Art, which among all the Arts of Divination is the
Chief, and yet is but vain and fantastical; the rest ought not to be otherwise
esteemed: And truly if there were any reality in these Arts, why at present,
since they are of no use in any Religion, should they be looked upon as of
worth, seeing that heretofore when their Religion ordered them to be taken
notice of, the learned and most intelligible Men of those Times slighted them?
For we know what Advice Thales gave to Periander, when a Monster, half Man and
half Beast was born of a Mare, from whence the Chief Priest concluded that
there would be a dangerous Sedition that would follow: It Is also known what
Cato, as Cicero tells, used merrily to say, That he wondered that when a
Fortune Tellers or Cunning Man met with another of the same Trade, that is to
say, one Cheat met with another, how he could contain himself from smiling;
Mirari se quod non rideret Haruspex Haruspicem cum vidisset. It Is the same
thing which was said upon the occasion of a Serpent that had wound it self
about a Lever; that it had been indeed a wonder if the Lever had been wound
about the Serpent. Thus Hannibal spoke to King Prusias, who was loath to fight,
because the Bowels of the Beasts were not favorable; Had you rather give
Credit to the Entrails of a Calf, than to an able and experienced General of an
Army, as Hannibal? Such another Story is related of Claudius Pulcher, who was
resolved to engage in a Sea Fight, though the Chickens would not come out of
their Coup: Well, said he, to the Keeper who told him that it was but an ill
Sign, cast them into the Sea; for seeing they will not eat they shall drink,
Quia esse nolunt, bibant. Marcellus also said pleasantly, That when he would
perform any thing he was willing to, the better not to be hindered by these Men
of Art, was wont to march with his Litter shut. And Mosamac, who killed a Bird
that hindered a whole Caravan from marching on their Journey, because they saw
it flying sometimes this way sometimes that, spoke thus to 'em; Are you such
Fools as to believe that this Bird that knew not how to preserve its own life,
should know any thing of our Journey?

We may allege our daily Experience; certainly when Experience is constant,
there is nothing but ought to yield to it. But how often do things happen
contrary to what is foretold? Flavinius, says Cicero, obeyed the Soothsayers,
and perished with his Army. A year after Paulus, who was also persuaded by
them, was also killed with all his Army at the Battle of Cannae. What shall we
say of the Answers of the Augures? I know of a great many that have had no
Events, or such as were contrary to their Predictions. These Diviners, forbid
Caesar to pass over into Africa before Winter; yet he passed over and Conquered.
If what we Dream of happens sometimes, how often does it never come to Pass?
and because sometimes it never happens, ought we not to conclude, that if it
happens it is Chance, rather than to think that there is any Art in it? Who is
it that shoots every Day with a Bow, and will not sometimes hit the Mark? We
sleep every Night, and there is scarce any of us but Dream, and we seem
surprised when what we have dreamt of sometimes comes to pass: You will say
it is an effect of the Providence of the Gods to intimate to us before hand by
Signs, the things that may befall us; for there is nothing more useful to us.
But to what end should the Gods give us Signs of the Mischiefs that must fall
upon us? Why should they give us such Signs that we cannot understand without
Interpreters? Why should they signify to us what we cannot avoid? and if the
Signs are of a Divine Original, why are they so obscure? Is it probable that
the Immortal Gods those Divine and Excellent Beings, should busy themselves to
buz about the Beds and mean Retirements of poor Mortals, in what part of the
World soever they be; and that when they find any of them snoring, they should
present them with troublesome, dubious and obscure Visions to fright them, and
to oblige them the next Morning to run and consult the Soothsayer? Is not this
a natural Effect that our active Spirits having been lately disturbed should
fancy to see sleeping what they had seen when awake? Which of these is most
becoming a Philosopher, to Interpret things by the Superstion of
Fortune Tellers and Conjurers, or by the Explication of Natural Causes; and the
less we are to heed them, because they who exercise this Profession, are
Fellows made up of the Dregs of the People, and very Ignorant. One that was to
run in the Olypick Games dreamt as he was a sleeping, that he was carried away
upon a Chariot with four Horses. In the Morning he went and consulted the
Soothsayers; they told him you will infallibly carry away the Prize, the
swiftness and the strength of the Horses intimate as much. The same Person went
to advise with Antiphon, who assured him that of Necessity he would be
overcome; Don't you see that four ran before you? A married Woman that desires
to have a Child, and questions whether she is Pregnant; and fancies that her
Womb is shut up: The Soothsayer that she went to advise with in the Morning,
told her that she could not possibly Conceive, because her Womb was closed up:
Another tells her that doubtless she was with Child; because nothing is sealed
or closed up in vain, and without cause. What ought we to think of that
Conjectural Art which is to no other end but to delude and deceive us by the
subtilty of Wit? Is it that the great number of Observations and Precepts that
the Stoics have gathered concerning this matter, signifies any thing else but
a little Cunning and Subtilty, which from some likelihood carries its
Conjecture, now this way, than another? Suppose one should now find a Serpent
twined about the young Roscius yet in his Cradle, which perhaps was false; but
if there should be found one in the Cradle, there is no great wonder, because
the Serpents are very common and numerous at Celoin, they being often found by
the Fireside.

I know that these Soothsayers pretend that there is nothing more Illustrious;
nothing more Noble, more Excellent, than their Art. I wonder why the Immortal
Gods should be willing to show such strange and miraculous Thing, in favor of
a Charlatan, and that they would never show so much Favor to a Scipio
Africanus.

For as to that Divination which is without Art, we might justly take for
Fabulous; such as that related amongst the Heathens of certain Spirits that
appeared openly, and familiarly discoursed and foretold things that were to
come: For to mention something of that of Brutus that told him that he should
lose the Day at the Battle in the Fields of Philippi, and that he would there
appear to him: We must observe that Brutus having revealed this Apparition the
foregoing Night to Cassius, the next Morning Cassius told him that this
supposed Apparition or Spirit was but a Mist before his Eyes, or of his deluded
Imagination: And that this was the more probable because Brutus was of a
Melancholy Temper, as Plutarch observes, that the troubles of his Mind so
oppressed him that he seldom slept; and when he considered in what danger the
Commonwealth was, and remembered that Pompey had been unhappy in a like cause,
he pondred what Resolution he might take if things succeeded not well; and that
which is considerable, ruminating and thinking upon these and such like things,
when the Night was well spent all his Camp very silent, all their Lights out,
and he half asleep, it is no wonder that he then thought he had seen and heard
his Genius or Spirit, because he was persuaded by the Doctrines of his Sect,
being a Stoic, that there were good and evil Spirits; besides there are four
Circumstances that discover in what disturbance his Mind was then in, and that
we may suppose him to have been but in a Slumber, or as we say Dreaming, or
half asleep: The first is that he enquired of his Servants if they had heard
nothing: This shows that he himself was doubtful whether this had happened to
him awake or asleep. The second, that the Domestics answered him that they had
neither seen nor heard any thing; nevertheless if it had been so, they could
not but have seen that monstrous Image or Appearance, at least to have heard
its Voice, which Brutus declared to be to this effect; I am, O Brutus! thy evil
Genius, thou shall see me again at the Fields of Philippi: The third, that his
Servants should have heard the Speech of Brutus to the Spirit, when he asked it
whether it was a God or Man, and what it would have? Ecquis tu Deorum aut
hominum es? Ecquid tibi vis qui ad nos venisti? And that Word which he spoke
without being daunted, after the Spirit had discoursed with him, Videbo: The
fourth, is that Brutus according to the Relation of Plutarch, was settled in
his Mind after that he had heard and advised with Cassius, by whose reasoning
he understood that all this was but a mere Dream.

But what shall we say of that famous Genius or Demon of Socrates? It Is true
Socrates himself speaks of it diversely in several Places; but as this
Philosopher was altogether employed about prescribing Precepts of good Manners;
he may perhaps make use of this cunning to add a greater weight to his wholesome
Admonitions; for we may know well enough with what authority he speaks who is
supposed to be divinely Inspired: Besides, when Simias in Plutarch made it his
business to inquire of Socrates himself what this Genius was; Socrates never
answered him a Word: This shows sufficiently that Socrates would not tell a lie
by confirming it, nor would deny it by answering, for fear that his wholesome
and good Councils should lose thereby their Authority and Influence.

So that we may suppose that the Genius of Socrates was nothing else but his
Reason, his Wisdom, and Natural Prudence, which had been empowered by a
constant and continual Study of Philosophy, and which discovered to him what
was best to be done, and furnished him with those good Counsels which he
imparted to his Auditors; and this is so much the more probable because
Xenocrates, one of the Disciples and Successors of Plato, and who consequently
ought to know the Thoughts of Plato and of Socrates, says, That he is happy
who is enriched with a good Soul, and that such a Soul is to every one of us a
Genius or advising Spirit. And Plato speaks in this manner of that most
excellent part, our Soul, That God has bestowed it upon us to be as our Demon
that inhabits in the highest and loftiest Fortress of our Bodies; and that he
who takes care of that divine Spark within him, and who emproves well his
familiar Spirit, becomes extraordinary Happy. Clemens Alexandrius speaks almost
to the same Purpose, when he teaches, That Happiness is nothing else but to
improve well our Spirit or Genius, and that the principal part of our Souls is
called by the name of Demon.

As to what concerns that supposed Agitation by which the Spirit being as it
were out of it self, and separated from all Matter, foretold things to come;
this supposes that the Spirit is a Particle of God, or of the Soul of the
World, and by that means knows all things, as being of the same Nature with
God, who is present in all Actions, and every where, and therefore is ignorant
of nothing. Now the Disciples of Plato, and generally all those who are
persuaded that our Soul is part of the Soul of the World, fancy that when the
Soul is engaged in the Body, it sees not plainly all things as that Soul does
whereof it is a Particle; but nevertheless, that it is in a possibility to see
and know them; first when it is stirred up by the strength of certain Diseases;
for Aristotle acknowledges, that in those Persons who are troubled with
Melancholy, there seems something Divine, which predicts the time to come.

Secondly, when it withdraws its self in its own Being, and is in a perfect
Tranquillity, and Sequestring it self at the same moment from the Thoughts and
Encumbrances of Corporeal Matters; and is if we may so say, altogether in its
own Power, which happens as they say, chiefly in Dreams, or when we are ready
to die, and when it begins to free it self from the Clog of the Body; for these
be the very Words of Plato, cited by Cicero. Plato therefore appoints us to
prepare and dispose in such a manner our Bodies for sleep, that there may be
nothing to cause a mistake or disturbance; for this cause the Disciples of
Pythagoras were forbidden to eat Beans, because this Food causes the the
Stomach to swell, and begets Wind and Vapors that disturb the Tranquillity of
the Mind; when therefore in our sleep the Spirit is disengaged from these
hindrances of the Body, it calls to Mind the time past, sees the present, and
foresees the time to come; for the Body of a sleeping Person is like that of a
dead Man; but his Spirit is living, and in its full Vigor.

But not to stay here to refute this Persuasion; because it is a mere Fable to
say that our Souls are the Particles of the Divine Substance, and that there
are some who can Prophecy in their Madness, in their Melancholy, or in their
Sleep: Let us only conclude with Cicero's Words, That it is very absurd to
believe that God sends Dreams; for that they are incident not only to Men of
Sense and Honor and Wisdom, but even to Men of meanest and lowest Degree.

Of the Oracles.
LAstly, for the Oracles and those Predictions that are ascribed to the Sybils
and to the Prophets, when they were possessed with a divine Fury that disturbed
them, caused their Color and Countenance to change, their Head and Breast to
swell in such a manner that they were quite out of breath, and as it were ready
to expire, as Virgil excellently represents it: -- Thus while she laid,
And shivering at the sacred Entrance staid,
Her Color changed, her Face was not the same
And hollow Groans from her deep Spirit came:
Her Hair stood up; convulsive Rage possessed
Her trembling Limbs, and heaved her laboring Breast;
Greater than Human Kind she seemed to look,
And with an Accent more than Mortal spoke:
Her staring Eyes with sparkling Fury roll,
When all the Gods came rushing on her Soul.


I shall not say that this kind of Fury seems not becoming the Divine Majesty,
and therefore Cicero has great cause to speak of it in these words; What
Reason or Authority can you produce for this Divine Fury? Can it be supposed,
that what a wise Man cannot foresee, a Fool or a Man deprived of his Senses
should be able to discover? I shall only observe some Particulars that will
discover to us the Vanity and Folly of the thing: The first is the affectation
of delivering their Oracles in Verse and not in Prose. We have already observed
that the Disciples of Epicurus made but a sport of those Verses, as being
ridiculous and unworthy of the Divinity: In this manner Cicero speaks of them,
These Verses which they say the Sybil in her fury made and pronouc'd, savor
more of Cunning and Subtilty, than of Transport and Disturbance of Mind; for
the Author who composed them, has artificially contrived, that whatsoever
happened, it will seem to be thereby foretold, for they express nothing
precisely nor plainly, neither of Men nor Times; but have designedly made them
obscure, that they might seem at another time to be fit for other purposes; all
which does not denote a Person in furious Transports, but one who is sensible
and cautious of what he does or says.

The Second particular is this Amphibologia, or manner of delivering these
Oracles with a double Signification, which Savours of a Subtilty that is no
greater than what belongs to Man. Besides among many of those who are most
Famous, there are several that are forged and invented merely for Pleasure. For
Example in relation to these.

Craesus, the Halys passing, shall destroy,
A mighty Mass of Wealth --
Pyrrhus, thy Force the Romans shall destroy.
Cicero informs us that the First was never given to Croesus, and that
Herodotus may have invented it of his own Head, as Ennius contrived the latter.
And especially as to the latter, for that it was certainly forged at pleasure,
and that it was never delivered to Pyrrhus, because Apollo never spoke in
Latin, and that in the Days of Pyrrhus, Apollo had left off making Verses.

The third particular is the Juggling or Forgeries related at large by
Eusebius, which prove that the Oracles were never delivered by the Gods or by
the Demons, but that they were contrived by cunning Knaves, Cheats and
Impostors; as Lucian very well observed, when he tells us by what means he
himself discovered all the Subtilty by which the false Prophet, Alexander, had
made himself so famous in the Oracle. He says moreover, that this false
Prophet hated very much the Christians and the Epicureans, because they
maintained, that the Oracles were nothing but mere Lies. In this manner
Eusebius speaks of them; They have among them Promoters and Ministers of their
Cheats and Tricks, who walk up and down and round about to inquire diligently,
and ask those who came, for what purpose and upon what occasion every one comes
to consult the Oracle: They have in their Temples a great many dark Corners and
Places to retreat and hide, where the People are not to enter, and where they
place themselves to hear what is spoken, without being seen. So that the
Darkness of the place, the Precaution, the Superstition of those that come, and
the Authority of the Ancients who have believed in these Oracles, are of great
use to 'em: We might add also the Folly and Stupidity of the People, who never
try nor examine things, and the Dexterity, the Cunning and Subtilty of those who
manage the Business, and who promise to every one pleasing Things, and
entertain all the World with fair Hopes, etc.

He relates afterward their ambiguous manner of speaking, their unusual and
barbarous Words, and the affected composure of their Expressions, how often the
Oracles have been proved guilty of Falsehood, and how often those who by their
Advice have undertaken Wars, and have met with very ill Success; how many
Persons they have deluded, unto whom they promised Health and Prosperity: And
after his Conclusion from hence, that they were no Gods but Impostors, who
uttered these Oracles, he continues and goes on thus, But why do you think it
is that they thus court Strangers, and give them such great Encouragments, more
than the Inhabitants of the Place, who are their Friends or Fellow-Citizens,
unto whom they should consequently endeavor to render the Gods more Propitious
than to others who are no ways related to them? The Reason is plain; for it is
much more easy to deceive Strangers, who understand not their Jugglings, than
Neighbors who are acquainted with all their slights and cunning. This shows
sufficiently that there is nothing here Divine, nothing that is above the Reach
and Contrivance of Man.

Afterward he reckons up several Oracles that have faltred, and diverse of
their Temples that have been burned; and then argues from thence, If these
wonderful Utterers of Oracles are not able to protect their own Temples nor
defend themselves in time of Danger, how can they defend others? But the
strongest Reason of all is, that many of these Diviners, Soothsayers and
Fortune Tellers having been by the Ancients examined, and more lately by the
Romans, have plainly discovered the Truth, and declared that the Mistake
proceeded from the too easy credulity of Men, and that all was nothing but
Subtilty and Cheat. We are not here to forget, that after Eusebius had made
mention of the Disciples of Aristotle, and of the Cynicks, says as to the
Epicureans, That he wondered at them, because being bred from their Cradle,
after the manner of the Greeks, and instructed by their Parents in the Belief
and Doctrins of the Gods; they nevertheless would not suffer themselves to be
cheated by Mistakes, but have boldly declared their Sentiments against such
Oracles, though they were then very famous and much frequented from all parts of
the World, protesting that they were mere Cheats and Impostures, and making it
appear that they were not only foolish, idle, and vain, but also wicked.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
OF Moral Philosophy in General, Page 1. CHAP. I. What Happiness is, Page 5.
Several Opinions concerning the efficient Cause of Happiness, Page 8. Some
Particulars needful to be examined and considered which will contribute very
much to the Repose and Happiness of Mankind, Page 14. CHAP. II. What sort of
Pleasure it is that Epicurus recommends as the End of a happy Life, Page 44.
Wherein Epicurus and Aristippus differ, Page 58. The Condition and Satisfaction
of a wise Man, according to Epicurus's Opinion, Page 61. That the Pains and
Pleasures of the Mind are greater than those of the Body, Page 63. Wherein
Epicurus differs from the Stoics, Page 67. That Virtue, according to Epicurus,
is essentially related to Pleasure, as it tends to the main End and Design of
an happy Life, Page 69. CHAP. III. Wherein an happy Life does consist, Page 77.
Whether all Pleasure be good of it self, Page ibid. Whether the Opinion of the
Stoics, in respect of Good and Evil, be justyfiable, Page 82. Whether at any
time Pain ought to be preferred before Pleasure, Page 84. Of the first Good
that Nature has in its view, Page 86. That things profitable and useful are
sought after for the sake of Pleasure, Page 91. That those good things which we
call honest, have the nearest relation to Pleasure, Page 93. Whether the desire
of Honor be blameworthy, Page 97. CHAP. IV. What advantage moral Virtue
procures, Page 100. Of Self-love, Page 111. Of the deceitful Virtue and
deceitful Happiness of Regulus, Page 114. CHAP. V. That a wise Man is only
capable of enjoying moral Virtues, Page 122. Of the Tranquillity of the Mind in
particular, Page 128. Of Life and of Active Felicity, Page 132. Whether a
Contemplative Happiness is to be preferred before an Active, Page 136. Of
freedom from Pain in particular, Page 138. CHAP. VI. What Virtue and Advantage
accrues by being contented with a little. Page 147. A description of the Indian
Diogenes. Page 171
BOOK. II.
CHAP. I. Of Virtue in General, Page 173. In what sense Virtue is said to
consist, in a Medium, or to be placed in a Mediocrity, Page 176. Of the Apathy
or Insensibility of the Stoics, Page 180. Of the mutual Connection of moral
Virtues, Page 185. A general division of Virtue, Page 188. CHAP. II. Of
Prudence in general, Page 191. Of the general Offices or Duties of Prudence,
Page 193. Of the Dispositions or Qualities needful for the performing the
Duties of Prudence, Page 195. CHAP. III. Of private Prudence, Page 199. Of the
Offices of private Prudence, Page 201. That it is dangerous to undertake any
thing against our Natural Inclination, Page 205. CHAP. IV. Of Oeconomick
Prudence, Page 210. Of the Nuptial Prudence, and its several Duties, Page 212.
Of Paternal Prudence, and its several Duties, Page 214. Of Prudence of
Superiors, and their several Duties, Page 217. Of Possessory Prudence and its
Offices, Page 218. CHAP. V. Of Politic or Civil Prudence. Page 224. Of the
first Original of Sovereign Power, according to the Opinion of the Ancients,
Page 225. Whether Monarchical Government is the best, Page 229. Of the Duties
of a Monarch in General, Page 230. Of the great concerns of Meum and Tuum, or
of the Property of the Subject. Page 238. Of the Duties of a Sovereign in times
of Peace, Page 241. Of the Offices of a Sovereign in times of War, Page 245. If
a wise Man ought to intermeddle with public Affairs, Page 250. CHAP. VI. Of
Fortitude, Page 254. Of the several kinds of Fortitude, Page 260. Whether the
Evils foreseen make the least Impression upon us, Page 263. How we ought to
support External and Public Evils, Page 265. Of External and private Evils,
and first of Banishment, Page 268. Of Imprisonment, Page 270. Of Slavery, Page
271. Of Shame and Disgrace, Page 273. Of the loss of Children and Friends, Page
274. Of the loss of an Estate. Page 276. Of Pain and of Death, Page 278. CHAP.
VII. Of Temperance, Page 280. Of Modesty and Decency, Page 281. Of Sobriety and
Chastity in general, Page 283. Of Sobriety in particular, Page 286. Of Chastity
in particular, Page 289. Of Mildness and Gentleness. Page 294. Of Clemency.
Page 297. Of Mercy, Page 299. Of Modesty, Page 300. CHAP. VIII. Of Justice,
Equity, and the Laws, Page 306. Of Retaliation, Page 308. Of Justice in
general, according to Epicurus, Page 312. Of Right or Just; from whence Justice
derives its name, Page 314. Of the Origin of Right and of Justice, Page 317.
Between whom Right or Justice takes Place, Page 319. That there is great Reason
to live up to Justice, Page 328. Whether we may wrong any Man without doing him
an Injury, Page 334. CHAP. IX. Of the Virtues which accompany Justice, namely,
of Religion, of Piety, of Observance, Love, Bounty, Liberality, Gratitude: And
first of Religion, Page 337. Of Piety, Page 348. Of Observance or Respect, Page
353. Of Friendship, Page 355. Of Beneficence and Liberality, Page 363. Of
Gratitude, Page 366.
BOOK. III. Of Liberty, Fortune, Destiny, and Divination.
CHAP. I. What Liberty or Free Will is, Page 372. CHAP. II. Of Fortune and
Destiny, Page 392. Of Destiny, Page 396. CHAP. III. How Destiny may be
reconciled or consist with Fortune, and Liberty, Page 409. CHAP. IV. Of
Divination, or the foretelling of future Contingencies, Page 424. Of Demons or
Spirits, according to the Opinion of Antiquity, Page 429. Of the Oracles, Page
449.
FINIS.
GASSENDI's MORALS.


