An Exact Description of the Growth, Quality, and Virtues of the Leaf TEE,
alias TAY, Drawn up for Satisfaction of Persons of Quality, and the Good of the
Nation in General.
TEE is generally brought from China, and grows upon little Trees (for the
most part) in one of the six Northern Provinces of that Kingdom, called Xemsi,
Latitude 36 Degrees, Bordering upon the West of the Province of Honam; the Leaf
is about the bigness of Scordium or Myrtle, there are diverse sorts of it, some
much better then other, and the upper Leaves do excel the other in fineness (a
property almost in all Plants) there is likewise of the Growth of Iapan, and is
called Cha or Tcha.

The said Leaf is of such known Virtues, that those very Nations, so Famous for
Antiquity, Knowledge and Wisdom, do frequently sell it among themselves, for
its weight in Silver; and the high estimation of the Drink made therewith, has
occasioned an enquiry into the Nature thereof, among the most Intelligent
Persons of all Nations, that have Traveled into those Parts; who after exact
Trial and Experience by all ways imaginable, have commended it to the Use of
their several Countries for its Virtues and Operation, perticularly as
follows, viz.

The Quality is moderately Hot.

The Drink is Declared to be most Wholesome, Preserving in Perfect Health until
Extreme Old Age.

The Particular Virtues are these:
IT makes the Body active and lusty, strengthening the Muscles and Sinnews.

It helps the Headache, Giddiness and Heaviness thereof.

It removes the Obstructions of the Spleen.

Its very good against the Stone and Gravel, cleansing the Kidneys and
Ureteries.

It takes away the difficulty of breathing, opening Obstructions.

Its good against Lipitude, Distillations, and clears the Sight.

It removes Lassitude, and cleanses and purifieth adust Humors, and a Hot
Liver.

Its good against Crudities.

It strengthens the weakness of the Ventricle or Stomach, and causes a good
Appetite and Digestion.

It vanquisheth heavy Dreams, eases the Brain, strengthens the Memory.

It overcomes superfluous Sleep, and prevents Sleepiness in general, a draught
of the Infusion being taken, so that without trouble whole Nights may be spent
in Study, without hurt to the Body, in that it moderately heateth and binds
the mouth of the Stomach.

It prevents Agues, Surfets, and Fevers, by infusing a fit quantity of the
Leaf, thereby provoking a most gentle Vomit, and breathing of the Pores.

It strengthens the inward Parts, and prevents Consumptions.

It asswageth the Pains of the Bowels.

It cures Colds, Dropsies, and Scurveys, by a proper Infusion, purging the
Blood by Sweat and Urine, and expels Infections.

It drives away all pains in the Colic proceeding from Wind.

It purges safely the Gall.

And that the Virtues and Excellencies of this Leaf and Drink are many and
great, is evident and manifest by the high esteem and use of it (especially of
late years) among the Physicians and knowing men both in France, Holland, and
other Parts of Christendom; and in England it has been sold in the Leaf for
six pound, and sometimes for ten pounds the pound weight, and in respect of its
former scarceness and dearness, it has been only used as a Regalia, in high
Treatments and Entertainments, and Presents made thereof to Princes and
Grandees, till about the year 1657, Thomas Garway of London Merchant, living in
Sweeting's Rents near the Royal Exchange, did purchase a quantity thereof, and
there first publicly sold the said Tay in Leaf and Drink made according to
the Directions of the most knowing Merchants and Travelers into those Eastern
Countries: And upon Knowledge and Experience of the said Garways continued Care
and Industry in obtaining the best Tee, and making the Drink thereof, very many
Noblemen, Physicians, Merchants, and Gentlemen of Quality, have ever since sent
to him for the said Leaf, and daily resort thither to drink the Drink thereof.

And that Ignorance or Envy may have no Ground or Power to Report or Suggest
that what is herein asserted of the Virtues and Excellencies of this precious
Leaf and Drink, has more of Design then Truth; for the Justification of my
self, and Satisfaction of others. I have here ennumerated several Authors, who
in their Learned Works have expressly Written and Asserted the same, and much
more, in Honor of this Noble Leaf and Drink, viz. Bontius, Riccius, Jarricus,
Maffaus, Almeyda, Horstius, Alvarez Semedo, and Alexand. de Rhodes in his
Voyage and Missions in a large Discourse of the Ordering of this Leaf, and the
many Virtues of the Drink; Printed at Paris 1653. Part I. Chap. XIII.


And to the end that all Persons of Eminency and Quality, Gentlemen, and others
residing in or near the Court, Westminster, and Parts adjacent, may the better
be fitted and supplied, the said Tho. Garway has now purposely taken part of a
House in the paved Yard or Court by the Harp and Ball at Charing Cross, over
against Kirke-House, and there at the Sign of the China-man, daily sells both
the best of the said Leaf and Drink; and for the accommodation of such as are
more remote, and are desirous, or have occasion to make use thereof, they may
there, or at his forementioned House in London, have of the very best Leaf,
and perfect Directions how to make use of the same, so as to be efficacious and
operative, according to their expectations, and the several Virtues
aforementioned.

And such as have occasion for Spanish Chocolata in the Cake, from three
shillings to ten shillings the pound weight, and right Turkey Coffe-berry
pulverized, may there be supplied by the said Thomas Garway.


