(...): OR SOME CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE Act of Uniformity;

WITH AN Expedient for the Satisfaction of the CLERGY within the Province of
CANTERBURY.

By a Servant of the God of Peace.

London Printed for Edward Thomas, and Henry Marsh, 1662.

Some Serious CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE Act of UNIFORMITY: WITH AN Expedient for
the Satisfaction of the CLERGY, within the Province of CANTERBURY.
K. CHARLES I. (...). 161. Neither do I desire any man should be further
subject to me, then all of us may be subject to God.
SECT. I.
ALthough frail nature below, Heavenly grace above,. 1.
and the common float of all things round about me, (the lively Emblems of
Mortality) summoned me to dye daily; the misery of late time giving leisure
enough, their injustice allowing occasion more then enough, to those
Contemplations of Mortality, which are never unseasonable, because this is
always uncertain: Death being an Eclipse which often happens as well in a
clear, as in a cloudy day.

Although the common burden of Mortality, that lies upon me as a man; the
clear apprehensions of another world, that I am endued with as a Christian; and
the serious observation of the successive Revolutions of nature, that I am
capable of as an inhabitant of the world, have put me most of the days of my
appointed time to wait when my change should come: when I should say, I shall
not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living; I shall behold man
no more with the Inhabitants of the world: the keepers of the house trembling,
the strong men bowing themselves, the grinders ceasing, because they are few,
and those that look out at the Windows, being darkened: this dust of mine
expected that it should return to the dust from whence it came, and this spirit
of mine should return to God that gave it: I was willing that God should hide
me in the Grave, and that he should keep me secret until his wrath and our
calamity was overpast. Although I was thus willing to retire to another world,
while that darkness covered the face of this.

Yet when by a wonderful Revolution of Providence, managed by nothing less
then an Omnipotence, that perplexed Chaos of affairs, and confused heap, was
admirably disposed to a sweet order and beauty, and a new frame of another
world, viz. a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness: I
was in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better; nevertheless to abide in the flesh I thought might be
more needful for the Church, whose sad breaches I hoped should now be
carefully repaired, whose sacred order, peace, honor, unity, and happiness, I
hoped should now be recovered to a glory becoming so ancient, so holy, so true,
so venerable, so divine a Religion as ours, in its nature, author, end, center
and circumference; so one; so deserving to be most united, and uniform in the
Catholic truth, which is according to holiness, justice, order and charity,
after the Primitive pattern, and constant practice of all true Churches,
Preachers, and Professors, founded upon Verity, fortified with Charity, edified
in Unity, Reverend for Antiquity, permanent in their Constancy, according to
the particular Constitutions of every Church, which still kept the great and
Catholic Communion as to the main, every Christian Catechumene, Penitent,
Communicant, Deacon, and Presbyter, keeping the peculiar place wherein God,
Nature, and the Church has set them; every Member keeping to its Congregation,
every Congregation to their lawful Minister set over them, to watch over their
Souls, every Minister to his own Bishop, obeying them that have the rule over
them, and submitting themselves; every Bishop to his Metropolitan, upon whom is
the care of all the Churches, and the Metropolitan to his Sovereign, as
Supreme, and he to God, over all blessed for ever.

The Faith delivered to the Saints I thought might have been solemnly
established; the worship in spirit and truth decent and in order legally
settled; the Primitive Discipline orderly restored; and our ancient Church
recovered to that beauty, order, glory, and majesty, for which it was spoken of
throughout the Reformed world, that rejoiced to behold our Faith and Order; and
therefore I was contented, if it stood with the good pleasure and will of God,
to be absent a while from that Church, which Christ presented to himself, that
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, (that it should
be holy, and without blemish) that City of the living God, that Heavenly
Jerusalem, from an innumerable company of Angels, from the general Assembly
and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven, and from God the
Judge of all, and from the spirits of just men made perfect, which I well hoped
to enjoy, that (...), that Heaven upon Earth, the Church in rest and peace
round about, with the beauty of holiness without, as well as all-glorious
within; in its Doctrine Apostolical, in its Government Primitive, in its Order
Venerable, in its Members Holy and Devout, in its Worship Heavenly, in its Laws
Exact and Prudent, which preserved every Christian, every Family, every City,
every Country, every Province, not only in a Church way, Communion, and
Correspondence, as to their particular bounds, and nearer Relations in every
Parish, Congregation, City, or Country, but as to that general bond of
charity, that Catholic unity of an universal spirit in a bond of peace, which
binds all Christians in one fellowship, of one body, whose head is Christ, to
whom every true believer, and visible professor in the whole Latitude of the
Church, being by the word of God, and spirit of Christ fitly joined together,
and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, does both edify and increase it self and
others in truth and love.

1. Instead of the immediate presence of God, (whom blessed are the eyes who
see) which I hope to enjoy with these eyes face to face: One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his temple; for I have loved the habitation of his house, and the
place where his honor dwells, ever since I have gone with the multitude,
ever since I have gone with them into the house of God, with the voice of joy
and praise, with a multitude that kept Holy day.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord God of Hosts! my soul longs, yea
even faints for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh cries out for
the living God, blessed are they that dwell in thine house, for they will be
still praising thee.

2. Instead of that perfection of Soul, Nature, Faculty, Gifts and Graces which
I hope for, I am contented to stay here a while, growing in grace, and in the
knowledge of God, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, and withal in
my place to contribute toward the work of the Ministry, and the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fulness of Christ, by promoting a powerful Preaching, by
erecting a severe Discipline, by exercising an impartial Authority, by showing
an exemplary Conversation, in order to the restoring of that purity, decency,
order, and Uniformity of Christian Religion, which becomes the wisdom and
honor of this Nation, by the exactest Conformity with the Catholic Church, in
its purest and Primitive Constitution, a happiness to be effected and enjoyed
by the pious Councils, devout Prayers, potent Preaching, and Learned Writings
of good and great men, owned by all Churches, loved by all people, supported by
all Princes, according to all right reason, all due order, all politic honor,
all Scripturall patterns and Divine presidents, besides the Laws and ancient
Customs of this Church and State, which had allwaies a due regard to the
greatness of their Learning, the soundness of their Judgment, the gravity of
their Ages, the sanctity of their Lives, and the dignity of their Calling.

3. Instead of the excellent society of Saints and Angels, which I hoped for
in Heaven: I was content to be with the Excellent that are in the Earth, who
content themselves with that plain and pristine holynesle, which is taught in
the Scripture, deposited in the Church, preserved by an holy Ministry,
expressed in Christian lives; Most eminently manifested in Jesus Christ: and
his Apostles, the great and famous teachers and examples of holy truth, holy
duties, holy Sacraments, holy Orders, and holy Ministry in the Church to this
time: that holiness by which we obey the command, embrace the truth, fear the
threatenings, observe the duties, preserve the Institutions, continue the
Orders, reverence the Ambassadors, joy in the Graces, hope in the promises,
and in all things are conformable to Christ by his blessed Spirit, who
transforms us from glory to glory: I mean those holy men, 1. that hear the word
with trembling; 2. that pray with understanding; constancy, fervency,
reverence, and comlinesle; 3. that receive the pledges of Gods love in Christ,
from the hands of Reverend men, called of God by the Church with care,
preparedness, and thankfulness. 4. those holy men who love in sincerity,
give with cheerfullnesse, rejoice in well doing, suffer with patience, live by
faith, act by charity: And live in order, contentedness and humility, a
communion of these Saints is part of the glory to be revealed: O happy those
who enjoy the benefit of their comprehensive abilities, their astonishing
accomplishments, their powerful discourses, their obliging conversations,
their enflamed devotion, their exact piety, their remarkable integrity, their
innocent and large prudence, their servent zeal, and their public Spirit: O it
is good for us to be here.

4. Even the High-prayses of God, which we hope shall be in our mouths with
Angels, and Arch-Angells: We may enjoy in the Holy Church, which throughout all
the World does acknowledge God with heavenly praises, they on Earth answering
one another as they in Heaven; Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath: Not
without those Excellencies, to which the Ingenuous industry of Christians, has
attained for singing, and the use of Music, Orall and Organicall, in consort
or solitary, whereby God is glorified both in private and in public, either by
the skillfull or attentive Christians, whose hearts are turned and framed after
Gods own heart; who are by this Heavenly way, pleased into a Spiritual, Holy,
Humble, and calm Frame of Spirit, and sweet meditations, which are the usual
effects of good and grave Music on sober and devout souls, who in hearing, or
reading, Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, in which the divine truth of
the matter affects the enlightened judgment, and the quieted Conscience by a
close, pleasant, and heavenly virtue, with the nearest Conformity to the holy
minds and Spirits of those Sacred Writs, inspired of God, for the Composures of
those holy Psalmodies.

5. Neither was it the least recompense for the delay of that perfect state
where Sin is quite removed, Sorrow cast away, Tears wiped from men's eyes, to
hope for that state of the Church, wherein we might be kept regularly to
mortify the deeds of the body, where we might have learned to swallow up our
Sorrow, with the graces of Patience and Joy, our Fears with a Blessed Hope, our
wants with a foreseeing Faith, our shame with a conquest over the World; In a
word, enjoying by a gracious Gonverse, a Heaven of happiness in this vale of
misery, and an Eternal life in this shadow of Death.

6. These and the like particulars, made up that happiness, in the hope
whereof, I flattered my self, to some comfort in my few days full of trouble:
The happiness that we should all have to rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad
with her; All we that loved her, and to rejoice for joy, with all we that
mourned for her.

A happiness we thought unquestionable, when our God who seemed to be angry
but for a moment returned to embrace us with everlasting kindness; When 1.
assisted by his grace and blessing, 2. countenanced with the presence and
authority of a gracious Sovereign, 3. furnished with an Incomparably Pious,
Prudent and Learned Clergy, 4. befriended by Persons of true piety, honor, and
prudence, who excelled in virtue; 5. provided for by just, equal, and exact
Laws: 6. supported with the effectual fervent Prayer of devout Sons. The
Church in all probability was likely to recover her ancient life, vigor,
beauty and glory; 1. by the Spirit of God, allaying animosities, and softning
the hearts of men to a peaceable and quiet frame: 2. by the Prudence of man
reconciling interests, closing differences, and filling up distances; 3. by
severe Laws, rooting up those principles, testraining and condemning those
practiles that ruined us, those Abominations that made desolate: 4. by that
cheerful submission for Conscience sake, which all men promised to his
Majesty's Government, upon his miraculous Restoration, with that General
Applause and Joy (when the Providence and hand of God restored Him, whom they
thought by the Providence and Hand of God excluded) what could we have answered
the Messengers of the Nations, but that the Lord has founded Sion, and that
the poor of his People should trust therein?

SECT. II.
BUt that we may be satisfied (as nature informs,. 2.
reason dictates, and our Faith instructs us) in the vanity and vexation of
Spirit, that is written upon all things under the Snn; That there is that
disproportion in the worth, that weakness in the nature, that uncertainty in
the being, that shortness in the duration, that deceitfullnesse as to all
expectations from all things under Heaven, that make them unworthy worthy of
our hope, unfit for our confidence, and below our trust, being subject to an
uncertainty below, and a Providence above: And so not capable of giving that
final Security, we may rest in both, because they are weak, and because they
are mutable, that we may learn not out of weak grounds, and out of too high
conceit of those means we use to build our selves peremptory imaginations of
future events, which the least Circumstance neglected, or misplaced, may
disappoint, 1. The not timing or placing our actions right. 2. The not
accomodating our means to the variety of occasions. 3. The miscarrying in one
circumstance. 4.
Having our minds too light or voluble, or too fixed and constant. 5. Too large
and wandering, too narrow and contracted. 6. Too credulous and facile, or too
diffident and suspicious. 7. Too peremptory, resolute, and hasty, too slow,
anxious, and discoursive. 8. Too witty and facetious, too serious and morose:
with many other emergencies, may endanger our endeavors and success, that we
may depend wholly upon God, with patience and humility. These uncertainties are
but further essays which God would have us make of the worlds vanity, the more
to fix us on himself, who never fails us that trust in him: Gods providence
commands us to retire from all to himself, that in him we may enjoy our selves,
which we lose while we let out our hopes to others; though the reeds of Egypt
brake under the hands of him that leans on them, yet the rock of Egypt will be
an everlasting stay and defense.

2. That we may learn that all people are so unconstant in their minds, so
uncertain in their fancies, so balanced with their interest, so mutable in
their humor, so depending upon the changeable things of this world, so swayed
by the private concern of some public guides, that the life and soul of
Government is that real power and resolution, which is in the hand of one or
more wise and potent, who are all ways intent to deserve well of the people,
yet allwaies able to curb and repress their insolency and inconstancy; its
indeed a point of wisdom and true honor to deserve well of the good people,
to gain their love, (...). Thucyd.
but the highest and safest principle of policy, is to command them by power to
that just fear, which is the surest ground of their love: No condition of
Government ever pleased all Subjects, most are unsatisfied with the present, a
change allwaies promising them a better; the true temperament is when just and
indisputable power is so wisely managed, (...). Muson.
as may render the Governors rather august then dreadful, rather venerable
then formidable, setting bounds to men's activity and unquietness, to the
raging of the waters, and the madness of the people.

3. That we may learn that this capacity of the people of all impressions, 1.
To relapse to Profaneness; 2. To rest in Hypocrisy; 3. To run out to
Extravagancies; 4. To persist in Errors, Anglorum in genia voria and mobilia:
Bodinapud Ep. Worces. Hierasp Scaliger apud Greg. Not.
for want of Discipline to cure, of Principles to establish, Ingenuity to
restrain their unsettled natures, is a peculiar temper of the English, who
being of quick and high spirits, of various and vehement fancies, inclined to
find out many inventions, given to change, to admire novelties, and with most
inconsiderate violence to pursue them: whom God bring to Christ a safe way,
where with holy and just restraints, (becoming order, justice, and Religion)
there are also the most ingenious Liberties, and the most liberal fruitions.

I pray God that neither the cares of this world, s
nor their dullness and incapacity, nor their want and weaknesses, nor their
lusts and passions, nor their prejudice and misunderstanding, may keep the way
of true Religion before God, wherein they may have rest for their souls.

4. And lastly, That we may know that personal and private sins, may oftentimes
balance the justice and hopefulnesse of public designs, and so walk humbly
with God; for these and other reasons it pleases God, That

1. Notwithstanding his Majesty's great condescension and care for public good
and peace, by impartial calmnesse and charity, endeavoring to remove all
differences and offenses in ways agreeable to the true principles of
Government, raised to its full stature and perfection, as also to the Primitive
Apostolical pattern, and the practice of the Universal Church conform
thereunto: so that he might say with his Royal Father, I have offered all for
Reformation and Safety, that in reason, honor, or conscience I can, reserving
only what I cannot consent to without an irrepairable injury to my own Soul,
the Church, and my people, and also to the next and undoubted Heir of my
Kingdoms.

2. Notwithstanding the endeavors of learned, grave, and godly men, who were
ablest for gifts, most eminent for their labors, and the highest for their
place to reconcile differences, to satisfy scruples and doubts, and so heal
our divisions by their prudent Counsels, by their rational Arguments, by their
powerful Persuasions; notwithstanding that his Sacred Majesty, knowing that
in multitude of Counselors there is wisdom, honor and safety, called those
sober persons of both ways and persuasions, hoping by an healing Conference
(after a tolleration of mutual converse and correspondence) to have satisfied
all reasonable men, when that which seemed good to these men assembled
together, might have been communicated to the Kingdom, and as Act. 16. 5. so
the Church might be established in the Faith, and increase in number daily.

3. Notwithstanding the many Acts of grace and favor, for the Persons,
Liberties, and Estates, of those that had forfeited all by a general Rebellion
and guilt: Vigorously interposing between them and the justice of an
exasperated Kingdom, and using all Princely art, and clemency, to heal the
wounds, to repair the Breaches, by an unparalleled Act of Indemnity, that
included all that could but suspect themselves to be any way obnoxious to the
Laws, which might have excluded all future jealousies and insecurities;
Rationally hoping that none would be more Loyal and Faithful to him, then
those who sensible of their errors, and his favor, would feel in their own
Souls most vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires to make some
Restaurations for former defects: The more conscious he was to his own merits
upon his people, the more prone he was to expect all Love and Loyalty from
them; Charitably expecting that Christian Ingenuity in all his Subjects, that
When much was forgiven, would have loved much.

Yet behold instead of that general submission and compliance, that might have
hushed all things into an universal calm and quiet, God (in whose hearts are
the hearts of all men) bowing their hearts as one man, to the Fear of God, and
the Obedience due to their King; Behold a general discontent, fear, sorrow,
and sullen sadness upon the face of the Kingdom! Behold a Catholic murmur,
and complaint whispered throughout the Nation! A contempt of dominion, a
speaking evil of dignities, a cursing the King in their hearts, a carrying of
Tales to shed blood; So that if his Majesty had not his own Innocence, and Gods
Protection, it were hard for him to stand out against these stratagems and
conflicts of malice, which by falsities seeks to oppress the truth, and by
jealousies to supply the defect of real causes, which might seem to justify a
New Engagement against him.

O those foul and false Aspersions, those secret Engines, employed against the
Peoples love: That undermining there opinion, and just value of his Majesty's
Enemies and theirs too, might blow up their Affection and their Loyalty; O the
sin and danger of poor Peoples souls, whose eyes once blinded with mists of
suspicions and fears, they are soon misled into the most desperate precipices of
action!

Alas! for that loose, licentious, and languishing posture, whereunto
(notwithstanding all means of settlement) some men's distempers and
indifferences, already have, and farther seek to reduce this Nation, as to any
settled doctrine, uniforme professions, Catholic order, and national
Communion.

O what dividings, shatterings, schisms, separatings, sidings, strifes, envies,
animosities, and contempts, whence grow Confusion, and every evil work! O that
loose and indifferent way of Christian Administration and Profession, that is
insisted upon by some for themselves and posterity, according to every man's
private fancy, choice and humor, without such solemn establishment, and
public union as has in all Ages and Nations best edified and fortified,
counseled and corrected, excited and increased both gifts and graces in a most
comely and most Christian order, with such harmony, unity, majesty, and
authority, as best becomes the Servants, Religion, and Church of Christ!

O what beauty, what order, what harmony, what unity, what gravity, what
solidity, what candor, what charity, what sobriety, what correspondence is
offered, is endeavored by the judicious affections, tender compassions,
prudent councils, conscientious care, attended with discreet zeal, fervent
prayers, and unfeigned tears of good men, whose aim is to promote sound
knowledge, fruitful faith, hearty love, discreet zeal, severe repenting,
fervent prayer, just fears, unspeakable comforts, well grounded hope, spiritual
joy, heavenly meditation, holy conversation, tender compassions, meekness of
obedience, and conscientious submission; In a word, a frame of Christian
carriage to God and to others, in order to men's own souls, and their neighbors
good.

O the excellent ways proposed, that Learning might flourish, Knowledge
multiply, Graces abound, excellent Preaching thrive, Sacraments be duly
administered, and devoutly received, the fruits of Gods spirit mightily diffused
in common honesty, hospitable kindness, christian charity, plain-hearted
sincerity,

O the crafts and policies, the frauds and factions, the jealousies and
distances, the malice and animosities, the rudeness and disorders, the
insolences and hypocrisy, the rashness and uncharitableness, the envies and
emnities, the rapes and outrages still pleaded for and upheld! by Prophets
that prophecy falsely, that the Priests might bear rule by their means, and the
people will have it so: What will they do in the end thereof?

SECT. III.
NOw it pleased God,. 3.
by the public Counsels of King, Lords, and Commons, to give all just
satisfaction to modest and sober desires, to prevent all misunderstandings and
miscarriages by the Act of Uniformity, composed with that gravity, and
discretion of Pious, Moderate, and Wise men: As might allay, and fix the People
to a due temperament, guiding their well meaning zeal, by such rules of
moderetion, as might best preserve and restore the happiness of Church and
State; a neglect of due obedience to this Act, (in such way as shall hereafter
be expressed) a contempt of its Authority, a discontent under it restraints,
evil thoughts and discourses of the Authors and Imposers, and a general
opposition to its blessed design of peace and settlement, I appeal to the
tender Consciences of sober men, who live within sight of the great day of the
Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, whether they be not, 1. Exceeding
sinful: 2. Desperately mischievous: 3. Very dangerous.

1. They seem to be very sinful, because they seem against the Consciences of
good men, which are guided, 1. by the word of God, which says expressly (O
consider it ye tender-conscienced men) Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Ye must needs be subject not only for
wrath, but for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. though not for conscience of the
thing commanded, yet for conscience of the power commanding: the thing it self
may be indifferent, yet your obedience necessary; obey them that are over you
in the Lord, and submit your selves. It was a holy man's advice, Mr. Brinsley.
that we should take heed how we beforehand take up resolutions, whether of
opposing, or not obeying; Certainly, however quiet and conscientious not
obeying, both may and ought to have a very favorable and indulgent
interpretation, yet presumptuous disobedience justly subjects a man to the
highest censure: Express for this purpose is that Judicial Law (which has a
great deal of morality couched in it) Deuteronomy. 17. 12. The man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest, or to the Judge, even that
man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel. Take we heed then
how we entertain any thoughts that way, but rather prepare our ears and hearts
to hear what the Lord will say unto us; or see what message he will send by the
hands of these his servants, who have been so long time enquiring after his
pleasure, which being made known unto us, resolve (in what we may) to submit
and obey: so did the Churches to whom Paul and Silas delivered their decrees,
they delivered them to be kept by them, and so they were: and so were the
Churches established: Now I praise you brethren, (says St. Paul) that you
remember all things, and keep the Ordinances delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 2.
be obedient as to Christ; that is, by the same necessity, for the same reason,
to avoid the same punishment, to have the same reward, by the same religion:
that you may not prevaricate the Laws of God, or do violence to your own
consciences: Nothing can add light to these so clear words, they are bright as
the Sun, clear as an Article of Faith, easy and Intelligible, according to
the nature of universal divine Commandments.

2. This opposition to the Act of Uniformity, is against the Oath of Supremacy,
which is this, That we declare the Kings Highness Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and swear to assist and obey him and all authorities united or annexed
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. A Religious attestation, which most that
oppose this Act have made before God the searcher of hearts, with an
imprecation of his heavy wrath upon them if they break it or abuse his name in
it, That they owned his Majesty's authority in Ecclesiastical affairs. Which
Oath I hope they took in truth, righteousness, and judgment: Do not they fear
an Oath? Do not they know, that for Oaths the Land mourned? I hope I speak to
men fearing God, that walk uprightly, work righteousness, and speak the truth
in their heart, and though they swear to their hurt yet change not: Now alas!
you deny the Supremacy you have sworn to, if you allow not his Majesty power to
impose a Ceremony, to settle a Discipline, to establish an Ecclesiastical Law,
alas he cannot show his authority in things necessary, for his Subjects are
tied to them already, nor in things sinful, for they are forbidden already,
nor in things indifferent, for there all men must be at Liberty: Wherein have
you sworn to him as Supreme? O be not deceived, God will not be mocked: Shall
the Laws of one solemnly acknowledged supreme Magistrate, which are 1.
Scriptural as to the main ground, rule, and end of them; 2. Rational, as to the
Order, decency and gravity of them; 3. Primitive and Catholic, be disowned,
repined at and complained of, by men sworn to observe those Laws: O men fearing
God, when you have vowed a view deferr not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in
fools: Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before
the Angel it is an Error, wherefore should God be angry at thy voice and
destroy the works of thine hands: for in many words which may be alleged to
excuse the violation of this Oath there is vanity: But fear thou God.

3. This opposition to his Majesty's Authority in matters Ecclesiastical, is
against their own Conscience, (and unhappy are they that condemn themselves in
others, in those things which they allow) you that disown Authority in matters
of Religion, did not you exercise it? you that repine at the imposing of the
Liturgy, did not you impose the Directory? you that are troubled for
deprivation upon Non-subscription, did not you turn out holy, pious, painful
Ministers, because they durst not take the Covenant, or subscribe the
Engagement? Only the same measure that you measured out to others, shall be
measured to you, you shall suffer but what you have done: Neither is his
Majesty more severe in supporting his Government by Laws, then the Parliament
was to support theirs by an Ordinance: Thus I see (says the Royal Martyr)
those who were the most rigorous exactors upon others to conform to their
illegal novelties, are least disposed to the due obedience of lawful
Constitutions, so that I know not whether they sinned more against their own
Consciences, by violently opposing our established order, or by violently
imposing their own: O suffer others to deal with you, as you have dealt with
others, this is the Law, this is the Prophets.

4. This discontent of yours to the present establishment, is very partial,
(for men that know they should have no respect of Persons, and that nothing
should be done through partiality) you who could call an Usurping Tyranny a
Liberty; who could be contented with that variety of Governments and Factions,
that exercised the Nations patience, can discern nothing in a lawful Prince
but Jealousies, in a settled Church but Superstition, nothing in ancient Laws
but Persecution, nothing in an established Religion but Popery; are ye not
(Brethren) partial in your selves, and become Judges of evil thoughts: Jac. 2.
4. if ye fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture, you do well; but if
ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the Law for
transgressors.

5. This unexpected discontent seems to be a great scandal and offense to his
Majesty, the defender of our Faith, and all other Kings and Governors, who
will now look upon Protestants as unpatient of Government, Enemies of Orders,
and disturbers of Peace: When they are thus unquiet under an innocent
Government, how will they behave themselves under a severer Tyranny? if they
are thus impatient of their good and gentle, how impatient will they be of
their morose and austere Masters? Its an offense to the Church to see its
laudable Customs decryed, its venerable Laws neglected, its ancient Canons
despised, its great Example despised; and that he is now the best Christian,
who was formerly the worst Infidel, that did not hear the Church: Its a grief
to good men that have many sad thoughts of heart for the divisions of Reuben;
and a joy to the bad, who cry, Aha, so would we have it. -- O woe to the world
because of offenses; woe to those men by whom offenses come; Brethren, you are
called to Liberty, but it is a great sin to use your Liberty for an occasion to
the flesh, but by love serve one another: Its not good to do any thing whereby
thy Brother, much less whereby the whole Church stumbleth, or is offended; if
the Primitive Christians, when it was at their own choice, whether they should
use some indifferent thing, or whether they would not use them, complied in
their practice with their Brethren, determining their Liberty, so as to give no
offense: What shall they answer to the God of Peace, whose Liberty though
determined by Superiors, is used by them to the disobedience of those
Superiors, and the offense of their Brethren?

6. The present distemper seems to be ungrateful, in regard of other favors
of his Majesty; his Majesty has saved our lives, and now do we stand upon our
Liberty? now we had been many days without a King, without a Prince, and
without a Sacrifice, and newly return to seek the Lord and David our King;
shall we so far sin against the Lord, as to run back again to our former method
of sin and misery? God forbid! Are we newly pardoned and saved to return with
the Dog to his vomit, and with the Sow to her wallowing in uncle annesse, do
live by his mercy, and shall we not make him that natural, equal, and easic
return to live in his obedience.

2. This Nonconformity is not only sinful in its nature, but as mischievous
in its apparent effects: which are,

1. A needless breach of the Communion of Saints; O sad, that men professing
one Religion, acknowledging one God, partaking of one Faith, initiated by one
Baptism, joined together with one Spirit, redeemed with one precious blood,
called to one hope, looking for one Common salvation, should for things
Confessed indifferent keep up divisions, foment distances, and refuse to be of
one heart, one mind, and one way, that the Lord may be one, and his Name one.

2. A dishonor to the Gospel, whose design is peace, whose Author is a Prince
of Peace, whose Preachers are Ambassadors of Peace, whose Spirit is a Spirit of
Peace, whose highest honor was meekness and peace: but alas! is become now
the great makebate of the world, the enemy of Government, the subverter of
Laws, the pretense of Faction, that which turns the world upside down. Woe is
us when our excellent Religion is ill-spoken of, by reason of our unworthy
Conversation; the Heathen whom we should Convert, will be jealous of us; the
Turk whom we should Convince, will keep at distance from us; the Papist whom we
should Reform, will persecute, when we cannot live under Lawful, mild, and
just Governments, but are disobedient, unthankful, unholy, truce breakers,
traitors, heady, high-minded, having a form of godliness, and denying the power
thereof.

3. This Nonconformity will continue those distractions which endangered the
first Reformers at Francford: disturbed the State in Queen Elizabeth's time,
disquieted the Church in King James his days, and ruined the Church and State
in King Charles his time, that time of the best temper, and the health fullest
Constitution, made up of sincere truth, unfeigned charity, liberal piety,
unaffected decency with just authority and uninterrupted succession:
Entertained with holy moderation and humble prosperity. Come not thou my Soul
into their secret, unto their assemblies mine honor be not thou united, who
maintain a perpetual dissension, and cherish the grounds of an endless Schism,
as serves to give both occasion and confidence to different parties, both to
excite their private ambitions, and in time ^o exert them in ways of open
hostility, whenever opportunity is given by any negligence, offense, or
distemper in Government or Governors.

4. This Nonconformity, will obstruct the promotion of true Piety, while men
are to much engaged in the Circumstances they neglect, the substance of
Religion, while by a sullen separation, they withdraw from one another, to an
incapacity of exhorting one Another while it is called to Day, least any be
hardened through the deceitfullness of Sin; Of Provoking one another to love,
and to good works: And of following after the things that make for Peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.

This public disagreement will be a great obstruction to the progress of the
Gospel, which will never be received by others, until we are agreed in the
profession of it our selves: while we thus unhappily engaged one against
another, we cannot all end that public Service of making the way of God to be
known upon Earth, his saving health among all Nations.

Its too great an advantage to the common Enemy, who making use of Parties
reasons and passions, against other, thereby overthrows all. It was the advice
of Cardinal Allen to the Persons that undertook to reduce Ireland back again
to Popery, That they should apply themselves to the Nonconformist, and possess
them with the Covetousness, ambition, and superstition of the Conformists on
the one hand:
and on the other they should apply themselves to the Conformists, and possess
them with the Factiousnesse, disobedience, and disorders of the Nonconformists;
that so they might be provoked to spend their fury upon each other, to their
mutual ruin. I speak as to wise men, judge you what I say.

7. This rupture is dangerous to our Native Country, for besides the Roman
advantage, which is greatest and Last, the private passions and various
interests of Factions and parts will hazard the Civil peace by endeavors to
promote their several opinions and pretenses under any specious name
whatsoever; alas! if these Separations continue, men knowing there is but one
Religion, as there is but one God, and his holy Will but one, every one is
prone to presume that he is in the right. Next he grows so partial to his own
persuasions, to imagine this above all others best, and only pleasing to God;
then he concludes all other ways of Religion as displeasing to God as to
himself: hence zeal and impotent Impulses to propagate his own way, and
overthrow all others, as an acceptable service and sacrifice to God: which is
done, first by words, disputing, writing, railing, and reviling; if that will
not serve to reform the obstinate world, then he first wishes, afterward
uses the sword, as soon as he and his party can get number and power
sufficient to act with probable safety: such an opportunity he counts a Call of
God, an hand of Providence inviting and directing what to do to establish his
own way against all others, never so approved of good men, and prospered by
Gods grace and blessing: yea, therefore we may observe that they are unwilling
to grant that freedom to others their inferiors in number and power, which they
once desired of their superiors upon a reason of State, that dictates to all
men thus much: That public Differings in matter of Religion are very dangerous
to the civil Peace of those that enjoy Power, and are quiet under it; which
every party secretly envieth, repines at, and endeavors to obtain for it self:
and therefore make no more conscience of any Civil or Ecclesiastical
Subjection, or Christian patience and submission, longer then they are so
balanced by the power and prudence of Superiors, that they cannot subdue all
things under their feet: Oh, its pity that those more minute Opinions and
Persuasions (when Religion which should restrain, stirs up men's passions)
should have more power to divide, than all the Agreements in other main
matters, has to preserve love and unity, as men, Contrymen, and Christians:
in so much that the Church of England which was grown to that height of Beauty,
Piety, Order, Moderation, and Honor, as became the glory of God, the majesty of
Christian Religion, and the Wisdom of this Nation, has often in H. 8. Ed. 6.
Q. Eliz and King James time bin endangered by these struglings in Religion
(which the public Power, policy, and vigilance of those times repressed) and
at last was undone by such breaches that are unparalleled in former, and will
be scarce credible in after Ages.

8. This reluctance of some against the present Establishment, threatens all
Government which consists in a full power to establish and maintain Laws,
Equity, Justice, and Religion: on the one hand, that we may lead peaceable and
quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty: and on the other hand, in due
obedience for Conscience sake, to those Laws and Methods of Government, every
one studying to be quiet, and to follow his own business.

If you now refuse the seasonable and well-advis'd Law, Order, and Decency
proposed by the Church, under pretense of Liberty of Conscience, you will teach
others to refuse Laws of the same nature from you: with the same Arguments that
you oppose the directions of the Liturgy, others did arise who oppose the
Rubric of the Directory; and there is no stop in setting up private Opinions
against public determinations; but in confusion, disorder, and ruin to your
private judgment: you cannot allow present Laws, others private judgment
cannot allow your Ordinances: Its your thoughts that you are above forms, its
others thoughts they are above ordinances: you dislike a Surplice, they dislike
a Gown: you cannot approve the Bishops double honor of reverence and revenue,
and they cannot approve yours of reverence and tithe: you cannot use the Cross
in Baptism, they cannot use Baptism it self: you cannot admit some innocent
circumstances in the Lords Supper, they cast off the Lords Supper it self: you
cannot away with Music, nor they with Psalms: what end would there be of
Dissensions, unless the Magistrate did interpose for outward peace and order?
men surely would grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, till their
folly be made manifest to all men. What dissolution of order? what novelties of
opinions? what undecencies of administration? what sacrilegious invasions of
the Church? what contempt of the Clergy? what overthrows of Magistrates, and
all Government, have been managed by the Principles now contended for, all
sober men have beheld with sorrow of heart, and can bear witness to with their
sighs, tears, and ruin? O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in Askelon! I
pray God give us all moderation and impartiality, the best tempers in religion,
unpassionately to consider from whence we are fallen by humane policies, and to
what we are transported by popular zeal, that all distempers may be laid aside
by free converse, and a Christian correspondence, whereby those sad principles
of everlasting schism might be removed: by which on our side men think, because
in many things they are right, therefore they can err in nothing: and on the
other side, because in some things men have mistaken and erred, therefore they
can be in nothing right, without regard so that Truth and Charity which is the
life and quintessence of Christian Religion.

9. Its of very dangerous consequence, that you, who should promote the joy and
thankfulness of His Majesty's loving subjects for His happy Restoration,
should now occasion these fears, jealousies, and public sorrow: that when all
rejoice to see things grow up to a public order and symmetry, you should be
discontent, (as when all the people cried Hosanna, the Pharisees murmured) is a
sin against that, Deuteronomy 28. where it is said, Because thou servest not the Lord
thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all
things, therefore (which is the danger) shall thou serve thine enemy in hunger,
in thirst, in nakedness, and in want of all things, and he shall put a yoke of
iron upon thee, till he have destroyed thee.

These are the dangerous Conseqences of Nonconformity, viz.
1. Hiding your talents in a napkin, and putting your light under a bushel, and
becoming unserviceable in your Generations.

2. The grief of many good people who value high your persons and gifts, who
thought you would have died for them under persecutors, and therefore you would
much more obey for their sakes, under a lawful Prince.

3. The disadvantage of the Church, which by your unexpected revolt, will miss
your gifts, and services which were devoted to it.

4. The disparagement of your brethren, who are censured as unworthy, for
practicing those things, which rather then you will do, you will resist unto
blood, whereby their labor is rendered unserviceable for those souls, from whom
your labor is withdrawn.

5. The undoing of your families for whom ye are to provide, unless ye will be
worse then infidels: O your wives and children, what have they done? That while
you are disputing whether you should wear a Gown, or whether you should stand
or kneel: whether you had best use these sorts of words, or those, to God
Almighty? In a word, whether you shall obey or Rebel? these should perish. If
you should go out (which God forbid) it is you that will be thought to turn out
your selves, for men judge that the Law intends only obedience and peace, and
that the offenders cause the punishment: the Parliament would have you live
orderly, and obediently in your places, you will not, who is to be blamed? But
you cannot believe the orders of the Church to be lawful and obliging, and the
whole Kingdom in Parliament cannot believe that Nonconformity is lawful.

You cannot submit, and the whole Kingdom in Parliament, cannot think you fit
to be encouraged with Ecclesiastical Livings, unless you submit: whether it is
more fitting the whole Kingdom, should submit to you, or you to the whole
Kingdom, judge ye. In a word, if you do reject the moderate impositions the
Church lays upon you, I humbly crave leave to offer it to your consideration,
what judgment the Protestant Churches are likely to make of your proceedings?
And how your cause, and the Churches, will stand represented to them, and to
all future Ages?

The present danger is this.
As in disaffected bodies, the humors fall to the weakest part: so in a
distempered Kingdom, the ill disposed persons, fall in with the discontented
part

1. Upon this falling off of your party, there are persons exasperated by just
punishment on themselves and relations.

2. There are thousands purchasers of Delinquents, Deans, Chapters, Bishops,
King and Queen, and Princes Lands, unsatisfied.

3. There are thousands of Cavaliers, notwithstanding all care to provide for
them, dejected.

4. There are abundance of Atheists and Neuters, expecting some trouble and
alteration, and persons of desperate fortunes, wishes they may once more fish
in troubled waters.

5. There are several persons turned out of Livings by the proper owners
thereof, and notwithstanding they are willing to submit, are not likely to be
admitted to so good again.

6. There are many of the old Army, that want employment.

7. There are thousands of disobliged Sectaries.

8. There are too many that for want of Trading, are not able in this dead time
to provide for themselves and families, who would be all willing to hazard
themselves, in the engagement of 41. they are in their method already, Popery
preached against, Ceremonies and Lyturgies are cried down, the Reverend Clergy
afftonted, Non-conformists are pitied, the silencing of them is resented:
trading is dead, taxes are complained of, meetings are appointed, plots
discovered, and all things by your dissent tend to a confusion. These thoughts
I leave to your cooler and more moderate intervals, to meditate upon between
your selves, and the great searcher of hearts.

The Expedient.
But my business is not so much to exasperate, as to accomodate dissenters, and
therefore I shall entreat those reverend persons concerned, seriously to
consider the following Propositions, (which if assented to, will bring them up
to the design of the Act of Uniformity) agreed upon by all sober Protestants.

Prop. 1. That since the first plantation of true Religion, which is a
judicious and sincere devoting of the whole soul to God, as the Supreme good
offered us in Jesus Christ, and the right performance of that duty we ow to
that God, upon such grounds, to such ends, and after such manner, as he
requires it of us: there have been an holy Company called by his word, to the
knowledge of God in Christ who in all holy ways, and orderly institutions,
publicly profess their inward sense of duty and devotion, which they ow to
God, by believing and obeying his word, and also that Charity which they ow to
all men, especially to that household of the faith that holds communion with
Christ's body, the Catholic Church.

Prop. 2. Its agreed, That this outward profession of Religion, as it is held
forth in the word, in its truth, zeals, duties, and Ministry, makes one Church
Catholic of all Christians, joined in a mysterious, inward, and religious
Communion with God, and one another in Christ, by the word and spirit, in the
inward part of Religion, Rutherford's Church-governmen.
and in obedience, charity, and comely order as to the outward part of that
Religion, and that any part of this Church distinct by civil limits and
relations from others, Eaxter of Church Government.
may own and establish such a Church power, relation, and association in
matters of Religion, as may best perserve themselves, Hudson, of the Church.
in true Doctrine, holy Order, Christian peace, and good manners, by joint
counsel, and more vigorous power, and mutual charity: (such a Church at
Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Act. 13. 1. Antioch, Act. 4. 23. Tit. seven Churches of
Asia.)

Prop. 3. Its agreed upon, Reyn. Peace of the Church.
that in the outward profession of Religion, there are many circumstantial
Ceremonies of order and decency to be determined by the Church, according to
the general rule of the Scripture, and the primitive practice of the Church,
and that all members of the Church are to rest satisfied with that
determination: Baxter, Church Government. Calvin Instit. de Ecclesia.
If any be contentious, we have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God.

Prop. 4. We are agreed, That besides the spiritual power of the Church, Mr.
Jenkins Sermon before the Parliament on Psalm. 2.
over her particular members, there is a coercive power belonging to the
Magistrate under Christ, by whom Kings Reign, to regulate men's lives and
conversations, according to the faith professed, the worship established, and
the order observed in that Church, as a nursing father to the Church: it is the
duty and happiness of Kings to make their Subjects fear God, Ward on Romans 1^.
12. Bishop Reynolds Peace of Church
that they may be blessed of God, and under them, as under the good Kings of
the old Testament, lead peaceable, and quiet lives in all godliness, and
honesty. These keepers of both tables are to be a terror to all evil doers, and
an encouragement to them that do well, having the Law of God before their eyes:
Religion that (...), being the first care of Princes.

Prop. 5. The Magistrate (whom the people are to pray for, that God would
direct his heart, show him the way wherein he should go, and make his paths
plain before) is to make use of his Conscience in Enacting Laws according to
his judgment well advised, Mr. Edwards of Toleration.
as well as His Subjects make use of their Consciences in obeying them
according to their opinion: Mr. Rutherford of Toleration.
they that would not be blamed because they cannot in conscience submit to an
Uniformity imposed, must not blame His Majesty, Mr. Jackson of Toleration.
if He could not in conscience but impose an Uniformity.

Prop. 6. We are all agreed, That as we should convince those meekly that
oppose themselves so. 1. The Church by a wise, grave charitable, Mr. Vines
Sermon of Heresies.
and solemn Discipline dispensed by worthy men. 2. The Magistrate, Mr. Marshal
of Toleration.
by just Laws and Penalties should restrain men from saying, or doing any thing
publicly scandalous to, or derogating from the honor, peace, and order of
that Religion which is esteemed, and therefore settled, as the best and truest.
Mr. Caryls Sermon before the Parliament.
To charge that they teach no other doctrine. 1 Timothy 1. 3. To charge men not to
strive about words to no profit, but the subverting of the hearers, Mr. Crofton
of Liberty.
2 Timothy 3. 14. To stop their mouths who subvert whole houses: to restrain any
man that teaches otherwise, Mr. Baxters Saints Rest. Part. 2.
and consents not to wholesome words, who are proud, not knowing nothing, but
doting about questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
raylings, evil surmizings, 1 Timothy 6. Not suffering them who call themselves
prophets, to teach and seduce Gods servants, Rev 2. 20. Jure Deorum majestas
vindicatur ab eo qui solo Deo minor, says Nature, Cic. (...). Jos. Cont Ap. 2.
nes alio more, aut novo colat: Leg. 12. Zab. (...), it was the grave* Advice to
Augustus, and the care of Heathen and Jewish Government.

Prop. 7. We are all agreed, That these restraints ought to be by such
penalties, as may be a terror to evil doers: and the King sitting in the Throne
of Judgment, Mr. Case's Sermon of Cov^nant breaking.
may scatter away all evil with his eyes, especially when an Uniformity is
pressed, not upon the conscience upon pain of damnation, Mr. Nalton.
but upon their outward practice, Mr. Cheynell.
upon pain of the loss of some privilege, which a public Society can allow to
none but those that are true to its interest, and sure to its peace and order
enjoined by God, who is not the Author of confusion, but of order, as in all
the Churches of the Saints: To which penalties we are to submit with meekness,
possessing our souls with patience, taking care we be not murmurers, or
complainers: and though the spirit of the Governor be stirred against us, yet
let us, not stir out of our place, but by a modest courage pacify wrath.
Magnum mundo documentum datum est, Parrere.

Prop. 8. We are agreed, That as God is (...), owing no rule or measure of his
actions, but his own good pleasure; so all his creatures depending upon him, as
greater, wiser, and juster then themselves, have their holy limits and bounds
set them by God; Mr. Leyford.
which the more they observe, the more rational and divine Liberty they enjoy
The true and eternal Liberty consisting in this, Boltons Extent of Christian
Liberty.
viz. in being freed from chains of darkness and sin: 1. Ignorance of mind. 2.
Error of understanding. 3. Perverseness of will. 4 Excess of passion. 5.
Violence of temptation. 6. Depravedness of custom, prevalency of interest, or
delusion of examples wherewith the soul is enthralled, Mr. Manton on James.
and by the wisdom of the word and power of Christ, in being willing to that
which we know God would have us, and in doing willingly what ever we so will
and know, as most conformable to his will. Cradocks Liberty.
True liberty is to guide us privately and publicly alone, and with others to
guide our thoughts, opinions, judgment, conscience, speech and action, as
sober men, by the ingenuous restraints of Reason and Religion, of modesty,
humanity, honor, civility, charity and society: and as sober Christians, by the
Law of God, the established Order, good Laws, just Power and Government in
things civil and sacred: Mr. Gurnals Complete Army Part 1.
Its fa^ from Christian liberty to think, speak, act, write, and dispute what
he pleases privately and publicly, according as his private persuasions, his
prevailing lust, interest and temptations, which other men's importunities may
guide him, without regard to right, reason, common order, public peace,
reverence of men, or fear of God, as if they had no yoke of Christ upon them,
no care of the duties of patience, self denial, mortification, meekness,
charity, modesty, sobriety, together with that comeliness that beseems Religion
and a Christian spirit; Mr. Marshal's Se^mon before th H. Peers. 1 46.
as if it were Christian liberty to be led captive to all impudencies and
violences, by the devil at his will: and to have that sad misery of doing what
we will, by following vain, erroneous, and blasphemous thoughts, raw,
undigested and rash fancies and opinions, with irregular, disorderly and
unwarrantable ways, whereby men are servants to their lusts, 2 Pet. 2. 17 and
are in danger of making it a cloak of maliciousness, to the dissolution of
humane societies, with the mutual relations of superiors and inferiors that
uphold them, whereas true Liberty, that glorious Liberty of the Sons of God is,
1. To do such things constantly, cheerfully, and without sinful impediment,
which are most proper, and advantageous to the excellent nature of man toward
God, in devout piety. 2. To do those things charitably, orderly, and gravely,
and soberly, which are duties of obedience public or private, which God has
commanded every one, Downham Christ: Liberty
not only in general, but in particular places, and callings as God has set
them in as free from that malice, uncharitableness, those envys, discontents,
and worldly disorders in any kind, as they may have dominion over mere natural,
and sinful man: To be free out of a principle of love to obey God and Man for
the Lords sake, in order to Gods glory, the p^ace, good example, and benefit of
others, in any humane, or Christian society.

Prop. 9. We are agreed, That there is a Liberty of wisdom, piety and charity,
which ought to be exercised by Governors in Church and State, according to
their consciences, Beza de Magistrate.
making such Laws and Restraints as they in conscience think fit for the
public welfare, Zwing. lib. and Obed.
although those Laws and Restraints are against the private opinions and
liberties of singular men. Calvin Oposs.
Public men thoughts and conscience, and not private, Gelespysrod.
are to be the rule of public Laws and good: it were as unreasonable as it is
impossible, for Magistrates to frame Laws according to their Subjects
consciences, and not their own: and so when they do not regard the Pleas of
private Liberty, to overthrow public order, they are not to be spoken against
as persecuting men, when they only keep them from those exorbitances that may
undo them; or as oppressing other men's consciences, when they are only
discharging their own duty and consciences which they bear to Gods glory and
the public good, for which they must be accountable to God. According to the
Magistrates conscience, Christians truly blessed with tender consciences and
meekness of wisdom, are most willing to be kept within christian bounds, and
most unwilling to take any liberty either in opinion or manners, beyond what in
the truth of the word, or in charity unto the public peace is permitted, and
most thankful for all just restraints.

Prop 10. We are agreed, That it is net enough for us to please our selves,
Romans 15. 1. and satisfy our own consciences, that we do but what we lawfully
may, but we ought also to bear one another burden, and do for o hers sake
what we may otherwise, and are willing to leave undone, and so fulfill the Law
of Christ, and by love serving one another: Omnia libera per fidem, omnia serva
per charitatem, Bishop ^eyn* Unity cum verba.
In indifferent things (and that there are some things indifferent we all
agree) we should know and be fully persuaded that all things are lawful: and to
purpose and fully resolve for charity and peace; to use, or forbear the use of
those things, as we find them expedient or inexpedient* He that will have his
own way in every thing whatsoever, though others will take offense at it,
makes his Liberty but a cloak of maliciousness, by using it uncharitably: we
may retain our judgment concerning things indifferent with christian liberty,
but we m^st conform our pract^ce for christian charity. I am free ^^ my
judgment for anyhabit, gesture, etc I will submit in my practice to that which
is publicly imposed: I am free in my conscience and opinion by the law of man,
concerning things commanded, I may think of them what I please, I am bound in
my conscience to submission, active or passive, by the Law of God: and I must
not do what I please, when orderly Ceremonies are enjoined, not as the party,
but as the decencies and becoming circumstances of worship, (which all allow) a
man may be free to think that there might be more decent Ceremonies pitched
upon by himself or others, if they were in place or power, and in the mean time
submit to the wisdom of those in authority that imposed.

Prop. 11. We are agreed, That as the public Constitutions enjoining Orders,
Decency, and Uniformity, tending to edification, restrain not the Liberty of
conscience, whereby men are free to do, or leave undone some things: so the
suggestions of men against those Constitutions, Mr. Cranford, Mr. Gataker Jus
Divin. Regim. Ecclesiast.
do restrain men's liberty, exercise dominion over their minds, by forbidding
them that which we say they are free to: as it is in superstition, to enjoin
that as necessary which is indifferent; so its superstition to forbid that as
sinful, which is in truth indifferent, and therefore lawful; so making that sin
which God never made, and ensnaring men's consciences, and teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men; and therefore we should stand fast in the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

Prop. 12. We are agreed, That they who can submit some impositions about
things, may submit to all which are imposed by the same Authority, in the same
manner, to the same end.

Prop. 13. We are agreed, That no Authority can in conscience, or with safety,
allow men Liberty in ways of Worship different from the public profession and
conscience. 1. Not in conscience, because as the good Kings of Judah, he is to
allow no known evil. 2 Not in safety, because differences in Religion are
dangerous to the State, (when that which should restrain, 2 Chronicles. 29.
stirs up men's passions) therefore Josiah, and the King in the Gospel, 2 Chronicles.
34.
compelled them to come in, Rev. 2. 14.
to serve the God of their fathers: Inde furor vulgo. Indeed for men furnished
with just power in Church or State, to leave men in a full liberty of seducing
and being seduced, Mr. Love.
is to concur with the malice of the devil, and the folly, Mr. Jenkin.
vanity, and madness of men's hearts to the ruin of multitudes. Mr. Case.
I leave it your own consciences, whether it would not be thought safe, and
conscientious by them, if power were in their own hands, and Church Affairs
left to their ordering, to forbid those things they now mislike, with as much
rigor, and necessity of imposition, as the Church now enjoyneth them.

Prop. 14. We are agreed, Jus Divinum.
That though many godly men should refuse to conform, Minist. Evang.
yet should we submit to order, peace, reason and Law, not suffering our selves
to be carried away with the high estimation of any men, as to subject our
selves to their judgment and wits, without questioning the truth of what they
teach, or the lawfulness of what they enjoin, having not men's persons in
admiration, knowing that they are subject to such infirmities as we are.

Prop 15. We are agreed, That it is lawful for the Magistrate to impose severe
punishments upon the small faults of dangerous men of dangerous principles
knowing that men of such dispositions who disobey in this, are prepared to
disturb in all: so its not lawful for the people upon the least offense* to
cast off necessary duty, as knowing that they are at liberty to pray, preach,
etc. with what gesture or garment they will, yet refusing to pray kneeling, or
preach in a Surplice.

O When our Clergy at the dreadful Day,
Shall make their audit; when the Judge shall say
Give your accounts: what, have my lambs been fed,
Say, do they all stand found? Is there none dead
By your defaults? Come Shepherds bring them forth
That I may crown your labors in their worth,
O what an answer will be given by some!
We have been silenced: Canons strucuks dumb;
The Great ones would not let us feed thy flock,
Unless we played the fools and wore a Frock:
We were forbid unless we would yield to sign
And cross their brows, they say, a mark of thine.
To say the truth, great Judge, they were not sed,
Lord, here they be; but, Lord, they be all dead,
Ah cruel Shepherds! Could your conscience serve
Not to be fools, and yet to let them starve?
What if your Fiery spirits had been bound
To Antic habits, or your heads been crowned
With Peacocks Plumes; had yet been forced to feed
Your Saviors dear-bought Flock in a fools weed;
He that was scorned, reviled, endur'll the Curse
Of a base death, in your behalfs; nay worse;
Swallowed the cup of wrath charged up to the brim;
Durst ye not stoop to play the fools for him?
Prop. 16. Where it is said, That it is wonderful to see so many men rational
and sober, to hazard all they have, and refuse the way to rise, which they know
as well as others. We are agreed, that this is not the first time that men have
sacrificed their present happiness to the honor of their way, living by faith
in hope of better times. It was as hazardous to oppose public Authority 1640.
as it is now, yet men ventured it with too good success. Alas! they that have
so much wisdom a, to control their Superiors, may have so much wisdom too as
to cast off some present advantage, for a future hope.

Prop. 17. Whereas men say, that a general conformity of the Ministers, would
be general scandal to the people. We are agreed, That we are to please the
people only for their good, while things are in agitation, its lawful for
private men to offer their thoughts, with the reasons thereof, modesty and
meekly, but after things are once established, as the people must submit, so
the Ministers should take more care, not to disobey a Public Governor, then
not to offend a private people, least while we fear to offend one or two
private men, we really offend a hundred, affront the Magistrate, and despise
Authority, we must rather offend others, then sin our selves, we must pay depts
of Justice, before debts of Charity, debts of Justice in obeying, the
Magistrate before debts of Charity, in pleasing our brethren.

Prop. 18. Whereas some say, that they could submit to the things, that are
established, but that they fear the impositions of more. We are agreed, That we
should obey us, for as we may, for peace, and quiet, and leave it to God, what
may be further imposed, and let us not suffer our obedience to be superseded by
our fears.

Prop. 19. Whereas its commonly discoursed, that if the thiugs now imposed were
necessary, why were not they constantly practiced, if not why were they now so
rigorously imposed. We are agreed, Dr. Sandersons Preface.
That when for decency order, and Uniformities-sake, any Laws are made there,
is the same necessity of obeying them, as their is, of obeying any other Laws
made for the good of the Commonwealth, that such necessity either in the one
or the other, arises not immediately from the authority of the Lawgiver, but
from the Ordinance of God, who has commanded us to obey, the ordinances of man
for his sake, as long as there is an ordinance of man concerning them is in
being.

Prop. 20. Whereas it offends some men, that they think that Laws in matters of
Religion derogate from the sufficiency of Scripture, and the wisdom of God, who
have, they think, without such Constitutions, sufficiently provided for the
Church of God, we are agreed, that in actions of common life, Ames. Fresh Suit
against Ceremoni^s. Mr. Jeaneys Scholast. Divinity. Part 2.
as eating, drinking, etc. and in the circumstances of religious actions, we
are left to private or public reason and discretion, guided by the general
rule of the Scripture: that all things should be done decently, and in order:
as good men before the Word was written, Mr. Baxters sheet against the Quakers.
Stillingfleet Irenicum.
did by nature the things contained in the Law. It was the wisdom of God that
appointed us to submit to the wisdom of our Superiors in the use of
indifferent things, and they derogate from the authority of the Scripture, who
will not obey them that are to set in order the things that are wanting,
according to the customs of the Churches of God.

Prop. 21. Whereas the great offense is, that whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin: and that men doubt of the lawfulness of some things, therefore they cannot
use them, Mr. Dyke of Conscience. Dr. Harris Look, To thy conscience.
we are agreed: That ordinarily there is no need of any more warrant for what
we do, then this only, that there is not to our knowledge any Law, either of
nature or Scripture, against them: we are to believe all things indifferent
lawful for us to do which are not by good evidence of Scripture and reason,
declared unlawful: and men whose Livelihood depends upon it, would do well to
satisfy their scruples about things imposed, with the solemn Consideration of
this Question: Where is this, and this in forbidden? provided that we have not
neglected to inform our judgments the best we could for the time past, and
that we are ever ready withal to yield our selves to better information for the
time to come: and we are strongly to suspect the Principles and Grounds that
Conscience goes upon, when it puts us upon the necessity, either of
disobeying Authority, or of sinning against our judgment. He that rests his
conscience upon this persuasion, that so long as he is unfeignedly desirous to
do for the best, and has not been negligent to use all requisite diligence to
inform himself a^ight, God will accept of his good intention therein, and
pardon his error if he shall be mistaken in his choice: Let him do what he
will, he sinnoth not, 1 Cor. 7. 36. This we are persuaded of, that our own
doubts must give place to our Superiors commands, which must be obeyed in all
things, not manifestly contrary to the revealed Will of God: A good conscience
fears not only to use this, or that Ceremony, but fears also to disobey.

Sect. Particular Expedients, in reference to what is enjoined in the Act of
Uniformity.
Prop 1 Whereas we are required to assent and subscribe, we are agreed that we
must consent 1. with the heart believing, Romans 10. 10. 2. with the mouth
professing. 3. with the hand subscribing, Es. 44. ^. Josh. 24, 2. 2 Kings 23.
3.) to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, Theodor. Eccl. Hist. l. 1.
cap. 2.
and to the doctrine which is according to godliness. Of which kind, are the
three things to be subscribed to in the aforesaid Act, whereof the first is:

I A. B. do here unfeignedly declare my unfeigned consent to all, and every
thing contained and prescribed in a Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer,
and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, according to the use of the Church of England; Mr. Ball
against Cann.
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be said
or sung in Churches, and the form and mauner of making Priests and Deacons.

Prop. 2. We are agreed, That a Form of Prayer is lawful, 1. grounded upon the
word, Numb. 6.16. Hos. 14. 1. Math. 6 2. agreeable to the general custom of the
Church which uses Liturgies, Liturgy, James, Basil, Chrysostom; Liturgy of the
Church of Scotland, Liturgy of Geneva; the Liturgies of the French Churches for
the instruction of the ignorant, the maintenance of truth, unity and peace;
yea, according to the opinion of the Non-conformists Liturgies are lawful; for
they composed no less than three in Queen Elizabeth's time, and one since the
King came in.

Prop. 3. We are agreed, 1 That upon search our Lyturgy, comes nearest the
primitive ones of any established, beginning with Sentences and exhortations
according to the Scripture, 2. that the confession is Orthodox, that the
Absolution, the Lords Prayers, the Hymns, the Psalms, the Chapters, Creed, with
all the Prayers, Mr. Baxter.
are such as may be allowed by any that judge charitably.

We are agreed, That the people may as well repeat the words of the Prayer
after the Ministers, as say Amen after them, to stir up their affections, to
declare their consort, to keep up their fervency, suis quisque verbis
resipiscentium profiteatur, Basil, Ep. 60.
and preces repetat, and repeat the Psalms as Moses and Mirian, Exodus 15.1. and
as the Angels answer one another, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

Prop. 4. We are agreed, That the gestures of standing in confession, of
kneeling, are our reasonable service, and that the vestures imposed may be used
decently according to the rules in St. Jerome, Hierom. Ezekiel. 44. advers. Pel.
1. 9. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. To. 5 Irsom. Gr. Naz.
divine Religion has one kind of habit, wherein to Minister before the Lord,
and another for ordinary uses belonging to common life, in this we approve St.
Basils Counsel, Let him that approves not his Governors Ordinances, plainly
yet privately show his dislike, if he have a (...) according to the true will
of God, and meaning of the Scripture, or else let him quietly with silence, do
that which is enjoined.

Prop. 5. We are agreed, 1. That we may safely say those words, When thou
did overcome the sharpness of death, virtually at the beginning of the
world: and actually in the fullness of time, thou did open the Kingdom of
heaven to all believers.

2. That we may safely say, God deliver us from sudden death; that death when
it comes may give us time with David, Moses, etc. leisurely to end our lives
in peace, praying for posterity, confirming, conforting, and instructing our
relutions, dying the death of the righteous, and having our latter ends like
his, or if death come suddenly we may prepar for it in our lives.

3. That we may say, that for our unworthiness we cannot ask, what for the
merits of Christ we do ask, looking inward we are silencedby our sins, looking
upward we speak and prevail.

4. That we may say, O Lord deliver us from all adversity; if it be possible
yet resolving, that not our will, but the will of God be done, in earth as it
is in heaven.

5. That we may safely pray, that God would have mercy upon all men, when the
Apostle would have supplication to be made for all men, because God was willing
that all men should come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved, 1 Timothy 2.
3. and our Charity hops all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7. Romans 9. 3. 10. 1. Math. 10,
11, 12. Jer. 15. 1.

6. That we may say, the child has all things, that its capable of which are
necessary to salvation, when he is Baptized.

7. That we may say according to the Scripture, John 3. that the Baptized is
regenerated of water, and we hope of the holy Ghost, if it die before the
Commission of Actual sin: Romans 5.12. etc.

8. That we may say, of any particular person, dying in the faith that we bury
him in hope of Resurrection unto life, by that charity that hops all things.

Prop. 6. We are agreed, To use the cross and other innocent Ceremonies, and
ancient as signal marks of Faith, Humility, Purity, Courage, and constancy in
some parts of the worship and service of the Church, as not conferring grace,
but as reverential in the solemn calling upon Gods name, as decent in Gods
public worship, and as instances of our obedience to superiors in Church and
State, commanding things not contrary to Gods word in faith, Mr. Sanders
Church Government.
mysteries, and manners, and thereby reducing the uncertainty of necessary
circumstances, (as time, place, vesture, gesture, measure, and manner, to that
fixed unity and comeliness as seems to the Church most decent, for the nature of
the Duty, the convenience of the people, and the beauty of holiness. In a word,
we are agreed to submit to the established Liturgy, as agreeable to the word of
God, Joel. 2. 11. Eccl. 5. 30. as agreeable to the custom of the Ancient
Churches, as agreeable to the custom of Modern Churches, who retain Liturgies
to this day, as exact as any of theirs, if compared; and allowed by the foreign
Churches, by learned Doctors, and holy Martyrs, who sealed it with their blood;
especially considering that we shall not be so strictly tied to the Liturgy,
but that we may use our own Gifts before and after Sermon.

2. Whereas we are obliged in the next place to declare, That it is not lawful
upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King; And that we do
abhor that traitorous of taking Arms by his authority against his Person, or
against those that are Commissionated by Him.

Prop. 1. We are agreed, See Mr. Jenkins on Jvde, ver. 6.
That its scandalous to our Religion, whose doctrine is Obedience.

2. That its dangerous to our Profession, Mr. Manton, Jude.
(such positions provoking Rulers to root us out of the earth.)

3. That it is contrary to the profession and practice of good men in all Ages,
whose way was prayer and patience. Mr. Baxter's Church Government.


4. That it is contrary to the Scripture to resist, and that whosoever
resists, it is his own damnation: Mr. Brinsley of Subjection.
If any kill with the sword, he shall be killed with the sword: here is the
patience of the Saints.

5. That its originally Jesuitical for Subjects to raise War against their King.

Prop. 2. We are agreed, That the Scripture provides not only for the safety
of the Royal Government, but of the Royal Person, when we are forbid to despise
Dominion, to speak evil of Dignities, not to resist the Powers ordamed of God:
O its absurd to follow the Kings person with arms in one place, and to preserve
his Authority in another: miserable is that Power that cannot protect the
Person in whom it is.

3. Whereas we are obliged in the third place to Renounce the Covenant:

Prop. 1. We are agreed, Amesius Case of Conscience. Mr. Downham of Oaths. Dr.
Saunderson de Juramento. Bishop Gaudens Analysis. Bishop Tailor Conscience.
Baldwin, de Conscientia.
That an unlawful Oath cannot tie us to the performances of it, (because
nothing can tie us to sin) but rather to a repentance for it: as a double sin,
1. the one, the intention of an evil: 2 the other, swearing of it so intended.

Prop. 2. We are agreed, That the solemn League and Covenant was unlawful, 1
because it was imposed contrary to the Liberty the Subject had sworn in the
Protestation to defend; to which Liberty, the Imposition of a new Oath, other
then is established by Act of Parliament, King, Lords and Commons, is said in
the Petition of Right, and in the Declaration of the Lords and Commons, to be
contrary.

2. It was against the consent of the supreme Magistrate, without whom no
public Resolution can be taken contrary to his Government, no more then we
must allow a child or servant, to resolve any thing contrary to the welfare of
the family where they are, without the father or masters consent.

3. Because it was in the manner of it violent, wherein men had uot power over
their own will.

4. Because it was in the matter of it sinful; as 1. obliging us to things
disorderly beyond our measure, to meddle with things too high for us: 2. As
obliging us to cast out Episcopacy as tyrannical, and the Liturgy as
superstitious: 1 to the scandal of the Papist, to whom the Cause is hereby
yielded, which our Learned Writers have maintained against them. 2. To the
justifying them in the scorn and reproach of our Religion. 3. To a confession
that the Laws and Punishments made and inflicted against Papists here, are
unjust. 4. To the violation of our own Consciences, 1. who approved both, as
agreeable to the word of God in our subscriptions at our Ordination, and
otherwise: 2 who swore to both in our Protestation, to defend the true
Protestant Religion expressed in the doctrine of the Church of England, and in
the Oath of Supremacy. 3. who know both to be of Apostolical institution, and
of ancient practice, and so owned by us, in our subscription to the 39
Articles. 4. as obliging men to extirpate that, which the Parliament declared
they would not abolish Rem. 15. Dec. 1641. Decl. 9. Apr. 1642. 5. Unlawful,
because obliging us to what is unpossible. 6 Because, limiting our care of his
Majesty, to the defense of true Religion, whereas we must be loyal to him, let
him profess what Religion he please. 7. It was unlawful in the end of it, which
was war, turmult, and sedition, and the ruin of the kingdom, because of that
oath the land mourned, and we did many sad things with Herod, because of the
oath.

Prop. We are agreed, That as if a woman vowed a vow to the Lord, which her
father dissalloweth in the day that he hears of it, not any of her bonds, or
vows shall stand, Number. 30. so now we have vowed a vow, and the father of our
country disalloweth it, the vow wherewith we have bound our selfs should not
stand.

Prop. 4. We agree all herein, viz. That the Dangerous position abovesaid, and
the Covenant are of such desperate tendences that if we abjure them not, as we
may be deprived by the statute of Conformity so we may be proceeded against as
dangerous persons, Se at for defense of his Majesty person.
by the statutes of treason, the Kingdom will think that he that has a
Covenant in his heart has a war there too, and so must not only loose his
employment but his protection too, as a person not only to be silenced but
confined too.

Thus at a Conference it was agreed how far we ought to submit to a Christian
Magistrates Authority, in matters of Religion, upon such Principles as are
owned by Mr. Baxter, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Manton, Mr. Crofton, Mr.
Edwards, Mr. Case, Mr. Caryl, and many others, in print before the world.

Blessed is he that condemns not himself in that which he allows. Romans 14.
22.
FINIS.

