AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST ERROR, Concerning JUSTIFICATION. OR, The True Notion of
JUSTIFICATION, and of JUSTIFYING FAITH, CLEARED By the light of Scripture, and
solid Reason, from several Mistakes of the words: which Misapprehensions prove
the seeds of Dangerous Errors.

By the late Reverend and Learned Divine, THOMAS GATAKER of Pious Memory. In a
Discourse on Romans 3. 28. too precious to be buried in Obscurity.

To which is added, The Way of Truth and Peace: OR, A Reconciliation of the
holy Apostles, S. PAVL and S. JAMES, CONCERNING Justification
By Faith without works, Romans 3. 28. By Works, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2.
21, 24.


By Charles Gataker, Rector of Hoggeston in the County of Bucks.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun near the west end of S.
Paul's. 1670.

Imprimatur.

Dec. 6. 1669. Rob. Grove, R. P. Dno Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.

To the Right Honorable, CHARLES Earl of Carnarvon, Lord Dormer, Viscount
Ascot, Baron of Wing, and Master of his Majesty's Hawks.
My Lord,
THe whole Design of this Dedication, as to the Ground and End of it, is so
clearly transparent to those who know, how Gods Providence has set me, a weak
Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, to work under the shadow of your Lordships
protection, that it is a superfluous waste of words and time, to defend the
presumption of this Address, which, without mine Apology, may be reasonably
taken for a just expression of my duty. It were moreover an unpardonable
trespass against your Lordships quick Apprehension, whose vigorous spirit is
active and piercing in the observing of Occurrents, if I should make a tedious
Harangue, to discover mine intentions in thus testifying the sense I have, both
of the common benefit, which I enjoy together with other sons of the Prophets,
who dwell in safety under the sheltring and refreshing shade of your Lordships
Patronage, and also of those peculiar obligations laid upon me by your
Lordships singular favor, the repetition whereof in particular were
impertinent, but my public acknowledgement in general is as decent, as my
private remembrance of them is perpetually and indispensably requisite. I have
only a mind to wish, that the product of my own Soil, which I pay as tribute
unto your Lordship, were as agreeable for the workmanship to the divine matter
which I handle, as the discourse it self is proper, and (as I humbly conceive)
suitable to your Lordships pious inclination. For I cannot with silence pass
by, what I have seen with huge satisfaction; that as your Lordship has had a
share in Timothy's happiness, in knowing the holy Scriptures from a child, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
which are able to make Thee wise unto salvation: so It has grown in
knowledge, by the advantage of Gods special endowment, a capacious and
tenacious Memory. It is also a blessed and pleasing Rarity, that in an Age of
men sadly degenerate into Atheism, who endeavor to forget that they are Gods
offspring, and would fain be taken for the Mushrooms of Chance, and are not
only sunk below Beasts in enormous sensuality, but also fallen beyond the
apostasy of the Devils in absurd Incredulity, with a perverse ingratitude
denying the Lord that bought them, and with a sottish insolency denying the
God that made them; your Lordship in the midst of this corrupt and crooked
generation has continued steadfast and unmovable in the belief and profession
of the general Principles of Religion, upon which as a sure Basis all Justice
and Civility are founded, and particularly of the Doctrine declared and
established by the Church of England, with an equal aversion from Atheistical
profaneness, and from newfangled pretensions to Religion.

Some have observed of us Islanders, that we are very apt to vary our Fashions,
and have ascribed our Inconstancy to the changeable temper of our Air, and the
unstable complexion of our Climate. I wish our Countrymen were not as vainly,
and that more dangerously fickle in altering the Opinions of their Religion, as
they are mutable in the habit and mode of their Apparel. I am sure the fault of
this flitting and shifting humor is not chargeable upon the Stars, Sky, Air,
or other Elements, which are all the innocent creatures of a good God, and
uneffective upon the wills of men. But the shame and misery will light heavy
at last upon these unballasted minds, unstable souls, unwary followers of
cunning seducers, or itching affecters of novelty, who delight to wander, but
forsake their own mercy, while they trust in lying vanities. To prevent the
going astray, or being misled from the way of Truth, and peace of conscience
which depends thereon, in one main point of Christian Religion, I have
published a Piece of my Father of pious memory; which tho imperfect, because a
mortal disease cut off the thread of his meditation first, and shortly after of
his life, drawn forth to fourscore years within a few weeks; yet is (as I
suppose) a very useful Foundation, on which any Christian exercised in the
study of Scripture, may build the same superstructure, which the Author would
have raised, if God had granted him a little longer use of light.

To this I have subjoyned a short Discourse of mine own composure, tending to
the explication of S. Paul and S. James their doctrine concerning
Justification, for the removal of a stone of offense, the seeming contrariety
between the blessed Apostles, which some weak Christians have stumbled at, and
some scoffing enemies of Christianity have taken up, to cast at the head, and
wound (if it were possible) the credit of the Gospel. And I hope that the
precious Relick premised will add weight and value to mine Offering, which I
tender in all humility first as a Peace Offering to the Church of God; and I
present it to your Lordship as a cluster of that Vineyard, whereof I am an
unworthy Dresser: devoutly praying that your Lordships benign influence on the
Lords inheritance may be recompensed from on high, with the plentiful
distillation of all blessings upon your Lordship, and your Lordships whole
Family most worthy of Honor; to which I am resolved, as well as engaged, to
remain in all faithful observance,

My Lord, Your Honors most devout Orator, and most humble Servant, CHARLES
GATAKER.

THE PREFACE To the Christian Reader.
BEcause I stand accountble for the increase of Books when the world seems to
be overcharged already with the number and bulk of them, even to the wearying
of the Readers flesh and spirit; I desire thee with candor to receive this
brief Account of my publication of these ensuing Treatises.

The God of truth and of peace (which two Titles are the most resplendent Gems
in the Crown of Gods glorious Attributes) has commanded us to embrace and
maintain with equal love and zeal the Truth and Peace. zech. 8. 19
Since also both these are the Legacies of our blessed Savior, bequeathed to
his Church by his Testament, sealed with his blood; certainly every sincere
Christian is concerned in both; 2 Cor. 4. 1.
but the stevvards of the mysteries of God are yet more deeply engaged in the
preservation or restoration of both, to their utmost ability. At present, our
amazing and distressing thoughts are great for the divisions of Reuben, Judge.
5. 15.
(to use the words of Deborah) and the spiritual flames of dissension which
(like the late dreadful Fire in the City) devour the strength and beauty of
our Church, call for the assistance of all hands to quench them. But as in a
Conflagration, while some labor to repress the violence, or stop the course of
the spreading Fire, others are employed to guard the Goods, and, while they
stand with aching hearts for the Calamity, do good service in perserving their
neighbors as well as their own Goods from perishing or plunder: so while my
Brethren, the blessed sons of peace, are hard at work, in drawing water out of
the ever-living spring, the Scripture, which plentifully affords the Word of
truth and peace, and applying the same for the allaying of these consuming
flames, (whose endeavors for the peace of Jerusalem I pray God to prosper) I
have undertaken to preserve and reseue an important Truth concerning
Justification, from the attempts made by same to corrupt or obscure this
heavenly doctrine. That I might discharge my fidelity in securing the
Apostolical doctrine avouched by the Church of England from a dangerous blow
offered at it, by raising an Objection out of S. James against S. Paul, and
then (because Christians are concerned neither to set, nor to leave the holy
Apostles at odds one with another) going about to reconcile them in an unsound
way, to the prejudice of Religion it self; I did lately on a just occasion
frame a short Discourse for mine own satisfaction, and for the instruction of
others. For I conceive my self, tho by many degrees inferior to Timothy, yet
in some measure to lie under S. Paul's double charge to him, ^ Tim. 6. 20*
first (...), to keep the precious truth committed to my trust, and then what I
have been sufficiently taught and assured of, 2 Timothy 2* 2.
to commit the same unto faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.
Thus far I allow Tradition of the faith once delivered to the Saints, tho it be
not infallible, unchangeable, and incorruptible, either by the course of
nature, or by the promise of grace to any particular Race or Succession of men,
yet to be a duty required of Ministers, and a means to propagate the Truth;
whether that delivery be transacted by word of mouth, which is transient, or by
writing, which is permanent, as now I transmit, what I have received. For I
count it a special instance of Gods gracious providence to me, not only that I
was born of a Parent eminent for Learning and Piety (the Honor I owe my Father
will free me from the guilt of vanity in this modest celebration of his Memory)
but also in this, that I was well acquainted with his Doctrine, and
particularly in this Head concerning Justification, which he had discussed with
a piercing reason, and explicated with a happy perspicuity; not leaning to his
own understanding, but after an examination of an innumerable variety of
Writers on this Argument, making the language of Scripture in the common sense
of the words the Rule of his Judgment and speaking, that he might speak as the
oracles of God. By this religious observing the form of wholesome words, 1
Pet. 4. 11*
he did disentangle to* Truth from many thorny Controversies, which have been
raised impertinently, but agitated with much heat, to the injury of Truth and
Peace.

In the year of our Lord 1640, April 19. he began in the course of his
Ministry to unfold that portion of Scripture, Romans 3. 28. and in process of
time, by Gods assistance accomplished his intended explication of the entire
Doctrine concerning Justification, with that accurateness of Method, solidity
of Reason, and elearness of expression, which was usual to him in such a
weighty Argument, and very satisfactory to his judicious Auditors. The rude
draughts of his Meditations be kept by him, and they are yet extant. He was
urged often to publish them; but according to his modest declining appearance
in public, he was averse from printing what he had preached with a cheerful
freedom of speech. At last, not so much the importunity of friends, as the love
of Truth, which he pitied to see not only opposed by Old Adversaries, but also
assaulted by upstart Enemies, and in danger to be smothered in a crowd of
newfangled Errors, qickned him to set upon a new Work, to recollect his loose
Papers, to revise his Notes, to new-model his Treatise, and to fit it for the
public benefit of the Church to posterity. But the Lord had measured his task
and his time. An Ague, which turned shortly to a violent and mortal Fever, was
the messenger that summoned him, and diverted him from communicating his
conceptions to the Church, A. D. 1654.
to the resigning of his spirit to God. This Piece, tho unfinished, I cannot
well permit to perish in the dust: And I publish it now while I have
opportunity, (for I am also hasting to the land of forgetfulness) because I
conceive it hugely useful to the advancement and clearing of the Truth, to the
determining of many Controversies, which would be easily resolved, if the sense
of words, about which men are apt to wrangle, were understood and agreed on,
and to the direction of the considering Reader in the way to a good
understanding in this Cardinal Point of Christian Religion. For such is igneus
vigor, the fiery temper, (as Virgil says) of the heaven-born Soul, that a small
hint given to an active nimble mind, is like a spark falling on sulphury
matter, which is sufficient to light a Candle, or to kindle a Fire, for the
enlightening and warming the whole house. So this spark of doctrine communicated
to receptive understandings, and cherished with Meditation, may prove a happy
introduction to a bright and lasting light of Truth. And it may be accounted no
small benefit, that the Author, who intended to do more service for the
household of faith, did (what his time allowed him) out of the hard flint strike
fire for others to make use of, and to improve. But, Greg. Naz.
some will be ready to say, (...) mine affection blindes and transports me. And
tho my over-valuing kinddess for this Fragment may be justifiable by my
Relation to the Author, yet I am both too nearly interested to judge (...),
sincerely and impartially, and too meanly qalified, to sway other men's
judgments by mine estimation. I confess all this, and am so far from presuming
that I can any ways add any luster to my father of pious memory, that I fear,
lest this very Work of his be sullied, when it is offered to the world by mine
hands. I do therefore invite the Reader only by the assurance, that this was a
Piece of his last undertaking, and so having set up this Taper, I let it shine
by its own light. So much for the former Treatise, to which in good manners I
have given the precedence before mine own.

And of the latter I shall say little besides what I have already intimated. It
was a proud Fancy and Motto of one, who being raised from an obscure original,
took himself to be the sole Engineer and Artificer of his own Fortune, Dan. 4.
30.
like Nebuchadnezzar ascribing his estate to his own Wit and Power for the
erecting it, and therefore gave for his Devise in a Shield, a Spider in the
center of a curious Web spun out of his own bowels, with this word, Mihi soli
debeo, insinuating that he was indebted to none but himself. I am very far from
the arrogancy and ambition of being deemed (...), or to have drawn out my
little knowledge by my mine own sole industry. Tho I acknowledge God to be the
fountain of wisdom, as he is the Father of lights, and therefore I desire to be
taught of God; (...).
yet it will not misbecome me to acknowledge that my fathers instruction, in
this point especially of Justification, was the Conduit-pipe whereby I have
derived what I now profess from the holy Scripture. For upon the Word of God in
Scripture, and not upon the Tradition of my Father, (how learned soever, yet
not infallible) do I ground my Faith. But as it is a piece of ingenuity to
acknowledge by whom we profit in knowledge, so it is in me a duty of filial
respect to confess, that I am indebted to my Father alone for that excellent
Observation, which was to me Indictum ore alio, unheard of from any other
mouth, concerning the different Questions or Cases in S. Paul and S. James,
which after him I have now propounded as a fair way to reconcile the holy
Apostles. And because this has not been so fully and generally observed, it
may now also appear new to others, and on that score suffer contradiction, as
Christianity it self at the first appearance was rejected for novelty, tho (as
St. Augustine says of it, Aug. de civit. I. 22. c. 7.
and I may say the same of this particular) it was Veritas nova consuetudini,
non contraria rationi; it was a Truth new indeed to custom, but not contrary to
reason. I desire therefore the Christian Reader to be so just, as to examine
the Discourse with sobriety, before he cast it awaey with scorn; and to be so
civil, as to give me leave in an Age too ambitious of latitude and liberty, to
enjoy my desired freedom of adhering to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
and choosing such a way of Reconciliation as preserves the Truth as well as
Peace.

But if any being sensible of some reflection in my Discourse upon his own
Opinion, and impatient of control, grow so froward, as when he is unwilling to
be convinced, and unable to convince me of Error, (I mean at least in the main
matter of my Discourse) he shall go about to raise dark and groundless
suspicious against the Author, and in stead of Reasons to disprove his Opinion,
cast forth Reproaches to disparage his person; I shall only say of my
Writings; as Ovid did of his Verses, Judicio poterant candidiore Legi; they
might have been read with a more candid judgment. One Caution more I hope will
be taken in good part, That the Reader will not be so dis-ingenuous, as to
endeavor to weaken the credit of an Orthodox Doctrine of our Church, which
has no affinity with Secular interests, because it has been asserted by some,
that have sowed the seeds of Sedition and Schism among us; or to blast the
reputation of his brother who maintains both the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England, Philo Jud. Just. Mart. Origin, etc.
(...), as the Greek Writers speak, with might and main, as occasion requires,
because the Schismatics (some, not all) are of the same opinion in this point.
It were unjustly done, and would be unkindly taken, if any one that holds some
disputable point of Divinity in common with the Jesuits, should for that
accidental concurrence in an Opinion, which is out of distance from things of
State and Government, be therefore charged as teinted with the poisonous
principles of Rebellion and Regicide, wherewith the Schools of the Jesuits are
deeply infected. And it is yet more unreasonable, that the defense of an
important point of Christianity common to men of different Persuasions, be
wrested by a Dissenter to breed an ill opinion of the defendant; as if he that
defends the Justification of a sinner by Faith only, must needs be confederate
with Rebels and Schismatics, in denying obedience and submission to the Powers
sacred in Church and State, which are Gods immediate Ordinances.

But why do I (will some say) surmise that any man can or will be so absurd?

I wish heartily that none were, or be so. But I see too much of this indirect
dealing and foul play in the practice of Gladiatory. It is enough, that I would
(if possible) prevent the like collateral strokes, when the contending for the
Faith exposes me to danger. I will detain my Reader no longer; whom I desire to
receive with the right hand, that which is offered with the right hand, and a
hearty prayer withal, that God give thee a right understanding in all things.

Thine in the Lord, CHARLES GATAKER.

An Antidote against ERROR, concerning Justification, etc.
THe Apostle Paul, the undoubted Author of this Epistle, tho he made use of
another man, one Tertius, chap. 16. 22. for the engrossing of it, as Jeremie
did Baruk for the writing out of his Prophecies, Jer. 36. 4, 18. as he says of
himself, and that qestionles most truly, in regard of the rest of his
copartners in the Apostleship, that he labored in the execution of that his
Office more abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15. 10. so in this particular
employment of laboring to instruct and edify the Churches and faithful
people, not only that then were, but that are in being at this day, (for unto
us are his writings now also beneficial, as-well as they were unto those that
then lived, and unto whom they were directed, being intended for a more general
good, Chap. 15. 4. 2. Petr. 3. 15.) by writing to them, when he could not be
personally present with them, the same may not without good ground be averred.
For we have twice as many more of his Epistles extant at this day, I say not,
then of any one severallie, but then of all his fellow-Apostles joyntlie put
together, if that to the Hebrews at least be granted to be his, as by most it
is deemed. And yet that he wrote more then have come to our hands, it seems
evidentlie to appeer. Nor do I speak of those counterfeit ones that have been
thrust out under his name, those to Seneca, which Jerome yet attributes too
much unto; or that to the Laodiceans, which Stapulensis has inserted into the
body of Paul's Epistles, grounding upon a mistake and mis-interpretation of the
Apostles words, Coloss. 2. 16. But of one written to the Corinthians before
that which we now generally call the First, himself makes expres mention, 1
Cor. 5. 9. which were it now extant, being written to an whole Church for
direction of their demeanure in matter of Church Discipline, would no doubt be
as Authentical and Canonical, as that to Philemon, whether a Minister of the
Gospel, or an eminent Christian only, about a private business, the reception
of Onesimus his fugitive servant.

Now as this our Apostles Epistles are set before those of the rest, James,
Peter, John and Jude: so this to the Romans stands in the front, or the first
place of his, so disposed by those, who at first gathered the Epistles, then
commonly had and acknowledged, together into one Volume, and digested them in
that order as now we have them, and which we find to have been from time to
time ever since generally observed. The reason whereof I conceiv to have been,
not because it was the first that the Apostles wrote: for as those that
gathered together the Sermons of some of the Prophets, so those that compiled
the main Body of these Epistles, did not observe that order in marshalling of
them wherein they were written; and it is justly deemed from that passage,
Chap. 15. 25, 26. that this Epistle was written later then some of those that
here ensu: nor yet do I conceiv it to have gained this precedencie so much, as
some other have supposed, in regard of the pre-eminence and soveraigntie of the
place to which it was written, being at that time the hed-Citie of the whole
Roman Empire, and the seat of the Emperors constant residence; but
principally rather in regard of the eminency and excellency, yea deep
profunditie of the Mysteries of the Gospel, more fully and largely therein
delivered then in any other of them, I may boldly say; what if I should say,
in all the rest of them, were they all put together? Ad we may hereunto, that
the points herein discussed and debated ar pursued and prosecuted with that
nervositie of argument and vivacitie of spirit, and the limbs and joints of the
whole discourse so aptly knit together and artificially rivetted into one
another, Jo. Picus Count of Mirandula.
that that noble Italian Earl so much renowned for his variety of Lerning,
sharpnes of insight, and soundnes of judgment, that he was deemed the Miracle
of the Age he lived, in, is reported to have said, that all the humane writings
of learned men and great Scholars that ever he had seen and read, seemed to him
in comparison of this one our Apostles Masterpiece, as he esteemed it, tanqam
scopae dissolutae, as it is in the Proverb, but as besomes without bands.

The main Body of the Epistle divides it self into two parts.

The former part is Dogmatical or Doctrinal, spent mosdie in opening, clearing
and confirming the Doctrine concerning the Redemption and Salvation of Mankind
by Christ. Chap. 1 -- 11.

The latter part is Practical or Parenetical, consisting of many Rules and
Directions for the ordering aright of a Christian man's life. Chap. 12. ad finem.

In handling the Doctrine of man's Redemption and Salvation by Christ, he lays
down and lays open,

I. The principal parts and branches of it: to wit,

1. Justification, whereby we are freed from the guilt of sin, the condemning
power of it, and stand reputed as just in Gods sight. Chap. 1 -- 5.

2. Sanctification, whereby we are cleansed from the filth, and commanding power
of sin, and have the image of God renewed again in us. Chap. 6, 7, and part of
8.

3. Adoption, by virtue whereof we have right to the heavenly inheritance. Chap.
8. 13 -- 16.

4. Glorification, whereby we are put in full possession and fruition of it.
Chap. 8. 17. ad finem.

II. The original ground and root from whence all this springs and has its
rise, Gods free Election and Predestination to Grace and Glory, obviouslie
propounded, Chap. 8. 29, 30. purposelie prosecuted, Chap. 9 -- 11.

Now because those former are effects and fruits of these latter, and as the
root of a plant, and foundation of a fabric, ly usually out of sight under
ground, but the shoots and branches of the one, and the frame of the edifice
with the other rise above ground and offer themselves unto view, so Election and
Predestination ly hid of themselves, and cannot be descried and discovered of us
concerning our selves save by their effects and fruits; the Apostles according
to the Rule, a notioribus inchoandum, he begins with the former, that thereby
as by streams issuing and flowing down from a spring we may ascend up to the
wel-hed, or as by tracing the course and decurs of a river running down into the
Sea, we may be directed unto that brimles and bottomless Ocean of Gods goodness,
from whence as they had their first rise, so they are to return and empty
themselves into, his glory being their ultimate end. Chap. 11. 36.

Again, because the apprehension of guilt and wrath is that which is wont most
to affright men; nor can there be any true peace or sound comfort of ought to a
soul, until the discharge thereof he obtained; the Apostle therefore in the
first place entreats of that Branch of Justification, whereby men may be freed
from and discharged of that guilt; and makes that the first subject matter of
his Discourse; having artificially linked it to the later end and close of his
Salvation; wherein he had (as the manner of Orators is) endeavored to
insinuate himself into the hearts and minds of those to whom he wrote this
Epistle, by declaration of his love and affection to them, that the doctrine
delivered in it might take the better with them. Chap. 1. verse. 7 -- 15.

Now the only means of Justification he affirms to be by Faith in Christ,
verse. 16, 17. which to clear and confirm, he endeavors to show that all
mankind standing of themselves guilty of sin in Gods sight, are therefore
liable to wrath.

This to make good, he divides the whole race of mankind into two ranks,
Gentiles and Jews.

1. Concerning the Gentiles he prooves that they are so, from the light of
nature, reveiling a Deity to them, and his wrath against sin; the substance of
his Law engraven in their hearts, and the testimony of their own conscience
accusing them of the breach of that Law, so that they carry about with them and
within them, both a Law whereby they are to be tried, so that they can not
pretend ignorance, and a witness, who when time shall come, will give in such
evidence against them, that they shall not be able to plead not guilty. Chap.
1. 18. to 2. 16.

2. Concerning the Jews, who would easily yield it of the Gentiles, but not of
themselves, who they deemed might be sufficiently cleared, either by the works
of the Moral, or rites of the Law ceremonial, he proves the self same, from
those heinous sins that the writings of their own Prophets charge them
withal, Chap. 2. 17. to 3. 19. And the force of the Apostles argument (not so
commonly observed) seems herein to consist, that if sin of all sorts were so
rife and so rank among that people, who had the greatest light to inform them
of the nature and haynousnes of sin, and the strongest means to courb and
restrain it in them, it must needs argu an universal corruption and depravation
of man's nature, and a very sinful disposition in the whole race of mankind.

Hence the Apostle inferres, drawing all that he had before delivered to an
head, that the whole world, consisting, of Gentile and Jew, stands guilty of
sin in Gods sight, Chap. 3. 19. and consequently, that no man, be he Jew or
Gentile, if he come to be araigned, as a sinner at Gods Tribunal, and there
tried by Gods Law, whither written or inbred, can be justified by his works,
verse. 20.

Thus having remooved the wrong means of the Justification of a sinner in Gods
sight, he proceeds to establish the right. And that is by such means only
as God out of his free favor and grace has assigned: now the means by God
assigned, are the satisfaction to Gods Justice made by Christ with his blood,
and Faith on man's part apprehending and relying on him and it. Verse. 21 -- 27.

In prosecution whereof the Apostle lays down the main causes and means of
Man's Justification.

1. The contriving or designing cause, God, verse. 25.

2. The procuring and producing cause, Christ, verse. 24.

3. The purchasing or meritorious cause on Christ's part, the ransom paid,
verse. 24. and satisfaction thereby made with his blood, verse. 25.

4. The instrumental cause on man's part apprehending him and it, Faith, verse.
25.

5. The impulsive cause of the thing done in general, Gods free favor and mere
mercy, verse. 24.

6. The impulsive cause of doing it in this manner and by these means;

1. The manifestation of Justice, verse. 26. on Gods part.

2. The exclusion of Gloriation on Man's part, verse. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 29-31.

There follows lastly hereupon in the words of my Text the Main and
Apostolical Determination of the Principal Point, containing in it the Sum
and Substance of all; and that tanqam e cathedra, in a Doctoral manner,
peremtorilie delivered, as by necessary and irrefragable consecution from the
premises resulting;

We conclude therefore that a man is justified by Faith without the Works of
the Law.

In the opening whereof to proceed the more closely and cleerlie, and to
remoov such rubs and scruples as we shall meet with in the way, we shall take
into consideration these four heds;

1. What is meant here by the word Justified.

2. What Faith it is by which we are said to be Justified.

3. How by this Faith man is said to be Justified.

4. How by Faith to be Justified without Works.

For the first of these, what is here meant by the word Justify; or what it is
to Justify, and how the word is here taken, I shall in the first place examine,
and endevor to remoov some senses or meanings of the word given by diverse, whom
I conceiv to be mistaken: and in the next place deliver and endevor to assert
what I take to be the right.

Of those whom herein I conceiv to be mistaken, some there are that give the
word Justify here a single, some that give it a double sense.

Of the former sort, to wit, of those that give it a single sense there are two
classes or ranks.

The one is of those, who would have the word Justify here signify, to make
reallie, inherentlie, habituallie, formallie just: that which we commonly
according to the usual phrase of Scripture ar wont to term, to sanctify, or to
make holy. For Justice or Righteousness, and Sanctity or Holiness, taken in the
largest sense, (when not opposed either to other, or where not distinguished
either from other) seem both one and the same, and signify goodness in general.
as Job. 1. 1. Matthew. 5. 20, 33. and elsewhere.

Thus the Fathers of that Tridentine Council or Conventicle rather, after many
windings and turnings, and ambiguous passages, seem at length to pitch upon;
when thus they conclude, Session 6. de Justificat. cap. 7. Vnica
Justificationis formalis caussa est Justitia Dei, non qa ipse justus est, sed
qa nos justos facit, qa videlicet ab eo donati, renovamur spiritu mentis
nostrae, and non solum reputamur, sed vere justi nominamur and sumus, etc. The
only formal cause of Justification, is the Righteousness of God, not whereby he
is righteous, but whereby he makes us righteous, to wit, wherewith being by
him endowed, we are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and become not reputed
only, but ar named and ar indeed truly righteous, receiving righteousness each
one in himself, according to that degree, which the Holy Ghost imparts to each
at his pleasure. And Bellarmine therefore (whatsoever he or they seem to say
elsewhere) de Justificat. lib. 2. cap 2. maintains this to be the meaning of
the Council there, Formalem causam justificationis esse justitiam inherentem:
That the formal cause of Justification is inherent righteousness. And hence
Suarez entituleth his Books, wherein he debates the point of Justification, De
Sanctificatione, Of Sanctification. Hence that distinction so rife with Popish
writers, taken from that place of the Council of Trent before mentioned, and of
which also Bellarmine de Justificat. l. 1. c. 1. concerning a first and a
second Justification. Illa qa ex impio justus, ista qa ex justo justior fit. A
first, whereby a man is of a bad man made good; a second, whereby he is of a
good man made better. The former whereof they say is done by an infusion of
grace inherent, the latter by exercise of such grace so infused. Which indeed
are no other but two degrees of that which we usuallie, and more fitly, term
Sanctification, the one the beginning, the other the growth and progress of it.
1 Pet, 1. 22, 23. and 2. 2 2 Pet. 3. 18.

Now true it is, 1. That it we respect the Notation or Original of the word
Justify, it should signify to make just, as Sanctify, to make holy. But if
we regard the common use of it, it no more so imports, then as Sanctify used
of God, does to make holy* or magnify in common use of speech to make great.
And it is the Ordinary use of words, not their Original without it, that must
carry it, and determine what they do import, and how they are to be understood.

2. It is not improbable that the Hebrew and Greek words which the Latin word
Justificare (tho not found in any Classical Author) and our English Justify,
very rife with us, seem to answer) are sometime, tho very seldom, taken in
Scripture for to make a man inherentlie or habituallie just by a good qalitie
infused or wrought into him. so Dan. 12. 3. the Hebrew word (...) word for word
Justificantes, as Junius and Pagnine render it; or qi justificant, as Calvin;
qi justificaverint, as Piscator. that is, as he expounds it, crudientes ad
justitiam; such as by instruction bring men to righteousness; or as our English
has it, convert men to righteousness: and Calvin therefore is of the mind that
(...) and (...) in that place; tho being terms of a diverse notion, yet do
design the same persons; expounding also the former of them not passively or
habituallie, docti, sapientes, or intelligentia praediti, as some do, whom our
English following renders it, those that be wise, but as in an active sens
(which the form of it requires and the word (...) in the titles of diverse
Psalms seems to import) doctores, sive erudientes, as Piscator also renders it,
those that teach and instruct, and by teaching and instructing make men wise,
bring them to true wisdom. So Revel. 22. 11. the Greek word (...), word for
word, justificetur, as the next also to it, (...) sanctificetur, seems to be
taken in the like manner, whether the particle (...) as implieing continuance
only be rendered there adhuc as Beza, and our English still, or as implieing a
further growth also, be rendered amplius as Piscator, and Junius in his
annotation, magis ac magis, more and more, for the word will admit either: the
whole series of the context seems to carry it strongly this way, He that deals
unjustlie, let him deal still unjustlie, and he that is filthy, let him still be
filthy, and he that is just, let him still be just, or be more just; and he
that is holy, let him be still holy, or more holy. Sanctitati amplius
studeat, Piscat. as in way of antithesis or opposition, (...) answers to (...)
to (...) to (...) to (...), so again on the other side (...) in a fit and apt
correspondencie (...) answers to (...) tho in a notion distinct. And these I
conceiv ar the only two places in Scripture, where the term of Justifying or
those answering it, is thus used.

3. It cannot be denied, but that some of the Ancient Fathers have expounded
the word (...) in some passages of this our Apostle in the same sens that these
men do. So Chrysostom in his eighth Sermon on this Epistle, expounds it in Romans
4. 5. (...). he that justifies the ungodlie, that is, says he, does (...). of
ungodlie make him just. So Augustine Ep. 120. c. 20. and in Joan. tract. 3. Qi
justificat impius; hoc est, impio facit pium. He that justifies the ungodlie,
that is, of ungodlie makes him godly. And on Psalm 30. Sermon. 1. Qis est qi
justificat impium? qi facit ex impio justum. Who is it, that justifies the
ungodlie? he that makes him of ungodlie just. And sermon. 3. Si justificatur
impius, ex impio fit justus. If the ungodlie be justified, he is of ungodly
made just. Wherein howsoever, I suppose, they miss the right sens of the word
in that place, yet their meaning seems sound, to wit, that where God pardons
sin, there he purges it out too, and that Faith infused purifies the heart,
and enableth a man to live righteouslie: and that every justified person, is
sanctified also. so Chrysostom expreslie expounds himself in that place, (...).
That God is able suddenly not only to free a man from penalty that has
lived in impiety, but to make him righteous too. And Augustine in his inchoate
Exposition of this Epistle; Venit gentibus justificatio fidei in Christo, non
ut qia justi erant crederent, sed ut credendo justificati, deinceps just
vivere inciperent. Justification of or by Faith in Christ came unto the
Gentiles, not that they might believ because they were just, but that by
beleiving being justified, or made just, they might thenceforth begin to live
justly.

4. It is a certain and undeniable truth indeed, that all true believers may be
said to be Justified, taking the word Justify in that sens, wherein it imports
habitual or inherent righteousness: for all that are Justified, are also
sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11. and Christ is made as well sanctification as
righteousness to all those that have interest in him, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Having the
Image of God consisting in true holiness and righteousness reformed and restored
in them, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10. And growing up therein with growths of
God, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Col. 2. 19. Whence it is that Abel is called righteous
Abel, Math. 23. 35. and Noa a just man in his generation, or the age he lived
in, Genesis 6. 9. and Job a just man, fearing God and eschewing evil, Job 1. 1.
and Zachary and Elizabeth just in Gods sight (sincerely righteous, just there
where God sees, 1 Samuel 16. 7.) Walking blameleslie (not in some, and not in
other some, but) in all the commandments and Ordinances of God, Luke 1. 6.

But as Andradius a Papist and a stif maintainer of the doctrine of the Trent
Conventicle, whereof also he was a member, in his Orthodox Explications (as he
entitleth his work) does well observe, lib. 6. fol. 186. Diversae and maxim
disjunctae qestiones sunt, An ita se res habeat, and utrum ex vocis
significatione concludi recte possit. They are two diverse and far different
qestions, how the things themselves are, and what may be concluded rightly
from the signification of a word, or what it is, that is thereby intimated.

Now that this cannot be the sense and meaning of the word Justify in this
place, it is apparent enough.

For 1. the qestion is here, how a man being a sinner, a transgresser, a
wicked, an ungodlie one, may come to be justified and discharged of his sins,
and acqitted of them at Gods tribunal, Chap. 3. 19, 23. and 4. 5. and 5. 6, 8.
and the justification here dealt in consequently such a justification whereby
may be procured a discharge from the guilt of fore passed delinqencies, verse.
25. But this cannot be attained or procured by such a justification as they
would have here understood, to wit, by sanctification or inherent holiness and
righteousness. For (to let pas the defectiveness of it while we live here) have
we never so much of it, and do we never so much with it, it is no more all then
du debt, we ow it now to God, as well as formerlie we did, Luke 17. 10. Romans 8.
12. 1 John 2. 6. And the payment of one part of a debt will in no reason
discharge a man of the non-payment of an other part; it would be a very selie
and sorry plea for a tenant sued by his Landlord for the arrear of his rent
wherewith for many years past he is behind hand, to plead that he had some
qarter or two begun now to pay him, and intended thence forward to do it.

2. The justification here spoken of concerns the guilt of sin and the removal
of it, verse. 9. 19. as Psalm. 103. 12. Whereas such justification as they would
have here intended, being no other then sanctification, respects not the guilt,
but the filth of sin: the justification here spoken of is of acts of sin past,
verse. 23, 24. sanctification is of the present inherent corruption, Ephesians. 4.
22, 23.

3. The justification here handled is opposed to crimination and condemnation,
Chap. 8. 33, 34. Whereas sanctification is no way opposed unto either of them,
but to pollution, corruption, and contamination, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Heb. 9. 13, 14.

4. The Apostle handles these two branches of man's restitution from his natural
condition apart. As he does apparentlie distinguish them elsewhere. ye ar
sanctified, ye ar justified, 1 Cor. 6. 11. so here he handles them distinctlie
and severallie, justification by it self, in Chap. 3, 4 and 5. and
sanctification by it self, in Chap. 6 and 7.

And thus much may suffice for the removal of their notion, who would have the
word justify here signify, to make habituallie or inherientlie just.

2. Others would have the word justify here to import nothing else but to
pardon, to remit, to forgive sin, and conseqentlie maintain justification to
consist wholly and entirely in remission of sins. This diverse Protestant
writers stiffie maintain, among whom Piscator most directly and largely
against Eglinus and Lucius, and Wotton in the second Book of the first part of
his prolix Treatise of Justification.

And true it is, 1. that not only some of the Ancients seem so to say.

And Bernard Epist. 190. Qid est ipsa (peccatorum remissio) nisi Justificatio?
What is remission of sins it self, but justification? And many Orthodox
Divines of later times ar produced as speaking somewhat to the same purpose,
(see Wotton of Justif. part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 3. 6.) who yet by their discourses
elsewhere seem to have been otherwise minded, however in eagerness of opposition
to that Popish Tenent of justification by inherent righteousness, sometime they
so speak: nor does the exclusive particle used by them seem to intend any more
then to debar and keep out the collation of grace inherent or the exercise of
it from having any place or office allowed them in the justification of a
sinner, that which Bellarmine himself ingenuouslie acknowledges of Calvin, who
is most of any qoted and urged by the Patrones of this Opinion as concurring
therein with them. See Wotton where above, Chap. 4. throughout. And Bellarmine
of justification, lib. 2. Chap. 1. Who also himself in his disputes concerning
Penance, lib. 1. Cap. 10. has let slip these words, the same with Bernards
above, Qid est peccatorum remissio nisi justificatio? What is remission of sins
but justification? and yet is far from holding justification to consist wholly
and entirely in a bare remission of sins.

2. It is no les true, that justification and remission of sins go always
together, and ar never sundred in Gods dealing with those whom he accepts of
and is reconciled unto in Christ, Act. 13. 31, 39. Chap. 3. 25. and 4. 7. And
that both of them respect the guilt of sin.

But yet that this cannot be the genuine meaning of the word justify, is as
apparent, yea in some regard more apparent, then the former.

For 1. Neither the Hebrew word (...) or (...) used in the old Testament, nor
the Greek word (...) made use of in the Greek Version of the old Testament, and
from thence by the Penmen of the New, to answer thereunto: (whereas in other
ancient Greek Autors it is never found so taken but in a far differing sense,
as I have elsewhere showed at large) nor the Latin Justificare framed to expres
either of them, nor our English term justify drawn from the Latin, and in
ordinary use with us, do ever so signify, or ar ever so taken. For the Hebrew
of the old Testament, see Genesis 44. 16. Exodus 20. 7. and 23. 7. Deuteronomy. 25. 1. 2 Samuel 15. 4. 1 King. 8. 32. 2 Chronicles. 6. 23. Job 27. 5. and 32. 2. and 33. 32.
and 40. 8. Psalm. 51. 4. cited Romans 3. 4. Psalm. 82. 3. Prove. 17. 15. and 24. 24.
Esaias 5. 23. and 43. 9, 26. and 50. 8. alluded to Romans 8. 33. Esaias 53. 11. Jer.
3. 11. Ezekiel. 16. 51, 52. Dan. 8. 14. and 12. 2. Mic. 6. 11. For the Greek of
the new, see Mat. 11. 19. and 12. 37. Luke 7. 29. 35. and 10. 29. and 16. 15.
and 18. 14. Romans 6. 7. 1 Cor. 4. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Tit. 3. 7. Rev. 22. 11. Now
take a view of these places (and I suppose very few, if any, have escaped me,
wherein the term of justifying is found in Scripture, beside those under
present debate, of Paul, Romans 2. 13. and 3. 20, 26, 28, 30. and 4. 2, 5. and 5.
1, 9, 16, 18. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Gal. 2. 16, 17, 24. and 5. 4. Act. 13. 39. and of
James 2. 21, 24, 25.) take, I say, a view of all these places, and substitute
weresoever you find the term justify, instead of it pardon, where
justification, pardoning, where justified, pardoned, and see if in any of them
so rendered any fit or convenient sense will thence arise, yea, whether the
notion in most of them will not be very uncouth, and not inconvenient only but
even sensles and absurd. To instance in some few, (for to run over all would be
over-tedious) read we the words of Judah to Joseph, Genesis 44. 16. How should we
pardon our selves? read we Moses his of Judges, Deuteronomy. 25. 1. They shall pardon
the righteous, or guiltles, and condemn the wicked, or guilty: read we David's
to God, Psalm. 51. 4. That thou may be pardoned; when thou speak. Jobs to
his Friends, Job 27. 5. God forbid that I should pardon you, till I dye:
Christ's of wisdoms children, Mat. 11. 19. Wisdom is pardoned of her children:
those of his, Mat. 12. 37. By thy words thou shall be pardoned: those our
Apostles concerning himself, 1 Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my self; yet am I
not therefore pardoned: or concerning our Savior, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Pardoned in
the Spirit. Read, I say, these passages thus (to let the rest pas) and you
shall give them a sens clear besides, yea far differing from, and in some of
them directly contrary to the mind and meaning of the persons by whom they
were spoken. Herein therefore Andradius of whom before, is in the right, and
keeps within the bounds of truth, when he affirms in his Orthodox explications,
above mentioned, lib. 6. fol. 185. That if a man examine all the places in
Moses and the Prophets, where the term of justification is used, he shall
scarce find any (he might have said truly, he shall find none) where pardon
of sin is thereby signified.

And its against reason, to reqire a term to be so taken in this our Apostles
discourse in such a sense, as it is no where found used, either in holy Writ,
wherein it so often occurres, or in ordinary speech, or in any profane
writer.

2. That the things themselves ar diverse and distinct either from other, it is
apparent. For it is an undoubted Axiom, Qae subjecto differunt, inter se
differunt. Those things that differ in Subject, that is, the one whereof may be
found in some subject, where the other is not, are distinct and diverse one from
another. But so it is with these two, remission of sin, and justification. for
remission may be where justification is not; and justification may be, where
remission is not. If a man have wronged me, I may forgive him, as David did
Shimei, 2 Samuel 19. 23. and yet not justify him in his dealings, 1 King. 2. 8,
9. And where a man is falsely accused of wrong done to another, there may he be
justified, and yet nothing remitted, because no wrong at all done: so Deuteronomy. 25.
1. Psalm. 51. 4. Yea in Gods dealing with the Sons of men, tho in regard of a
man's state and condition in general, he never remittes sin, where he does not
justify; yet in regard of some particular acts, he remittes sometime, where he
justifies not. Psalm. 78. 37, 38. Tho their heart was not upright with him,
(their semblance of repentance was but counterfeit, not sound and sincere) yet
out of the abundance of his compassion he forgave their iniqitie, and destroyed
them not. So far forth remitted it, as not instantly to destroy them for it.
And sometimes he justifies where he remittes not, as he did in approving of
Phineaz his act as a just and righteous deed, Psalm. 106. 30, 31. And as he is
said to justify the Prophet Esaias in the discharge of his Ministry, Esaias 50.
8. Yea, will you see a manifest difference between these two, by an instance,
that may make it plain to the meanest capacity. A party offends and wrongs
his Neighbor, who therefore intends or attempts to follow the Law against him:
if now upon the Parties own submission and bare acknowledgement of his offense,
or at the mediation and entreatie of some common friend to them both, the
Party offended is content to let fall his suite, and does freely forgive the
wrong; here is remission, but no justification. And if by his Heir or Executor
after the wrongeds decesse the Party who did the wrong should be qestioned for
it, he could not stand upon his justification, he could only plead his
pardon. Again, say a man have wronged his Neighbor, but has made him full
satisfaction for the wrong done him, or if not able to do it himself, has
procured some friend to do it in his behalf, and the Party wronged having
accepted thereof, does thereupon remit it and seeks no further remedy against
him for it, here the Party that did the wrong, if he should at any time after
be qestioned for it, he may stand upon his justification, and plead not
guilty, because he can plead satisfaction made and accepted: and this latter,
not the former, is the very case between God and man in the justification of a
sinner: satisfaction is the main ground of the justification of him, not made
by him, but by Christ for him. So even the Papists themselves in this regard
sounder then the Socinians. Bellarmine de justificat. lib. 1. cap. 2. Est hoc
loco breviter annotandum, Christum non esse causam justificationis meritoriam,
qasi Pater in gratiam sllii nobis peccata dimiserit, qomodo saepe reges in
gratiam amicorum potentium reos absolvunt; sed qoniam pretium redemptionis
exactum persolvit, and ex rigore justitiae pro nostris omnium sceleribus
satisfecit. This is (says he) breiflie to be here observed, that Christ is not
the meritorious cause of justification, as if the Father in favor of the Son
did forgive us our sins, as Kings oftentimes assoil guilty Persons out of
favor to, and at the suit of friends; but because he has paid an exact price of
ransom, and thereby in rigor of justice made satisfaction for the wickednesses
of us all. What could any Protestant writer say in this point more? And
Calvine (among many other) albeit that many parcels and long passages ar
produced out of him, from those places, wherein he bends his discourse against
the former conceit of justification consisting in an infusion of habitual and
inherent holiness, as if he restrained it unto, and would have it wholly consist
in a mere pardon, and bare forgivenes of sin; yet he places it, where he speaks
his mind out more expreslie, in such an absolution as is obtained by a full
satisfaction intervening. For so he speaks in his Institutions, lib. 3. cap.
11. Sect. 3. entreating of that place, Act. 13. 38, 39. Vides post remissionem
peccatorum justificationem hanc velut interpretationis loco poni; vides aperte
pro absolutione sumi; vides operibus legis adimi; vides merum Christi
beneficium esse; vides fide percipi; vides deniqe satisfactionem interponi. You
see, says he, after remission of sins mentioned, that this justification (to
wit, such as we maintain, not such as Popish writers many of them would have
meant) is by way of interpretation put; you see it is manifestly taken for
absolution; you see it is taken away from the works of the Law; you see it is a
mere benefit of Christ; you see lastly that satisfaction is interposed. Which
last clause they do not well to clip off, who among many other, cite this
place also of Calvine as patronizing their opinion, which we here oppose, in
that point. And in the same place, Justificare, nihil aliud est, qam eum qi
reus agebatur, tanqam approbata innocentia a reatu absolvere. To justify is no
other, then to assoil the party qestioned from guilt, as approved innocent, or
guiltles, which is another matter then meerlie to pardon. neither is this
difference a slight matter or of light weight, and unworthie much regard, since
that herein Socinus states the Controversy between the Orthodox Divines, and
himself with his adherents, in his Theological Prelections, cap. 15. thus
speaking; Qaeritur utrum in justificatione nostra per Christum, peccata nostra
compensatione seu satisfactione aliqa deleantur, an vero remissione and
condonatione. pleriqe satisfactione interveniente id fieri arbitrantur; nos
vero simplici condonatione. The qestion is, whether in our justification by
Christ, our sins are done away by some compensation or satisfaction, or by
remission and condonation. The most say this is done by satisfaction
intervening; but we by simple condonation. And the former way Calvine expreslie
takes to, where he delivers herein his mind more fully.

Thus having discovered and refelled the mistakes of two sorts, who both give
the Term of justification a single notion, the one confounding it with
sanctification, the other making it all one with remission of sins.

I shall now proceed to the examination of some others, who amiss also (as I
suppose) give it a double, or a complicate notion. and of these also there are
two diverse parties.

The former is of those that would have justification to consist partly in
remission of sins, and partly in sanctification and the renovation of the
inward man. So the Fathers of the Council of Trent seem at least to determine,
where they say, Sess. 6. c. 7. of justificat. Est ipsa justificatio, non solum
peccatorum remissio, sed and sanctificatio and renovatio hominis interioris,
unde homo ex injusto justus fit. that is, justification it self is not only
remission of sins, but sanctification also and renovation of the inward man;
whereby of unjust a man is made just. And so Bellarmine also de justific. lib.
1. cap. 2. Justificatio impii constat ex remissione peccati, and infusione
gratiae. Justification consists of remission of sin, and infusion of grace. Or
as some others, remissione peccatorum and infusione justitiae sive gratiae
sanctificantis. In remission of sins and infusion of righteousness or
sanctifying grace. And howsoever Bellarmine charge Calvin with fraudulent
dealing in his Antidote against the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, Sess. 6.
in saying, Caussam Justificationis faciunt duplicem, etc. that the Fathers of
that Council make a twofold cause of Justification, as if we were just, partly
by remission of sins, and partly by spiritual Regeneration. Yet the words of
that passage above recited seem to intimate no other: and Bellarmine himself
besides what out of him before, in Chap. 6. of the same Book before pointed to,
terms remissionem peccati and donum renovationis, utramque partem
Justificationis, Remission of sin, and the gift of renovation, both parts of
Justification. concerning which see Wotton more largely, de Justificat. part.
2. lib. 2. cap. 6. Yea throughout the whole Chapter his main intendement is, as
himself propounds it, to prove, from Scripture, Reason, and Authority,
Justificationem non consistere in sola peccatorum remissione, sed etiam in
interna renovatione, that Justification consists not in remission of sins
only, but in inward Renovation also.

True it is, that in the restoration and restitution of man fallen from God,
and the conversion and reconcilition of man unto God, both these are done, both
sin is remitted and the soul is sanctified. But in neither of these (to speak
distinctlie and properly) does Justification consist, as has of either ben
showed; and if in neither severallie, nor in both of them joyntlie.

2. Others, and those also of our own, would have Justification to consist,
partly in remission of sins, and partly in imputation of righteousness. And
I pass by that which Bellarmine in the place before mentioned cites out of
Calvin, where having charged him to have dealt fraudulently, as before was
observed, with those of Trent in saying they made a twofold cause of
Justification, whereas they say elsewhere that there is one only formal cause
of Justification; he retorts the charge upon Calvine himself, who howsoever in
that place of his Antidote he affirm, Vnicam and simplicem esse Justificationis
caussam, that there is one only single cause of Justification; yet elsewhere,
to wit, in his Institutions, lib. 2. cap. 11. sect. 2. does in expres words
affirm, Justificationem in peccatorum remissione ac justitiae Christi
imputatione positam esse; that Justification consists in remission of sins and
imputation of Christ's righteousness. Which form of speaking many others of our
besides him use. But Calvines meaning is not as the Cardinal would have it,
that these were two several causes, or two distinct parts of Justification,
remission of sins, and imputation of Christ's righteousness; but he joines
these two together, as two argumenta consentanea, the cause and the effect, the
one being the ground and foundation of the other. His words are these, Nos
Justificationem simpliciter interpretamur, acceptionem, qa nos Deus in gratiam
receptos pro justis habet; eamqe in peccatorum remissione ac justitiae Christi
imputatione positam esse dicimus. We interpret Justification simply, or
singlie, acception, or acceptance, whereby God accounts us for just, being
received into grace; and we say that it consists in remission of sins and
imputation of Christ's righteousness. True it is, that Polanus, who also cites
this place of Calvine, both in his Partitions, lib. 1. and in his Theses de
partib. Justificat. tho he say, Justificatio un^ca est; Justification is but
one; adds, sed ejus parts duae sunt; but of it, or of Justification there are
two parts, (which Calvine says not) remission of sins and imputation of
Christ's righteousness, which latter he defines, ben^ficium Dei, a benefit of
God, whereby he vouchsafes, to account as ours Christ's obedience, etc. Whereby
he sustained the pains of sin for us, even as if we had sustained the same our
selves. which words of his implie that imputation to be rather the ground, then
any part of Justification. Leaving Calvine therefore, and those that use the
like expressions; we shall apply our selves for the present only unto those,
who make remission of sins, and imputation of righteousness two distinct parts
of Justification. So Ludovicus Lucius in his Christian Theology, Justificatio
est tum peccatorum ^emissio, tum justitiae imputatio; il^a, qa Deus omnia
credentium peccata corumqe reatum simul and paen^^ propter satisfactionem
Christi pro illis condonat eisqe non imputat, haud secus ac si nunquam ab eis
peccatum fuisset, etc. Ista, qa credentibus perfectam Christi justitiam ac
sanctitatem ita acceptam habet, ut propter illam justos ac sanctos reputet, ac
si illa ipsis iness^t, atqe ab ipsis praestita esset. Justification is both
remission of sins, and imputation of righteousness; that, whereby God pardons
all the sins of beleivers for the satisfaction made by Christ for them, as if
they had never sinned; this, whereby unto those that believe he accounts and
accepts the perfect holiness and righteousness of Christ, as if it were in them,
and had been performed by them. Yea thus beside others not a few, Bishop
Downham of Justification, lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 16. but with some difference
from those other, There are two parts of Justification; the one the absolving
from the guilt of sin and damnation; the other the accepting of a beleiving
sinner as righteous unto life.

And true it is, that wheresoever God justifies a sinner in and for Christ,
there he remittes sin, and there he imputes righteousness, Act. 13. 38, 39.
Romans 4. 6, 7.

Howbeit this exposition of the term Justification seems faulty as well as the
former: and that two ways.

1. With the most of them, it draws remission of sins into the very nature
of Justification; whereas remission of sin, is a diverse and distinct thing
from Justification, as has formerlie ben showed; and therefore no part of it.

2. With them al, it presumes in the matter of Justification a needles twofold
act, the not imputation of sin, and the imputation of righteousness, as two
distinct things; whereas not to impute sin in consideration of satisfaction
made for it, is no other thing then to impute righteousness to the Party
therein concerned. Since that a man can not be deemed or doomed guiltles or
faultles, but he must of necessity be deemed or doomed just or righteous; there
being no medium or middle state between a delinquent or a guilty person and
one guiltles or just. He that can proov himself no delinquent, but free from
fault, must of necessity be justified, acqitted and assoiled as just. See Deuteronomy.
25. 1. If nothing but sin can make a man unjust, then surely the utter
absence of sin must necessarily make a man just. See Paul's plea, Act. 25. 8.

Hitherto we have endeavored to show, what to justify, as the Apostle here
takes it, and as the word is most commonly used, is not: we now pass on to
show what it is, and what indeed it properly imports.

The word Justify therefore (as our writers do generally against the Papists
maintain) is forense vocabulum, a term taken from Courts of Justice, and
courses or cases of judicature, as appears plainly from Deuteronomy. 25. 1. 1 King.
8. 32. 2 Chronicles. 6. 23. Psalm. 82. 3. Prove. 17. 15. Esaias 5. 23. and 43. 9. And it
is an act either of the Party himself qestioned, or of his Advocate, or of the
Jurie, or of the Judge, or of them all. Of the Party himself, when he pleads
not guilty, and stands upon his defense, as Paul does, Act. 25. 8. of the
Advocate, when he defends and maintains his Client to be not guilty, as the
convert theif pleaded for Christ on the Cross, Luke 23. 42. of the Jury, when
they give in their verdict in behalf of the Party accused as not guilty, as the
Pharisees did in the behalf of Paul, Act. 23. 9. of the Judge, when he
pronounces him not guilty, and so cleeres and assoiles him, as Pilate did
Christ, Luke 23. 14, 15. the Advocate justifies by pleading and defending as
not faulty; the Judge by pronouncing and sentencing as such. and to Justify
conseqentlie, in a judiciarie way, is to discharge from guilt of sin, or
declare free from it, either by defense, as an Advocate, or by sentence, as a
Judge.

Now hence the term of Justifyeng is taken, and used out of such solemnities,
applied to other proportionable acts, but retaining still its proper and genuine
notion, even the same that in those set and solemn courses and cases it had.
Thus a man is said to Justify himself, when he stands upon his own innocence,
and maintains his own faultlesnes and integrity, against such as charge him
with ought amiss. So Job 27. 5. Luke 16. 15. John 8. 46. and others, to
justify a man, when they stand in defense of him, and maintain his honesty
and innocence against those that qestion it, and either doubt of it or deny
it. So 1 Samuel 19. 4.

To Justify then in general is to defend, or clear, acqit or assoil from fault
or guilt, from desert of blame or penalty, and conseqentlie to proov or
approve and pronounce guiltles or just. not to make just, save in such an
improper sens, as when we use to say* you would make me a theif, or, you would
make me a lier, that is, you would aspers me with, or fasten such an imputation
upon me. as John says, of him that beleives not God, that he makes him a liar,
in not giving credit to him, 1 John 5. 10. and, you would fain make such an one
an honest man; when our meaning is, you would proov, or approov him, as such.
so that as to sanctify when it is spoken of God, Esaias 8. 13. is not to make
him holy, as he does us, Heb. 2. 11. but to acknowledge him so to be; and to
glorify him, Psalm. 50. 14. Gal. 1. 23. is not to make him glorious, as he does
us, Romans 8. 30. but to acknowledge his glory, and ascribe glory to him; and
to magnify, is not to make him great, but to acknowledge and set forth his
greatness, Psalm. 34. 3. So to justify is not to make just, but to declare and
pronounce just. and as a man's righteousness is said to be taken from him, when
he is censured or condemned as unjust, tho he be never so just, nor be any
whit the les just, because unjustlie so deemed or doomed, Esaias 5. 23. Job 27.
5. In a word, as a wicked or guilty person is said to be made wicked, or
guilty, when he is convicted and condemned as such; so is the righteous or
guiltles party said to be Justified, or made righteous, when he is acqitted
and assoiled as such. See both terms so used, Deuteronomy. 25. 1. and Job 40. 8. so
Job 27. 5. What the Hebrew has (...) and our English that I should justify
you, The Greek renders it (...), that I should pronounce you righteous, and the
Latin ut justos judicem vos, That I should judge you righteous, Job 27. 5.
(...) the Latin, ut tu justifice^is, That thou may be justified, as the
Greek renders the same, Psalm. 50. 4. (...), and here (...) that thou may
appear to be just, Prove. 17. 15. (...) the Greek (...). He that judges the
unrighteous righteous, and the righteous unrighteous. and the Latin more
expreslie, Qi justificat impium, and condemnat justum. and our English
accordingly, he that justifies the wicked, and condemns the just. yea, so
Augustine himself, tho often elsewhere he go the other way, as before has been
showed; and in his tractate of the Spirit and Letter, Chap. 26. discoursing of
that passage of the Apostle, Romans 2. 13. Not the hearers of the Law, but the
doers of it shall be justified, he tread a while in his wonted track, yet after
some forced and far-fetcht expositions given of the words, at length he
pitcheth upon this; Aut certe ita dictum est, Justificabuntur, ac si diceret,
justi habebuntur, justi deputabuntur; sicut dictum est de qodam, ille autem
volens se justificare, id est, ut justus haberetur and deputaretur. unde aliter
dicitur, Deus sanctificat sanctos suos; aliter autem, sanctificetur nomen tuum,
nam illud ideo, qia illos ipse facet esse sanctos, qi non erant sancti; hoc
autem ideo, ut qod semper apud se sanctum est, sanctum etiam ab hominibus
habeatur. Or certainly it is so said, they shall be justified, as if he should
say, they shall be accounted, they shall be reputed just; as it is said of one,
he willing to justify himself, Luke 10. 29. that is, that he might be counted
and reputed righteous. Hence it is otherwise said, God sanctifies his Saints,
and otherwise, sanctified be thy name, for that therefore because he makes them
to be holy, who before were not holy; but this therefore, that that which is
always holy of it self, may also of men be accounted holy.

And that the word Justify is to be here so taken, appears

1. From verse. 19, 20. for what is there taken from and denied unto works, is
here attributed and ascribed unto faith. But of works it is there said that by
them no man living can plead not guilty, or be assoiled at Gods tribunal. And
the meaning therefore must by necessary conseqence be that by faith they may.

2. From Chap. 8. 33. Where Justification is opposed to accusation or
crimination, that is, charging a man with guilt, and condemnation, or passing
sentence against him thereupon, the place taken from Esaias 50. 8. and
Justification therefore conseqentlie a discharge thereof.

Howbeit because remission of sins is by so many said either to be the very
same with Justification, or to be at least contained in it, I shall endevor
further to show what near affinity and necessary connection these two free
gifts of God have in the work of man's redemption and reconcilement to God, and
yet how they are distinguished the one from the other.

1. Remission of sin, tho it be not the same with Justification, yet is it a
necessary conseqent of efficacious Justification grounded upon satisfaction
tendered and accepted, made and admitted. For as one that has done a wrong can
no way now be justified, but by making full satisfaction to the Party wronged
for the wrong that he has done, and the offense that he has committed: So
when such satisfaction is made and accepted, and the Party that did it in
regard thereof Justified, that is, thereby thereof discharged; reason and eqity
reqires that the offense be remitted, that is, that the Party wronged cease
now to be offended with him, whom he was justly offended with before.

2. Remission simply and nakedlie considered in it self, is a work of mercy
or favor only: whereas Justification, to speak properly, is a work of
Justice, Deuteronomy. 25. 1. Psalm. 82. 3. yea in the same act, where upon satisfaction
in some other kind is from a stranger admitted in the behalf of the delinquent,
the wrong is remitted, tho it be a point of favor and mercy in regard of him
to whom it is done, yet it is a point of Justice in regard of him for whom it
is done. if it be done at entreatie and intercession only, it is mere mercy
and free favor in regard of either; but then, to speak properly, there is no
Justification; if it be done upon a price paid, or valuable consideration
performed, by a third Party, it is a matter as well of Justice in regard of
the one, as of mercy and free favor in regard of the other, and is not then a
naked or bare remission, but justification properly so termed. And this is
the case of man's justification for the satisfaction made by Christ. Whence that
of Bernard,

Gratis hoc qoqe praestitum est: sed gratis, qod ad te attinet; nam qoad
Christum, non gratis salvus factus es pro nihilo, sed non de nihilo tamen. This
also (to wit, the work of thy redemption) was freely performed. but freely,
so far as concerns thee; for in regard of Christ, not freely. thou art saved
for nothing, but not saved with nothing: for nothing laid down by thee; but not
without a price paid by him.

For as for that which a learned Writer of ours has of a Judge or Ruler, upon
some weighty considerations known to himself, remitting the penalty of the
Law, and so discharging a guilty Person as if he were innocent and righteous,
not according to Law and Justice, but out of a sovereign and absolute power; as
if that were the right meaning of the term of Justifyeng in the Apostles
discourse, it cannot hold here.

For 1. the Justification here treated of, is such a Justification as wherein
there is a special manifestation of Gods Justice, verse. 26. whereas in such
case (which in plain terms is no other then mere pardon) there may be an ample
declaration of mercy, but no such demonstration of justice at all. nor does
that bear any weight at all with me, which a late Annotator of no small note
does largely discourse upon the Apostles passages in this place, wherein he
would have the word (...) to signify here not strict justice, but moderation,
eqity, grace and mercy in pardon of sin; and the word (...) or just,
conseqentlie, as it is here given unto God, to import a merciful and charitable
person; and to be taken no otherwise, then as it is given to Joseph, Mat. 1.
19. where it is said of him, that being a righteous, that is, a pious and
merciful man, he was unwilling to expose or subject Marie to public and
shameful punishment, to execute the rigor of the Law upon her, or to urge it
against her: affirming withal for the better support of this Paradox, which
Socinus had broached before him in his Treatise de Christo servatore, lib. 1.
cap. 1. as a thing worthy the observation, that the word seldom in these
books (the writings of the New Testament, I suppose he means) if ever, belongs
or is applied to the act of Vindicative or punitive justice. All which is
apparentlie cross to the main intent and scope of the Apostle; which is, as
Cajetane also well observes, to show, that in the justification of a sinner,
concurrunt gratia Dei and justitia Dei, both the grace or free favor of God,
and the Justice of God also concur; for it were grace alone, if God should
remit or pardon sin without payment; which God (says he) never did nor does;
but gratiae suae inserit justitiam suam, he riveteth into his grace or favor
his justice; and this his justice consists in the redemption or ransom, that
is, the price that Christ paid to set us free. And the Scripture therefore
says not that we are justified by grace alone, but by grace and justice
together, and both of them of God.

And it seems to me very strange, that this learned man should say that the
word (...) or just should in these books be seldom or never meant of punitive
justice. For the Annotator himself acknowledges that the word of Justifying
here is a juridical term, and as in juridical proceedings, so here there is a
Judge, a Client, and a Law, and that the Judge here is God: now a Judge is
called a just or righteous Judge, not in regard of showing favor, or moderation
and mercy, but in regard of doing Justice eqalie and indifferently, according
to the strict right of each ones cause that comes to be tried before him. and
Justitia forensis, that Justice that is exercised in Courts and courses of
judicature, is as well absolutive as punitive, that is, consists as well in
acqitting the guiltles, as in condemning the guilty, Deuteronomy. 25. 1. and Justice
is the same in either; and that Gods Justice does as well appear in the
acqitting us for Christ, as in exacting a payment for us from Christ, Esaias 53.
7. Albeit the word (...) or righteous, and its conjugates, is not very
freqentlie found in the writings of the New Testament applied to Courts and
courses of judicature, because seldom occasion to entreat of them, nor are
they over-frequentlie attributed to God, as a Judge, and to his judgment, yet
where they are, it is apparent enough, that they have an eye to retributive
justice, consisting in the assoiling of the guiltles and doing Justice upon the
guilty. To such manner of judicature had our Savior Christ's words qestionles
respect (tho directed to private judgment) and not to any favorable or
eqitable compliance, when he said to his hearers, John 7. 24. Judge not
according to sight or outward appearance, but Judge (...), just or righteous
judgment. Yea, when of himself and the judgment that he will in his appointed
time execute, he says, John 5. 30. As I hear, so I judge, and my judgment is
just. Which place the Annotator himself expounds, as of saving those that
believe on him, so of damning those that reject him. And what other sens can
the word bear in those passages of Gods people in the Apocalypse, but of
vindicative and punitive Justice, when praising God for avenging them on their
cruel Persecutors, they say, just and true are thy ways, Rev. 15. 3. and just
art thou, in that thou have judged thus. and true and just ar thy judgments,
Chap. 16. 5, 7. and of Christ riding out furnished with his two-edged sword and
Iron Scepter, to execute vengeance on the Nations, and tread the wine-pres of
Gods wrath among them, he judges and wars (...), in Justice, or with
righteousness? Chap. 19. 11. Let the Annotator consult himself on these places.
Or how can he with any color of reason exclude such Justice, from his own
exposition of those words of the Evangelist, 1 John 2. 29. he is righteous;
that is, Christ is a most just Judge? which himself also expreslie inserts in
the exposition of the same term given to Christ, the just Judge, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
tho I suppose there not so necessarily, because the allusion is there rather
to the Judges or Triers at the solemn Olympic games, as the Annotator also
well observes. Yea, not to go far for such use of the word, when our Apostle in
this Epistle, Chap. 1. 32. says of the Heathen, who knowing (...), the
judgment or just judgment, (...), as it is termed Chap. 2. 5. of God, that
those that commit such things ar worthy of death; where it is apparent what
Justice or Judgment is intended. Again, where Chap. 3. 4, 5. he says of God,
citing David's words, Psalm. 51. 4. that thou may be justified; or as the
Psalmist has it, be just, that is, appear so to be; that the meaning is of
punitive Justice, as the drift of David's speech plainly demonstrates, so the
Apostle also shows evidentlie in his very next words, where the opposite
term (...) is used, is God unjust in taking vengeance? nor can the words be
otherwise well expounded, Chap. 9. 28, 14. where the Apostle cites a passage
out of Esaias 10. 21, 22. wherein God threatening to make such a round reckoning
with his people, that a poor remnant should remain when the account was cast
up, says he would do it (...) as the Prophet, (...), that is, in justice or
righteousness, as the Apostle, who also in the same Chapter, demands whither
there be any injustice or unrighteousnes with God, in dealing thus with the
Jews. Lastly, to conclude with a most conspicuous place, the same Apostle, 2
These. 1. 5, 6. as he calls the judgment of God to be exercised in taking
vengeance on the Persecutors of his people to be (...), a just judgment; so to
proov it to be such, for that, says he, (...), it is a just thing with God so
to do: which place howsoever the Annotator contend not to be meant of the last
Ecumenical judgment, yet he cannot deny to be spoken of vindicative justice,
which the words, (...), to give vengeance or to take it, as we usuallie phrase
it, do evidentlie in express terms import. This exception and observation
therefore is of no force to weaken the received exposition of the word (...),
that is, just or righteous in this place attributed to God, as taken in a
notion of retributive justice exercised in condemning the guilty and assoiling
the guiltles.

2. The justification of a sinner as it is here described and defended, is such
as is transacted and acted not by a mere sovereign and absolute power alone,
but in a legal way, and according to Law. whence it is that the Apostle says
that thereby the Law is not infringed or annulled, but established, verse. 31.
and as our Savior himself speaks, not dissolved, but fulfilled, Mat. 5. 17,
18. For the further clearing whereof, we are to consider that Christ in
Scripture is termed not only (...), a Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5. One that
mediates and deals between God and us, as a man may do between two persons,
that are at variance either with other, by persuasion and entreaty, and making
use of his interest in either, endevoring to compose the difference between
them, yet not engageing himself for ought to either; but he is said to be also
(...) sponsor, a surety, an undertaker, one that engages himself for the
articles agreed upon in the Covenant of the Gospel between God and Man, Heb. 7.
22. Gods surety to man for the performance of all the gracious promises made
on Gods part, which are all of them yea and amen in him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Man's
surety to God, for the discharge of the debt of all those that have interest
in him, and making satisfaction to God by doing and enduring in his humane
nature, whatsoever could in Justice be reqired to that purpose for their
delinqencies and breaches of his Law. Hence that of Esaias 53. 6, 7. We all had
strayed, had deviated from the rule and directions of Gods Law; for that is the
nature of all sin, 1 John. 3. 4. had turned aside each one to his own way,
betaking himself to some one wicked course or other, and the Lord caused the
iniqitie (that is, the guilt of our sin, as Psalm. 32. 5.) of us all to meet on
him. It was exacted, (as Junius aright renders it) and he answered, that is,
undertook, engaged himself, for the discharge of it; as a learned French writer
Lewis Cappel well renders the word) yea he did reallie answer it, as we use to
say, of a party or his surety upon payment made, or satisfaction given, that
he has answered the debt. For the word here used, even in the form here used,
is taken in a notion of answering, Ezekiel. 14. 3, 6. yea and that of a real kind
of answering; as by inflicting there, so by sustaining here; by taking
vengeance in the one place, by giving satisfaction in the other, either of which
by the term of payment, we are wont to expres. Now where full satisfaction is
made and accepted for the the breach or transgression of a Law, the Law is not
thereby repealed or abrogated, but it is rather thereby manifested to be firm
and of force to oblige those whom it concerns, either to the strict observation
of it, or to a just compensation in some kind or other made for default therein
committed. and this has our Savior Christ in our behalf exhibited. For
howsoever I dare not run out so far as to affirm as many do, that our Savior
suffered the very self-same torments, partly in his Agony and partly on the
Cross, that the damned souls suffer, and those that have interest in the merit
of his sufferings, should have suffered in Hell; much les that he suffered such
an high degree of torments in those few hours while he hung on the Cross, as
did in the intension and extremity thereof ad pondus for weight answer and was
adeqate unto all those penalties, made up into one Mass, and comprised in one
lump, that unto all eternity the whole multitude of Gods elect, for all whose
sins he satisfied, were to have endured, the power of his Deity supporting
and enabling his humane nature thereunto: since that Christ's humane nature, in
which the satisfaction was to be made, and was made, being but a finite
creature, could not be capable of admitting such an infinite weight of torment,
as such a mass of endless suffering must of necessity have amounted unto.
albeit for the allay hereof, that were allowed, Dr. Field of the Church, l. 5.
c. 17.
which a learned man of eminent parts from Picus and Scotus suggests, that unto
the sins of the penitent, because they are broken off by repentance, an
infinite penalty is not du: which yet seems to want sound ground of proof from
Gods word; wherein the Apostle speaking of the sins of the faithful, who had
now cast off the service of sin, says in general, theirs not excluded, the
stipend of sin, (or the pay du to it, a military term) is death; and that
eternal death is intended, appears by its opposite, everlasting life, said
there to be Gods Donative, as Tertullian well renders it, being a term of the
like nature with the former, that is, his larges or free gift: such as the
Roman Generals besides their pay used to confer upon their Souldierie: and tho
granted would hardly withdraw weight enough, to make a finite creature capable
of it within so narrow a stint of time, as some three howrs could make up. I
conceiv, that keeping our selves within the bounds of Christian sobriety in
this profound mystery, we may safely say, that Christ's humiliation through the
whole course of his life, and his sufferings as well in Soul as in Body, in his
whole humane nature consisting of both near upon his death, together with his
death in that manner inflicted and sustained, the eminency of the person being
even God as well as Man, that was content to expose and abase himself unto all this, Phil. 2. 6-8. being duly weighed, was such and so great as God deemed
in Justice eqivalent unto, and well worthy to weigh down, whatsoever was
reqisite to the discharge of the debt of all those that had interest therein.
For as for that which the same Author subjoins, and some other also have therein
concurring with him, that the worth and excellency of Christ's person, was
only to make the passion availeable to many, but was not at all to dispens
with the continuance nor the grievousnes of his pains; and that if it might
dispens with any degree of extremity of punishment due to sin, it might
dispens also with two, and so conseqentlie with all; seems to ty and stint Gods
justice to over-strict terms; and the worth and value of Christ's sufferings to
such a precise rate, as their private estimation shall deem fit to assign it. As
on the other side they seem to raise it to an higher estimate then there
appears good ground for, and to control Gods wisdom in the disposing the means
of procuring man's justification in such manner as he has designed, and in such
a measure of sufferings and humiliations as he assigned Christ to undergo, who
stick not to affirm, that the least drop of Christ's blood was of so infinite a
value, as was sufficient to make a full satisfaction to Gods Justice for the
discharge of the sins of the whole World. Which if it were true, then the
blood shed in the Circumcision of our Savior had been sufficient to have
answered Gods Justice, and to have made a full compensation to whatsoever the
law of God could in utmost rigor have reqired on the part of all that had ever
transgressed it. And so all that Christ afterward either did or endured, and
his death it self the upshot of all had been superfluous and needles; which how
it will consist with the wisdom of God, and love to his Son, I shall leave
to be deemed by others of deeper reach then my self. Howsoever Christ having of
his own accord become our surety, and undertaken the discharge of our debt,
and it being at the choice of the Creditor or Party wronged, even according to
Law to reqire satisfaction of the debt, or compensation of the wrong done,
either from the Debtor and delinquent himself, or from his Surety, as it is a
favor and mercy in God to forbear the exacting it of us, who were (...) of no
ability, unable utterlie to perform it, Romans 5. 6. so it is not against, but
according to his Law, even that Law unto which we were obnoxious for the breach
of it, to exact of our surety a full compensation for all our transgressions.

In a word, that Justification is an act of Justice and not a matter of free
favor or mere mercy alone, appeers evidentlie from the very term to Justify,
whence it is deduced, whither we consider it, in its native notion, or in its
ordinary use.

For 1. In its native notion and propriety the word (...) in Hebrew, and (...)
in Greek, as also whatsoever term we can frame in Latin or English to answer
in any du analogy unto either of these two, it does and must include a notion
of Justice in it. For howsoever we truly affirm that neither of those, the
Hebrew or Greek term do necessarily intimate a making just, save in such sens
as has formerlie ben hinted, and might therefore in Latin be rendered by the
word justare, derived from justus, in the same form and sens with probare from
probus, which signifies not to make allowed or sound, but to proov or approov
as such, as well as by the word justificare, which tho not found in the Ancient
Latin Autors, but framed in latter times by Christian writers to express those
Hebrew and Greek terms, yet is now grown into common use, whereas that other is
not: yet as well the one term as the other, will as those it answers to be, bear
in the forehed of it, a notion not of favor or mercy, but of Justice and
right. and it is not unworthie the observing, that howsoever the word (...) in
Scripture and Christian writers be used in reference to the Hebrew (...) in the
better sens for to assoil and acqit, yet among the Ancient Greeks (as I have
elsewhere evidenced and evinced) that term was used only in the wors sens for
to cast or condemn, and to execute or punish, because in such cases Justice is
presumed or pretended at least to be done on persons so dealt with; and we shall
find the word therefore in Heathen writers not distinguished only from pardon,
but opposed thereunto, as in that cited by a learned French Divine out of Dio.
(...) Guil. Rivet de justif. part: 1. c. 2. lect. 3.
Such Cities as willingly yielded, obtained pardon, but such as stood out had
Justice done on them, or were punished. So that of Justice there is still an
intimation in the term, whither way soever it be taken.

2. In its ordinary and vulgar use there is no other matter intimated, then of
Justice and right, not of favor or affection. nor as we have formerlie showed,
is either the Hebrew or Greek term ever taken in any such notion of favor and
relaxation of Justice and right in the Books of Scripture: nor in our common
speech do we intend or understand any such matter, when we either say, or hear
others say, You justify your self; and You justify him, and, I Will justify
such an one, and the like. And to say then that the word in this place and this
discourse is to be so taken, without some good proof from the Text it self, is
but petitio principii, a begging of that that is at present in debate.

I will add a few not unfit Considerations or Observations only, and so leave
this head.

1. That we must distinguish between these two things, to be in the state of
Justification, and to be actuallie or occasionally justified.

1. To be in a state of justification, is to be in a justifiable condition,
when a man is so disposed, and the case stands so with him, that he may be
truly justified, that is, he may justly be defended, maintained, assoiled,
declared, pronounced, discharged as not guilty, as faultles upon any
occasion, or as occasion shall reqire: for there is not always a present use or
need of justification. As a man ought at al times to be patiently disposed, to
be continually of a patient disposition; but there is no acting or exercise of
it, save upon some special occasion. Patientiae in prosperis nullus est usus,
says Gregory, There is no use of patience in times of prosperity; when all
goes with a man according to his own hearts desire. So tho a man be, and it
meerlie concern him so to be, always, and at al times, in a state of
justification, in a justifiable condition, yet is there no use of
justification, until he be qestioned, and unles somewhat be objected against
him. To affirm a man to be an honest, or a just, or a wise, or a learned man,
when no man makes qestion of him, or averres ought to the contrary, is to
commend him, not to justify him; but when his honesty, or his integrity, or
his wisdom, or his lerning shall be qestioned or controverted, doubted of, or
denied, then to vindicate his honesty, integrity, wisdom, or lerning is to
justify him. Howbeit then a man may be said to be in a state of justification,
even when no such thing is, if he be so qalified as that it may be justly and
truly upon good ground done, when occasion shall reqire. Thus God is always
justifiable, because ever in all things just, Psalm. 92. 15. and 145. 17. But is
then said to be justified, when the Justice and eqity of his courses is
qestioned, Romans 3. 4. Ezeck. 18. 23.

2. To be actually and occasionally Justified, is for one upon such occasions
emergent, to be defended, maintained, approved, and sentence passed in his
behalf, against those, that shall charge him with ought, Esaias 50. 8. Romans 8.
33. 1 King 8. 32.

Thus then upon a man's entrance into the state of grace, having right to and
interest in the satisfaction made by Christ, he is presently discharged of and
freed from the guilt of all his fore passed transgressions, and put into a
state of Justification, and he is so now disposed, it stands so with him, he is
in that state and condition, that he may be justified, whenever occasion
thereof shall be, Tit. 3. 5, 7. but then may God be said actuallie or
occasionallie to justify such, when against Satan's accusations, or wicked men's
aspersions, he cleers them and gives sentence against the calumnies of their
Adversaries in their behalf, Romans 8. 33. he commended Job to Satan, Job 1. 8.
he justified him against Satan, Job 2. 3.

2. That it is one thing to be made or constituted just, and another thing to
be Justified. And a man who before was not just, cannot truly be Justified,
unles he be first made or constituted just. for

1. Tho the word Justify do not signify in propriety or common use to make
just, as has formerlie ben showed, yet a man that has done a wrong and is a
delinquent, that he may be Justified, must be made just, not inherentlie just,
for tho he were so, yet were not that sufficient to clear him from the guilt of
his fore passed unjust act. a man that has played the theif, albeit afterward
he become formallie just, that is, tho by wholesome advice and good admonition
he be brought to repent of his former thievish courses, and thenceforth become
a new man, a true man; yet will not that discharge him from the guilt of his
theft formerlie committed; but he must so be made just, that is, guiltles and
blameless, as that he may answer the rigor of Law and of Justice, ere he can
truly be justified: (for it is the guilt of the offense that Justification
regards) and this cannot be done but by a plenarie satisfaction for the wrong
done and the offense formerlie committed, exhibited and accepted. and this is
that justice or righteousness that the Apostle intimates, when he says, that by
the obedience of one (to wit, of Christ) many are made or constituted, (...),
just, or righteous, Romans 5. 19. not formallie or habituallie, but relativelie,
in reference to the Law, and the guilt of sin arising from it. On which place
Calvine, Hinc colligimus Christum, eo qod Patri satisfeceret, justitiam nobis
comparass^. Hence we gather, that Christ by making satisfaction to the Father
has procured or purchased Justice or righteousness for us.

2. That which is exhibited whither by doing or suffering, or both in way of
satisfaction and so accepted, being such as makes a plenarie compensation for
an offense formerlie committed; because it utterlie extinguisheth and
abolisheth the wrong, so takes it away, as if it never had been; it justly
procures a guiltlesnes, a blamelesnes unto the delinqent, in whose behalf it is
performed; and makes him therefore to be reputed in the eye of Law and Justice,
as now no delinqent, but as guiltles, faultles and just: there being no medium
between these two just and unjust, nor between guiltles and just. see Deuteronomy. 25.
1. this guiltlesnes therefore is justly termed justice; and the party
conseqentlie by plea thereof upon any emergent occasion may be truly
justified. and such guiltlesnes a^cheived by Christ's satisfaction made to Gods
Law and his Justice, makes the party unto whom the same is imputed, and who
has interest therein, truly named and justly deemed just, and to be in the
state of justification, or in a justifiable condition. 2 Cor. 5. 21. and this
is that, not the satisfaction it self, but the guiltlesnes thereby procured,
that is so often in his argument termed justice or righteousness, called the
Justice of God, Romans 1. 17. and 3. 21, 22. and 2 Cor. 5. 21. not, as some, for
that the satisfaction was made by Christ, who is God, but because contrived,
prepared, propounded, and appointed us by God, for God as the party wronged,
and Christ as the party satisfying, for the wrong, are in this argument
distinguished, Romans 3. 24, 25. and 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21.

3. That every true Christian has a twofold justice or righteousness; the one
in reference to the guilt of sin, ariseing from transgression of the Law; 1
John 3. 4. Romans 4. 15. and 5. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 56. the other in reference to the
filth of sin, being a pollution and depravation of the Soul, depriving it of
that purity and integrity wherein at first it was created, Matthew. 15. 18, 19.
2. Cor. 7. 1. Ephesians. 4. 22-24. and that these two are to be distinguished is
apparent, for that diverse things and acts that do not in their own nature
pollute or defile, yet by a special Law prohibited, do in the use of them by
virtue of that inhibiting Law produce guilt. Now in regard of this latter
justice or righteousness, consisting in a freedom from the filth of sin, the
faithful ar truly and sincerely, but imperfectlie just, or righteous, Job 1.
1. and 9. 3, 15, 21. and 23. 10. Luke 1. 6. in regard or the former, consisting
in a freedom from the guilt of sin, they are fully, compleatlie, perfectly
just or righteous, 1 John 1. 7. the one is the righteousness of sanctification,
the other the righteousness of justification: that in this life at least,
uneqallie shared; this eqallie imparted to each, being in common accepted for
and imputed unto all. Whence that of Luther, AEqe justus latro in cru^e, atqe
ipsa beata Virgo Maria, that The convert theif on the Cross was all out as
just, or righteous, as the blessed Virgin Marie, Christ's Mother.

4. That there is a twofold Justification,

1. General, in regard of all sin whatsoever in general;

2. Particular, in regard of some special or particular crime. And a man that
is just and justifiable in regard of some particular offense, yet may not be
justifiable in general. So Job charged by his friends with gros hypocrisy,
oppression and cruelty, Job 22. 5-9. stands stiflie in justification of
himself, Chap. 23. 10. and 27. 5. and yet in general acknowledges that he
could not be justified, nor answer for one act of a thousand, should God call
him to a strict account, Chap. 9. 2, 3. and a man that is unjust and cannot be
justified in general, yet may be just and justifiable in regard of some
particular. So David, tho in the general he declines Gods strict dealing in way
of judicature with him, Psalm. 143. 2. yet in particular, upon false imputations
cast upon him, he appealeth solemnlie thereunto, Psalm. 7. 3, 4, 8, 9. and 38.
19, 20. yea the wickedest man in the world, and the Devil himself, may thus be
legallie just and truly justified, because in that particular guiltles, when
some criminal act shall be wrongfullie charged on him, that was never committed
by him. But it is general justification, that is entreated of and intended in
this place.

And thus we have endeavored to show what the word Justify does preciselie
denote in this place.

The Use whereof briefly may be;

1. To inform us aright concerning the distinct notion and nature of diverse
graces of God, that tho they be knit and linkt one to an other, hang all on one
string or chain, are all fruits of Gods favor toward us in Christ, concur all
together in and with all those that are reconciled to God in Christ; yet are
things of a several and distinct nature and notion, Sanctification is one
thing, Justification an other, and Remission of sin a third, as has been
showed. And yet again so far forth to reconcile and qalifie the differences of
diverse of those that seem to mistake, and misexpound the word here used, that
notwithstanding this their mistake, they may not maintain any error therefore
in matter of faith: only they use some words and Phrases improperlie; and
misexpound some places; but otherwise say nothing but what is orthodox and
agreeable to the analogy of faith.

Yea to remoov some groundles controversies between us and the Papists, and
clear some mistakes and misunderstandings on either side. while the Papists
charge us to hold, that a man is made formallie, habituallie, inherentlie holy
and righteous by Christ's holiness and righteousness imputed unto us, as if a
black-Moor, says Bellarmine, De justificat. l. 2. c. 7.
were made white by casting a white garment upon him, whereas we say no such
matter. and withal he acknowledges, that, if when our writers say, that
Christ's righteousness is imputed unto us, their meaning were no other but this,
that Christ's merits are imputed unto us, because they are given unto us, and we
may tender them unto God for the discharge of our sins, in regard that Christ
has taken upon him the burden of making satisfaction for our sins, and of
reconciling us to God his Father, they held nothing therein but what is right;
tho (says he) the manner of speaking that they use, is vetie seldom or never
found either in the Scriptures or the Ancient Fathers. And the truth is, that
precise form of speaking can hardly be found in Scripture; nor is that justice
whereby we are said to be justified, called, as we have observed, the justice of
Christ; but the justice of God. But yet the same Bellarmine elsewhere
confesses, Lib. e^d. C. 10.
that Christ is rightly called our Justice, or Righteousness, First, because he
works righteousness in us: and secondly, because he has made satisfaction to
his Father for us, and that his satisfaction he does bestow on us, and
communicate unto us, when he justifies us, that he or it may well be called our
satisfaction, and our righteousness. For tho (says he) by righteousness inherent
in us, we are truly just or righteous, and ar truly so termed; yet do we not
thereby make satisfaction to God for our faults and for eternal damnation du
thereunto; but both that inherent righteousness, and the remission of the fault
and eternal penalty thereto du, ar the effect of Christ's satisfaction, which
as the Council of Trent says, is in Justification bestowed on us, and applied
unto us. Nor were it at all absurd on this wise to say, that Christ's
righteousness and merits are imputed unto us, since that they are so conferred on
us and applied unto us, as if we had satisfied God our selves. Speaks he not as
much as any Protestant does, or can do, in this point? yea it may be somewhat
more then some will approov of: so that herein and hitherto the Papists, so
many of them at least as herein agree with him, and most Protestants concur:
(howsoever in other points concerning the merit and worth of works and
satisfaction made by them for venial sins, to be expiated otherwise by
Purgatory penalties, and some other the like differences we keep far asunder)
and much time and pains ar spent and wasted on either part, by them on the one
side, in contending against such an imputation of Christ's righteousness, as none
of ours ever dreamed of; and by many of ours on the other side, in confusing
what they deliver of Justification, when as by that term they mean not
Justification, strictly so termed, but Sanctification improperlie by them so
styled; and so the Air only is to no purpose between them both beaten, while
the one either will not see, or marks not what the other means.

A second Use may be to minister much comfort to every sound and tru-hearted
Christian:

1. Against the temtations and accusations of Satan, and of the wicked of this
World. The Devil is styled as the temter, so the accuser of the Brethren,
Revel. 12. 10. and the wicked of the world are over-prone to traduce them as
evil doers, 1 Pet. 2. 12. but the true Christian may with the Prophet Esaias,
Chap. 50. 8. and the Apostle Paul, Romans 8. 33. bid defiance to either, God will
defend him against either. If Satan shall offer to traduce him with God, or to
accuse him unto God, as he did Job, or worldly men censure him for an
Hypocrite and a formalist, as Jobs friends did him, God himself will vindicate
him as well against the one as the other: Job 2. 3. and 42. 7, 8. he will bring
forth his righteousness as the light, and make his cause or case as clear as the
noonday, Psalm. 37. 6. every tongue that enforms ought against him, shall it
self be cast and condemned, Esaias 54. 17. what accuser or accusation can prevail
to the conviction or condemnation of him, whom Christ sues for, whom God
assoils? Romans 8. 33, 34.

2. Against the remainders of sin and corruption within him, considering that
notwithstanding them, he may be, and is, if he have interest in Christ, in the
state of justification, for justification regards not the filth but the guilt
of sin; and tho justification be never severed from sanctification, yet is
sanctification here but imperfect; whereas justification is grounded upon that
that brings a perfect discharge of guilt with it, 1 John 1. 7.

3. Against the fear of Gods indignation and wrath. for being justified by
Christ's blood, says the Apostle, we shall much more by him be saved from wrath,
Romans 5. 9. where the party is pronounced faultles, there offense must needs
cease, and vengeance much more, Esaias 54. 9, 10.

4. Against the rigor of Gods justice. for justification is an act of justice,
nor can God in justice condemn those whom he has assoiled as guiltles in and
for Christ, Romans 8. 1. God is not like Pilate, who though he pronounced Christ
guiltles, yet for all that would scourge him, condemn him, and give him up to
be crucified, Luke 23. 14. 16, 22. John 19. 6, 16. yea injustice it were to
exact that from any of those who have interest in Christ, for which he had
received satisfaction from Christ their surety before, Esaias 53. 6, 7.

5. Against their want of worth, in regard of many other of far more eminent
parts of piety and sanctimonie. for howsoever in regard of those graceful
parts, that excellent luster of inherent holiness, that renders them, as well
gracious in the sight of God, as conspicuous in the eyes of men, there is as
vast difference and as distant degrees between Saint and Saint here below upon
the earth, as there is between Star and Star aloaft in the Heavens; 1 Cor. 15.
41. yet as in remission of sin, so in justification, and in Christ's
satisfaction the ground of either, the meanest, weakest and poorest Christian
has an eqal share with the most eminent and excellent. And therein does
eithers blessedness principally consist, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

6. Against condemnation and sentence of judicature, tho justly past here upon
him, and deservedly inflicted. for notwithstanding that also, having his peace
made with God, and reconciled to him in Christ, he shall with the penitent and
faithful Theif on the Cross, for Christ's satisfaction, stand discharged and be
pronounced guiltles at Gods tribunal, nor shall his ignominious suffering
exclude him from entrance into the place of his eternal rest and blis, no more
then the like did his and our surety Christ Jesus, after his satisfaction
finished and accepted, which not for himself, but for him and al Gods elect,
was by him both undertaken and exhibited, Heb. 12. 2. Luke 23. 43.

Having thus dispatched the first Head, which we propounded to be handled,
concerning the right meaning of the term Justify here used; we shall proceed
now to the second, to wit, what Faith, or what act of Faith it is, whereby we are said here to be justified.

And herein following the same Method, that we did in the former, we shall
endevor to show,

1. What act of Faith it is not, and 2. what it is.

In the former I am encountered with two erroneous (as to me seems) mistakes and
extremes, the one falling short of the true nature of justifying Faith, or that
act of faith whereby we are said to be justified; and the other, as in
opposition it usuallie falls out, going as far beyond it, as the other comes
short of it.

The former error or mistake is of those, who by Faith will have here understood
nothing else but a general belief, or assent of the mind to the truth of Gods
word in general, or at least, to the doctrine of the Gospel in special,
concerning salvation by Christ, to wit, that Jesus Christ is the only Savior
and Redeemer of Mankind. that which is commonly termed Historical Faith, but
of some learned writers rather by a fitter term Dogmatical Faith, because it
respects not so much the History of the Scripture in general, or of Christ's
life and death in particular, as the doctrine contained in the word, or that
more specially concerning Christ laid down in the Gospel.

Some difference indeed I find herein, between the Papists, and those of ours,
the one making Gods word in general the object of this Faith, the other
restraining it to the promises of the Gospel. but the difference is not great,
and this latter is included in the former. Now true it is, and must of necessity
be granted, that this Dogmatical Faith, or such an act of Faith as it implies,
is a necessary antecedent of justifying Faith, and lays a ground and
foundation for it. But that it is the very justifying act of Faith, with most
of our writers and teachers I cannot admit and condescend unto; yet not because
that the Popish party mostlie maintain it, (for even the Papists hold many
truths in common, both with us and other orthodox Christians.) nor because the
most of ours oppose and impugn it, (for we make no mere man's or men's judgment
the ground of our faith,) but because I deem it unsound and repugnant to Gods
word.

My reasons ar these.

1. That Faith, which the Devils and damned Spirits may have, cannot be
justifying Faith, or the justifying act of Faith. For justifying Faith is a
most precious Pearl, 2 Pet. 1. 1. a special gift, Ephesians. 2. 8. and grace of God,
as the word (...) imports, Philip. 1. 29. And being so, it is consqentlie such
an endowment, as those damned Spirits have not, nor ar capable of. But this
belief either of the word of God in general; or of the doctrine of the Gospel
concerning Salvation by Christ in particular, even the Devils themselves may
have, and have. That there is a God, the Devils, says James, beleiv, and
tremble, Jam. 2. 19. they beleiv there is a God, and beleiving that, beleiv
withal that he is a true God, and that his word is true; did they not beleiv it,
they would not tremble. and indeed what is the reason why wretched Atheists,
wors herein then the Devil, tremble not at Gods word, but because they beleiv
not that there is a God, or that the word is the word of a God, or that it is a
word of truth? yea even the Devils, as they beleiv a God, so they beleiv a
Christ too. So themselves profess, I know who thou art; (say they, speaking to
Christ) even that holy one of God, Mark 1. 24. and again, What have I to do
with thee, Jesus, the Son of the most high God? Mark 5. 7. and yet further,
if this be not sufficient, thou art (...), the Christ, or that Christ, the
Son of God, Luke 4. 41. what more in this kind could, or did Peter say?
Matthew. 16. 16. compare Peter's confession there, and the Devils here, and see if
not in substance only, but in terms also, they be not the very same. Hereunto
might be added, that Act. 16. 17. where the Spirit of divination in the Damsel
possessed therewith, avouches of Paul and Silas, These men are the servants of
the most high God, who show unto you the way of salvation. he confesses that
the doctrine taught by them, was the way whereby God had appointed that men
should be saved. It is apparent hereby that even the Devils may have, yea and
have that faith, which these men affirm to be justifying faith; and which yet
in truth it cannot be.

But against this Argument some exceptions have been given me by some: which I
shall endeavor to remoov.

The first exception taken by a young Divine having some employment in the
City about the time, when I dealt in this argument, was this, that it followed
not, because the Devil thus spoke of or unto Christ, that therefore they
believed him to be so as they said. they might speak it in a colloging way, as
did the Herodians, Mat. 22. 16. when coming to tempt and entangle him, they
say, Master we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly
without respect of or regard unto the person of any. which yet it may justly
be doubted, whether in truth they believed. and so may it be of what the Devils
are related to have said.

For answer whereunto I shall not stand to discuss what likelihood hereof there
is, whether the speech of the one and the other be alike; or whether the Devils
came at those times, when those things were uttered by them, on purpose, as the
Herodians did, to tempt and entangle Christ.

But I answer directly,

1. That it cannot be, but that the Devils must needs know as much as there they
do confess. To make it evident by an instance. suppose the Grand Signior or
Turkish Emperor, holding (as at this day he does) in captivity the subjects of
diverse Christian Princes and States not a few, some one of those Princes, whose
subjects he so holds, should undertake an expedition, wherein he would go
himself in person, for the deliverie of his subjects so detained, enter upon
his territories, defeat him, subdu him, release his captives and set them at
liberty, take the Captiver of them captive, and lead him in triumph; were it
now possible but that the tyrant thus dealt with should know, that this Prince,
who had done all this, were the deliverer of his people? It is the very case
here. The Devil, the Prince of darkness, the God of this world, held in
thraldom and servitude the greatest part of the world; our blessed Savior
comes, he defeats him, Luke 10. 18. dispossesseth him, John 12. 31. disarmes
him, rifles him, Luke 11. 21, 22. rescues men daily out of his hands and
bands, Colos. 1. 13. leads him captive, Ephesians. 4. 8. triumphs over him, Colos. 2.
15. and is it possible that this spiritual tyrant so defeated, disarmed,
dispossessed, despoiled, bereaft of his prey and purchase, captived, triumphed,
should not know and beleiv this Jesus Christ by whom all this was done, to be
the Savior and redeemer of mankind? it is a thing utterlie impossible and
scarce credible, that any man should make qestion at all of it.

But 2. to put this out of qestion; what some scriptures say that the Devils
acknowledged, others of them expreslie say that they knew. so Mark 1. as verse
24. it is related how the Devil in the man possessed said to Christ, I know who
thou art; so verse 34. it is said of those fiends which Christ cast out, that he
would not suffer the Devils, (not (...) to say, but (...)) to speak; because
they knew him. they professed not only to know him, but they knew him indeed.
and more fully yet, Luke 4. 41. when they made that confession of him before
mentioned, it is said, Christ rebuked them, and would not suffer them to speak,
because they knew him to be the Christ. so that this first exception is of no
force, since that what the Devils professed to know, the Evangelists expreslie
affirm that they knew.

A second exception is, that the Devils could not be justified, tho they had
the same kind of faith, or the same act of faith, whereby men are justified,
because there is no promise made unto them, salvation was never tendered on any
such condition to them, as unto mankind it is.

To this I answer, 1. that the qestion is not, whither the Devils should or
could be justified, if they had that faith or act of faith, whereby men ar said
to be justified. but the qestion is, whither they have, or may have, or are
capable of such a faith, for the nature of it, as that is, which those have,
who have interest in Christ, and whereby they are justified. and the force of
the argument depends not upon the denial of the former, but upon the denial of
the latter. To make this plain by an instance of the like. suppose some should
maintain that the repentance spoken of by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. 10. where he
says, godly grief breeds repentance unto salvation never to be repented of,
were nothing else but a sorrow for sin, or a regret and remors only arising
from the apprehension of evil ensuing thereupon, shame and confusion in regard
of men, death and damnation in regard of God. and to disproov this conceit, a
man should reason in this manner. That repentance which the Devils themselves
may have, cannot be that wholesome and saving repentance, which the Apostle
speaks of. But the Devils may have an inward remors and sorrow for sin in
regard of those evils that for it have befaln them and ly heavy upon them, and
unto all eternity shall so do. and it is not therefore that repentance of which
the Apostle there speaks. The qestion here would not be whither the Devils
might be saved if they could repent, but whither they are capable of such a
repentance as godly grief produces and works unto salvation in men; and the
stresse of the argument would rest upon the denial not of the former, but of
the latter. And in like manner is it here, the pith of the argument consists
not in this, whither the Devils should be justified or no, if they had such a
faith as men have whereby they are justified; which is not affirmed, nor is at
all qestioned, but whither they have, or can have such a faith as the Apostle
here speaks of, and whereby he affirms that men may be and ar justified; and
this only is that that is here denied. And truly unto me it seems as strange
to affirm, that the Devils have or may have, that very same faith, (that
precious pearl, that very same gift and grace of Gods Spirit) whereby they are
justified, tho not for the work, but for the object of it, as hereafter shall
be shown; as to say the Devils have or may have that kindly and godly grief
for sin as sin, not for the evil ensuing it, but for the evil that is in it,
and the sincere and genuine repentance springing from the same, which the
Apostle there speaks of: since that the one is a special gift and grace of Gods
Spirit, as well as the other: and look what is spoken of the one in this kind,
to wit, of Repentance, Act. 5. 31. and 11. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 25. the very same is
said of faith in the places before mentioned.

2. For the removal of this exception more fully; consider we, that tho it be
true, that there is no such promise or tender of salvation on any such
condition made unto the Devils and damned spirits: yet the tender of salvation
and justification upon this act of faith is made to all mankind in general,
without exception of any, Mark 16. 15, 16. Go forth into all the world, says
our Savior, and preach the Gospel unto every creature. He that beleiveth and
is baptized, shall be saved. If then it can be made out, that some men that are
not justified, nor saved, some wicked ones remaining unjustified, unsanctified,
yet notwithstanding may have the faith by these men maintained to be here meant,
to wit, a belief only of the truth of the doctrine of the Gospel, that Christ
is the Savior and Redeemer of mankind; then this exception must necessarily
fall to the ground.

And so I pas to a second argument, which may thus be framed: That faith which
wicked, ungodlie, irregenerate, unsanctified men, so remaining may have, yea
and sometimes have had, cannot be justifying faith, nor the faith spoken of by
the Apostle in this place. But this belief of the Gospel, that Christ is the
Son of God, the Savior and Redeemer of mankind, some have had, have known and
believed it, who yet coutinued still, wicked, ungodlie, irregenerate,
unsanctified. and this cannot therefore consequently be the faith here spoken
of. For the proof of the Proposition, I shall not so much insist or rest upon
the necessary conjunction of this faith and repentance the one with the other,
in regard of Gods ordinance; and tho by means of his appointment there is a
necessary connection of Justification and Sanctification; See Peter
Alliacenses ad Sent. lib. 4. qaest. 1. art. 3. conclus. 1.
which as some of the Scholemen have observed, might otherwise have been
severed; so that justification might have been, where sanctification were not,
had God ben pleased so to dispose it. and sanctification might have been without
justification, if God had restored our first Parents to their original
condition, See Ger. Vossius Defens. Grot. de satisfact. advers. Ravensperg.
cap. 2. 8.
freely remitting their offense without any satisfaction; as by his absolute
power he might have done. for I dare not say as some do, that God may not as
well without breach of his justice, remit a wrong done him by his creature and
vassal, as a man may an injury offered to him by his fellow and
fellow servants, howsoever in his wisdom he has decreed and determined to
dispose things otherwise; which yet divine determination, disposition and
ordinance were sufficient ground to make the proposition good. But the main
stress of my proof I shall lay upon this, that therefore faith and repentance
cannot be severed, faith and holiness cannot be sundred, in regard of the very
nature and property, the condition and qalitie of this faith it self; for that
this faith, whereby a man is justified, is an holy habit, or disposition, and
the act issuing from it, an holy act; termed therefore a most holy faith,
Jude 20. nor in regard of the objects of it, because it is conversant and
exercised about holy things, God, and Christ, and the goodness and mercy of
God in Christ; but because it is an holy disposition in the soul, whereby the
heart is purified, Act. 15. 9. and the party possessed of it is sanctified, Act.
26. 18. such faith is a fruit of regeneration, a limb or a branch of
sanctification, which it self is either a fruit or a branch of Regeneration.
either a fruit or a sprig, I say, because regeneration may be considered two
ways, either as an act of God working in us, or as a change thereby wrought
upon us. Conceiv we this by the like concerning conversion. conversion may be
taken two ways, either as an act of God working in us, or a change thereby
wrought upon us. and we shall find both together mentioned, Jer. 31. 18.
Convert me, O Lord; there is the act of God working in him; and I shall be
converted, there is the change thereby wrought upon him. In like manner may
Regeneration be considered, either as an act of God working in, or on a man,
Jam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 3. and so sanctification is an effect or fruit of it, or
as a change wrought thereby upon him, 1 Pet. 1. 22, 23. and so it is a
principal branch of regeneration; whereof one main arm is illumination,
respecting the mind and understanding, and sanctification respecting the will
and affections an other, shooting out and dividing it self into many sprigs, as
sincere repentance, the filial fear, the true love of God, and the like; all
which and among the rest this faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. being branches of
sanctification, ar all holy dispositions, and the acts issuing from them of no
other nature or qalitie then the disposition, or first act, as the School
terms it, from which they proceed. Seeing then that the habit of this faith,
whereby any ar justified, is an holy disposition, such as makes the soul and
person possessed with it holy, that purifies and sanctifies him that has it,
and the acts of it conseqentlie such as proceed from an holy heart and a
sanctified disposition; it must needs follow, that no wicked man, no
unregenerated and unsanctified person, while he so continues, can have the
faith by the Apostle here intended.

And thus much shall suffice for the proof of the proposition: I shall now
proceed to the proof of the assumption.

That a man may beleiv the doctrine of the Gospel, that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, and the Savior of mankind, and yet be never a whit the holier,
but remain still irregenerate and unsanctified, is apparent. For first the
Devils, as has been said and showed before, know and beleiv all this, and that
now doubtless, as undoubtedlie as any man living does or can do, and yet are no
whit at all the holier for all that, but remain still as evil as ever they were.
yea many wicked men, limbs of the Devil have done the same. And here why
should I not name Balaam for one? for did not Balaam know Christ? yes
undoubtedlie, how could he else have Prophesied of him? he had an heavenly
revelation, a revelation from God concerning Christ; that might be said of him,
that Christ himself said of Peter, Mat. 16. 17. Flesh and blood did not reveil
this mystery unto him, but God himself that is in heaven: tho he were not
blessed, as Peter, nor sanctified therefore, as he was. But hear we Balaams own
words, Number. 24. 15-17. Balaam the son of Beor, the man whose eyes were opened,
who heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, and saw
the visions of the Almighty, he says, I shall see him, but not now; I shall
behold him, but not nigh. (as if he had said, The time shall come, when I shall
see the Messiah, the Savior of Israel; I shall one day behold him, but afar
off; so as I shall not be the better for my sight of him, it will be little to
my comfort.) There shall come a Star out of Jacob; and a Rod, or a Scepter shall
arise, or stand up out of Israel, etc. a plain Prophecy of Christ, as all
confess, and is generally acknowledged. Yea mark we how far he proceeds, Chap.
23. 10. Let me dye, or, Oh that I might dye, (says he) the death of the
righteous; and that my last end might be like unto his. Balaam would never have
thus spoken, had he not believed, that if he did take the same course that Gods
people did, who trusted in the Messiah, and yielded themselves up to be ruled
wholly by him, he might be saved by him, as they were. but for all that his
belief he would not, nor did condescend so to do. But leave we him, and proceed
to some other instances. What is the sin against the Holy Ghost, of which our
Savior Christ says, Matthew. 11. 31, 32. All manner of sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, shall not
be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come? Is it not almost
generally by most Divines acknowledged, that this irremissible sin, is a sin
always joined with knowledge? and what knowledge? not a bare speculative or
notional knowledge, but a belief of the truth of the Gospel, accompanied with a
malicious opposition thereuuto. No man therefore can commit that sin, but such
an one as knows and beleives the doctrine of the Gospel, which yet he
malitiouslie opposes, and conseqentlie must needs have that Faith, which these
men would have to be justifying faith. It was sometime the speech of a Reverend
Divine, that if Paul had had Peter's knowledge when he opposed the Faith of
Christ, or Peter Paul's malice, when he abjured his Master; they had both them
committed that unpardonable sin. But Paul did what he did in ignorance, and
Peter what he did, out of weakness: and both repented of what they had done;
which none of those that have committed that sin, ever do. Heb. 6. 6. In which
place further the Apostle plainly intimates, verse, 4. 6. that men that have been
illightned, (with what, think we means he, but with the knowledge of
Evangelical truths?) and have partaked of the Holy Ghost, (of the common
graces of the Spirit) and tasted of the heavenly gift and the good word of
God, (as those compared to the seed sown on stony ground, that receiv the
word with joy, and beleiv for a time, Matthew. 13. 20. Luke 8. 13. and the powers
of the world to come, may* yet, not fall only, but fall utterlie away; (as
those also in the Gospel, Luke 8. 13.) yea not fall wholly off only, but sin
in despite of Gods Spirit, Chap. 10. 26, 29. and so sin, that it is a thing
impossible for them to be restored again by repentance, Chap. 6. 6. and what
sin it is that is there so deciphered, is no great difficulty to determine*
which albeit I dare not say that Judas committed; (for it seems avarice, not
malice, that run him hedlong into that guilt of impiety, little imagining, it
may be, but that his Master would rid himself well enough out of their hands,
unto whom he had betrayed him, as he had sometime before done the like, Luke 4.
29, 30. John 8. 59. and 10. 39. and himself go away with their money the
whiles) yet it is very likely, that he believed that concerning his Master to
be true, that he preached unto others. Howsoever, the former instances showing
that wicked ones so continuing may have such a belief of the truth of the
Gospel, declare the same not to be the faith here spoken of.

But pas we on to a third argument. That faith which a reprobate or a castaway
may have, one that is not of the number of Gods elect, cannot be justifying
faith, or the faith of which the Apostle here speaks* for justifying faith, is
a grace proper and peculiar to Gods Elect; and is by the Apostle therefore
termed, (...), the faith of Gods Elect. But a man may know and beleiv the
doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ and Salvation by him, and yet be a
castaway, none of the Elect. so the Apostle Peter, 2. Pet. 2. 20-22. implies,
that men who have known the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the knowledge of him
abandoned their former worldly defilements, yet afterward returning thereunto,
like a Dog to take in again his vomit, or a Sow washed to wallow again in the
mire; may be in worse, more irrecoverable state and condition then ever before
even as the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 6 4, 5. above mentioned, as there is
no possible means of restoring them again by repentance.

4. That faith, whereby a man is justified, is such a faith as brings a man
home to Christ, such as causes a man to come to him, pitch upon him, adhere
unto him. So our Savior, John 6. 36. He that comes to me shall not hunger, and
be that beleivs in me shall not thirst. which words of our Savior plainly
show, that that faith, whereby a man receivs any benefit from Christ, is such
a faith, as carries him unto Christ. But a man may beleiv Christ to be the
Savior and Redeemer of mankind, and yet not in that manner come to him, as to
pitch himself upon him, and adhere to him. nor need we go far for an instance,
we have one in that very Chapter, when Christ had fed a great multitude with a
very small qantitie of food, This, say they, certainly is that Prophet that
should come into the world, John 6. 14. That Prophet, what Prophet, think we,
meant they, but the Prophet spoken of by Moses? Deuteronomy. 18. 15. he that was to be
their Savior and Redeemer, the Christ, Act. 3. 22. and yet for all that, albeit
they were willing enough to follow him to be fed, verse 26. yet they would not
come to him, that they might be saved by him, John 5. 40. and what was the
reason why they would not? their credit and reputation, and other the like
carnal and worldly respects lay in the way between them and Christ, which kept
them off from coming so to Christ as to adhere unto him, tho they professed
verily to apprehend and believe him to be the Messiah.

Lastly, justifying faith is such a faith whereby we embrace, entertain,
receiv, admit Christ, not into our houses, but into our hearts; and whereby
conseqentlie we are united unto Christ, so as that he is said to be in us, and
we in him. To as many as received him, says he, he gave this privilege to
become the sons of God, even to those that beleiv in his name. Where to
receiv him, is to give him entertainment, not so much in their houses, which
Matthew, Zacheus, and others of them also did, as in their hearts: according to
that of the Apostle, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.
17. whence it is that they that are in the faith, ar said to have Christ in
them. Examine your selves, says the Apostle, whether ye be in the Faith: do you
not know that Christ is in you? 2 Cor. 13. 5. thereby implying, that if they be
in the faith, then Christ is in them. For howsoever I conceiv not the term of
beleiving on Christ, for our justification or faith in his blood, as the
Apostle terms it here, verse. 25. does in the proper and peculiar notion of it
signify a receiving of Christ to be our King, Priest and Prophet, or to
contain and comprehend all Evangelical Duties; yet it does necessarily implie
an acceptance of him to be not our surety, Savior and Redeemer only, but our
Sovereign Lord also, and as our Priest our Prophet. Since we cannot with any
good ground rely on him or trust him for the discharge of us from the guilt of
our sins, unles we be content to receiv, and do willingly embrace him, on
such terms as God offers him, and as he offers himself unto us* and on no other
terms then these is he offered unto any. But a man may beleiv that Christ is
the Savior of the world, yea that he cannot be saved but by Christ, and yet for
all that may refuse to receiv him and yield himself up unto him, because he
mislikes the conditions on which he is tendered unto him, or delay to do it at
present, in hope that he may timely enough do it hereafter. As when a company
of Rebels ar up in arms against their Liege Lord, and a Proclamation of pardon
and impunitie is published by him unto all such of them, as will lay down their
arms, put themselves upon his mercy, acknowledge their offense, and by solemn
oath engage themselves to du allegiance and constant obedience for the future;
albeit that they all know him to be their lawful Sovereign, and beleiv that he
will be as good as his word, to all that so accept of it, nor know which way to
escape, but that first or last they shall be surprised, if they do stand out,
and have execution done upon them; yet there may be diverse among them that will
choose rather to persist in their rebellious courses, or refuse at least to
yield themselves up to him, and to accept of his gracious offer, either out of a
stoutnes of stomach, and a stifnes of self-wil, or out of an extreme malice and
inveterate hatred against the person of their Prince, or out of a strong
affection to some advers party, or out of a fond conceit that they may keep
for some good space of time out of the way, undiscovered and unsurprised, or
that when they perceiv themselves near to be attached, they may then by a tender
of themselves attain the benefit of the offer, there being no limitation of
time mentioned in it. In the same manner: although a man do beleiv that Jesus is
the Savior of mankind, and that there is no way for him to attain salvation but
by Christ, yet for all that may he refuse to receiv Christ for his Lord and
Savior, or to accept of salvation by Christ, because he mislikes the
conditions, upon and under which Christ and salvation by Christ is offered and
tendered unto him, and without which it cannot be had. But what ar those terms,
that are so necessarily reqired, and with so much difficulty received? why,
these ar: If any man will come after me, says our Savior, (...), let him
utterlie deny himself, Matthew. 16. 24. and, If a man hate not Father and
Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brothers and Sisters, his nearest relations,
his dearest affections only, be as willing to part with them and leave them,
when they shall stand in the way between him and Christ, as if he did hate them
and were weary of them, but over and beside all this (...), even his own life,
his soul, himself also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26. and, he that
(...), does not renounce all that ever he has, ibid. v. 33. yea all that ever
he is, he is not for Christ, he must not be his own man any more, but he must
in resolution at least be Christ's alone, wholly at his command, will and
disposal. and is not this, think we, durus sermo, a hard saying, as they
sometime said, to flesh and blood? is not this self-denial a shrewd pil to
swallow? who, say they, can hear it? who can endure the very hearing of it?
John 6. 60. but much more may it be said here, who can endure to admit it?
(...), This word or saying, that Christ came to save sinners, it is a sure
saying, such as we may write and rest upon it, we may with good ground afford
credit unto it, yea and it is withal a very acceptable saying, a saying
worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1 15. and indeed who would not accept of such
a gracious offer? would not willingly and gladly entertain such tidings, the
glad tidings of salvation, and of salvation not temporal, but eternal? See Esaias
52. 7. Nahum 1. 15. Romans 10. 15. yea but what is the reason then, that this so
acceptable message finds so little acceptance in the world, that so few do
accept of it? that when this Savior came unto his own, he found so sorry
welcome among them, his own refused to receiv him? John 1. 11. It is not in the
thing offered; that no damned wretch in Hell would refuse to accept; but it is
in the terms whereupon the offer is made and tendered, which man's corrupt nature
will in no wise condescend unto. Man by nature is so wedded to his own will, his
corrupt heart is so fast glewed to his lewd, but beloved, yea best beloved
lusts, that he will rather part with life, and soul, and self, then endure to
hear of a divorce from them, that are dearer to him then himself. Do we not hear
wicked wretches sometimes say, such a sin they cannot leav, they will not leav,
tho they be damned for it? Christ, says the Apostle, was consecrated of God,
for this purpose, that he might become the Author of eternal salvation to all
those that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. yea that yield obedience to him in all things,
that do whatsoever he enjoynes them, John 15. 14. And will we see how avers man's
nature is to this obedience, to this absolute, this universal obedience? tho it
be most true, that our Savior says, (how can he say other then such, who is
truth it self?) that his yoke, the yoke that he would have us to draw in, is
not harsh and hard, but (...) good and gentle; and his burden, the burden that
he would impose upon us, and have us to bear, is not heavy and cumbersome, but
light, Matthew. 11. 36. it is so in its self, in its own nature; it was so at the
first unto man's created nature; it would be so unto us, were it not for our
corrupt nature; had we but a love and a likeing unto it. See Prove. 3. 17. and
8. 8, 9. 1 John 5. 3. yet such is the perverseness and untowardnes of man's
crooked and crosgraind will, that it will not by any fear or force be wrought or
brought to a yiedling thereunto. so that well may that of Solomon be applied
unto it; That which is crooked cannot be made straight, Eccles. 1. 15. The
Apostles words, Romans 8. 7. ar very pregnant to this purpose: if the genuine
notion of them were well observed, and rightly expressed, which is not easy to
be done. (...), says he, which some render, the wisdom of the flesh. but
(...) and (...), tho springing from the same root, ar in notion, far asunder;
as may appear by that of Synesius in Dione, (...) they come nearer home, that
render it, the mind of the flesh. but the word (...), or mind, as the word
(...), or concupiscence, is of a middle notion, and may be used, yea must be
taken therefore in a different sens according to the nature of the subject,
whereunto it is applied. See Gal. 5. 17. The word (...) therefore here applied
to the flesh, signifies not mind simply, but a stout or haughty mind, as the
word most freqentlie signifies, and is in the best Autors very commonly used;
and the words ensuing implie as much. The words may well then be thus rendered,
The stoutnes, or hautines of the flesh, of man's carnal heart or mind, (and
there is an Emphasis also in the word flesh, which of it self has an
intimation of infirmity and weakness, Genesis 6. 3. Heb. 5. 7. yea sometime of a
pliable and yiedling disposition, apt to receiv any but slight impression,
Ezekiel. 36. 26. 2 Cor. 3. 3. that such a sorry piece of flesh as man's heart is,
should be so stif, and so stubborn) is enmity against God; not avers to him,
but enmity it self against him; stands out in such defiance against him, and
whatsoever he wills and enjoins, that it neither does submit it self, nor can
be subjected unto his law, or brought under and kept in any order thereby, yea
that the very prohibitions and comminations of the Law, ar so far from abating
the heat and force of man's corruption, that they are to man's untoward spirit,
but as water to qick lime; that water whose nature and property is of it self
to allay heat, to qench fire, yet being powered upon qick lime, until it have
got the masterie of it, does but set the heat and fire that lay hid in it a
working and boiling, whereas it lay qiet, unseen and insensible before; they
cause that corruption that seemed to be ded before, begin to revive, to grow
full and fierce, to bestir it self, and break out with much violence and
outrage, and sin to become excessively sinful, (...). Romans 7. 5, 8, 9, 13. Ad
unto all that has been said, of the difficulty of self-denial, the strong
bent of the heart unto its own evil lusts, and its stifnes of opposition unto
Gods word and will, the deceitfulnes of sin and Satan in an other kind, those
wiles, whereby they suggest unto the soul of it self so loath to deny it self,
so unwilling to part with and leav its beloved lusts, to turn over a new leaf,
and engage, or inslave himself rather, as he esteems it, to the rigid
observance of a strict tenor of life; that for the present so to do is
altogether needles, it may be done timely enough, and well enough hereafter;
he may follow the world, and take his pleasure, pursu his own courses, and
persist in his own ways, as long as he sees good, and has liberty and
ability so to do; and afterward, when by age or cross occurrents he is so
restrained that he cannot do as he did and desires still to do if he could, when
he is arrested upon his sick, or lies upon his deaths-bed, he may then
seasonablie begin to think on those things, which he has now no mind to,
which his mind at present goes so much against; and the applieng of himself
thereunto will stand him then in as much steed, as if he had put himself to such
a tedious task before, and undergone such a toilsome penance all his life
long. And many doubtless building on such vain imaginations, and gulling their
own souls with such groundles hopes, as like Castles in the air, they thence
raise and erect to their own ruin, refuse to receive Christ so tendered unto
them, albeit they beleiv him to be the only Savior of mankind, and no
salvation to be had without him.

And thus much may suffice for refutation of the former mistake of those who
hold the Dogmatical Faith, that is, the belief of the truth either of the word
of God in general, or of the Gospel in special, that Jesus Christ is the Savior
and Redeemer of mankind, to be that Faith whereby we are said here to be
justified.

There remain some few Testimonies of Scripture to be answered, that are wont to
be produced for the proof of that tenent either by the Papists, or our own
writers.

Now for the proof of this, that justifying faith is no other then a firm
assent to the truth of Gods word in general, Bellarmine produces only one
place of Scripture, to wit, the Apostles words, Hebrews. 11. 1. Faith is the
substance of things to be hoped for, and the argument, or, evidence of things
not appearing. This he calls his first argument, tho it have no second, as
elsewhere he does the like. And in the prosecution of his argument from this
place he spends a whole Chapter, de justificat. lib. 1. cap. 6. wherein he
takes for granted that the Apostle in these words gives an exact definition of
justifying faith: and the instances that after he gives concerning the creation
of the world by Gods word, and the destruction of it by a flood, etc. show that
this faith is a belief of the word of God in general, as well of Historical
relations, as of doctrinal instructions, and of comminations as of promises.

Unto all which we may thus answer.

1. It is not denied that the Apostle in this Chapter does at large commend and
set forth the strange and admirable power, efficacy and excellency, of that
true lively and saving faith which he had before mentioned, Chap. 10. 38. but
that he intends to deliver in those first words an exact definition of faith so
far forth as it justifies, or either there or in the instances ensuing, to
point out that special act of faith whereby it does justify, that is, is a
mean of assoiling a man from the guilt of his sins, is more then the Cardinal
is able to make good. and indeed who almost would be so absurd as to say, that
any man should be so justified by believing that God made the world of
nothing? (the truth whereof some yet among us have of late flatly denied, and
have not forborne to publish their flat denial and disapprooving of it in print)
tho true it is, that by that self same faith we beleiv as well the worlds
creation by God, as man's redemption by Christ; and ar thereby as firmly assured
of the one as of the other.

2. Nor does it follow that Noa was assoiled from his sins, and became an heir
of that righteousness that is according to faith, by believing that the whole
world should by a deluge be destroyed: tho by the same faith he believed also
that he and his should be saved from destruction in that universal deluge by
means of the Ark, which by Gods appointment and according to direction received
from him he thereupon to that end built.

3. Yea to return Bellarmines argument upon himself, whereby he would proov
that the justifying act of faith is not such as we would have it to be, to wit,
fiducia, a fiducial trust or reheng on Christ and Gods promise of justification
and salvation by Christ; because such a faith produces not fear, but produces
hope and expels fear: whereas that act of Noa's faith, whereby he believed
that the deluge would undoubtedlie come, bred in him that fear, that caused him
to build the Ark. For as the warning given of the flood, notwithstanding the
improbability and in humane reason incredibilitie, yea impossibility of it in
natural power, yet certainly apprehended and undoubtedly believed upon Gods
word, relating and revealing it to him, produced fear in him, even as the
comminatorie prediction of Ninevies destruction delivered by Jonas from God,
and by the Ninevites believed, bred a fear thereof in them, Jon. 3. 5. so the
promise of deliverance made withal unto him at the same time by God, being as
certainly believed and relied on, bred in him an hopeful expectation of the
undoubted performance of it, and was the principal motive of his building the
Ark, which otherwise to have attempted had been a most vain and foolish project,
and would have prooved of none effect.

4. Hereunto might be added, that the Apostle Peter seems to implie, that that
deliverance from the deluge had somewhat typical in it, 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. and
as in that promise to Abraham, for the performance whereof his trusting upon
God is said to be imputed unto him for righteousness, Genesis 15. 5, 6. had beside
the expression of the numerositie of his issue in general mentioned also, Genesis
13. 16. an intimation withal of that blessed or blessing rather, Act. 3. 26.
Seed, Genesis 3. 15. and 22. 18. Jesus Christ in special, by whom all that rely
on him and trust to him were to be justified and saved; and the possession of
the Land of Canaan mentioned in the Covenant that God at the same time plighted
with him, Genesis 15. 8-18. was a type of the right unto and interest in the
heavenly inheritance procured and purchased for all the faithful by Christ,
Heb. 3. 18, 19. and 4. 1-11. and 6. 20. and 9. 12, 24. and 10. 19, 20. so that
temporal deliverance promised to Noa, from the destruction by the deluge,
proceeding from the special favor and grace of God to him, Genesis 6. 8. might well
be a type of that spiritual deliverance from the power of sin and Satan,
which Noa no doubt believed to be attained by the promised seed, on whom by
relieng he became heir of that righteousness that is according to faith in him.

5. That the Apostle speaks of the faith of Gods people in general, whither
ordinary, and that either Historical of matters as well already past, the
creation, v. 3. as future, the departure out of Egypt, v. 22. or Dogmatical,
concerning God and his goodness, v. 6. or extraordinary, that of miracles, v.
33, 34. is apparent by the variety of instances given by him, as Bellarmine
also himself grants, and would hence proov, that faith in all these instances,
yea that faith in general, is but one and the same, which if it were true, then
every one that has justifying faith, should have a power of working miracles
also: which is directly contrary both to our Saviors intimations, Matthew. 7.
22, 23. and 17. 20. and the Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. 9, 10, 29, 30. tho it be not
denied that some general notion of faith be found in each of them.

Lastly, albeit that Historical or Dogmatical faith, or that act of faith,
whereby the truth of the History or Doctrine of the word in general, or that
of the Gospel in particular is believed, be of necessity conjoined with, or
antecedent unto that act of says whereby a beleiver is justified, it does not
thence follow that these two therefore ar one and the same. no more then the
slavish fear ariseing from a mere apprehension of wrath and greatness, is the
same with the filial fear, ariseing from apprehension of Gods mercy and
goodness; Psalm. 130. 3. Jer. 31. 39, 40. because the one is to the other, tanqam
a^us ad silum, as the needle to the thread, it goes before to make way for it,
and helps to introduce it: or that faith and hope ar one and the same, because
the one is the foundation of the other, nor ar they in time severed the one
from the other.

I shall not need to examine any of Bellarmines other arguments; for this place
of Scripture is not the principal only, but the only one produced by him to
proov that the assent to the word of God in general, is that whereby we are said
to be justified. and the rest proov no more then this, that such a faith is
reqisite to justification and salvation, and that without it a man cannot be
justified or saved: whereas the qestion is not, whither all that are justified
have such a belief of Gods word in general, or of the Gospel in particular;
which no man denies; but wither such a belief, be that faith or that act of
faith whereby we are justified; which is that alone that is here qestioned, Yea
the rest of his Scriptures, as himself acknowledges, ar intended only to
disproov the particular application of the promise to be the justifyeng act of
faith; whereof more anon, when we have done with some others of our own, who of
the Dogmatical Faith or belief of the doctrine concerning Christ, approov and
affirm the same, that of the belief of the word in general Bellarmine does.

THE PUBLISHER Of this Posthumous Piece of Work, TO THE READER.
IT is a fruitless wish for me to utter, Oh that I were not enforced to adjoyn
this Epilogue, Desiderantur caetera.

The rest is wanting, and will be wanted. It will be fitter for me to say,
Placeat homini, qod placuit Deo. Let not that discontent man, which pleased
God. And it seemed good to the Lord of the Vineyard to interrupt this faithful
Servants labor with an acute disease, which supervening to age, which is an
incurable sickness, put a period to his life; which was his day or season of
work. He was not idle in the former part of the day, but took this business in
hand at his very evening, which man that knows not his time, could neither
foresee, nor put off. Eccl 9. 12.
And now this unfinished Piece of his must stand, as an imperfect Table begun
to be wrought by Apelles or Titian (famous in their Generations) which no
surviving or succeeding Artist, will adventure to accomplish with a less-skilful
hand. But yet we are not at an irrecoverable loss, since we have still the living
Oracles of Gods word, which are the original truth, whereof humane discourses
are extract Copies and besides common Reason, Luke 11. 1^
we may by humble and earnest pra^e^ obtain the assistance of Gods holy Spirit
for the improvement of Reason in the prosecution of what is not here expressed.
And tho this discourse be abruptly broken off, before it fully explain what
faith is, yet we may from the Negative part, which cuts off all Notions
pretending to that Title, conclude the affirmative, that justifying faith is an
affiance in Christ, or in God through Christ, and for Christ's sake, for
absolution from our sins, and so conseqentlie for eternal salvation: and the
justifying act of faith is to trust to, on, or in Christ, commonly called
beleiving in or on him, by a speech somewhat improper, yet not without example
in Exotic Authors. Bud. in Comment. Fides non modo credulitatem, sed and
fiduciam significat, (...) pro confidete, sumitur. Aeschin. con^* Cetesiph.
(...) Diod. Sicul l. 26. (...). Aristot. Politic. Tyr^^^orum esse notat, (...).
Latini pariter in eodem sensu usurpa^^^^ ^edere. Val. Max. l. 6. Nemo debet
nimium fortun^ cr^dere. Virg. celog. 2. Nimium ^crede coloti. i. e. confide,
Serve.
But if our Interpreters had been so lucky, as instead of beleiving on God, and
on Christ, to have rendered the word (...) by trusting, (as e. g. John 14. 1. we
read the words of our Savioor to his Disciples, Ye beleiv in God, beleiv also
in me, but we may very well read thus, Ye do trust, or, Do ye trust in God, or
on God, trust also in me, or on me) use would have made the term familiar, and
the thing it self obvious to the understanding, and it would have prevented
many hot but impertinent contentions about words. But mine infirmities will not
permit me to enlarge in the explication of the nature of faith, which is a
common Theme, but deserves exact handling. I entreat the Christian Reader to
accept this final portion of heavenly Treasure rescued from the dust, since
the earthen vessel, by which it was conveyed to us, is broken by death, and
crumbled into his primigenial Dust.

-- Si qid novisti rectius hisce,
Candidus imperti: si non; his utere mecum. Hor.
FINIS.

