Faithful and fair Warning, Humbly presented to the Knights, Gentlemen,
Clergymen, Yeomen, and other the Inhabitants of the County of SVFFOLKE.

And may, for the greatest part thereof, serve for a seasonable Caution to the
whole Kingdom.

By LIONEL GATFORD B. D. the true, but Sequestered Rector of Dinnington, in the
said County.

Ezekiel. 2. ^, 6, 7. And thou son of Man be not afraid of them, etc.

Chap. 22. from verse. 25. to the end. There is a Conspiracy of her Prophets in
the midst thereof, etc.

Chap. 7. v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Cast away from you all your transgressions,
whereby ye have transgressed, etc.

Matthew. 11. v. 15. He that has ears to hear let him hear.

LONDON, Printed for John Gytes, Prisoner in the Fleet, for his loyalty to his
Sacred Majesty. 1648.

Right worthy, worshipful, and the rest most affectionately and intyrely
beloved Countrymen and Brethren.
HAving ever reputed that command of God, first given in charge to the Prophet
Ezekiel cap. 3. of his prophecy from verse 17. to verse 22. Son of man, I have
made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my
mouth and give (...) w^rning from me. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall
surely die; and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked
from his wicked way, to save his life; The same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity; but his blood will I re^^ire at thine hand. (...) if thou warn the
wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall
die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. Again when a
righteous man does ^^n from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I
lay: ^ng block before him, he shall die; because thou have not given him
warning, he shall (...) in his ^e, and his righteousness, which he has done,
shall not be remembered; but his blood will I req^ire at thine hand.
Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not,
and he does not sin; he shall surely live because he is warned; also, thou
have delivered thy soul. Which command is again repeated and illustrated Chap.
33. from verse 2. 10 verse 10. Having, I say, ever reputed that command of God
to be an universal, everlasting rule of Prophesying, and so to concern us
Prophets and Teachers in the time of the Gospel, as well as those Prophets and
Seers in the time of the Law: the frequent and serious meditating thereon,
sanctified unto me by Gods Spirit, as it made me, ever since God honored me
with that Sacred, though now despised, calling of a Minister, to apply the
exercising of that calling, upon all occasions so requiring, as much as I could
to the observing that rule, notwithstanding the known opposition, slanders and
reproaches, that I met with therein; so of late years, since the wickedness of
the wicked has, so superabounded in this Nation, and the righteousness of the
righteous has so decayed, and the sword of the Lord has therefore wasted and
devoured from one end of the land to the other: I have devoted my self in a
manner wholly to that service, both in private and public by speaking,
preaching, and other ways of warning, as opportunities were offered, and God
enabled. And though very lately, upon the calling to mind the success that I
had in some former warnings, (being therefore, with the Prophet Jeremiah
smitten by the tongue of those whom I faithfully endeavored to keep from being
smitten with the sword, and imprisoned by those whose liberty from that and
other judgments I earnestly supplicated) I had once, with the same Jeremiah,
resolved to have spoken no more in Gods name to men so perverse and obstinate;
ye^ his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was
weary with forbearing and I Jer. 20. 9.
could not stay: or to use David's expression, I was for a time dumb with
silence, and held my peace even from good, and my sorrow was stirred. My heart
was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spoke I with my
tongue; or, to Psa. 39.
come nearer to that prophet with whom I began (and all three without either
boasting or fal^ifying) I remai^ed, some days, as Ezekiel did immediately
before he received that rule of prophecy but now named, astonished among the
people, astonished at what I saw and heard daily committed by them, astonished
at their impudence and hand hea^tednesse, astonished with sorrow and
indign-tion at both, and astonished with thinking what I should do to deliver
my own soul from such a wicked generation; till at last, the same word that
came to Eze. 3. 15.
Ezekiel, did from him (and, I h^pe, by the same spirit, though not in the same
manner that it came to him) come to my thoughts again and again; and then God
was pleased to r^^^e and quicken my spirit, so that my soul could no longer
rest, till I had once again delivered her from the guiltiness of the blood of
others by telling those whom it concerned, what I apprehend from Gods word has
already pulled on them the guilt of others bloods, and will, if not speedily
prevented pull much more, even to the devastation and desolation of this whole
Nation, and to the inevitable ruin and destruction of their own souls. And
to whom amongst all that are concerned, should I rather, or can I better direct
my speech then to you of this County? whether I consider mine own obligations,
or your present state and condition? My obligations to this County, and to some
of you in particular, are such and so great, that I desire no longer to breath
then whilst I shall be willing to spend my breath in the acknowledgement of
your favors, and in the re^urning you the best thanks and, service, that I am
able, for them. And such and so deplorable is your present state and condition,
that should, I profess with Isaiah. That, Therefore* are my loins filled with
pain, pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travelleth,
I was bowed down at the hearing of it, I was dismayed at the seeing of it; or
should I wish with Jeremiah, That my head were wat^rs, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I Isae. 21. 3.
might weep day and right in the lamenting of it. I should profess no more
nor wi^h no other, then what your present state and condition require, and what
I Ier. 9. 1.
have already in some part performed for you. To you therefore, to you, my
Honored and dearly beloved Countrymen, do I here humbly present his
faithful and fair warning, and with it my self to suffer or to rejoice with
you, for you, or by you, as God and you shall please, and as well beseemes him,
that seeks you, and not yours, the Kingdom's peace, and not the favor of any
in the kingdom, the honor of the Church, not any dignity in it, and Gods
Glory and the restablishment of his Truth in and above them all.

Yours, as you please to use him, or make use of him, to love, LIONEL GATFORD
the true, but Sequestered Rector of Dinnington, in Suffolk.

A faithful and fair warning, humbly presented to the Knights, Gentlemen,
Clergymen, Yeomen, and other the Inhabitants of the County of Suffolk: and
may, for the greatest part of it, serve for a seasonable Caution to the whole
Kingdom.
AS at the first, the sins of this Nation were the original provoking cause
of Gods inflicting all those fore judgments upon us, under which we have these
late years groaned; and our not repenting of them, but adding to them, and
seeking other ways of ease and relief, has, instead of procuring any remedy,
increased our misery, and blasted all our means and endeavors for redress,
how probable or hopeful soever; insomuch that, whereas we Lusted Numb 11
for a Parliament, as Israel sometimes did for flesh, and slighted all Gods
other great mercies unto us, as they did even Manna it self, thinking any
condition better than our own, unless we had our Ib.
longing, and that, if we had that, all things would go well with us: which ^o
afflicted our Moses, that he, like theirs of Israel, was even weary of his
burden of governing this people alone; and was content to have others The
great counsel at York.
gathered unto him to take part of that burth^n (would God had been pleased to
have given them of his spirit also) and to assist him in the bearing thereof:
and then upon that, our lusting was condescended unto; but, like that of
Isreal's, whilst the blessing so desired was between our teeth* ere it was
chewed, by that time we had gotten a little smack or taste of a Parliament, The
wrath of the Lord was kindled against us, and Ib.
the Lord smote us with a very great Plague, the sorest that ever befell a
people; For that became our plague, which was longed for as our greatest
blessing, and that, which should have been for Psalm. 69.
our welfare, became a trap; or, to express that terrible curse in the words
of a former translation of ours, the thing that should have been for our
wealth, was unto us an occasion of falling.

So to this present, it is the continuing in our sins, and the not acknowledging
of our Rebellions against God and his Vicegerent, but the justifying of them,
and seeking other ways of peace and security, that incense and inslames Gods
indignation against us, to the continuing and multiplying of his heavy
judgments upon us, and to the rendering of all assayes and overtures, for the
composing and quieting our sad (...) and distractions, (the most destructive
judgment of all others) fruitless and ineffectuall: For we know who has said
it. He that covers his sins shall not prosper: but who so confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy: Prove. 28. (...). 13.
And the Scriptures is in no point more full and clear, then in the asserting
of that truth. That without acknowledging of sin, repenting of it, and
turning from it to the Lord, there is no mercy to be expected from the Lord in
the pardoning and forgiving of sin, and in the removing those judgments
which he inflicts for it.

Ye have had some new teachers of late times (and this County at this time
swarms with them) that have had the impudence to tell you, that Repentance is
of no use to Believers, but that it is a derogation to the merits of Christ for
any such to repent but then withal they tell you that there is no sin in such,
and so at once destroy both Law and Gospel. I shall not now spend time in
refuting them; but this I dare be bold to affirm of them, (and it is no more
then I am able to demonstrate) that they, which are of that opinion, are no
true Believers; and if the mercies or judgments of God, or both, do not make
them to repent and desert that opinion by bringing the sense of sin home to
their Consciences, or the punishment of sin home to their doors here in this
life, it is to be feared, (so far as one may judge of another) they le be made
to see and feel their own error and blasphemy, where there will be no place
or space of repentance. But set those Heretics aside. I am con^ident there is
never a Teacher or Preacher amongst you, the whol^ County through, (that is not
leav^ned with that heresy) which dares undertake to show you any other way for
the making you^ peace with God, and so for the removing of his sore judgments
already inflicted, and the averting those his more dreadful plagues further
threatened, then that of confessing and forsaking your sins, the undoubted
original cause of all judgments and plagues whatsoever. And therefore if ye
would not have iniquity to be your ruin, Repent and turn your selves from all
your Ezech. 18 30.
transgressions. And be entreated to deal clearly and freely with God,
acknowledging not only your unthankfulness for former mercies; your Pride,
Luxury, unprofitablenesse under the ordinance of God and contempt of them, and
such other sins of long con^inuance (whereof some have so often minded you on
purpose to keep other later abominations from your thoughts) but also your
Rebellion and Blood-guiltinesse, with your Sacrilege, Perjury, Blasphemy,
Lies, Robbery, Oppression, Cruelty, and whatsoever other crimes have
accompanied the same; whether ye have been actors in or contributors to those
iniquities, or whether ye have been otherwise consentors to, or complyers with
those, that have acted and continued them. Take heed of that guile in spirit
(as David experimentally called it) in thinking to hide your sins: The same
David paid dear for it: for all the while Ps. 32.
hide your sins: The same David paid dear for it: for all the while that he
kept silence, and would not acknowledge his sin, his bones waxed old through
his roaring all the day long: and Gods hand was heavy on him day and night,
etc. but no sooner did he acknowledge Ib.
it, nay, no sooner had he resolved upon the acknowledging it, but God forgave
the iniquity of it: and be assured that if you do not acknowledge your
iniquities to Gods glory, though to your own shame; God will glorify himself
in making you to acknowledge them to your greater shame and confusion. Take
then the shame to your selves, and give the glory to God; and Josh. 7.
God will take off that shame again from you, and make your taking shame upon
your selves a comfort and glory to your selves. For that is Gods usual dealing
with men: ye know it is his promise, that If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged. And that other promise to his people of old import as
much concerning 1 Cor. 10. v. 31.
our taking shame to our selv^^* (...) not be ashamed: neither be thou
confounded, for thou shall no^ (...) put to shame; for thou shall forget the
shame of thy youth, etc. and that promise in Ezech. puts it out of all
question. But if the Isa. 54. 4.
wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, etc. All his
transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him.
They do best that do avoid the committing Ezeck. 18 v. 21, 22.
any thing worthy of shame: but when any such thing is committed, the next
best, is to acknowledge it and to be ashamed of it, to the abhorring of it and
themselves for it. And where God has any love to any people, he will never
leave them, when they have committed (...) ^orious sins, till he have brought
them to an humble acknowledgement of them, and to a true loathing of themselves
for them: and that is an act of his mercy, by how Ezeck 2^ 43.
many judgments soever it be effected; as the longer that men hold off from
it, the more and the more severe judgments does God inflict, till he have
brought them to it, as is easily collected from that twentieth of Ezech. and
other scriptures. But then there is another acknowledgement and shame of sin
which God brings upon men by way of vengeance, which, though the former be
terrible enough, is yet more terrible, as having confusion always attending
it: and there is no way for the avoiding either, but a voluntary acknowledging
of sin, and taking the shame thereof to themselves before God scourge them to
it, or confound them by it. It Is a saying very often repeated in sacred writ in
the closes of Gods denun^iations of judgments, and it is to be trembled at
wheresoever it is so mentioned, Then shall they know, etc. or, And they shall
know, etc. Happy are they that know those things, before they are so made to
know them. In the first place then be forewarned of the putting off the
acknowledging your sins till God force you thereto by his judgments, least,
whiles a foolish fear of shame, fained to your selves by such an
acknowledgement, scare you from it, and a terrible shame and confusion of faces
caused by God for want of such an acknowledgement seize upon you to your
unspeakable torment.

Oh, but, will too many reply, would you have us now to acknowledge our selves
guilty of Rebellion, and of the Blood which has been shea in the prosecution
thereof, and of all those other horrid crimes that have accompanied the same.
We have long since again and again, charged those crimes upon the adverse
party, upon the King himself and all those that have taken part with him: And
if we should now take them upon our selves: how would all ^enjeer at us, and
they of the other party insult over its! Nay, what would become of us and ours,
and all that we have! Surely, therefore now it is our best course to stand upon
our own justication, and to go on as hitherto we have done, or else we are out
in a miserable condition.

Thus when the Devil and Devilish men have tempted and seduced any to commit
any foul notorious wickedness; the next thing they endeavor is to draw or
carry them on therein as far, and as deep, as possibly they can; and if the
s^ouced do but begin to consider what they have done, and how far they have
gone, and so think of breaking off, and returning from their wickedness: then
fear shame, and despair are presently represented unto them, to scare and
hurry them on, or at least to keep and ^^sten them where they are. When
Zed^kiah King of Judah had disobeyed Gods word by the Prophet Jeremiah, and
began upon Jer. 38.
after thoughts to listen to what that Prophet had advised him: presently fear
and shame were presented to his fancy, and by them was he scared off from
hearkening to the Prophets counsel. And when all the people of Judah were
admonished by the same Prophet to break off their Idolatry and their other
iniquities, and to return to the Lord, and do their duty; and had so much told
them to that purpose, that they had nothing to say for themselves; Jer. 18.
(...). 12.
then despair furnished them with this desperate answer. There is no hope, say
they; but we will ^^lk after our own devices, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart.

But to answer more particularly to each part of this objection. That many have
charged both this Rebellion and all the blood that has been spilt in the
pursuance thereof upon the King and those faithful subjects of his, that
adhered to him, is too well known; and it is pretty well known, that this way of
shifting off sin from themselves to others, is of all the many other ways,
the most impudent and detestable. I hat others persuaded them, tempted them,
incited them, scared them, or forced them to commit such and such sins, have
been frequent excuses that we read of in several facred and other stories: but
this shifting off sin wholly from themselves, when they know themselves foully
guilty, and charging it upon others, whom they known to be, in that respect,
most innocent, is never practiced but by men of brazen faces, Adamantine
foreheads, black tongues, and blacker hearts: And, if God will be a swift
witness against any, then surely against such as do not only bear false
witness against, but condemn the innocent: Mala. 35.
and if he will plead the cause of any or execute judgment for them, so as to
being them forth to the light, that they may behold Micah. 7. v. 9.
his righteousness, and others theirs; then without all peradventure he will
do it for them, that are so palpably and unjustly slandered and accused, and
have so just and clear cause of appealing to his Justice for it But why ^tay I
so long upon a recrimination, so foolish and ridiculous as well as false and
odious! I dare appeal to the Consciences of them themselves, that have so
charged it (as cauterised as they are) for the unjustnesse of the charge, If
the Rebellion and Blood guiltiness of this Nation (I join them together;
because they, that are guilty of the Rebellion, are without all further dispute
guilty of all the blood that has been shed in it) can be charged upon the King
and his loyal Subjects; why have not the other party all this while put it
upon that issue, and when they had the King (as to our unspeakable grief they
have) and the most of his loyal Subjects in their power; why did they not
legally charge them therewith, and urge the Laws, and indite them, (I mean the
Subjects, though they blush not to talk of inditing the King himself) by
those laws, and so proceed to trial against them according to the laws of the
Land, the true and only rules, whereby Rebellion and Murder is to be tried
and judged here in this Nation! Was it their mercy? Why then have they waved
that way of trying and judging those particular Persons of the Kings party,
upon whom they have exercised their power to the height of cruelty, and
proceeded against them onelyby Votes and Ordinances, or by illegal Judges and
unwarrantable Juries, and other unheard of process! Or to bring the answer yet
closer; If the Rebellion and Blood guiltiness of this Nation be to be charged
upon the King and his loyal Subjects: why do they of the other part, that
have shown so much mercy to them, despair of all security, or at least,
distrust all the security that can be given them, against the known established
Laws of this Kingdom! What need they any act of Indemnity, or Oblivion? What
need they any Pardon from the King, or any security against him or his party?
Let the King live, and the Law run in her course, might be their wish rather
then any's. But alas, their Consciences tell them, That if the King and his
party should return to their own just power and rights again, and the Laws of
this Kingdom to their due force and vigor, and they should be no more
merciful to them then they have been just to them, or then the Laws are
favorable to their courses; they and theirs would indeed, as they say, be but
in a miserable condition. But whereas they from thence resolve; That therefore
surely it is their best course to stand still upon their justification, and to
go on to the last, as hitherto they have done, That is but a deceitful as well
as an impious resolution. Impious it is, and that so hideously impious, that I
will spend no more breath in declaring the impiety of it, then by telling you,
that this is despair worse then Caines; for when he had slain his brother, and
God had cold him of the cry of his brothers blood, Genesis 4.
and what panishment he must suffer for it, he did not resolve to go on in his
shedding more bloods; but the guilt of that blood, which he had shed, did so
torment him, that he was afraid that every one that should find him, would shed
his blood: and therefore I know not with what desperate wicked resolution to
match this; unless it be with that of Judahs, (before mentioned though in
other words and from another text) when they returned this answer to the
Prophet Jeremiah. There is no hope, No, for I have loved Jer. 2. 25
strangers, and after them will I go, And I may say of them that so resolve,
as the Prophet says of those of Judah in the next words. As the theife is
ashamed when he is found, etc. so will v. 26.
they be ashamed when God shall, in his inquisition for blood and other
iniquities, find them out and bring them to shame, they, their Kings (for they
have set up many Kings for one) their Princes, Psalm. 37.
their Priests, their Prophets. And for the deceitfulness of this resolution.
Do but rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him; not fearing thy self
because of him who prosp^reth in his Ib.
way, because of the man who brings wicked devices to pass, etc. and behold
yet within a little whi^ the wicked shall not be; Yea thou shall diligently
consider his place, and it shall not be. And though the wicked still plotteth
against the just, and gnasheth upon. Ib.
him with his teeth; Yet the Lord shall laugh at him; for he sees that his day
is coming: And that sword which the wicked have drawn out to slay such as be
of upright conversation, shall enter into their own heart. But I desire to
forwarn and not to forejudge: and therefore suffer a word of expostulation
before I return you back this objection so answered as I desire it.

Why do any of you despair of your safety and security, if you should now
return to your obedience and duty? Do you di^trust the mercy of the King? The
truth is, your foul breach of Faith to him, and your high Rebellion against
him have been such, as would provoke the meekest and most merciful Prince that
ever lived, even Moses himself to excessive wrath and indignation: Yea so
far was Moses provoked by a less Rebellion then this, that he, that had so
often interceded with the Lord for that people, when the Lord was ready to
destroy them, did in the heat of that Number. 16
Rebellion pray against them; at least against the ringleaders of them. But
what was sometimes said of the Kings of Israel in general. That they were
merciful Kings; is most true of the present 1 Kings 20. v. 31
King of England in particular. He is a merciful King indeed, few Kings ever
matched him for that grace. It has been made a great objection against him,
that he is too merciful; and this to be sure. He has been so merciful all
these merciless times through, as well as formerly, that the presuming upon his
mercy above his enemies justice, has se^uced not a few, that have professed
themselves to be his friends, to join with his enemies: and they have not been
ashamed to say, that they would rather hazard their lives and all that they had
upon the hope of his mercy, then expose ought of theirs to the power of his
adversaries And if the censure of his real friends indeed, as well as his
pretending, be not extremly out of the way; King Charles his mercy has been
occasionally, by others abusing it, none of the least advantages to his Enemies
for their bringing him and his to so much misery: and yet for my part, though
it were so, I verily believe he will be no looser by it in the end, if he be
not a saver by it already: For the God of mercy will not, nor has not already,
let that mercy of his go unrewarded. And for mercifulness hereafter. Surely
the mercies of God to him in his miseries and afflictions, and the good which
those afflictions and miseries sanctified unto him, have wrought in him, will
not render him less merciful then before, but rather far more, as having
therein tasted so much of the sweet fruits of his former mercif^.

O most pious and gracious Prince, how has he oftentimes wept for grief at
the folly and madness of his Subjects in these Rebellious times; and how much
more would he now weep for joy, to see any of them acknowledge their folly and
madness, and to return to their wits and to their duties: without doubt, if
that were done, they should not need to crave or beg his Pardon. He would
prevent them by proclaiming it before they should ask it; Luke 15.
and, like the Father of the Prodigal, representing God the Father himself,
he would run to meet them, if he saw them coming; though afar off, and weep on
their necks before they could throw themselves at his feet; yea and think no
entertainment to dear for them, though some of his other Sons, that have all
this while obeyed and served him, should perchance murmr at it: Ah, my dear
Countrymen, King Charles has not left out of his prayers, that petition of
beseeching God to forgive him his trespasses, as he forgives them that
trespass against him: though too many of you have cast out that whole Prayer
out of your Closets, ^amilies and Churches; and therefore do not ye measure
his Charity by your own uncharitableness. What an injury is it to the Spirit
of Grace in another, for any to think, that because I have been so wicked as to
do another so great wrong, therefore that other must needs be so cruel and
uncharitable, as never to forgive me that wickedness? Why? Though God did leave
thee to thy self, and so thou, through want of Grace, did deal most
injuriously and wi^kedly with another, yet thou can not, without injury to
the Spirit of God, conclude, that therefore he will also leave that other so to
himself, as that he shall revenge hi^ self on thee. The King is the minister
of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. And therefore
having done that which is evil; Romans 13.
yea most abominable evil, thou have cause to be afraid, as the Apostle there
argues: But withal, as thou art there told, he is also a minister of God to
thee for thy good: and therefore, if thou would not be afraid of the power,
do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same: Cease to do
evil, and learn to do good; break off thy Rebellion, and return to thy
Allegiance, and thou shall find that the King will be to thee, not a revenger
to execute wrath upon thee for thy evil, because that thou have forsaken, and
abhorrest thy self for it; but a gracious receiver of thee to mercy, because
thou art returned to thy duty, and art resolved to persevere in that duty:
for the King knows well, that mercy as well as truth, preserves a King, and his
throne is upholden by Prove. 20. v. 28.
mercy. But suppose the King were not so eminently inclined to mercy and
forgiveness as he is. Remember what he tells you, who was a King himself. The
Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, Prove. 21 1.
as the rivers of water he turns it whithersoever he will: and therefore do
but you turn to the Lord and to your duty, and you need not fear, but the Lord
will turn the Kings heart to you, for your good. They that despair of Gods
showing them so much mercy upon their repenting of their iniquity, as to turn
the Kings heart to them, so as to remit unto them what they have deserved to
suffer temporally; how can they hope for so much greater mercy from God, as
that his own heart should be so turned within him, (as the Prophets expression
is) as to remit to them what they have Hos. 11. 8.
deserved to suffer eternally: if they despair of Gods mercy in the lesser
degree; how can they hope for his mercy in the greater! God does, it is
confessed, oftentimes chastise and afflict (and so make use of men as his
instruments for that purpose) temporally those whose sins he pardones and
forgives eternally. As Daniel, Job, etc. But then they are not such as despair
of finding mercy in a temporal deliverance, but such as hope for mercy in a
deliverance temporal, if God see it good for them, and wait in faith and
patience Gods will and pleasure in it. Gods mercy is infinitely greater then
man's; and so the cruelty of men may be feared, where the mercy of God is hoped
for, and relied on; but that fear, where it is as it should be, does not banish
the hope of deliverance from that cruelty that is most feared. David chose
rather to fall into the hand of God because his mercies are great, then into
the hand of man. That is; when David had sinned, and had his 2 Samuel 24
choice of temporal judgments for that sin offered him by God, he chose
rather to have a temporal judgment of Gods more immediate inflicting by his
own hand, such as the plague is, then a temporal judgment inflicted by the
hand of man, such as the sleeing before enemies, and being pursued by them is:
(and yet by the way when David did at any time, as he did often fall into the
hand of man, he never dispaired of deliverance from that hand; but on the
contrary patiently waited for it and confidently expected it) But David did not
choose so to fall into the hand of God, rather than the hand of man, as to
adventure to do any thing which was displeasing to God, and so to run the
hazard of his punishing him either with temporal or eternal judgments,
rather then to venture the displeasing of man, and so to suffer what he could
lay on him which is the case of too many in these days. No, David knew well
(what I beseech you all to consider) that in that sense, it is a fearful thing
to fall into hands of the living Heb. 10. v. 31.
God, infinitely more fearful then to fall into the hands of the most cruel
of men.

To descend yet lower; for men in despair descend very low, and he that would
lend them his hand to recover them, must follow them close. Let it be supposed,
(as I am confident it is yet but a supposition) that the abu^^d mercy and
^lemency of the King should be turned into the extremity of rigo^ and severity,
and being injured by thee beyond expression, he should exccute vengeance on
thee beyond moderation. It Is acknowledged, that he, that is a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil, may himself do evil, and pull Gods
wrath upon himself. By his executing wrath upon another; for he may sooe
^termixe too much of ^is own wrath with it: but if he should, thou must
willingly submit to the execution thereof, and leave the sin of his executing
it to himself to answer for, and him to God to be called to that answer: But
it is a crime to be abominated by all men, upon fear of another punishing thee,
otherwise then thou would, or perhaps then he should, for thy wickedness
already committed, to proceed on therefore in thy wickedness, and to add to
it the just desert of greater punishment, for the preventing, as thou think
that punishment which is too great; Vengeance is the Lords and he will repay
and recompense every one according to their Romans 12. Heb. 10.
deeds, if not by one revenger or executioner of his wrath, to be sure, by
another: and the suffering patiently by the hand of him, whom thou have
injured, though his hand should be heavy, may not only be a quieting to thy
conscience in giving such satisfaction to the person himself wronged, and to
the Law: but it may be also such an acceptable satisfaction to divine Justice
it self, through him that has otherwise fully satisfied it, that no f^r
satisfaction shall be required of thee for those injuries; thou having made
such satisfaction to him unto whom thou did them. And let this s^ce in answer
to the distrust of the Kings (...). I have but a few words to add concerning
the Kings Party, who are by diverse more distrusted then the King, and then I
close up this first Consideration.

How the Kings loyal and faithful Subjects, who in obedience to Gods command
and in conscience of that duty, in fidelity to the established Religion of the
Church of England, and in testimony of that fidelity, in love to their
Sovereigns supereminent Graces and virtues and in gratitude to God and him for
his exercising them in his regal and Christian government of them and this
whole Kingdom for so many years together, and (which must not be forgotten)
in the discharge of t^^ many natural and civil bonds of Allegiance and for
the performing of those many sacred and solemn vows, and oaths made to God,
for the strengthening those bonds, have adheared unto and assisted his Majesty
in the defense of the established Religion, in the preservation of his sacred
person, Honor and dignity, and in the maintenance of his just power, rights,
and prerogatives, together with their own and your just laws, liberties and
properties: How, I say, those faithful and loyal Subjects of the King for
their adhearing to and assisting of their King upon these grounds, in these
ways, and to these ends, have been reproached, slandered, plundered, hunted
up and down, imprisoned, sequestered, banished, sold as slaves and for slaves,
starved, hanged, and otherwise murdered, their wives and children, abused,
oppressed, forced to live upon the charity of others, or otherwise made weary
of their lives, are things so well known to your selves and to the world, that,
if there be any thing that makes you to doubt of the charity of the Kings
Party, it is the consciousnesse of your own Parties unchristian, unexampled,
cruel, barbarous, in-sufferable, and with any, but God and them, unpardonable
dealing with them and theirs. And therefore, if any of you should come into
their power, and they should exercise that power upon you to their utmost of
fury and vengeance; they could not deal so ill with you, as you have done with
them, except they should act over your own Tragical practices upon your
selves; and yet still they would come far short of you, because they should
do, what they so did, but by way of recompense where it is first deserved, and
they thereunto deeply provoked, whereas you did it only in pure malice without
any desert or provocation at all, more then what your own false fears and
jealousies fained and fancied. And if they should match your cruelty as far
as they were able, and reward you according to your ways and according to your
doings, which is Gods usual way of dealing with men, when no other way will do
good on them; As it would be most just with God, so the most of men would be
ready to justify them in it; and so should I, if these two cautions or
conditions were truly observed; 1. If they had Gods command for it. 2. And if
they could do it without intermixing their own revenge with it: But because
they have no assurance of the former, and may be assured, that they cannot
observe the latter (and therefore how glorious or just soever it is for God to
use whomsoever he please as the executioners of his vengeance upon others; yet
it is but unhappy and uncomfortable for any to be made such instruments and
executioners) upon these and such like reasons, I tremble to think of any such
retaliation, and I have many other reasons to assure me, that they will abhor
to practice it. For how ill soever you and your lying Prophets have voyced
them, or how deeply soever ye have reprobated and damned them, the Kings party
have to my knowledge been better instructed both from Christ and his Gospel,
and from those dispensers thereof which you for other ends forced unto them, as
also from their very sufferings, which you without cause have loaded them
withal. They have been taught to recompense to no man evil for evil, they
have been taught, that if they forgive Romans 12. 17. Mat. 6. 15. Mat. 18. 12.
not men their tresspasses, neither will their father forgive them theirs. They
have been ^aught, to forgive their brethren, not till seven times but till
seventy times seven. They have been taught that how highly soever their fellow
servants have sinned against them, yet in respect of their sinning against
their own Lord and and the^s, it is not so much as the debt or damage of an
hundred pence to ten thousand talents; and therefore as they hope to be
forgiven of their Lord their trespasses, so can they from their hearts Cap. cod.
^orgive their fellow servants and brethren their trespasses. In a word, They
have been taught to love their enemies to bless those that curse them, to do
good to those that hate them, and to pray for Mat. 5. 44.
those which de^pitefully use them and persecute them. Thus has their Master
and his Ministers taught them, whilst your Masters and their and your new
teac^ers, have corrupted and perverted several Texts of Scripture to
in-courage you in blood and cruelty; Jud. 5. 23. Ier. 48. v. 10. Exo. 32. v.
20.
As (...), Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof because the^ (...). Cursed
be he that keeps back his sword (...) your selves to day to the Lord, every
man upon (...) his brother. Raze it, Raze it even to the foundation, (...)
translation read the words, Down with it ^owne with (...) to the ground etc.
And happy shall he be that t^th and dash to thy little ones against the stones.
Neither have Is. 137.
the sufferings of the Kings party taught them any other lesson. For knowing
what a double blessing is pronounced, and a manifold reward is promised to such
sufferers as they have been. As blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; and again, Blessed
are ye Mat. cap. 5. v. 10, 11, 12.
when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my sake; Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is
your reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets, which were before
you. They would not part from their claim to that blessing, and their
interests in that reward, and so loose the honor and comfort of all their
sufferings, by seeking revenge on their revilers and persecutors, for ten
thousand times more than you or your estates could advantage them. This I know
to be the resolution of some of that party, and I have good cause to believe it
will be the practice of very many: for they could never have suffered so much
and so cheerfully, had not these and the like principles of Grace been in
them. And therefore it may well be hoped that he that has laid such a
foundation in them will perfect the building; and he that has begun Phil.
(...). 6.
so good a work in them, will perform and finish it until the day of Jesus
Christ. And for the rest of that party, whom ye most fear, it is wisdom to
fear them so much as not to exasperate them more. Yet thus far I dare
undertake for them, (were my undertaking worthy of your notice taking) That
were you in their power, as many of them have been in yours, you should find
the most profane, and rude among them, less cruel in their cruelties they
and their fellows before have found than many of your pretending Saints and holy
ones, in those, which they call their mercies but the fault is your own if you
run your selves upon any such hazard; For make your peace with God, and he
will make your enemies to be at peace with you: and return to your Sovereign,
and there is none that have hazarded their lives, Prove. 16. 7.
and lost their liberties and estates for him, their Religion, Laws liberties
and property, but would be ready and willing, upon a resettlement of all these
without any more blood and other public calamities to catch at and embrace any
reasonable propositions and kis^e the beautiful feet of such propounders. As
therefore ye have tried many other ways for procuring peace, and they have
all failed you, ^o be entreated for Christ's sake, who is the Prince of peace
and the propitiation for our sins, to make trial of this way of
acknowledging your sins and forsaking them; which never yet failed, any, and
which is so infallible, as that God himself gives that as the reason of his
giving over people, when their sins are come to their full measure and they
ripe for ruin, to blindness and heardnesse of heart, least they should be
converted and be healed; implying that if a people did turn from their Isa. 6.
10. Mat. 1. 3. 15. Act. 28. 27.
sins unto him he could not but heal them. Turn thou us O Lord and we shall
be turned. Turn thou us and we shall be healed. Let that be your daily prayer
to God. Come let us return unto the Lord. For he has wounded and he will
heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up: let that be your constant
exhortation to one another, and practice your selves what you shall so exhort
Ier. 31 Hos. 6. 1^.
others. And the Lord hear and accept you in both.

Having repented of your sins, and in particular of your Rebellion, Blood
guiltiness, and other iniquities and impieties attending them. The next thing
that you are besought to consider, is the present state and condition of
Religion here in this Kingdom. That the Church of England in its Reformed
established Religion was not only a defense and refuge, but the glory and
honor of all the Reformed Churches in Christendom cannot justly (and
therefore I hope will not) be denied by any of those Churches: if it should,
we are able to evince it out of the mouths of their own most learned and
eminent Preachers and Professors. And had not those unhappy di^^sions, breaking
out as they did, prevented it; the Christian world had in all probability, ere
this seen the happy fruits thereof in the harmonious, and of them and us much
desired conformity of other reformed Churches (especially the more Eastern) as
well in Discipline, as Doctrine, so far as conformity in Discipline could have
been conveniently observed in several National Churches. This the Tobiahs and
Sanballets of the Church of Rome, have known and maligned so long, that their
attempts against this Church and the established Religion thereof have been
more, and more industriously and eagerly prosecuted, then against any Church
whatsoever: though they have not omitted any opportunity of practicing their
complotted designs upon any of the Reformed Churches or the members thereof.
And having tried all the other ways and courses that they could invent, and
some of them such as, I hope, will never be forgotten of this Nation. Some few
years before the beginning of this Parliament, Cardinal Richeleiu, the
Politic favorite of France, and gracious son of Rome, used all his art and
skill to kindle a fire against us in Scotland: which art and skill of his
prospered too much there by the unskilfulnes and imprudence of some of our
managers of Church affairs here in England. No sooner was that fire kindled,
but Emissaries of Rome were ^ent thither to inflame it; and, the better to
effect it, some of them pretended great love and affection to a new Reformation
of that Kirk, even to a seeming disclaiming and detesting of their own. About
the same time there were not a few of those Incendiaries dispatched hither into
England, to practice upon those of this Kingdom, that were disaffected to the
established Government of this Church, or that distasted some new rites and
practices, too much favored and countenanced by some of the Governors
thereof: and so far had they within a short time crept into the favors and
Counsels of some leading men of each sort, that this Church and State began to
be much distempered; Insomuch that our most Gracious and Religious Sovereign,
next under Christ the prime defender of our Faith, and nursing Father of our
Church and Commonweal (whom they had many other ways assaulted but found
impregnable) was persuaded, for the peace and safety of both his Kingdoms, to
call a Parliament, and within a while after, for the peace and security of all
his three Kingdoms, (the third being also then inflamed) to derive unto them
greater liberty of continuance, but otherwise not of any power, then ever
Parliament had; and, as we find by sad and woeful experience, then they had
grace to make good use of. The Jesuits and Jesuited party finding this
advantage, and feeling by the Pulse of the chief of the disaffected and
discontented part of that great Assembly, how their hearts stood inclined; they
applied themselves to them in all ways and services possible: One Jesuit,
(well known to the most reverend and Religious the Primate of Ireland his
Grace) was a constant Tabler and Counselor to the Lord Brooks, an active,
furious driver on of the mad factious peoples desperate turbulanc^^s. Others
applied themselves to others, whom I forbear to name: Only one passage I must
not omit. Before those worthy members of the honorable Houses of Lords and
Commons, that held firm to their duty and allegiance, were forced from the
tions; so bold were those Romanists grown, that an honorable member of the
House of Commons was earnestly importuned by one of them, an acquaintance of
his, to recommend a Pettion to the House in behalf of the Romish party, for the
taking off all penal laws from them; which he refusing to do, and
expostulating with the Gentleman about it, as suspecting that he came to entrap
him, and to render him more distasteful to the factious party, and so more
disserviceable to his King and Country; the Gentleman replied, that he was very
much mistaken; ^^t that Petition would find^ better acceptance in the House,
then he thought for: And accordingly, it being soon after presented there by
another (who may be presumed to account it an honor to him to be known by such
a motion) viz. Mr. MARTIN, it was seconded and entertained by some of the
greatest pretenders of Reformation in that assembly, till one of courage and
esteem stood up and said, He was sorry that he had lived to see a Petition of
that nature find such favor in that place, wherein those prudent laws,
against which it petitioned, had been upon so good and just grounds, and with
so much wisdom and deliberation framed; and thereupon it was for that time
waved and laid aside. Since that how far the Jesuits and Jesuited party have
proceeded and succeeded in their prosecuting of that design of a toleration,
is sufficiently visible in the fruits thereof to every seeing eye; But because
the greater part of men will neither see nor hear, or, if they do, dare not
speak what they see or hear, how prejudicial or destructive soever it be to
Religion or ought else that good is; I shall in the cause of Religion adventure
a little further in the discovery of the designs of those professed enemies
thereof. I have been assured by a person of Honor, that the Protestants of
France, had toward the beginning of these unnatural and unchristian wars,
resolved upon a Declaration against the Parliament and Subjects of England
their taking up of Arms against their King, and had published it, had not the
forenamed Cardinal dashed it, and underhand wrought them to too much
approbation thereof; rendering by that one subtle act of his, the said
Protestants odious to their own Sovereign for approving such Antiregal,
Antimonarchicall attempts, and also advancing thereby his own design of
fomenting our destructive divisions. But to return nearer home: Who, but the
Jesuits and Jesuited Papists began that Rebellion in Ireland? And who but
their favourors here in England drove it on to that height, by making those
Rebels desperate, in selling their lands and Voting them and theirs to ruin,
past all hope of mercy; by detaining the King from going thither in Person to
quiet that Rebellion, when he so graciously offered it, and so piously
endeavored it; by diverting those fair, full, free, running streams of bounty
and liberality flowing all this Kingdom through, toward the relief of the
distressed Protestants of Ireland, into those foul, black, bloody rivers of
War and Rebellion, overflowing this whole Kingdom to the wasting and
weakening if not to the ruining and destroying of the now despised Protestants
of England: and lastly, by the withholding and delaying, all along from the
first to the last, the necessary supplies of men, moneys, arms, and other
provisions from that Kingdom, notwithstanding the Kings often and often
calling upon the Houses to be mindful thereof, and conjuring them thereto (as
appears by his many Messages and Declarations to that purpose) and
notwithstanding the loud and doleful cries of the Protestants of that Kingdom
from the greatest to the least so constantly ecchoing in their ears If the
Jesuits and Jesuited Papists of this Kingdom had not their hands deep in all
this, and too prevalent a power with those, that had the power of ordering that
business better, let any man, that knows one hand from another, judge.

But to come yet nearer, those incendiaries of Nations and perturbers of the
peace of Christendom, are fowly belyed, by one, whose brother has been one of
them these many years, and he himself is now theirs, and was then little
better. If there were not in, and about the City of London, and in, and near
the Armies, about 3 weeks or a month, before that heavy blow at Nazeby, above
sevenscore Jesuits and other Romish Priests (known the most of them to him)
which kept correspondence diverse of them and gave intelligence to them at
Westminster, and served them both in keeping off assistance from the King, from
Princes of their Religion, and in betraying the Kings counsels and the
resolutions of his Army (which they, by their instruments and favorers crowded
into those quarters, got knowledge of) to the adverse party; so that they could
draw the kings Army into what part of the kingdom they pleased, and there
fight them, or not fight them, as they saw the advantage. Insomuch that a Noble
Colonel of the Kings Party, and a man of good estate and credit, being then a
Prisoner in the Counter in Southwarke, and having there fed at his table and
preserved the author of this information, that had been a prisoner in the same
prison, but was then by his Brothers means set at liberty; was, about that
time before mentioned, advised upon those grounds and some other by the said
informer (and that in gratitude as he affirmed, knowing no other way of
acknowledging his bounty and liberality toward him) forthwith to make his
composition and peace with the Parliament, for that the King would without all
peradventure (yet the King was at that time in as high and hopeful condition
as ever he had been in from the beginning of these wars) be brought very low.
Strange prophetical counsel at that time, had not the counselour had too
strong presumption to conclude from.

And now, to speak a little upon mine own more immediate knowledge. Traveling
beyond the seas in the company of a Romish Priest, borne in England, and
another English Gentlemen of the same religion; after some warm dispute
between us. I was told by the Priest that I need not be so hot and zealous for
my religion; for so said he, we have now as good cards to show for our
Religion in England as you have for yours; for we perceive you are a Protestant
of the established Church of England; and if you, and such as you, do ever
enjoy your Religion there again, it must be by a Tolleration, and so shall we
enjoy ours, I replied, that I hoped. God would disappoint them of their hopes*
but since that, I found they had too much cause so to presume? for I was no
soonet arrived here in England, but, being constrained to attend some
Parliament men at Westminster; I heard a Gentleman (who by his habit and
discourse seemed one of credit and trust among the Romanists) soliciting
another Gentleman (whose Father had been a Parliament man, but was then dead)
for the assisting him by his friends in the promoting of a Petition for a
Toleration of their Religion: and he told him, amongst other discourse, what
progress he had made therein, both with some prime Commanders of the Army, and
with diverse members of the House of Commons; (whose names, for the present I
conceal) and that he had delivered three Petitions to that purpose into the
hands of three of the House of Commons, who had u^dertaken the recommending
them to the House, and promised him the^ best furtherance therein: so that he
did not much doubt of the success, but yet should be obliged to him, if he
would be pleased to contribute thereto* (...) party solicited replied. He
should do^ him any servic^, and the Petition desired no more, then he
apprehended to be according to the judgment of the times in point of liberty
of Conscience: when I heard this, and observed how liberty of Cons^^^nce was
every where contended for; I no longer wondered at the cooling Cards which ^h^
Priest gave me: for I p^^ceived they of his part had played their Cards so well,
that they might afford^d any of us the knowledge of such a triumph: not did I
then the it strange (which, but a few days before I admired) that so many
Jesuits and other Priests did daily flock into this Kingdom from France,
Flanders, and the Countries adjacent, and all by the way of H^lland; there
having been nine or ten such newly shipped at the Bri^^, under the same ^onvoy,
if not in the V^si^li, that Master Stric^la^d the Parliaments Agent for
H^llan^, came over in about Mic^a^lmas last; and multitud^s (...) more have
been th^^^, and in other Parts of the L^, past for England within f^w months;
when, God (...), many worthy* Ministers of the Church of England dr^ the S^as,
choose rather to endure some hardship (...) ^^rangers, then yet to adventure
the hazard of worse (...) own Country. T^^se things, I thought it my (...)
with, as I have done others already upon ^ns both in public and in private:
and, though perhaps they may be slighted by some engaged with the Sectaries,
calling themselves Protestants, or quarrelled by others, that are professed
Papists, I solemnly avouch before the Almighty God of truth, that I have not
falsified in the least particular of what I have spoken upon mine own
knowledge, nor varied, so far as my memory would serve me, from wha^ others and
they men of known honor and honesty, have informed me. I know well that it is a
foul sin to speak wickedly for God, or to talk decestfully for him, (as
Job Job 13. 7.
som^times intimated to his friends) and I abhor to be c^arged with a Romish
trick my self, whilst I endeavor to discov^ of theirs. Had diverse of this
Nation but that courage and spirit, as to speak what they know to this purpose,
and but that love and zeal to the established Protestant Religion, as to
think it worthy of their adventuring that courage and spirit which they have
in that service; you would find that all this little that I have said, is
scarce the gleanings to their harvest, or an handful to their Barnsfull, for
the clearing this discovery of the Jesuits and Jesuited Papists, having their
hands deep in all our miseries, and a desperate design upon our Religion: And
let such take heed that God do not one day require it at their hands in
vengeance, for that they did it not, when he required it of them in duty. I
know there are some in this Kingdom of the Romish Religion, that have given
ample and honorable testimonies of their Allegiance and fidelity to their
Sovereign, and of their love to their Country: for which they deserve all
Christian and civil respect and honor that can be shown them (and that makes
me so often to use that limitation of Jesuits and Jesuited, to distinguish
them from such, which, as has been often and truly said, like Sampsons Foxes
look contrary ways to our furious Separatists and other Sectaries, but join
with them in the setting this Kingdom on fire.) But it is to be feared, that if
Religion should come again to be contested for betwixt the Protestants and
Papists here in England, (which God of his mercy forbid) the most moderate and
loyal amongst the Popish party, would loose no advantage* that they could
catch or lay hold on, for the exalting of their own Religion, and the pulling
down and destroying ours: And it is certain, that since the first Reformation of
Religion in this Kingdom, they never had so great advantages given them to
that purpose. It was a frequent ^aying of an ancient and knowing Dr in
Cambridge, that had very much observed, as well as too much served the times,
in alteration of Religion (and I have heard it several times cited by a most
learned and reverend Professor of that University in his Commencement Orations)
That if ever Popery came into this Land again to have any power, it would be by
the Precisian called then the Puritan. And what an open broad way the
Precisians or Puritans properly so called have made for Popery to march in; or
(to use the Prophet Ezekiels expression) how they have opened the sides of this
Church to those enemies of that Faction to enter and repossesse her, and Ezeck.
25 v. 9.
what arms and ammunition of all sorts, they have furnished them with, and what
aid and encouragement of all kinds, they have given them, to make good their
entrance and keep their possession, is very deplorable to consider, and much
more deplorable, that it is not considered as it should.

The most learned and acute Divines and Artists are driven from the Schools and
Colleges in both Universities: The most Orthodox and conscientious Pastors and
Teachers are forced from their Pulpits and Pastoral charges: The most reverend
and renowned Bishops are cast out of their Bishoprics, and Episcopal power
and jurisdictions: and all these are robbed and deprived of their lively-hoods
and necessary subsistence, (yea, many of them of their lives) and all others
that shall succeed them, of all hopes of any honorable encouragements: And
what then may not the enemies of our Religion do, when so much is already done
to their hands toward the undoing of this lately most flourishing, but now
linguishing Church of England? Who shall dare to take up the weapons, or
venture on an encounter with the Adversary, when all our ^to^t Champions are
gone, and only Children and weaklings, with unexpert Tradesmen and Mechanics
are left to graple with Giants and experienced warriers? Take away the
encouragements, and you take away the s^ws of war: who will go to war at
their own costs; especial, when they know where good pay and good preferment
too are to be had in another service? There are too few that serve God out of
pure zeal and mere conscience. In the combat between the Flesh and the
Spirit, the Flesh ought to be mortified and kept down as much as possibly may
be: but in all incounte^s, wherein the Flesh is to join with the Spirit against
a third adversary; there it is best to let the Flesh have its necessaries; yea,
and its honest allurements and encouragements to, or else the Spirit will be
but ill assisted and served by it It has been several times attempted (and
the poor simple Country people have been put upon it, and incited to it, with
much earnestness and no little deceit) That all Tithes should also be taken
away from the Clergy, and the Ministry be provided for by way of Pension or
Benevolence: And truly were I one of the Church of Rome, or wished well to the
returning of her power and tyranny into this Nation, I would now, after the
taking away of Bishops lands and revenues, with the other dignities and
honorable maintenance of the Church, most sacrilegiously torn from the
Governors and Ministers thereof, labor and endeavor nothing more. For then
to be sure none should dare to speak ought in Pulpits, no, nor whisper ought
any where else, against any error or heresy, or against any vice or wickedness
whatsoever, that should find any favor or countenance in his Parish, or in
any of his parishioners of power and ability, for fear of being cut short in
his allowance; if not for the present, yet at the next Session of
Commissioners, who would perhaps be so wise of themselves, as to think the case
might otherwise be some of theirs; or, to be sure, that would be intimated to
them, as it has been too often suggested unto Juries in trials for Tithes: And
then doubt not, but the Popish party would be as active and subtle in stealing
in their leaven into every Parish, as any other heretics could be, and a
little more able to enforce arguments for the promoting it: for the Church of
Rome wants no policy, nor means, nor instruments to improve it. And if the
maintenance of the Protestant Clergy, were but as poor and contemptible, as
is desired by many; the Clergy it self would soon be as base and despicable,
as could be wished by any; and then, besides the peoples growing like their
Priests: (which;) constant observation has made a Proverb, it would be no
small temptation to such a Clergy, upon hopes and promise of recovering their
old ancient honorable portions and revenues, to desert that Religion, which
allows their Ministers such miserable starving pittances, and to embrace that,
which rewards theirs with such liberal, plentiful rewards. Much more might be
said to that point; but I touch it only in relation to the design of the
Popish party, who have been and still are the principal instigators to all
sacrilegious acts and resolutions in this Kingdom, and will be, without all
peradventure, the greatest gainers thereby: not that they themselves would
practice the same, when they should come into power, but because they know
there is no more ready way for them to come into power, then by such practisces
of ours which would both render the Clergy of this Kingdom contemptible to
the people, and the people not a little odious to them, as also otherwise fit
and prepare both for their working them into what they shall please. To tell
you that a prodigious rabble of damnable heresies and pernicious errors are
crept, or rather brought with full sails at midday, into this miserably
distracted Kingdom, and that multitudes are daily bred and hatched (...)
within, were but to tell you your own dreams; the true fathers and mothers of
diverse of that spurious issue. (Filthy dreamers, that defile the flesh,
despise Dominions, and speak evil of dignities) But who have been the Jude v.
9.
principal factors for the bringing in, and the chief brokers for the venting
of those from other parts, as also the chief fom^^ters of these started up here
at home? why, who but the Jesuits and their accomplices? who have for that
purpose transformed themselves like their great master into all shapes, and
become Anabaptists to the Anabaptists, Antinomians to the Antinomians,
Familists to the Familists, and all things to all men, that they might deceive
the more. And no more probable way of making pro^elytes to themselves then
this. For the most of that numberless number, that have been poisoned, or
tainted with those heresies and errors, are either such, as have no principles
of Religion at all in them, but are (like those Saint Jude speaks of) clouds
without water carried about with winds, even every Jude. (...). 12.
wind of doctrine by the sleight of man, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive: and such are as fit to be carried about by the wind of
Popery, as of any other doctrine; Ephesians. 4. 14.
or else they are such, as have in them already good store of Popish principles
properly so called; how odious so ever for the present the name of popish or
papists be, or seems to be unto them: and of these there are a vast number, as
will easily appear to any understanding man, that shall but compare the
frequent tenets or positions held and asserted in these times, with the known
principles of Popery, truly so called. The Gangraena (a book written by Mr
Edwards, and so entitled) will furnish any man with enough, and yet he leaves
out some Principle ones: as THAT IT IS LAWFUL FOR THE SUBJECTS TO TAKE UP ARMS
AGAINST THEIR SOVEREIGN; That Ecclesiastical Courts are independent on the
Civil; That officious lying and equivocating is justifiable, with many others.
Now how easy will it be for the Serpent, when he has thus gotten in a part of
his body, to wind in all the rest? and how hard will it be, when such poison
and infection has diffused it self through so many parts of the body, to
purge it out again? Men are too prone of themselves, through their pride,
self-love, and p^rversenesse, to defend their own errors to their utmost; and
will oftentimes deny many known truths, rather then be brought to acknowledge
one received error; yea, will sooner part from those remains of truth, that
are in them, then part from some errors taken up by them: what then will such
men do, when they shall be backed and encouraged therein by so powerful and
subtle a party, as the Romish is? Besides, if the Popish party should gain no
more proselytes, (as who sees not, that they gain more in one month, then
they did formerly in seven years; and have gained more in these six or seven
years last past, then they had done in all those other years past since the
Reformation) yet if they can, by their broaching of, and by their inviting and
inciting to heresies and errors, bring but our Church to confusion; they hope
to triumph and insult upon our ruins, like those Foxes upon the defolate
mountain of Zion: And, if any Church be raised out of the rubbish and Lam. 5^
18.
ruins of ours, or any Religion be generated out of the corruption of ours,
they presume, and not without cause, that it will be theirs. And that they
expect some such day, may be many ways collected; and particularly, from their
sparing engagements for the King in all his distress, either by their Persons
or Estates (excepting only some few loyal and noble spirited ones, that were
(to their honor be it acknowledged) as liberal of their Bloods and Estates as
Subjects could be) as also from their present for bearing to appear for him. To
all which, I must confess, they have been well encouraged, for the most of
them have enjoyed more of their Estates, and made easier Compositions for them,
then the most known Orthodox Protestants have. And here by the way, I cannot
but recall to your memories, some letters sent down to some of you from some
members chosen for this County, in answer to some of yours, concerning the
receiving of contribution from Popish R^cusants, upon the Propositions for
Horses, Money, or Plate, at the beginning of these wars. In which letters you
were told, as some of you have confessed That it was the sense of the House,
that contribution should be received from Popish Recusants; provided, that it
were such as might witness their affection to the cause, and not argue only a
desire to save themselves, or to that effect. And whether they did then
con^ribu^e with you or ^ot to the raising of that cur^ed war; to be sure
(except, as I said but now, some few of them) they have, from that time to
this, contributed very little to the King for his d^f^^ce against it: And I
beseech God, that that war ^econded by this may contribute no more to the
terrible designs of some of that party: though there need no other
contribution to the (...) shrone of Antichrist, then the sending of a people
(...) that they should believe a L^e: 2 These. 2.
and there needs (...) for the demonstrating how foully* and grossly we (...)
been so d^luded, and are contented if not desirous still so to be. I remember
well, and shall do whilst I have breath, what I heard fall from the mouth of
that Apostolical, (I wish I might not in that particular say,) that
Prophetical Preacher, the matchless Primate of Ireland, (matchless for the
Graces of God in him, as well as for that Grace of Primacy conferred on him) in
one of his constant Lords day Sermons in Oxford. I fear not, said he, those
Feltmakers, Weavers, Cobblers, etc. that are risen up amongst us, sowers of
Sedition and broachers of Heresies and Errors: but those with whom I fear, we
shall have the strongest struggling, are those Giant-like Jesuits, trained up
men of war from their youth: these, these are they whom we have all cause to
fear; as those, with whom we shall have the last and sorest pull for our
Religion. God grant it prove not so: But if we go on in the rending and tearing
out one another thoats; and the Heretics and Schismatics go on in their
rending and tearing the very bowels of our Church, who can expect less? Who is
there that has read or heard of Christ's way in planting and propagating of his
Gospel of truth, and in acquainting men with the mysteries of Godliness; and
of the way of Antichrist in planting and propagating his Doctrine of lies, and
in possessing men with the mystery of iniquity; that can expect from Se^s of
Heresy and Schism, sown by the enemy in the furrows of men's hearts, filled
with malice and all uncharitableness, and watered with the bloods of so many
thousands of their fellow Christians, any other Harvest then of Popery and
Antichristianisme?

Be ye then supplicated, (O all ye that have any love unto, or care of, the
preservation of the true Protestant Religion) to take the sad deplorable
condition thereof into your most serious consideration, and speedily to apply
your selves with all your art and skill, and with all your might and power, to
the resisting and countermining of its openly professed and secretly conspiring
enemies, and to the ayding and assisting of its known, and by these late
persecutions and temptations thoroughly tried friends. Think soberly and sadly
with your selves (God's cleansing your thoughts from all selfe-favour and
brother-prejudice being first implored) whether they, to whom in the beginnings
of these miseries you first adhered, and who then made you so many fair and
large promises, and took some solemn Protestations, Vows and Oaths in the
presence of God, to Defend and Maintain the true Established PROTESTANT
RELIGION, have made good those promises, Protestations, Vows and Oaths, yea or
no.

If they have, what means the lowing and bellowing of such herds of notorious
abominable Heretics of all sorts, and the bleating and bawling of such flocks
of furious Schismatics of all cuts in every corner of this Kingdom? Yea, what
mean those favorable exeuses, and defensive Apologies published to the
Kingdom in one of the late Declarations in answer to the Scots, that
complained thereof? What means also their suppressing and silencing of all, or
the most of the known, religious, Orthodox, Protestant Preachers throughout the
Kingdom, sequestering their livings, and clapping them up into Prisons, and
then setting up Antinomian, Anabaptisticall, Socinian, Jesuiticall, and other
notoriously heretical Teachers and lying Prophets in their rooms? What means
the blasting of the established Doctrine of the Church of England, as being
corrupt and erroneous, such as needs Reformation? What means the blaspheming
the Lords Prayer, and Apostles Creed commonly so called, and rejecting them
from being publicly used in any Congregations? And what means the casting
out and condemning the whole Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments, which had so often and so long been found and made use of, as one
of our strongest out-workes and fortifications against Popery and other
Heresies, as well as an incomparable and unparallelled rule and form of
public Worship and Devotion? In a word, what means the entertaining of
Petitions for the Toleration of Popery, forbearing only the granting them their
requests, till the people be a little better prepared by that Doctrine of
Liberty of Conscience? Bethink your selves also, whether they, to whom ye now
give up your selves to serve with your lives and estates, and join with in all
their rebellions and bloody enterprises, have not sufficiently declared their
disaffection unto, yea and their hatred and detestation of the true Protestant
Religion. What mean else their retaining only such Chaplains amongst them, as
hold far more principles of the Popish Religion then Protestant, and have
expressly renounced the established Protestant Religion of the Church of
England? Or why do they, like those Rebels against the house of David, make
to themseves both high places to worship in, and Priests of the lowest of the
people, to minister unto them? And why do they proclaim the liberty of being
of any Religion, or of no Religion at all, rather then of the established
Religion of our Church? If there be any so stupid as to think that the
leading-men either at Westminster, or in the Army, or their active Adherents;
are at the present men of other affections and resolutions, more then what the
present oppositions and their want of power to withstand them, and to crush the
opposers to pieces, do constrain them to dissemble; I shall admire their
stupidity, and lament their weakness, unless they can produce some better
evidence of their retracting their former errors, of their repenting of their
former iniquities, and of their returning to their God, and to their duties,
then their own bare words, so often broken and contradicted by their actions.
And yet which of you can show so much as the Armies words for any good intended
by them either to this Church or Commonwealth, or so much as to you of this
County, that have hazarded your honors, estates, lives and fortunes?

And for the promise of those at Westminster, call but to mind the success of
that Petition of the Ministers of this County and of Essex, presented to both
Houses in these doleful terms. That your solemn League and Covenant, your
great and glorious victories, the expectation of the Reformed Churches beyond
the Seas, the longing desires of our Brethren of Scotland, the Humble Petitions
of the Rever end Assembly and the great City of the Kingdom, the pressing
miseries of the Orthodox and well affected Ministers and people in the Country,
(here is a Letanie of conjurations indeed, enough to conjure any that would
come within compass of any figure) cry aloud to your Honors for the
settlement of Church Government according to the word. Then follows. For the
want of this it is Right Honorable, that the name of the most high God is
blasphemed, his precious Truths corrupted, his Word despised, his Ministers
discouraged, his Ordinances vilified. Hence it is that Schism, Heresy,
Ignorance, Profaneness, and Atheism flow in upon us, Seducers multiply, grow
daring and insolent, pernicious books poison many souls, Piety and Learning
decay apace, very many Congregations lie wast without Pastors, the Sacrament
of Baptism by many neglected, and by many reiterated, the Lords Supper
generally disused, or exceedingly profaned, confusion and ruin threatening us
in all our quarters.

In all Humility therefore, etc. we out of conscience and in tender regard to
the glory of God and the salvation of our people, beseech your Honors, that a
form of Church Government, according to the Word of God and the example of the
best formed Churches, may with all possible speed be perfected and confirmed by
your civil sanction, that Schismatics, Heretics, Seducing Teachers, and
soule-subverting books be effectually suppressed, etc.



And what was their answer? The Lords they answered like Lords, professing much
joy at the zeal and care of the Ministers of those Counties for the preventing
the further increase of Heresy, and Profaneness, etc. They desire them to
continue in their endeavors therein, and say they will not be wanting to give
them al encouragement, etc. they assure them that they will improve their power
for suppressing of Error, Heresy, seducing Teachers, and soul-subverting
books, and likewise for the settling of Church Government according to the Word
of God, etc. Here was a Lordly answer, but that they had not consulted the
House of Commons; for they return another, and indeed their common answer, viz.
That the most of the particular desires of their Petition were then under
consideration, and they hope will be brought to a settlement speedily, etc. O
the miraculous care and diligence of that House! There was scarce ever any
Petition, for redress or relief in any things presented unto them, but they
were just then in Consideration of them, and hoped that they would be speedily
ordered as they desired, only through some intervening obstructions they could
not do as they would. But how came it to pass that the Commons had most of
those particulars under their consideration, and had proceeded so far in them
as to hope for a speedy settlement therein, and yet the Lords knew of no such
thing, at least forgot it quite in their answer? Well but let that pass: How
much of all these fair promises has been performed either by the one House or
the other from that time to this? Why so nothing but the just contrary, that
every abomination complained of in that Petition is increased to that height,
and has received that countenance from some of the Petitioned (as well as some
of the Petitioners) that though each of them deserve a particular sad complaint
(in a sharp Petition) yet it is thought but vain for any to petition or complain
to them of them all. And do but remember what success all other Petitions
since that from other Counties, either for Religion, or King, or Laws, or
ought else that good is, have found at their hands, and hope for relief or
redress from them if you can.

Examine thoroughly in the last place, whether those men both of the Clergy and
Laity, which have been since these unhappie divisions, reviled, slandered and
persecuted under the names of Popish and Popishly-affected persons, have not in
former times been to their power very many of them, as zealous propugners of
the Protestant Religion, and as earnest opposers of Popery and Superstition,
and whatsoever seemed to incline that way, as any men whatsoever, yea above
any of those whom ye now most adore: as also, whether they have not, all these
sad times through, to the eternal honor of their Religion, as well as of
themselves, both in their own and in other Nations (as many of them of note
as have been forced abroad) held firm to their first faith, and to each
principle thereof, notwithstanding all temptations of poverty and want
attending that their constancy, and all allurements of large supplies and
honorable employment and preferment, if they would desert or dissemble it;
whiles they, whom ye have cried up, magnified and idolized as the great Pillars
and supporters of the Protestant Religion, have both in former times failed
like staves of reed, and falsified like broken bows, and now in these times
have shuffled and shifted not only from post to pillar, but from seeming to be
pillars in one profession, to seeming and being any thing, that might serve
the times in another, even to their own everlasting shame, and to the reproach
of that Religion which they have pretended.

Put these and all those other particulars mentioned in this second
consideration together, and then judge whether it be not high time for all
those that are true Protestants indeed (according to that distinctive name so
long used) to look to their Religion, and to themselves, least otherwise they
be suddenly cheated of it, or at least of the happy and long enjoyed freedom
of professing and exercising it, and that by those that pretended and so seemed
for a while, to be most devoted to it, and least Popery so much objected, and
so falsely charged upon those that least deserved it, be within a while obtruded
on them by those who have suggested those objections and forged those
accusations, as the stales and cries whereby to draw men within compass of
their nets and snares, there being no such ready way to catch and ensnare any
creatures, as by imitating their cries and calls, and by setting some of their
own kind, or somethings very like them for stales. You cannot but remember
who it was (for his blood is yet fresh in some of your skirts) that told you
when he was on the Scaffold, that it was part of his Prayer, that (...). 2. 34.
the tumultuous people of this Nation might not be like those Pharisees and
their followers, who pretending a fear of the Romans coming and taking away
their place and Nation, when John 11. 4^
there was no such cause, only they made use of that suggestion to further
their mischievous design of murdering the innocent, had at last the Romans
brought upon them indeed, and were utterly ruined by them. The factious
tumultuous people of this Nation have in all other things the most resembled
the Pharisees, that ever did any people. God of his mercy grant, that they do
not also resemble them in this.

3. Next to the consideration of the dangerous and deplorable condition of
Religion here in this Kingdom, be pleased (as many of you as have any spark of
Religion in you) timely to consider the state and condition of your King. I
forbear the assaying any description of his condition, because it is so well
known, and so far beyond the being comprehensible in a description by the best
of Artists: as I likewise abstain from all Epithetes, or Periphrases to set it
out by, or to set men's passions on work to condole it, the condition of our
King being above all sympathy of passion, even of his most loving and
compassionate Subjects, as well as expression of language of the most fluent
and passionate of Orators. I have heard it objected against a reverend and
dear brother-sufferer in these times, (though without any just cause alleged)
that he ascends too high when he compares so many of our Kings sufferings with
some of our Saviors, which I am assured he did, neither with the least intent
of flattering his Majesty, (then in no condition to be flattered) nor without
all due fear of approaching near the verge of Blasphemy, then, and ever so
much abhorred by him, but on the other side, with all due honor to our blessed
Saviors sufferings, and with no small comfort to the King and to all that
suffered with them, that his sufferings were and are so conformable to them,
and he himself therein to his and our Saviors image. And although I slight
the objection, yet Phil. 3. 10. Romans 8. ^9.
I shall avoid the occasion of having any such thrown in my way: and because I
may not without some scandal taken, make use of any such comparison, I shall
not compare them at all with any other sufferings, there being none other that
ever I have read or heard of, that do in all respects match them. Take them
therefore in their bare narration, thus.

Charles King of Great Britain, the first of that name, the only surviving Son
and the immediate successor to his royal Father King James, to whom this
whole Kingdom by their Representatives in Parliament, after a large
commemoration of the inestimable and unspeakable benefits (as they truly called
1. Jacob. 1.
them) powered upon this Nation by his becoming our King, and after great and
high expressions of joy, and rejoying at the same, not forgetting their thanks
to Almighty God for that blessing, as also after a modest repetition of that
their Sovereigns personal gifts and graces, and the assured fruits and
effects thereof, which they had tasted in that little time of his Government,
together with an humble and hearty profession of constant faith, obedience, and
loyalty to his Majesty, and to his Royal Progeny, made this acknowledgement
and promise in these very words. We therefore your most humble and loyal
Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, do from the bottom of our hearts yield to the divine
Majesty all humble thanks and praises, not only for the said unspeakable and
inestimable benefits and blessings beforementioned, but also that he has
further enriched your Highness with a most Royal Progeny of most rare and
excellent gifts and forwardness; and in his goodness is like to increase the
happy number of them. And in most humble and lowly manner, do beseech your most
excellent Majesty, that (as a memorial to all posterities, amongst the Records
of your high Court of Parliament for ever to endure, of our Loyalty, obedience,
and hearty and humble affection) it may be published and declared in this high
Court of Parliament, and enacted by authority of the same, that we (being
bounden thereunto both by the Laws of God and man) do recognize and
acknowledge (and thereby express our unspeakable joys) that immediately upon
the dissolution and decease of ELIZABETH late Queen of England, the Imperial
Crown of the Realm of England, and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and
Rights belonging to the same, did by inherent birthright, and lawful and
undoubted succession, descend and come to your most excellent Majesty, as being
lineally, justly and lawfully, next and sole Heir of the Blood Royal of this
Realm, as is aforesaid: And that by the goodness of Almighty God, and lawful
Right of Descent, under one Imperial Crown, your Majesty is of the Realms and
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, the most potent and mighty
King; and by Gods goodness, more able to protect and govern us your loving
Subjects in all peace and plenty, then any of your noble Progenitors. And
thereunto we most humbly and faithfully submit and oblige our selves, our
Heirs and Posterities for ever, until the last drop of our bloods be spent:
And do beseech your Majesty to accept the same, as the first fruits in this
high Court of Parliament, of our loyalty and faith to your Majesty, and your
Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever.



O the shameless degeneration and falsification of these times!

CHARLES, to whom his Subjects, each one for himself, and in particular every
Member of the House of Commons, when he was admitted a Member of that House,
solemnly swear, That he did testify and declare in his conscience, that he the
Kings Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other
his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or Causes, as Temporal, etc. And that he would bear
Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful
Successors, and to his power assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings Highness His
Heirs and Successors. etc. as follows in the Oath of Supremacy, as also
again in the Oath of Allegiance, That he would bear Faith and true Allegiance
to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them would defend, to
the uttermost of his power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever,
which should be made against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by
reason or color of any sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or
granted by the Pope, etc. or otherwise, and would do his best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and traitorous conspiracies, which he should know or hear of to be
against him, or any of them.



Oh the damnable perjury of these times!

CHARLES, whose Person, Honor, and Estate the same Members of the House of
Commons did, on May 3. 1641. in the pr^sence of Almighty God promise, vow, and
protest to maintain and defend, as far as lawfully they might, with their
Lives, Power, and Estates, according to their allegiance; and that they would
according to their Power, and as far as lawfully they might, oppose, and by all
good ways and means indeavonr to bring to condign punishment all such, as
should either by force, practice, counsel, plots, conspirao^^s or otherwise,
do any thing to the contrary, etc. Which Protestation was afterward
recommended by the Vote of the House July 30. 1641. to be taken by every
person well affected in Religion, and to the good of the Commonwealth, and was
accordingly taken by the most of the Kingdom.

Oh the multiplied perjurie and the sacrilegious breaking of Vows, Promises
and Protestations perperated in these times!

CHARLES whose Supremacy and power over all Persons and in all causes within
his Dominions, the Subjects of this Kingdom have so many years acknowledged
unto God in their prayers, in their Public Liturgy, and in their prayers
before their Sermons; and for whom they have pretended to beg so many mercies
and blessings, and to return to God such hearty and solemn thanks and praise.

Oh the abominable juggling with God, and mocking of him, and lying to him,
discovered in these times.

CHARLES the Defender of our Faith, the Protector and Patron of our Religion,
the Nursing father of our Church and Commonweal, the light of our eyes, the
breath of our Nostrills; La^ 4. 20.
of whom we said (as the people of Judah did of Josiah) under his shadow we
shall live; yea of whom we must confess, that we did live under his shadow for
many years together (and might have done to this instant, had we not run from
the Olive tree to a Judges 9.
Bramble Bush) in that peace and tranquillity, in that honor and renown, in
that abundance of wealth and plenty of all things that could render us happy,
save grace to know it and be thankful to God and him for it, that never any
people enjoyed greater, if any so great.

Oh the sordid ingratitude of these times!

CHARLES, not the RELIGIOUS only, or the JUST, or the MERCIFUL, or the
CHARITABLE, or the VALIANT, or the WISE, or the TEMPERATE, or the CHASTE, or the
COURTEOUS, or the LOVING, or the MEEK, or the HUMBLE, but all these, and a
compendium of all other graces and virtues, and they in such supereminency, as
that it has been thought an eternal honor to other Princes to deserve the
title of but one such to adorn their other glories, and perpetuate their
memories.

O the prodigious wickedness and impiety of these times!

This very CHARLES (Be astonished O ye Heavens and stand amazed all ye Nations
of the earth) This very KING CHARLES, by his own Subjects, by his own
Servants, by his own professed Friends, by his own great Counsel called by his
Writ to advise with him, and authorized by his power alone to sit in Parliament
with him, has been driven from his great Council, forced to fly from one
part of his Kingdom to another, hunted like a Partridge on the mountains,
pursued with Armies, fought with in sundry battles, struck at and shot at
with all the force and malice, that hands and hearts strenthened and encouraged
with rage and fury, and completely furnished with all the bloody instruments
of War, could possibly lay on, betrayed, sold, hurried from Prison to Prison,
separated from his dearest Consort and Children, ^cked, scorned, contemned,
railed on, libelled in Pamphlets, H^es and Cries, Votes, Declarations, Sermons,
Prayers, and robbed of all his revenues, plate, jewels and regal ornaments,
deprived of very necessaries, both of food and raiment, (Gush out O tears, or
break O heart, for I am not able to go on till my head or heart has given one
the other some ease:) This very King Charles has been at the last, after all
these and many other barbarous cruelties practiced on him, thrust into close
Prison, denied the comfort of any Chaplain, the attendance of any other
servant, and the access of any faithful Subject, treated worse then any
villain or murderer, assayed by villains to be murdered, and to encourage
them thereunto, Votes have been passed in both Houses for no further addresses
to be made to him, and no message to be received from him but he adjudged unfit
to govern. And why I beseech you? why this King Charles will not break his
oath solemnly taken at his Coronation, he will not consent to Sacrilege; he
will not yield unto a toleration of Popery and of all other Heresies and
Schisms, under the title of Liberty of Conscience; he will not part from all
his power of punishing those that do wickedly, and of protecting those that do
righteously: upon that pretense of settling the Militia in safe hands; he will
not suffer an Army of 50. or 60. thousand under that name Militia to be kept
and quartered in this Kingdom for the oppressing of himself, his Posterity,
and his Subjects; he will not grant Liberty to those Houses to sit where they
please, who have already so ill requited his former grant of sitting as long
as they please, least they and their Army should keep house together, and when
the City will no longer endure them, the Country be forced to bear them or
break under them; he will not endure compeeres and copartners with himself in
his Royal Throne, Rights and Prerogatives, under the name of a standing
Committee or States Commissioners, he will not deliver up his Loyal Subjects
and faithful friends and servants to the merciless cruelties of his and their
implacable enemies: and in a word he will not betray that trust that God has
committed to him, and that his Subjects repose in him. These must be confessed
when men's consciences are awakened, to be the principal causes so far as
concerns the provoking of men, why this so supereminently Gracious King has
and does yet suffer such inexpressibly grievous persecutions. And amongst all
these causes, his not yiedling to a toleration of Popery and other Heresies
and Shisms, is none of the least provoking, as may well be thought, if the
reflecting upon the principal contrivers and continuers of his Majesty's and
this Kingdoms miseries has that inpression in our thoughts that it ought to
have: for what else can it be that should render so religious and virtuous a
Prince so distastefull and hateful, not only to all Heretics and Shismaticks
here at home which every one knows; but also to all or the most Jesuits and
Priests beyond the Seas, which is sufficiently known to those men of Honor and
worth that have lived among them; there being no man more distasted and hated
of those of that stamp, then the persecuted King of England. And if those
Kingki^lers can but prevail with their fellow Jesuits the furious Sectaries
of these times (as they have thoroughly prepared them for it) to take away his
precious life, to be sure it shall be suddenly done, for no man lies long under
their hatred, that they can possibly remove out of the way. And what a
justification would this be to all their assassinations? what a satisfaction to
their desires? what a stain and wound to the Protestant Religion, and what an
advantageous service to the Romish? and what vengeance of vengeances must it
needs pull upon this whole Nation, that have had so often and so loud warnings
of it, and do not (as by several oaths and many other bonds they are obliged)
hazard their own lives to prevent it, but still contribute toward it by
assisting those that contrive and complot it. It is recorded of Josiah, one of
the best Kings of Judah, 2 Chronicles. chap. 35. Lam. 4. 20.
that being taken in the pits of the Egyptians, (as Jeremies phrase is) and
slain by them, both the Prophet Jeremiah lamented for him, and all Judah, even
the singing men and the singing women spoke of him in their lamentations for a
long time after his death, and they made them an Ordinance in Israel (it seems
the remains of Israel joined with Judah in that mourning) for the lamenting of
him: And this was such a great mourning, that the Spirit of God speaks of the
greatness of it many years after. But should our Josiah (which the Lord of
Lords, and King ^b. 12. 11
of Kings of his mercy forbid) be slain by those Egyptians that have him now
in their pits, not only our Jeremiahs, our great Prophets, but all the
Prophets and Prophets Sons throughout this Nation, (the lying Apostatizing
Prophets only excepted, that have deserted their Religion upon that destructive
alteration suggested) yea, and all the men, women, and children of these three
Kingdoms that wish well to the Protestant Religion (...) good of these
Kingdoms, would excessively lament it unto all posterities, though we have too
much cause to believe that we should never obtain an Ordinance for it from
those Ordinance-makers that now bear rule: beware then in time, and that time
is very short.

You have had such trial of King Charles his fidelity and firmness to the
Protestant Religion, as never Prince gave the like; and I hope, never Prince
either in this or any other Nation shall be put to the like; for he has had as
great and as strong temptations, as prosperity and adversity in the height and
depth of both could court or torment with, even such as would have made a
Luther, or a Calvin, a Cranmer, or a Ridley, or any other of the most renowned
confessors, or Martyrs of the Reformed Religion, either to have sunk or shrunk
under them; or else would have rendered them far more glorious then their
confessions or sufferings did or could render them, though they want for no
access of Glory on Earth or reward in Heaven. Beware then I say in time, for
if King CHARLES should come to resist unto blood, as he has already often
done to the extremity of hazard of it, and that Royal Religious blood of his
should be shed by you, that profess your selves to be of the same Religion
with him, (if of any at all) either by your contributing money, horse, arms,
personal assistance, or ought else, to those that thirst and hunt after his
blood, and to the resisting of those that seek with the expense of their own to
save it, or else by their not contributing what is in your power, to the
hazard of your own lives for the preservation of his still in such known
hazard; (for they that preserve not blood from being shed, when it is in their
power to preserve it, are undoubtedly guilty of shedding it:) Besides the deep
everlasting stain that you would thereby bring upon the Protestant Religion,
such a guilt and horror would withal seize upon your souls when God should
come to set your sins in order before your eyes (as Psalm. 50. 21
doubtless he will sooner or later) that if ye did not like some Murderers
believe that whatsoever ye looked on, ye behold King CHARLES his bseeding sides,
and whatsoever ye eat or drunk, ye tasted King CHARLES his Blood; yet would ye
wish ten thousand times over, that you had lost every drop of your own bloods,
and of the bloods of those that are most yours, that ye had but done your duty
in time for the preserving of his. Of all blood-guiltinesse take heed of being
guilty of the blood of a King, for as he that is guilty of any man's blood,
is in that guilty of more bloods then the blood of one, (and therefore the
Scripture, speaking of the shedding of blood, does commonly, if not constantly
use a word that signifies bloods in the plural number) so they which are
guilty of the blood of a King, are in that guilty of the bloods of a whole
Kingdom, every Subject losing blood in the loss of his Sovereign. Yea what if
I should say that they which are guilty of the blood of their King, are to be
reputed as guilty of doing their utmost to shed the blood of God (if I may so
speak after the manner of men) or of Christ himself? I should not need to be
put to prove it, if what is most true be but confessed; namely, that Kings are
Gods immediate vicegerents, and the most representative image of his Majesty,
and therefore called Gods: which may be one reason if not the main one, why the
shedding of the bloods of the most Psalm. 82. 6.
wicked of Kings, by any of their own Subjects, has been always so publicly
and severely avenged, as in several stories is recorded. But above all abhor
the thought of being guilty of King CHARLES his blood, least in it you prove
not only guilty of what is already told you, but also of more Protestants
bloods then have yet been shed since the Reformation, as well as of the best
that ever ran in any veins. And to you my dear Countriemen I add this one
short caution more. Take you heed, least as your Ancestors, the religious
Protestants of this County, are highly honored in the Acts and Monuments of
our Church and in the Annals of our Commonweal for the discharging their
duty in that height of equity and fidelity, as to be the prime aiders and
assisters of Soveraigntie in the settling and establishing the last, and (for
persecuting the professors of the Gospel) the worst Popish Prince that ever
swaied the Scepter of this Kingdom, so ye your selves be eternally stigmatized
by all records of Church and State, for deserting your duty and becoming the
abetters and maintainers of Rebels and Traitors in the deposing and murdering
(for that is known to be their design) of the last, (for so it is resolved if
they can compass their resolutions) and the best Protestant Prince, that ever
yet swayed this or any other Scepter whatsoever. Consider what I say, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things. And so I pass from the King to your
fellow Subjects and your selves, and with the consideration of the several and
joint present State and condition of both, I shall conclude this faithful and
fair warning.

As for your Fellow Subjects, I shall dispose them (for I abhor the word
divide) into two sorts: Those in general throughout this Kingdom, and those
in particular against whom ye now bear Arms. As for your fellow Subjects taken
in the Generality throughout this Kingdom; if you do not know their miserable
deplorable state and condition, as it is confessed, you of this County have had
the least experimental knowledge of the misery of this Kingdom of any County
within it, though you have contributed as much toward it as any, be pleased at
your leisure to read but those sad and lamentable descriptions of the most
distressed, and most to be bewailed conditions of other people and Nations, as
they are for our warning (if we had the grace to have taken it) here and there
drawn ready to our hands by the finger of God in holy records; and then lay
them together, and therein you may behold your poor fellow subjects distresses
and miseries, already felt and further threatened, as lively represented, as if
they had been the prototypes, and these the ectypes or expresses, they the
first draughts and these the copies, or if you win, they (...) after which our
cursed schoolmasters have taught the inslaved subjects of this Kingdom to
write, and that in their own blood; I will only point ye to some few, for your
better direction in examining the rest which are very numerous. Isaiah Chap. 3.
from ver. 1. to ver, 10. and from ver. 12. to ver. 16. Chap. 9. from ver, 13.
to the end. Chap. 19. ver. 2. 3. Chap. 24. ver. 1. 2. 3. Chap. 34. ver. 2. 3.
5. 6. Chap. 59. from ver. 2. to ver. 16. Jerem. 4. ver. 20. 21. 22. Chap. 4.
from ver. 1. to ver. 18. and from v. 26. to the end. Chap. 6. from ver. 7. to
ver 16. Ezekiel. Chap. 22. from ver. 4. to ver. 14. and from ver. 18. to ver. 23.
and from ver. 25. to the end. Michah Chap. 2. from ver. 1. to ver. 12. and
Chap. 3. throughout. I have directed you to such places as do diverse of them,
record the sins as well as the punishments of such and such people, because
they are the sorest punishments, where any people are delivered up to commit
such sins, and such sins are the assured forerunners of the most
destructive miseries, as well as the causes of them. And whereas I have cited
but here and there (...) portion of Scripture, you can scarce turn amiss any
w^ where judgments are mentioned as inflicted or threatened (...) what is so
mentioned, is either in part or in the whole (...) fulfilled upon this Nation,
or the fullfilling thereof (...) a little time, may be now justly feared, there
being so little sign of repentance (the only means to prevent it) to be
found amongst us.

And what County of this Kingdom has cast in more to the filling up the
measure, either of this Nations iniquities or their other miseries, then you of
this? And do ye think that ye shall go unpunished? No, I pray God that you be
not made to drink the very dregs of the cup of Gods fury and vengainee, and to
wring or suck them out as Isaiahs expression is: or as Ezekied Isa. 51. 17.
Ezech. 23.
expresses it, that thy sisters cup, (the cup of which the other parts of this
Kingdom have already drunk, and are now a drinking) be not given into thy
hand, and thou made to drink deep and large, till thou be laughed to scorn and
had in dirision, till thou be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup
of astonishment and desolation. Your late madness and sottishness in
imbroyling your selves in a new War, and in imbruing your hands in your
Brethrens blood, when you might have avoided it, is a terrible simptome of such
drunkenness. And this brings me without any Jerem. 25. 15, 16.
interruption from the Consideration of the state and condition of your
fellow subjects in General, to the consideration of those your fellow subjects
in particular against whom ye now bear arms.

For Christ's sake and your own, consider well who they are, against whom ye
are now risen with so much and so strange fury and violence. Are they not such,
as besides their being created after the Image of their Creator and yours, (an
Argument of power sufficient to deter any that bear the same Image, from
attempting ought against the blood of such, especially if that one terrible
sentence were but thought on. AND SURELY THE BLOOD OF YOUR LIVES WILL I
REQUIRE: Genesis 9. 5, 6.
AT THE HAND OF EVERY BEAST WILL I REQUIRE IT, AND AT THE HAND OF MAN, AT THE
HAND OF EVERY MAN'S BROTHER WILL I REQUIRE THE LIFE OF MAN. WHOSOEVER SHEDDETH MAN'S
BLOOD, BY MAN SHALL HIS BLOOD BE SHED: for in the Image of God made he man.)
Besides that, I say, are they not such as for whom Christ, who was the express
Image of his Father, shed his most precious blood, and do by their being
Christians, carry in them the Image of Christ? And do you not tremble to shed
their blood for whom Christ shed his? or can ye call your selves Christians,
and yet persecute and murder those whom Christ calls his, and that must be
acknowledged by your selves, to be more his, then your selves, if you would not
measure your selves only by your selves, but by those 2 Cor. 10, 12. Acts 9.
4. Colos. 1. 24.
rules which Christ has prescribed? why Christ accounts the persecuting and
afflicting of such, as the persecuting and afflicting of himself, and so the
shedding of their blood will be reputed as the shedding of his. To come a
little nearer you, though no relation should be nearer or dearer to you, then
that of Christian: Are they not Christians of the same particular profession of
Faith with you, at least, so many of you as call your selves Protestants, and
profess to be of the same Faith with the established Church of England? And
will ye take the Swords, P^stolls, Poynadoes, and other bloody instruments out
of the Jesuits and Jesuited Papists hands, and clap them into your
fellow-Protestants sides, that they may hereafter with their knives cut your
throats? Ye have indeed diverse of you (that you might render them the more
odious, and those whom ye have engaged against them the less suspicious, and
the more bloody) raised rumor upon rumor, lie upon lie, and slander upon
slander, and cast them all upon them; particularly that grand cheating slander,
wherewith the poor people have been so often fooled into blood, that the
principal men among them, by name the Earl of Norwich, and the Lord Capell,
are great Papists; whereas the Kingdom knows, (and so do many of you that
raised and fomented that lie) that both these right honorable personages are
as sound, firm, religious Protestants, as any in this Nation; and if you were
but as far from Popery as they, you would both abhor so to belly them, and
tremble to appear in Arms against them. And what I say of those two, may, I
am confident, be avouched (and will be by those that know them) of the rest of
those Worthies that are with them, infinitely beyond what can be affirmed of
the most select Regiment, yea Troop that the adverse Army can ^ull out. But I
speak only of those two, because the people have spoken most of them, and they
are best known to me; and indeed so well known are they to me, that I
should have been more guilty of bearing false witness, then they of raising
such a false report, had I not vindicated their Honors from such a notorious
calumny. And now that they are named, suffer me to interpose this one word
more concerning them. If there be any thing besides their known loyalty, that
does exasperate the factious seditious party against them, it is their eminent
and approved firmness and immoveablenesse in the Protestant Religion. And if
they should miscarry in this action (which I shall with all earnestness and
constancy, as all that wish well to this languishing Church and state ought to
do, pray that they may not) the Protestants would find as great a loss in
them, as in any of their Peers within the three Kingdoms. But I have severed
them too long from their honorable and ever to be honored society and
fellow-Souldierie. Are they not all or the most of them men of known, tried
integrity and honesty, (and many of them your very next neighbors) and have
they not so proved themselves by their Declarations, Remonstrances, and
actions? Do they not all profess clearly, that they have and do engage
themselves in this present undertaking only for the defense and preservation of
the established Protestant Religion; for the delivering their Sovereign from
bondage and imprisonment, and from being murdered therein: for the restoring of
his Majesty to his lawful Government, just rights, and throne in Parliament,
for the maintenance of the known Laws of the land, and the rights, Liberties
and properties of their fellow subjects; and for the procuring and settling of a
firm and happy peace in this miserably divided and almost utterly ruined
Kingdom? would to God that the Army, which call themselves the Parliaments
when they please, had declared, or would out yet declare half so much, and
give such assurance for the performance thereof, as those Worthies will give;
and then it might be hoped, that these unnatural wars would soon be ended;
But when so many of that Army have so openly declared and proclaimed the
contrary to all these; and some of them have been bold to say, that they fought
neither for King nor Parliament; and that they had above sixty thousand to be
at eight hours warning, to fight both against King and Parliament, and have
given very observable earnests of their having too many in a readiness, by
their sudden raising such considerable Troops and Regiments of such, and
wholly such within very few days. It is high time for all those that would not
be gulled, cheated, or forced out of all those forenamed comforts, and
honors, to betake themselves to their arms for their defense, maintenance
and conti^uance. And what a stain, shame, and reproach, will it be to you of
this County, and to your Posterities after you? That, when such men, of such
known honor and integrity, and of such approved firmness and fidelity to
their Religion, King, and Country (like those renowned Worthies eternized by
the Spirit of God to memory and imitation) jeoparded their lives to death in
the high places of the field, for the defense and maintenance of those very
truths and rights, Judge. 5.
which ye your selves have often sworn and protested, and do still pretend
and prosesse, to defend and maintain; and that against the most base,
perfidious, pernicious, seditious, tray terous, bloody, tyrannous, professed
and proclaimed Enemies thereof, ye not only deserted them, and came not out
to their help, To the help of the Lord, against his and their adversaries;
but, rose up and came out against them, and cast in your lot with those
Adversaries, that lay wait for blood, for the blood of Kings, Princes, Priests
and people, and lurk privily Prove. (...).
for the innocent without a cause, not considering that by so doing ye lay wait
for your own blood, and lurk privily for your own lives. And so my poor
Contrymen I come a little closer yet to your selves, and to the
consideration of your own state and condition; and then I shall commend you to
Gods mercy, if by your repentance ye shall render your selves capable thereof.

How little you of this County have been sensible of the miseries and
distresses of your fellow Subjects and Brethren, and how much you have
contributed to them, I leave to your own conscience to examine, and to your
selves, to judge your selves for them. Only take these two conclusions along
with you as two inseparable consequents of those two premises. First, That mers
not being sensible of their brethrens miseries, and so not taking warning by
them, pulls so much the more certaineand Amos 6. from v. 2, to v. 12. Isa 22.
v. 12, 13^ Jer. (...) 10, 11. and chap. 12. v. 1^.
^ore judgments upon themfelves: they that remember not Texts of Scripture
enough to that purpose, consult those in the margent. Secondly, That when God
has made use of any people to scourge others by, for their sins and
iniquities, (as he usually does of the worse, to scourge the better) he does
constantly cast that his rod into the fire, and punish that people the more
severely, by whom he has severely punished others; and one principal Reason
thereof is, because they, whom God makes use of as his scourge to others, do,
with Gods chastisement or vengeance for their sins, constantly intermix their
own malice and other iniquities, in chastifing and taking vengeance on them.
And this conclusion you have confirmed in each circumstance by many remarkable
and clear examples, as one of the Books of the Prophets, namely, in. Ezekiels
Prophecy: As in Gods dealing with the Ammonites, the Moabites, and those of
Mount-Seir, the Edomites, and the Philistines, Ezekiel. 25. with those of Tyrus,
chap. 26. with those of Zidon. chap 28. with Pharaoh, and all Egypt, chap. 29.
and with the rest of the heathen, chap. 36. All which people had been at
several times scourges to the people of Israel and Judah, and are in that
relation there called to an account, adjuged by God to those judgments. And
though you may from these sad conclusions see evidence enough of your hastening
Calamities, yet there are other visible symptoms of your approaching Miseries,
which may perchance more awaken you, as crying yet somewhat louder unto you,
and at less distance, either to repent speedily, or to expect swift
destruction suddenly. As first, What think ye will be the inevitable
consequents of your late engagement against those Worthies of our David before,
but rever too often named, to their honor and your shame, those English
Heroes, those Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and others in renowned
Colchester? the most inferior of which company carries better blood in their
veins, because untainted, then the proudest Adversary that fights against
them; and, I trust, God will preserve it as preciously, and the City wherein
they are. High, exceeding high already is the Honor of that City, for being
the City wherein Lucius, Helena, and Constantine, the first Christian King,
Empress and Emperor in the world, were borne; And it may please the Lord in
his merc^e, notwithstanding our multiplied iniquities crying so loud for the
contrary, to raise its honor yet much higher, by making it the City, wherein
King Charles, the most Religious of Christian Kings, the Established Religion
of the Church of England the Helena or Empress of Christian Religion, and the
Incomparable Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, which for equity and
Christianity deserve the Crown Imperial of the World, shall be preserved
from ruin, and be restored to their pri^^in^ glory; The same Almighty God,
that wrought that first great Work in that City, is all-sufficiently able,
there, even there, to accomplish this second. And we humbly beseech him, that
neither their nor our ^innes may separate between his blessing and their
Loyal and Christian endeavors to that purpose; and, whatever the success be,
that that City, nor those Worthies that are in it, may never want their due
honor, nor his gracious protection and comforts. But suppose the worst Suppose
that by your engagement against that City, and those Worthies in it, their
Enemies should prevail over them, to their and this whole Kingdoms further
weltering in blood; must not their and the rest of the blood of this Kingdom
be charged upon your score? When as if you had but sat still, and not in gaged
against them, (as you were by many bonds, never to be cancellod, obliged to
do) there had not been in all probalitie at this time any Enemies to Peace,
or thirsters after Blood, that durst to have shown themselves so, throughout
the whole Nation. And therefore, what will God say or do unto you, when he
comes to make inquisition for blood, and to avenge it? This is the bloody
County, that had Peace laid at their feet, and trampled on it; that had Peace
brought home to their doors, and not only shut it out, but called to bloody
War to enter in; that had many thousands of their fellow Brethren and
Neighbors, that would have ventured their lives to have preserved them in
Peace, and they chose rather to lose many of their own lives, to take away
some of theirs. They loved not Peace, therefore it shall be far from them;
they delighted in War, therefore shall it cleave close to them; and they
thirsted for blood, therefore shall they be drunk with their own blood. Do
not think that I speak more in Gods Name, then I have warrant from Gods Word
for; though ye have bin too long used so, and abused by such lying Prophets.
Search the Scriptures, and observe from thence what God speaks of the shedding
of blood, and you will find that I speak very sparingly, as having regard to your
infirmities: For there God tells you, That shedding of blood is one of those
crying sins which makes a land to mourn, and every one that dwells therein
to languish, Hos. 4. v. 2. 3. That blood defiles the land^; and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, or there can be no
expiation for the Land, but by the blood of him that shed it; and that, If a
people would have God to dwell among them, they must not so defile the land
which they inhabit, Numb. 35. v. 33. 34. That the shedding of innocent blood is
such a sin, that, of all other horrid sins, the Lord will not pardon, 2
King. 24. v. 4. And therefore no satis^action was to be taken for the life of a
murderer, which was guilty of death, but he was to be surely put to death,
Numb. 35. v. 31. with a multitude of other sayings on that subject, that are to
be trembled at by the Rebellious Subjects of this Kingdom. It Is true, if a man
killed any person unawares, there were Cities of refuge appointed by God for
such a one to fly unto, from the avenger of blood; but Oh, my poor
Contrymen, what Cities of refuge can ye fancy to your selves, who wilfully
murder your brethren?

And what less can the King say of you, then this, or to this effect? The
County of Suffolk, it is the most Rebellious County of all my Dominions. For
when one of my Kingdoms moved not against me; when a second rose up for me;
and when the third Petitioned for me from almost all parts, and took up Arms
for me in most parts, they of Suffolk neither Petitioned for me, nor moved for
me, but rose up against me: and when Rebellion was expiring its last poisonous
breath, they hazarded their own lives to prolong its life, and to preserve the
lives of those Rebels, that seek nothing more then to take away mine: When
thousands of my Loyal Subjects were endeavoring to fetch me out of my Cruel
Bondage and Imprisonment, then they helped to besiege and imprison, to kill and
murder those very Subjects; and when others with them were making what haste
they could to set my Crown again firm on my head, and to restore me again
to those Rights, Honors and Comforts, which I was wont to enjoy, they did what
they could to throw my Crown back again to the ground, and to keep mine
Honor still in the dust, and me from all hopes of enjoying any Rights or
external Comforts here in this life. Thus have they endeavored to continue,
and add to my Miseries, who have therefore endured such Miseries in such
Extremities, because I would not yield to the delivering up of them, amongst
others, to extreme Slavery and Tyranny. Thus have they not only fought against
me without a cause; but for the love that I had unto them, they take now my
contrary part, and have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my good
will: But I give my self unto Prayer. Stir up thy self, and awake to my
judgment, even unto my Cause, my God and my Lord. Judge me, O Lord, according
to thy righteousness, and let them not rejoice over me. Let them not say in
their hearts, Psalm. 35.
Ah, so would we have it: Let them not say, We have swallowed him up. Let them
be ashamed and brought to confusion together, that rejoice at my hurt: Let them
be clothed with shame and dishonor, that magnify themselves against me: Let
them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my righteous Cause; yea, let them
say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which has pleasure in the
prosperity of his servant; and my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness,
and of thy praise, all the day long. Amen. Amen.

But what then will all the other Counties of England say of you? O bewitched
besotted County of Suffolk! They that had lived in peace and plenty all
these times, when in the most Counties of this Kingdoms (like those
Territories spoken of by Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 15.) there was no peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the
inhabitants of the Countries, and Countries was destroyed of Country, and
City of City; and that might still have enjoyed those mercies themselves, and
have bin the happy instruments of restoring the like mercies to their
Brethren, in other afflicted and distressed Counties: They, even they, have
pulled War, and all the miseries and calamities that attend it, upon
themselves, and have prolonged and increased the afflictions and distresses of
other Counties: They, who were formerly honored with that Eulogie of being
always For. Act. and Mon.
forward in promoting the Gospel, and had now an opportunity offered them, of
being the preservers and deliverers of the Gospel from such blasphemons,
heretical, Antichristian reproachers, opposers, and impugners thereof, as
scarce any Nation, since the promulgation of the Gospel, were ever invested
with the like: They (and few others but they at that time) have joined in a
Confederacy with those reproachers, opposers, and impugners of the Gospel,
against those who endeavored with their lives and estates the vindicating and
re-establishing of it: They, that had bin informed, beyond further questioning,
and assured, beyond all doubting, of the horrid Plots, Conspiracies, and
resolved Designs of that Army, called the Parliaments, and their abettors,
against the Liberty and Life of their Religion, against the Crown and Life of
their King against the Power and Privileges of Parliaments, against the Rights
and Properties of the Subjects, against the Justice and Equity of the Laws,
yea, and against the very Orders and Degrees of Men, and how far they had
proceeded in all these; insomuch, that besides their former Oaths and
Protestations taken for the opposing of such, and bringing them to condign
punishment, they did very lately profess and declare (for the generality of
them) upon all occasions, and in all meetings, an universal abhorring and
detesting of that very Army, and their adherents, with all their cursed ways
and courses: They, (O, what a be witching stupilying Devil is the Spirit of
Rebellion!) they have listed themselves in the same Army, fought for them, and
with them, in the same encounters, run on with them in the same madness, and
given up themselves to them, as their slaves and vassals. And therefore, O my
soul, come not thou into their secrets, unto their assembly mine honor be not
thou united. Give them shame for their honor, and let them that have bin so
false to their own King and Kingdom, to their inexpressible Damages, if not
Ruin, be removed into other Kingdoms for their hurt, to be a Reproach and a
Proverb, a Taunt and a Curse, in all places whither they shall be driven. The
Lord of his mercy give you grace to prevent this sad Curse from your
neighboring and other Counties, as also your Kings sore displeasure, and Gods
heavy indignation before mentioned, and all by a speedy returning to God, and
your duty, and doing those things which belong to your peace, honor, and
safety, and to the peace, honor, and safety of the persecuted Protestant
Religion, your oppressed King, and this otherwise perishing Kingdom.

I know there are very many amongst you, in this County, of very much Religion
and Loyalty, Honor and Honesty; O that God would but give you that Spirit
and Courage which is required in the exercising of those excellent indowments,
and without which, those excellencies will be of little benefit to others, or
comfort to your selves; nay, they will aggravate your shame here, and your
confusion hereafter: For your poor contrymen will say (as many of them have
already said) If such and such had in due time shown themselves to be what
they seemed, and we thought them, we had shown our selves to have bin other
then what we are now thought, and are. And you know, to whom God gives most, of
them he requires most; and it will be less tolerable, in the Day of Judgment,
for those that knew their Masters will, and did it not, and had their Masters
favor, and made no good use of it, to his service, then for others: therefore
stir up these graces in you, and improve them to your Lords best advantage.
And truly, I do not despair of many others of you, that do now walk, or
rather run, in most desperate ways and courses: But if you shall go on, let
me tell you what further Curses and Judgments do yet threaten and hang over
you; All the blood (as I before intimated) that shall be shed by this your
engagement, by whomsoever it be shed, will be justly charged upon you; and the
Cries and Curses of the Widows and Fatherless (made so by your folly and
madness) and of the Fathers and Mothers made Child-lesse, will cry loud in
the ears of God against you: Woe unto that bloody County, will such and
such, and such a poor Widow say; for had it not bin for them, I had not bin
now bereft of my dear Husband, nor my poor Infants of their dear Father:
Cursed be that Rebellious County, will such and such, and such a poor
Fatherless Child say; for had it not bin for them, my honored and tenderly
loving Father, that had escaped the Sword all these sad Wars through till
then, had then returned home in peace to my disconsolate Mother and me, and we
had had peace ere this in all our borders. For ever detested be that pernicious
County of Suffolk, will such and such, and such Parents say; for had not
their Swords made us Childlesse, we had now enjoyed those sweet Pledges of our
Loves, and Comforts of our Age, which now we are deprived of. O let not the
seditious County of Suffolk, will Men, Women, and Children say, be named
amongst the other Counties of this Kingdom, but with some brand of infamy and
dishonor; for had it not bin for them, our Swords had ere this bin turned into
Sythes and Sickles, and our Spears into Rakes and Forkes, and we had bin
reaping and gathering in our Corn and our Hay, and our other fruits of the
earth, with joy and gladness, and refreshing and solacing our selves therewith
in rest and quietness; whereas now our troubles and fears are increased, and
we see little hopes of reaping ought, but the accursed fruits of their and our
own wicked doings; or if we should, we have less hope of enjoying it, but
that others will eat it up, and devour it: Reward thou them therefore, O Lord,
as they have served us. It Is true none ought thus to imprecate vengeance on
you, but to pray for you, which have thus despightfully used them and theirs:
but if in the bitterness of their souls such Curses, or Complaints to God
against you, shall fall from them, and God shall not suffer them to fall to the
ground, he himself having denounced such Curses upon such practices, and you
by yours so justly deserving them; poor souls, what can ye plead for your
selves, or who will regard your plea?

Again, as it is to be feared, that some will deliver ye up to God, for his
avenging their sufferings and wrongs on you and yours; so it is not to be
slighted, what others may do in prosecuting their own revenge on you: for how
may every County of this Kingdom be enraged against you, when they shall see,
that you thus desert them in all their endeavors and labors for Peace and
Truth, and join with those that are the vowed enemies of both? Who knows,
whether all the other Counties may not (like those other Tribes of Israel, when
the Tribe of Benjamin struck in with those sons of Bel^al, that had abused
the poor Levits Concubine, and refused to deliver them up to Justice, when
their Brethren demanded them, Judge. 20.) arise (...) one man, and come against
you to battasle? And though, perhaps, like those Benjamites, you give them a
foil or two at the first, yet at the last, being the more incensed, smite you
with the edge of the Sword, at well the men of every Village, as the beast, and
all that come to hand, and set on fire all your habitations that they come to?
The like sins in Israel and England, have been often and often punished with
the like punishments.

In the next place, think of the evil that is coming to you (though we hope
it will be to the good, and peace, and happiness, of this whole Nation
besides) out of the North, and that great destruction. Lift up your eyes (says
the Prophet unto them of Judah) and behold them that come from the North; What
will thou say when he shall punish thee, (for thou have taught them to be
Captains and chief over thee) Shall not sorrows take thee as a woman in
travail? Jerem. 13. v. 20. 21. The same may I say to you, word for word; and
every one of you, if you will, may see cause enough why I should say so. It Is
often threatened in Scripture as an aggravation of judgments, That God will
give up such or such a people into the hands of strangers: And it must be
confessed, That it is most just with God, to give you up into the hands of
strangers, who have so unworthily deserted your own King, and fellow Subjects:
and the justice of God will be somewhat the more remarkable, in his giving you
up to those Northern strangers of all others; because they were they, whom ye
your selves formerly called in, and contributed so liberally to their coming
in to your assistance against your King, though ye pretended to them that it
was to fight for him: And therefore now it must needs be the more observable
justice both in God and them, that they should come in of themselves to the
assistance of the same King, and his faithful Subjects against you, that
deserted him and them so shamefully, and have thereby discovered your former
hypocrisy and other iniquity so notoriously. And let me further tell you,
That, if those Strangers should not avenge the King and Kingdoms wrongs
sufficiently, it is to be believed, some other Strangers, more fierce, bloody,
and cruel, shall do it. For remember, I beseech you, that famous and pertinent
Story of Gods dealing with the men of Judah, when they deserted their King,
(though the most wicked of Kings, Ahaz by name) because he was brought low, and
made a confederacy with those two tails of those smoking firebrarnds, Rezin
and Pekah. For that very cause (as God by his Prophet gives the Reason, Isa.
8.) did the Lord threaten to bring up upon the men of Judah, the King of
Assyria, and all his hosts (called there his glory) compared to the waters of
an overflowing river, strong, and many; and that he and they should pass
through Judah, and should overflow and go over, and reach even to the neck
etc. which was all accordingly done, as you may find by comparing Isa. chap.
7. and 8. with 2 Chronicles. chap. 28. and 32. And do but observe further, how God,
Isa. 8. from v. 9. to v. 16. scorns and mocks at the men of Judah's
associating themselves, and joining their forces with others against their own
King; and how earnestly he calls upon his Prophet, not to walk in the way of
that people himself, and to instruct others not to join in confederacy with
them, nor to fear their fear, nor be afraid, (which is the principal cause
of such Rebellious Confederacies) but to sanctify the Lord of Hosts, and to
let him be their fear, etc. promising them safety that shall avoid such a
Confederacy, and threatening ruin to such Confederates, and to those that join
with them. So spoke and did the Lord then, and he is the same Lord still, and
changes not; and they that commit the like fins, may justly fear the like
punishmens. And now answer to that question, which God by the same Prophet,
though in another chapter, propounds unto you; unto you, my lamented
Contrymen, who have joined in a Confederacy with those, who (as the Prophet
describes them, with a woe to them prefixed, Isa. 10.) decree unrighteous
decrees, and that write grievousnesse, which they have prescribed, to turn
aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor, etc.
that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. What
will ye do in the day of visitation, and, in the desolation which shall come
from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will you leave your glory?
Will you flee to the Army for succout? Cursed be the man that trusts in man,
and makes Jer. 17. v. 5. Psalm. 5. v. 6
flesh his arm: especially such men, and such flesh, that are themselves so
near a curse. But ye shall not need to flee to them, for they will flee to you,
or come to you, and will be the first that will help to devour you. For if
the Army should swallow up Colchester, (which God of his merey keep them from)
and so Essex be wholly worsted; where must they give themselves and their
Horses the next bait, but in the well-stored houses and fair pastures of
Suffolk? And who must recruit their consumed army with more men, but they who
have furnished them with so many? Give the Devil or any of his Imps but a
little, and that gives them power over all that ye have: and now that they have
gotten you into the same way with them, they will find allurements enough to draw
you on, or fears enough to frighten you on, or force enough to drive you on, as
far as they please. Then if other Counties rise up against them, and join with
the Northern Army, which private as well as public interest will persuade them
to, (unless God should give them up to a reprobate sense, as he has done some
of you) Suffolk must then be the Stage of War, at least Suffolke-men must be
the chief Actors on that Stage; and to be sure, the most desperate parts of
that Tragedy will be put upon them, as has bin already practiced; though
when ought of spoil chances to fall to their lots (which is but a ci^rsed lot
God knows, like that of Achans wedge) the lots shall be so ordered, That the
old Soldiers, that have born the heat of the day, will, like the Lion in the
Fable, challenge the prey as their due, and that by many Lyon-like arguments as
the poor beasts have lately found to their grief.

Thus (like the broken staff of reed, Egypt to Israel) the Army, if thou
leanest on it, will be the first that will gall and pierce thee: and who can
expect other, then that the treacherous dealer should deal Isa. 2^. v. 2
treacherously, and the spoyler spoil? which the Prophet calls a grievous
vision. If any of you shall complain thereof, who will not be ready to return
you answer in the Prophet Jeremiahs words? Have thou not procured this unto thy
self? Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy
wickedness, because it is better, because it reaches unto thine heart, Jerem.
2 17. and 4. 18. Nay, will not your own hearts return this answer to your
selves? And how then will ye be ashamed of your trust and expectation, and of
those lying Prophets, and other Seducers that incited you thereto? Neither will
it be any ease to you at all, to say, We were persuaded and drawn on by such
and such: for those such are such, as ye will blush to name; It being no small
addition to your shame, that ye should suffer your selves to be gulled and
fooled by such unworthy, inferior, base fellows, even those of the lowest of
the people, and Priests like to them; such as many of this County would
formerly have scorned to have seen in the same room with them, except it had
bin in a Shire-house or Towne-house, at a public As^ise or Session; yea, such,
a^ should they now be but plucked and strip^ of all that they have cheated and
stolen by Sequestrations, Collections of Excise, and other illegal Taxes, they
would be the most contemptible of Monsters.

Now add to all these Judgments but one more, which me thinks I should not
speak of, nor any man of compassion hear, without crying out with the Prophet
Isaiah once and again; My loins are filled with pain, pangs have taken hold
upon (...), as the pangs of a woman that travelleth: I was bowed down at the
hearing of it, I was dismayed at the seeing of it, my heart panted,
fearfulness affrighted me; the night of my pleasure has he turned into fear
with me, chap. 21. v. 3, 4. or, as it is in the next chapter, v. 4. Look away
from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, etc. Behold, a
terrible devouring Famine is hastening upon this Kingdom and this County is
most likely to drink deepest of that Cup of Gods ^urie, so far as Gods
unsearchable Judgments can be guessed at by man's shallow reason and
observation. How near a Famine is to the doors of other Counties, is best
known to God and them; only this is known to every one, that knows ought of
Gods Word and ways, That when God has brought the Sword upon a people, to
avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, and that people do not repent of their
transgressing his Covenant, but instead thereof transgress it more and more
(as we have generally done in all Counties of this Kingdom, for ought that I
could either see or hear) it is Gods usual course then to send both a Plague
and a Famine too upon such a people* that they may devour what the Sword
spares. So God professes to do, Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. and in sundry other
places.

But for this County, unless we shut our eyes (as we have done too often) we
cannot but see a sore Famine already at our doors, and ready to break in upon
us suddenly. The Sword we drew our selves against our selves, when it would
have bin otherwise, in all likelihood, quiet; and since we drew the Sword, God
seems to have bent his Bow in the Clouds, as it were with the Bend toward us,
as though, upon our forgetting our Covenant with him so much, he would forget
his Covenant with us so far, as to destroy us with Rain, though he never
will again destroy the world so. Never was this County so richly furnished
with all sorts of Grain in their fields, and they so hopeful, as they were
this year, which makes me to fear a Famine the more; for when God intends to
bring his sore Judgments upon a people he usually takes that for his time,
when men least think of any such thing, and when there is most expectation to
the contrary, which renders his Judgments so much the more sore: as when
there is most show of peace and security, then does God, if provoked, commonly
bring the Sword; and so, when there is most expectation of plenty and
fullness, that time does God make choice of to send a Famine: because, as I but
now said, the Judgment is most sore, when the contrary is most expected; and
then also is the hand of God most seen in it, and the Judgment best discerned
to be from his hand: which are the two principal reasons that some later
learned Divines have given, from S. Ambrose, and others, why God sent the
general Deluge in the Spring time, when all things were in their flourishing
glory, and the Season most unlikely for such a Flood. But to return (if this
be a digression) to what I was saying; Never was this County so richly
furnished with all sorts of Grain, and they so hopeful, as they were this
year, till they began to imbrue their hands in their brethrens bloods; and
since that, even from that very time (if the observation of many more, beside
my self, do not fail us) the Lord has caused it to rain upon these parts
(whatsoever it has done upon other) in such a manner and measure, and for so
many days together, as the like has scarce ever been, or at least has not
been transmitted to us by any tradition or record that I could meet with:
insomuch, that the faire-promising chearefully flourishing Corne-fields of this
County are now likely to afford little other Harvest, but what (as the Prophet
sometimes threatened) will be an heap in the day of grief and desperate
sorrow. And what then will Isa. 17. (...).
ye do, when the Army has devoured that little which remains of your old
store, and consumed what they can get of your new? for they will be first
served, though you and all yours starve. Other Counties will be so far from
supplying your wants, if they should be able, that they will scarce pity them
or you; and a commanding Navy at Sea will hinder all foraine Kingdoms from
bringing any relief to you, and you from fetching any from then. Then,
perhaps, when your children shall cry for bread and ye have none to give them,
and they shall swoone away in the streets, or pour out their souls into their
mothers bosoms; when your comely Wives and Daughters, whose countenances were
fair and comely, shall have Visages blacker then Coa^es; and when ye and your
soones shall look so thin and ghastly, that ye shall not be known to those of
your familiar acquaintance: then, perhaps, you will think, those that dyed by
your swords, in a better condition then you and yours, that lived to perish by
Famine: then, perhaps, you will discern betwixt the times of having a King,
and the times of having none, but every man to do that which is right in his
own eyes: then, perhaps, those Rulers of yours, that made you first to cry,
and at last to howl, may be as great an abhorring to you, as they are now a
delight: then, perhaps, the feet of them which have preached Peace unto you, may
be again thought beautiful; whereas, for some years, their very faces have bin
looked on (if deigned a Look) by diverse of you as loathsome and odious, and had
all the dirt thrown on them that you could rake together: then, perhaps, those
Lands and Tithes of the Church, which some of you have swallowed, and others
gaped after, will be thought reasonable, as well as just, to be restored
again, when you feel such a sore Curse upon your own lands, and the fruits
thereof, for the sacrilegious robbing of God and his Church of theirs: then,
perhaps, those lying Prophets, which beguiled and seduced you into Faction,
Sedition, and Rebellion, and so brought the Sword, Plague, and Famine upon you,
will be ashamed of their lying Visions and Prophesies, and either fly the
Land, or, if any of them shall prophecy in it, their own fathers and their
mothers that begat them, may say unto them, ye shall not live, etc. as ye may
read their doom, Zech. 13. and then the true Prophets may receive some honor
again: then, perhaps, those loyal Subjects, that are now branded with the
names of Malignants, may once again be thought worthy of better Titles; and
those, now styled the well-affected, may appear to be what they are, the most
pernicious of Rebels: Then the Saints of these times may be discovered to be
little better then Devils, and those, now blasted with the epithites of Popish
and Popishly affected, may approve themselves the most Religious Protestant
Christians: Then Peace it self may be as amiable, and desirable, as it is now
hateful and contemptible; and then he, that deals thus faithfully and freely
with you, in telling you of your sins, and fore-warning you of these
miseries, will be thought as honest and conscientious, as he is now deemed by
some impudent and presump^uous. But my earnest and constant prayer to God for
you (my bewailed Countrymen) shall be this; That God would be pleased in
mercy so to open your eyes, ears. and hearts, to see, hear, and understand
all those things, and whatsoever else belongs to your Peace and Salvation, that
you may by a speedy* repenting of your sins, and returning to your duty,
prevent and avoid the dreadful remains of Gods Judgments further threatened,
and get those already inflicted suddenly removed.

Without repentance, it is impossible that any thing which ye do should be
accepted; much more impossible is it, that ought which ye suffer, should be
removed; for Gods Judgments shall accomplish their end for which God sends
them, either conversion or confusion. A removal there may be, and often is, of
this or that particular Judgment, where the sins that caused it are not
repented of; but if God intend mercy to such, other Judgments or
Chastisements are inflicted, and they are by them brought to repentance; or
else the removal of Judgments is a sore Judgment, and the assured
forerunner of destruction; as might be at large shown, if need were. What
other way soever therefore ye think to take, you will find your selves, as
hitherto ye have, far out of the way of obtaining what you desire and expect,
if your desires and expectation be such as beseem Christians: and if ye do
get out of one fire (as the Prophet Ezekiel expresses it) another Ezekiel. 15. 7.
fire shall devour you. But if ye shall repent and turn to the Lord, and do
that which is just and right; be sure the Lord will both accept you and what ye
do, and forgive what ye have done amiss, and withold no good thing from
you, that may conduce to the healing 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Hos. 6. 2.
either of you, or the Land wherein ye live; as I shall be ready further to
demonstrate to any that shall require it. Be entreated therefore, my deeply
afflicted, and of me most compassionately affected, Countrymen, as ye love
either your Religion, your King, your Country, your Honor, your own
comforts, or the comforts of any of yours; your preservation in this world, or
your salvation in the world to come. O be entreated to remember and practice
what I in the first place recommended to you, and do now again, in the last
place, by the bowels and mercies of Christ Jesus beg of you, Repent, Repent.

And if any of you do distrust or doubt of the Kings pardon and acceptance of
you, or of your fellow Subjects firm and loving reconciliation with you; If
that which I have said to that purpose, do not sufficiently satisfy you, be
pleased to employ me (if ye have no other servant more fit and worthy, for ye
have none more affectionate and faithful) in that service for you; and I shall
either lose my life in procuring of it, or resign it up willingly into your
hands, to be disposed of at your pleasure, if I do not bring you an engagement
under hand and Seal from all those men of Honor and worth, either now in
Colchestor, or in the Northern Army, for their undertaking to stand between
you and all suffering for whatever is past, either from or by the King, or any
of his party; and to live and dye with you, and for you, in defending you
against all the malice and power of his, and their, and your Enemies. And
besides this, if you please to honor me with that trust, I doubt not but his
Highness, the Prince of great Britain, will favor me with so much access, as
to receive by my hands any reasonable Propositions for the giving you his
assurance of mediation to his Royal Father, and protection, till his Royal
Father can grant you what you shall, for the further assurance of your own
peace and security, reasonably desire; and to return by the same, or other
hands of more honor, that his assurance under his own hand and Seal. This I
presume, not out of any favor that I have deserved from his Highness, but out
of my knowledge and experience of his Highness deep sense and compassion of
this Kingdoms unhappie and unnatural divisions and disractions, his religious
pro^enesse and readiness to embrace all oportunities of composing and quieting
them, and his unpa^alell'd graciousnesse and goodness in forgetting former
wrongs, and in encouraging to future duties.

I had much more to have written: but I feared that my enlarging this warning
might render the time of presenting it less seasonable, and the particulars
themselves so presented less acceptable and successful. And for that which I
have written* I shall be ready (through Gods inabling me) further to confirm
by my Pen against all gainsayers, and, if there be cause, to seal with my
blood against all opposers. If ought of circumstance has slipped from me, that
shall be thought by any sober Christian, either too plain or too bold, let that
party consider, that he, that speaks to men in a deep and almost a dead
sleep, must not only speak plai^, but cry aloud and spare not, lifting up his
viyce like a trumpet: And Isa. 58. i.
he that will show a people their transgressions and their sins must call each
sin and transgression by its proper name, and do his u^ most to set it forth
in its own colors A reprover to an impudent and rebellious generation, had
need to bes^ech God to make his face strong against their faces, and his
forehead strong against their Ezekiel. (...). v. 7, 8, 9.
foreheads. And if, that considered, there shall still remain ought that may
seem to any such unbeseeming or uncharitable, I shall upon information thereof
humbly beg pardon for it, both of God and that man, how mean soever, whom it
shall offend. I know (...) the changer of appearing in the these parts
especially* and I could as easily have avoided (...) otherwise given ample
testimony of my duty, and of my ^onse^ enciousnesse to perform it in spite of
opposition. But I remembered, and often ruminated that complaint of God, Ezekiel.
13. v. 4, 5, 6, etc. O Israel, thy Prophets are like the Poxes in the deserts;
(...) have not gone up into the gaps, or breaches, neither made up the h^dge
for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord. They
have seen vanity, and lying divination; saying, The Lord says, and the Lord
has not sent them; and they have made others to hope, that they would confirm
the word, etc. The Fox-prophets, and the Lying-prophets, are in that complaint
coupled together. And therefore, as I have always abhorred Lying, and Lying
prophets, so I ever thought it my duty to detest Shifting, and playing the
Fox-prophet; and rather, as I first said, then I would be found guilty of
others blood, by not giving them warning, I resolved to hazard mine own in the
giving it; thinking it an eternal stain and shame to us the Clergy of this
County, that so many amongst us of that Calling, should ply you so close, and
encourage you so much; to the shedding of your Brethrens blood, and that not
one of (...) should appear to deter you from it, by showing you the infinite
danger of it, and the miseries that are attending it. And now, my fairly-warned
Contrymen, Whether ye will hears, or whether ye will for bear, ye shall
know that there has bin a Prophet among you, Ezekiel. 25. Deus. 30. 19
who has set before you this day life and death, blessing and ^ursing. Bu^ my
prayer shall be, that ye may so hear what has been told you by your unworthy,
but faithful servant, that ye may choose life, that you and your seed may
live; and so live in obedience to your God, in constancy to your Religion
established, in Allegiance to your King, and in love to your fellow Subjects
and Brethren; that you may outlive your Nations miseries in much peace and
comfort; your names outlive you in much sweetness and honor; and your souls
outlive, or live with your names in eternal ^lisse and glory. So prays, and
remains at your commands and service, so far as consistent with Gods,

Yours, LIONEL GATFORD.

FINIS.

