A Letter from an Honorable Person in LONDON, To a small Friend of his in
LANCASHIRE, Containing the Character of a certain constant Practiser of
Rebellion, now pretending to Loyalty.
Sir,
I Have lately been injured by, some indignities of Language, and slanderous
reports, raised by a thing of so despicable a same, and dirty reputation, that
it is below an Oyster-wives Tongue, and a Foot-mans Cudgel to undertake my
revenge, and, indeed, there is not any thing infamous enough to be
isntrumental therein, besides your self, and the Common Hangman, for this
reason, I now address to you for justice, it being as absolutely in your power
to do me right, as if you had been the Man that had done the wrong, I cannot
point him out to you by his proper name, for it is so Ugly and loathsome, that,
should I attempt to write it, my Pen would nauseate, and disgorge it self in a
blot, but I shall represent him to you in a character so peculiarly his own,
that you shall know him as insallibly thereby, as if you beheld him in your
looking-glass.

He is one who is by nature the Child of wrath and sury, of a choleric
constitution, suddenly angered, slowly appeased, and never cordially
reconciled. He is of a busy meddling humor, which, keeps him in perpetual
motion, and gets him the repute not of an industrious, but a pragmaticall,
person, who applies himself to other men's troubles, as flies do to Horses
sores, to draw a nourishment out of them, or if, by interessing himself, he
chance to prove serviceable, is but as dogs heal-wounds by licking them, to
which they are moved, not out of charity to the patient, but by the
licorishness of their own palate. He is of a haughty imperious disposition,
and a violent persecutor of any Man that shall dare to live near him, with, a
less proportion of Land and power, and a larger Talent of honesty and
ingenuity than himself.

He sat long at the Receipt of Custom, and resolved to keep the seat, as the
strong man in the Gospel kept the house, till a stronger than he came, and
think's that, if St. Matthew had understood the Office as well as he, he would
not have left it upon a bare call. He believes himself to be a perfect
Politician, and endeavors to make others of the same faith, by the frequent
use of a subtle wink and a nod, such as Machiavill tells us were observable,
in the grand Master of policy, Casar of Borgia. 'Twas from the same Evangelist
St. Machiavill, that he learnt to deport himself in point of religion, which
is, to carry as much of it in his face as the precifest, and as little of it in
his heart as the profanest. His education was behind the Counter of a certain
seller of Linen, whose accursed spawn we find in the List of the Brethren in
blood, who decreed the Butchery of their Sovereign. From this young Master of
his, he learnt the Rudiments of Rebellion with much docility; and perceiving it
a readier way to rise by Treason, than by his Trade, he relinquisht this, and
practiced the other with much industry. His first Essay was to betray his
Brother in bonds, his fellow Apprentice; and soon after, he put near a thousand
pound cheat upon his Father, and Elder Brother, according to the flesh, and
called it good service to God and the State, because they wished well to the
King.

At length to show himself a complete Rebel, he appears one, tam Mart quam
Mercurio, Polemick as well as a Politic: he gets a Commission to raise a
troup, and being a Man of a discreet Charity (which ever begins at home) he
first raises himself, by raising some hundreds of pounds, and then about half a
hundred men, with whom he desperately marches to Cromwells Camp in Scotland,
and conceiving it to be two men's office to conduct Soldiers, and to fight
them, he pretends to have left his spanner behind him, posts back to fetch it,
marries a wife, and so could not come any more into Scotland.

Shortly, after he acts the part of a Mephistophilus, or a minor intelligencer
in his native region, to the grand Beelzebub then at White Hall, and in that
Diabolical employment he showed himself well vers't in the very Metaphysics
of knavery, now called Trepannery: he would by, forged Letters, and treacherous
messengers ensnare men into a discovery of their affection to their true
Prince, and then persecute them as Traitors to the Usurper.

And he was never so dangerous, as when he invited (...) to dine with him, or
himself to dine with you, when he dip't his hand in the dish with you, he was
sure to betray you, but this had like to have cost him dear, for had his
Classical face been, as it seemed, true Elder: his nose had lately been
sequestered from it by the hand of a One of that name pulled him by the note
and kick't his breech in London streets.
Carpenter, but it proved as right brass, as Friar Bacons, magical head, and
will shortly suffer, the like confusion, uttering the same last and Lamentable
words. My time is past.

But in his foresaid office he now affirms that he did his Majesty service for
he often times gave in false information, and that, indeed, must needs be
conses't: but it was only then, when he could raise no persecution to the
Cavaliers by any that was true. And though he has hitherto been a Saul to the
Kings friends, not only in exercising his own rage against them, but in
accusing and supplanting such persons as were civil toward them, yet now,
moved by the turn of affairs, and not the conversion of his own heart, he
would needs appear a Paul, and, having sold a horse to one who appeared in the
Cheshire engagement, ^ 0.s. under the rate, he calls it a service to his
Majesty, and having trepanned the pens of 2. or 3. Noble personages, to
subscribe a favorable Certificate; with as much modesty as merit, he puts in
for a reward, as if the King were obliged to do good for evil only, and to
love none but his Enemies, and to take the Coats from his friends, to bestow
them on those who have already robbed them of their Cloaks. By such subtle
contrivances and artifices he has now got himself into a very good condition,
though no good condition could ever get into him. Sir, by this time, I
conceive, you apprehend who is signified by the Character, as well as David did
by Nathans parable: and you cannot but acknowledge, that it is absolutely in
your power to give him a punishment proportionable to his guilt, and to disable
him to practice any farther mischief, and that by the president of a
King-killing Alderman, you may Hoyl him up, and thereby purchase more love and
fame, then by all the former actions of your Life. 'Twill render you immortal,
and (as the song has it) From you ^^^ll that is humane, 'twill take, 'twill
ease you' from all thoughts and sighs for an Act of Oblivion, as wide as your
offenses, for 'twill^^^ng you to the Land where all things are forgotten. I
hope, the prickings of your own, conscience will prevail with you to effect it,
and so by saving my pen the pains of Rhetoric to persuade you to do it, oblige
me to employ it in a panegyprick, when it is done. A word is enough to the
wise; that is, to you.

From your faithful adviser. J. G.


