EGALEIA THEOY Gods great DEMONSTRATIONS AND DEMANDS OF Justice, Mercy and
Humility, Set forth in a SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of
Commons, at their Solemn Fast, before their first sitting, April 30. 1660. By
JOHN GAVDEN, D. D.

Prove. 21.3. To do Justice and Judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than
sacrifice. (...). Clem. Alex. Apud nos quo religiosior quisque eo justior.
Minutes, Fell. de Christ. LONDON, Printed by J. Best, for Andrew Crook, at the
Green-Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

TO THE Honorable the Speaker, and other Members of the House of COMMONS,
NO sooner had I done my duty to Gods commands and yours (Honorable and worthy)
but (blessed be God) you presently applied to do your duty to God, the King and
your Country with such Justice, Mercy and Humility, that you have by an
astonishing joy revived the sunk spirits of all just, merciful, and humble men
in these three Kingdoms, who had for many years been sorely depressed and
almost despaired under the importune injuries of some insolent and proud
Masters; who with Caesar or Pompey were impatient of any superior or equal; yea
with Lucifer and Antichrist they exalted themselves above all that were called
God in the British Honor and Authority; advancing their unjust and merciless
ambition so high, that at last it fell, not by force so much, as its own
weight, and that just confusion which God brought upon those Babel-builders;
whose foolish building had indeed many pinacles of fanatic opinions and
projects daily starting up, yet but one great Tower or Mole, whose moorish or
sandy foundation was tumult and violence; its line and measure, fancy and
providence; its materials, the lives and estates of its Countrymen; its cement,
the blood both of Kings, Priests, and People.

. The gracious and glorious God, who alone does wonders, has by the Justice,
Mercy and Humility of the two Houses of Parliament (added to the most renowned
Generals humble valor, and loyal courage) soon made Nehustan of those brazen
Serpents and Idols which were made up of subtilty and hypocrisy, violence and
impudence.

7. In a few days (even before I could print what I had preached) we have lived
to see that holy Motto under the Kings Arms made good; Exurgat Deus,
dissipentur inimici: Let God arise and his enemies shall be scattered, Psalm.
68.1. The royal (Dieu and mon Droit) God and my right, has like Moses his
Serpent devoured the Serpents and rods of those Magicians, who usurped all
things, yet nothing more falsely and unjustly than that Inscription Deus
nobiscum, God with us; when indeed they had neither his Word, nor the Laws of
the land with them: with the like vain and arrogant ostentation did Dionysius
boast of the gods good will and approbation, when after his sacrilegious
pillaging one of their Temples, he had a very fair gale of wind to carry him
and his booty home by sea.

. Certainly, nothing is more remote from Gods gracious presence, and the power
of godliness than that brutal power, and inordinate might, which is carried on
with penal prosperities and successes, but without any right, as to Law and
Justice, which are the only rules and boundaries of good conscience, also the
soul and life of all righteous Government; void of which the other is but
(cadaverosa potentia) a putid carcass of prevalent usurpation, which stinks in
the Nostrils of God and all good men.

. But You even You are those True Worthies who by your just, loyal and humble
agnition of, and submission to the Kings lawful Authority, have made Mercy and
truth meet together, yea righteousness and peace kiss each other: You have
fulfilled in the affirmative that old and ambiguous verse (which I remember to
have heard many years before our sad troubles) which ends with Nullus; In which
Negative the time-serving Astrologasters and others strongly fancied, they
found a fatal period of the British Monarchy, at least of the Stuartian royal
family, O how must it make those Diviners mad, to see (what I long ago hoped
would be the meaning of it) that King who was made and esteemed as Nullus, (a
persecuted, expulsed, and as much as lay in humane malice, a nullified King) to
see him reign as surely and gloriously as any of those royal Predecessors did,
who under the emblems of other words made up that strange verse.

. To which so benign an interpretation and event, there wanted not some
providential omens and signatures; as first that star which appeared a little
after noon on the day of the Kings birth, May 20. Anno 630.
of which there were many eye witnesses in London and Westminster, Next were
those meddals of silver which were then coined, with this Inscription, Hactenus
Anglorum nulli, to denote that Prince to be the Nonsuch, who alone had the
glory to be born Heir apparent to these three British Kingdoms; Nor was his
signal preservation after Worster-fight a small pledge of Gods special
protection, whose usual methods are to build up to an unwonted height and
conspicuity of glory, there where he lays the deepest foundation of earthly
affliction.

. I confess I cannot sufficiently (with you and all good men) admire the
wonderful revolutions and intricate ridles of Gods providence; punishing us
justly for our sins, yet relieving us mercifully from our sufferings: We are
yet in extacies of joy and wonder, as those that dream; hardly believing the
strange undeserved and unexpected dispensations of God toward us; in which he
has made that precious stone which some builders refused, to become the
corner, the capital, and crown-stone of the building; the only center and
stability of that Arch, in which the loyalty and love, the joy and hopes of all
good Subjects, and true English-Protestants do meet and six.

May you go on prosperously and unanimously under the Banner of the most high
God to complete your religious, loyal, just and valiant Counsels; not only to
establish his Majesty's Throne, and our civil rights in Truth, Mercy, and
Peace; but also to cleanse and repair the Temple, the Church and house of the
living God, whose miserable dilapidations, and sordid ruins in doctrine,
devotion, discipline, order and government are such, that you cannot but pity
to see all things sacred covered with dust; and the Ministry of the Church
both Bishops and Presbyters almost buried with the rubbish of factions,
confusions, dissentions and despiciencies.

I confess this Church-work ought (as the Kingdom of God,) to be first in every
good Christians intention, (as no doubt it was and is in yours) But you are not
to be blamed, by any unseasonable severitie, if, as to point of execution, you
first applied your selves, in the present distress of our times and affairs,
to settle and secure as to the main, those things which belonged to your civil
rights, and National peace. The exigents or extreamities of which, not bearing
any delays, do sufficiently justify your endeavors, to preserve the ship of
the State, in which the Church is imbarqued, which being almost Ship-wrackt and
sincking, it had been a very preposterous zeal, to have left the vessel to have
contended with the Rocks and Sands, by a superdevout diligence to save the
lading, or goods in it; Alas we had been much to seek for a reformed Church, in
a ruined State.

Your discreet and orderly diligence took the right method, in making way for
religion, by civil justice; nor need you fear the dictates, frowns and
censures of any Anastarchusses, whose piety like Jacobs might hope to have
supplanted this just necessary and honest policy, of restoring our civil laws,
and royal authority, by which our Religion, as Cristian and reformed, was best
established.

. The settling or reforming of religion; in all its duties and devotions,
discipline and decencies, together with its order, and Government, is a work
which requires not only time, but that leisure which is attended with a calm
and steady posture of civil affairs: Men cannot build Gods Temple till they
have first washed their hands and purged the land of innocent blood. No prudent
piety can think such a storm as we were in, was a meet season for Church
reformation; It would only fit those who might hope to fish best for their
parties and opinions, in troubled waters, knowing their projects and models to
be less consistent with the true interests and pristine welfare of this Church
and State; doubtless they must have made strange work of Church and
reformation, before ever they had owned, and restored the Master- builder, the
King, who is supreme Governor of it under Christ, as to all extern order and
Authority. We hope and pray, that God will shortly give both his Majesty, his
Parliaments and his loyal people, such rest on every side, as may be most apt
for those sacred and serious concernments of the Church and true Religion,
which require first Justice, as to the rights of Christ and his Church, both
Bishops, Presbyters and People; Secondly they require mercy, as to that
remission, moderation and condescension, in things not necessary, to the being
and well being of religion, which either tender consciences, or weak, but
humble and harmless Christians do require, yea and expect, agreeable to Christ's
care of his little ones, and the Apostles regard to weak brethren, yea and the
Kings gracious expressions touching his regard to such, that they may not be
needlessly offended, superciliously despised, or rigorously oppressed, in
matters that are neither of faith nor morality.

. Lastly, Religious composures require an unfeined humility, and self denying,
as the proper rule and measure, and of all Church-work, that nothing may swell
out, beyond the plumline of verity and charity, order and decency, use and
edification, either in the substances, or circumstances of Religion, nor yet in
the controversies of it.

. In all which blessed counsels and endeavors, there will be need and use of
the assistance of the best heads, the honestest hearts; and the softest hands
which the Church of England affords; not only in the Nobility and Gentry, the
Lords and Commons, but also among the Clergy, who are no doubt the Angels or
Intelligences most proper, for those motions and that sphere of Religion.

But we hope by the good hand of our good God, upon his Majesty and your loyal
counsels, for the best of blessings, a wise constitution, and well ordered
administration of religion, both as Christian and reformed, which will be the
greatest glory and stability of all estates. As you have given to Caesar the
things that are Cesars, so no doubt you will be ready to give to God the things
that are Gods: In which just and humble retributions, you will both show mercy
to many thousands of souls, and obtain mercies for your own; for which ends as
you have the prayers and thanks of all worthy persons, so you shall never want
mine, whose freedom in speaking and writing I presume your sound minds can
bear, as abhoring to keep your Ministers like Parots in a cage, as at no great
charge, so only for the pleasure to hear them speak; Your honor is, that you
hear and know, and do the will of God; in which that you may enjoy his eternal
rewards, is the Prayer of

Your humble servant in Christ, I. GAVDEN.
May 12. 1660.
Books written by Dr. Gauden, and sold by Andrew Crook, at the green Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. HIeraspistes, A Defense for the Ministry and Ministers of the Church of
England.

2. Three Sermons preached on public occasions.

3. Funerals made Cordials, in a Sermon preached at the Interment of the Corpse
of Robert Rich, Heir apparent to the Earldom of Warwick.

4. A sermon preached at the Funeral of Dr. Ralph Brounrig Bishop of Excester
(December. 17. 1659.) with an account of his Life and Death,

5. A Petitionary Remonstrace in the behalf of many thousand Ministers and
Scholars.

(...): sive Medicastri. Slight healers of public hurts, set forth in a
Sermon Preached in St. Paul's Church, London, before the right honorable Lord
Mayor, Lord General, Aldermen, Common Council, and Companies of the honorable
City of London, Febr. 28. 1659. being a day of Solemn thanksgiving unto God,
for restoring the Secluded Members of Parliament to the house of Commons, (And
for preserving the City) as a Door of Hope thereby opened to the fullness and
freedom of future Parliaments: The most probable means under God for healing
the Hurts, and recovering the health of these three British Kingdoms.

Magna Dei postulata. Gods great Demonstrations and Demands. Set forth in A
Sermon preached at a Solemn Fast April 30. 1660. before the Honorable House of
Commons, Upon MICAH 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do Justice, to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God?
I Am not so ignorant of my infirmities, Preface.
(Right Honorable and Beloved) as to have adventured on so great a province,
before so noble an Assembly, in such an important time, and on so short
warning; if my obedience to Gods call in your commands had not swayed more with
me than any confidence of my own sufficiency, whose greatest ambition is to
walk humbly with my God in the amplest services I were able to do for his
glory, his Churches peace, and my Countries welfare.

The great and public importance of this Parliament,
. I well understand the great importance of this Parliamentary Convention as to
the peace and settling of this Church and State; all things sacred and civil are
imbarqued in your counsels, and adventured on your Justice and Mercy, your
piety and Humility, your Equanimity and Moderation. You, under God, are the Ark
in which the weather-beaten and scattered remains of our Religion, Laws,
Estates, Liberties, Peace, Honors and Lives are deposited; so much of them as
has escaped the tedious tempest and the terrible deluge of our sad troubles
and confusions these last score of years; in which the windows of heaven (the
just wrath of God) and the fountains of the great deep (the lusts and passions
of men's evil hearts) have met together to punish our sins.

. You are looked upon as Noah and his family, (semen novi orbis) a seed and
nursery of true Christian Protestants, of right English Gentlemen, in which
there may yet be a blessing; you (with the other Right Honorable House of
Peers) are the hoped Repairers of the vaste breaches made upon our Laws, and
the Restorers of our Reformed Religion, so miserably deformed, defamed and
almost quite desolated, as to any beauty, order, and anity.

. You are the center in which all our secular Votes and hopes do meet; or
rather you are the circumference, orb and circle, in which they are all
contained, that you may draw them all to their right point, and proper center,
of fixed duty to God and Man: You are the answer of many prayers and tears; God
forbid you should miscarry: yea, as St. Ambrose said to Monica of her Son St.
Austin (while he was yet debauched in both morals and intellectuals, in opinion
and practice) I am not a little confident you will not miscarry; nay I am sure
you cannot miscarry if you steer your counsels and actions by the compass of
this Text, Doing Justice, loving Mercy, and walking humbly with your God.
Pride, cruelty and Injustice have been and will be our undoing.

. It will be your wisdom to look to this cynosure or benign constellation; in
which Law and Gospel, Justice and Mercy are joined with humility; in these,
your inward peace of conscience no less than your outward comforts, together
with your honor and all our safeties are conjoined. Beware you mistake not
blazing meteors of partial and fanatic interests, for the fixed stars of our
firmament, our fundamental laws, and public welfare, lest the hand of God
break out against you, as it has done against others, and cut you off by a
further abscission, as parts of desperate and incurable distempers, which are
to be smitten no more by the fruitless strokes and superfluous severities of a
chastising Father, or an healing and searching Chyrurgeon, but with the wounds
of such enemies, and cruel ones, as seek to cut us off from being a Reformed
Church, and a Renowned Nation under heaven.

I lately in a great ((...)) and public Assembly set forth the hurts and
slight healings of the Daughter of my people, by a faithful scrutiny, and just
severity, with which all honest hearts were affected: I now bring a vial of
Balm from Gilead very precious and sovereign, wherewith to present you, who are
by a miraculous Providence, and the wise conduct of a modern Hero, called by
God, and chosen by men to be our Physicians: Not that I am to teach Senators
wisdom; but I know you will not disdain to learn of God; for from the tree of
life, his holy Word, together with the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
(your own experience) this divine balsom is distilled;

1. There is a Justice of expiation, to break off our sins by repentance, which
is Debitum Deo and animae, a debt to God and our souls.

2. A Justice of compensation, by meet repairing our public injuries; which
is Debitum bonis, a debt due to all good men.

3. A Justice of Vindication, to confirm our laws by inflicting such just
penalties and restraints as some men's insolences have deserved, which is
debitum impiis, a debt you owe to wicked men, yea to all men, that they may
hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

Secondly, Yet lest we should be terrified with the name of Justice only (which
no men have more cause to dread, than those who once cried loudest Justice,
Justice) there is the allay of Mercy, as to all such moderation, compassion and
tenderness, by way of pardon, indemnity and oblivion, in order to close and
compose our breaches (for praestat motos componere fluctus) as may not only
best suit with your pity and compassion to the public, but most become the
humanity of Countrymen, and the charity of Christians to each other, without
any reproach to the justice, piety and honor of the Nation.

Thirdly, There is added the root and crown of all virtues and graces,
Humility; which makes you surest of Gods acceptance and benediction; as to all
your counsels and actions, your fastings and prayers, your sacred and civil
endeavors: For Humility is the salt which must be mingled with every Sacrifice,
a sweet perfume that must attend every Oblation; being the glory of all humane
and divine perfections, the security of Justice, and sanctuary of Mercy; for
from pride, and inordinate valuing of men's selves, come all those ambitious
discontents and contentions, for getting more than men have, or indeed deserve,
of estate and power; hence they are betrayed to all those cruelties and
confusions, which we have not only read and heard, but to our cost both seen
and felt in humane affairs, and never more than in those of our own Country.

. If you intend to walk with God, and hope that God should go along with you;
you must not only ( vos totos subigere, sed and in nihilum redigere, as Calvin
on the place) deny, but so far utterly renounce and annihilate your selves, as
not to trust in or to seek your selves, but the living God; the less you lean
to your own understandings, Prove. 23.^.
and the more you attend ((...)) the divine dictates of Justice, Mercy, and
Humility (without Pharisaick boastings, popular complyings, and Popish
presumptions) the more blessed you will be of God, and the greater blessing to
your Country.

The Lord will be with you while you follow him in these holy ways of Justice,
Mercy and humility; 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
but if you pursue lying vanities, you will forsake and forfeit your own and
all our mercies; if you attend passionate and partial interests, unjust and
cruel counsels; if your hearts (as Pharoahs) be lifted up against God, and
above your brethren, you also will be entangled in the wilderness of sin, your
chariot wheels will be taken off; you will drive heavily, and at last engage
your selves and all of us in a deeper sea of blood (if deeper can be) to the
utter ruin of our Reformed Religion, and our justly endeared, but afflicted
Country, which is the nest of our posterity.

The way of our happiness.
. Give me leave therefore (O ye Heads of our Tribes and chief of our Families)
to bespeak your attention (as Jotham did the men of Sechem) Hearken to me,
Judge. 9.7.
that God may hearken to you; they are divine Revelations, not humane
inventions that I offer to you; if you turn away from hearing and doing these
few, Prove. 28.9.
clear, and necessary commands of God, your prayers and fasts will be
abominable, your consultations confusions, and your actions will be as well
unsuccessful as injurious to God, your selves, and others.

. We have been many years as the Lepers in their desperate dilemma, between
famine and sword, 2 Kings 7.8:
oppression and confusion, sin and suffering, death and despair; if we returned
to the City, or but looked to our former Jerusalem, to our excellent laws and
constitutions in Church and State, it was confiscation, plunder, sequestration,
destruction; if we still advanced in the perplexed ways of some men's new
inventions, and endless novelties, it was not only sinful confusion but sore
oppression, and continual exhausting of our estates and honors, beside our
peace and liberty, together with the baffling of the very orderly profession,
no less than the power of Religion.

. Indeed we could neither have leave to live freely, as honest men, nor as good
Christians; all our sacred, and civil, our temporal and eternal interests were
and still are at stake. Terrent etiam nunc nubila mentem, our bodies and souls,
our persons and posterities are still engaged; yea, and the Ark of God too, our
Religion, as reformed and Christian.

. In all these respects, our eyes and hearts are next God passionately toward
you; we have many years been solicitous, with that Catholic Question, Who will
show us any good? we have long looked for the promised good things, of a
glorious Church, of a flourishing and settled State but our iniquities have
withheld them from us: Ier. 5.25.
Here the Lord has showed you in a few words what is good; Bonum Ecclesiae,
patriae, conscientiae, animae; good for souls and bodies, for Church and State;
for Sovereign and Subjects, for rich and poor, for great and small, for their
selves and their posterity, for civil and religious interests, for temporal and
eternal concernments; namely, To do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with your God: All our evils arise from either our want of justice or mercy, or
humility, from our injuriousness, uncharitableness, and arrogance, which knows
not how to be either thankful and content before God, or merciful and just
toward men.

. The Text, as a full and liberal fountain, Partition
has many emanations like the Rivers that watered the garden of God.

1. We have the main head or source, the Lord.

2. The great cistern or receptacle, Thee O man.

3. The ( tria fluenta) three grand Derivations or streams.

First, Of doing Justice. Secondly, Of loving Mercy. Thirdly, Of walking humbly
with God.

All are clear, copious and comprehensive subjects of our meditation, discourse
and practice. For 1. In una justitia omnes virtutes. 2. In una misericordia
omnes beatitudines. 3. In una humilitate omnes gratiae; Matthew. 5.7.
all graces are in humility, all blessednesses in showing Mercy, and all moral
virtues in Justice; for every vice and sin is an injury to God, our selves or
others.

Nor have we God herein our Instructor only, but also our ((...)) great
example; for we Christians serve not only ( justum Dominum, and benignum
Patrem, sed and humilem Deum) a just Lord and a merciful Father, but even an
humble God, He abaseth himself (says the Psalmist) to behold the things done
upon earth, Psalm. 13.
to dwell with the Sons of men, especially with the humble and contrite spirit;
yea, Phil. 2.8.
the Lord of glory, in order to save us from the sad effects of our pride, has
humbled himself even to the death of the cross; and is it time for us sinful
worms to be proud, unjust, and unmerciful!

. There are four parts to be set forth.

1. (...), The Demonstrator or Shewer; The Lord. 2. (...), or things
Demonstrated, Justice, Mercy and Humility; indeed the ((...)) whole duty of
man. 3. (...); To whom this Demonstration is made, Thee O man. 4. (...), The
manner of demonstration, how God shows to, and requires of man these things.
. It is not my design to handle each of them after that ampleness which these
subjects may bear or deserve, nor will the time and after duties permit: but
only to make such short remarques and touches of them, as may not so much teach
you (who are knowing in all the will of God, as to Justice and Mercy, Law and
Gospel) but only stir up your pure and holy minds to be not knowers, or hearers
only, but doers also of the will of God, that you may be blessed of God and
man; and Saviors indeed, not Deceivers and Destroyers of your selves and your
Country.

. I begin with the first, The Demonstrator, who, The demonstrator.
The Lord. Here two things are to be considered, First, (...), the rise or
occasion of this demonstration. 2. (...) or (...), the credit and authority of
the Demonstrator.

. First, The Occasion, 1 The occasion
putting the Lord upon this way of remonstrating, to inculcate these (requisita
and dictata) old lessons; this you will see in the foregoing words, verse. 6, 7.
where we may observe the vaunting questions, and presumptuous postulations of a
company of formal Hypocrites, who demand ( in Dei dedecus and legis
contumeliam) to the reproach of God and his Laws, what he would have to please
him? Burnt offerings or Rivers of oil, or if need be, their very firstborn;
they will be at any cost to appease him, part with any thing, spare nothing but
their sins.

1 Samuel 15.13.
. Thus they quarrel with God, and justify themselves with Saul, that they had
fulfilled the Law of God; Isa. 58.3.
as those devout Bulrushes in Isaiah, who are not ashamed to ask, Why have we
fasted and afflicted our souls? when they had not parted with any sin, nor
loosed any bands of oppression.

. We may observe as in Scripture, so in all our late experiences, that no men
are more supercilious self-justifiers, and imperious retorters upon God and
man, than those who are most defective in their duties to both; they are angry
that God is angry, and unsatisfied that he is not satisfied with their
Hypocritical chaff and formality; they plead ignorance when wilfully blind; and
ask for light when they shut their eyes; they would know what to do, when they
do not what they know.

Such proud and insolent vaporers (like Jehu and the Pharisee) are audacious
and frontless Hypocrites, Ezekiel. 18 15.
as if their ways were equal, and Gods unequal; as if God were blameable, and
themselves blameless: O what cost and pains will they be at to reform Religion,
Laws, Liberties, Church and State when, they aim to be the most irreligious
Depravers, and licentious oppressors of all? O the Temple, (...). 7.4.
the Temple of the Lord! O his service, worship and Ministers; when they rob
God, destroy his Church, and debace his Ministers; these do not so much err as
lie and dissemble in their hearts: They brag of precious liberties, when they
bring in both slavery and licentiousness: They boast of great Reformations,
when they are most deformed Reformers; they find fault with God, and all men
but themselves; all their aberrations are gracious, and their very sins must be
glorious essays or successes; while they follow Providence, they fly from
plain Scriptures, and known Laws; these prescribe to such new Saints ( angustam
minus justitiam) too narrow a loom for their wild justice; these talk high of
successes, which are their racks, when they look not to their consciences which
are as empty mangers: they talk of Religion, and neglect civil Justice; they
are large-hearted to God, and strict-handed toward men; he shall have enough
of praying, preaching, and fasting, provided they may proudly usurp, and
cruelly oppress their Brethren and betters.

. Yet will they pretend, What will God have more? why does he yet complain?
when they have both wearied themselves and him too with the heaps of their
formal services and vain oblations.

God here (as elsewhere) sharply retorts upon them; ye need not go far, O you
hard-hearted, Ioh. 1^ 1^. Psalm. 50.8. ^sa. ^6.3. Psalm. 51.17. 1 Samuel 1^.22.
Hos. 6.6.
and cruel-handed Hypocrites, to learn that God will have mercy and not
sacrifice; that obedience moral, is better than burnt offerings ceremonial;
that (comparatively) God has not required these things at your hands, not
solely, not chiefly; that he is sick and surfeited, and overladen with these
sordid and sinful oblations, nothing is cordial to him, but humble hearts,
charitable hands, and just actions.

. He requires not so much the outward cost, pomp and ceremony of Religion, as
that equal piety and pious equity, which is just to God and man; Thus in vain
do some Papists highly urge and prodigally insist of the excessive cost they
bestow on their Religion, when they applaud, yea almost adore the Papal pride
and usurpation, persisting in that the Sacrilege and injury they do to God and
man, by denying the plenary doctrines, and donations of Christ in the
Sacraments to all communicants, and in their communicating something of worship
and merit to the creature, beyond what the divine glory and jealousy set forth
in the word of God does permit.

. Not that God loves a lazy or a penurious, a hide-bound and illiberal
Religion, which seeks to serve God of that which costs us nothing; much-less
does he approve those sacrilegious robberies, which are pretended for his
glory, and the advantages of his service: No, he is neither a covetous nor a
cruel God; he gives all things, and is content every one in Church and State
should enjoy their own, what ever by right (that is by Law) belongs to them.

. From the occasion of this hypocritical insolency (the (...)) or
inquisitiveness, which they fallaciously use, as if solicitous to content him,
the Lord himself by the Prophet inculcates not the Deuteronomy, but the
Hecatontonomy, that law of justice, mercy and humility, which he had an hundred
times repeated by Moses and the Prophets to the Jews, as the ((...)) principal
pleasure of the Lord, beyond all Holocausts and Hecatombs, all rivers of oil,
and sacrifices of the first born; God who is ((...), as Dionysius calls him)
all essence wholly substance, or self-subsistence, without any shadow or
accident, cannot delight so much in any such shadows and leaves of ceremonious
service with which the most barren Formalists may abound; as in those real
fruits and solid effects of Equity, Charity and Sanctity, with which as none
but the truly godly do abound, so whoever brings these to God from a pure and
devoted humble heart, is more welcome with two mites or a little meal, then
others are with all their luxurious costliness; of all which the very Heathens
had pregnant conceptions to offer to the gods.

-- Jus, fasque animi, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto,
Haec cedo ut admoveam Templis and far litabo.
. 2. We are to consider the ((...)) credit and authority of this Demonstrator,
2 The credit and authority of the Demonstrator.
which makes his words both for the truth and goodness of them ((...)) most
worthy to be believed, received, and obeyed, since he is the most wise God, in
and from whom are all treasures of wisdom, intellectual, moral and political.
He is the great eternal and inexhausted fountain of all power and order,
natural, civil and spiritual; the Father of lights, the infallible Teacher, the
Sovereign Dictator, ((...)) the great Lawgiver, whose will is the highest
Reason, and his Word the most unalterable truth; we have these lively Oracles
of Justice, Mercy and Humility, not from Jupiter as Minos pretended; or from
Egeria, as Numa; or Minerva, as Solon; or Apollo, as Lycurgus; or from
fictitious artifices, as Mahomet; or from fantastic Enthusiasms, as Fanatics;
but from that King immortal, the only wise God; who has the authority of both
Lord and Father, the sufficiency of infinity, and the exemplary Ideas in him of
all perfections; that being in him to the highest glory of goodness, Psalm.
94.10.
which he shows to us, and requires of us in his Law; This is he that
teaches man wisdom.

. 2. He is not more ((...), than (...)) able by his wisdom, than willing by his
indulgence and love to instruct mankind in the way that is best for him, and in
those Laws which are most just and equal, most easy and useful, most comely
and honorable, for all conditions, single and social, public and private,
Sovereign and Subject, for Magistrate and Minister, for Church and State: This
is he who teaches man by way of eminency, that one great and fundamental
lesson, Job 28.
That the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding. He gave to the Jews the knowledge of his laws, not only
ceremonial but political and moral; those are (...), or magna moralia, in
comparison of which the ceremonies were but transient shadows, and begga^ly
elements, as the Apostle speaks; Statutes that were not good, that is, not
absolutely and in themselves or materially, but relatively; as referring to the
Imposers authority, and those better things of which they were emblems or
types; they were as heavy burdens, so but temporary dispensations, during the
poedagogy or minority of Religion, till the better ages (or worlds) should
come, in which Evangelical Justice, Mercy and Humility, should most fully be
not only demonstrated from the moral law, but also from the glorious example
of the justice of God satisfied and his mercy procured, by the humiliation of
Messiah, the condescension and crucifixion of the Son of God.

. 3. The Lord has showed thee, these ((...)) most infallible and immutable
rules of Justice, Mercy, and Humility, who is ((...)) the justest exacter, and
the exactest observer of our obedience, and conformity to these laws; in other
matters of ceremony and service, he is not so severe and rigid, but graciously
dispenses, upon many occasions, as of necessity and infirmity, of prepotent
custom, disuse and prejudice; but in the grand points of Justice, Mercy, and
Humility, there is no dispensation or remission; no man can, as to these, be at
any time unable, if he be not unwilling; here impotency is impiety; God
strictly observes all wilful and presumptuous transgressions, and will be the
avenger of them; not is he to be deceived or satisfied with any formal excuses
and pretentions used by wily hypocrites, who offer chaff instead of good weat,
no more than he can be escaped or reresisted by any tyrannique power and
insolences, when he makes inquisition for these notorious omissions of
Justice, Mercy, and Humility, which are the summaries of all good Laws, and the
seminaries of all piety, grace and virtue; nor shall these words of God, which
drop like the rain and gentle dew from heaven return in vain, but will be swift
witnesses against any soul, whose barrenness presages it is nigh to our sing
and burning: for these laws and lessons (as from Mount Sinai) are with thunder
and lightning; Gods demonstrations are not only true but terrible, armed with
omnipotency, never to be bafled, pregnantly showed by their own perspicuity,
and powerfully exacted by the divine severity, who will carry himself frowardly
or contrarily, and as I may say, with an uncondescending height, and divine
stiffness against those that are not humble in his sight, resisting the proud,
and withdrawing mercy from the merciless; yea requiring the justice of
punishment on us, because the justice of obedience is not done by us. Ideo enim
patimur justitiam quia non agimus, as St. Bernard speaks; for this is by the
eternal vengeance still inculcated in hell (as Virgil expresses)

Discite justitiam moniti, and ne temnite divos. while the Furies with their
flaming iron whips (flagellis ferreis and flagrantibus) do compel wicked and
unjust men to suffer that justice which they refused to do to God, to Man, to
themselves and others.

But I have done with the first general; in which I observed the occasion and
authority of this Demonstration.

. Secondly, I now come to the ((...), or (...)) thing demonstrated; 2 Genesis the
thing demonstrated.
the grand lesson which God teaches so clearly and constantly to all men at
all times, these are denoted under these three grand heads; Justice, Mercy and
Humility,

These are considerable. 1. Conjunctim, jointly. 2. Divisim, severally, in
their united and distinct aspects.

1. Consider them together, and they afford us six things considerable.

First, The paucity of these ( magna mandata, or sum requisita) grand
demands: The Lord lays but a few things upon us; Tria sunt omnia, a sacred
Trinity of Precepts from the sacred Trinity of Justice, Mercy and Humility,
from the divine Wisdom, Power and Majesty.

These make up that ( monile sacrum) holy pendent or jewel, which is the
greatest ornament of humane nature, and blessing of all Societies, consisting
but of three gems; but they are paragons of great price; for what is brighter
than the invincible Diamond of Justice, which is scintilla Dei, a spark of God,
as pearls are drops, and Diamonds sparks of the Sun? what more beautiful than
the gentle Sapphire of Mercy? what more amiable than the modest Emrald of
Humility?

. The paternal indulgence of God is pleased to give us, in his teaching us
short lessons, compendious Counsels, and holy Epitomes of his will and our duty.

. At first he propounded but ( december verba) ten commands in the Decalogue,
which is a summary of all Theological and Moral Institutions: After he reduces
these to a narrower compass, of loving the Lord thy God, and thy neighbor as
thy self: So Solomon, To fear God and keep his Commandments; Christ makes up
all in one grand sentence, of doing as we would be done unto; whence the
Emperor Severus took his famous Motto; the Apostle St. Matthew. 22.40.
Paul brings all points and lines of the Laws and Gospels circumference to this
one center, Love, as the fulfilling of all in one word. Nor does he permit
Timothy to vary from that ((...)) wholesome form of words, the faith once
delivered to the Saints, which he had taught him, as a short creed or summary
(no doubt) of Christian doctrine, which otherwhere is expressed in beleiving
with the heart, and confessing the Lord Jesus with the mouth; so in the end of
the commandment, which is Charity, out of a pure heart, and a good conscience,
and faith unfeigned; So inexcusable are they who refuse to learn of God; whose
commandments are neither grievous nor numerous, but condescending to the
weakest capacities, and frailest memories; to which, what ever is necessary in
religion, is easy to be learned and retained.

. For secondly, as the particular heads are few in number, so very short in the
discourse: some points may by long Orations be (like gold) malleated and
extended to such great latitudes of diffused expressions, as make them very
combersom; as the volumes of our times, both in Dogmatick, Polemick, and
Practick Divinity do witness; while the superfluity of man's wit and eloquence
glories to find out many inventions, definitions and distinctions, even in
plain things; wire-drawing religion into fine threads, and driving the solid
mass of Divinity, as to Faith and Repentance, love of God and our neighbors to
leaf gold, chopping, and hewing, and paring the pillars of wisdom into small
chips and thin shavings. Doubtless (as Erasmus writes to Archep. Warrham) the
Church of Christ was never in a more happy estate, than when it was ( uno and
brevissimo symbolo contenta) both contented with and kept in the compass of
that one short Creed, which we call the Apostles, and which was yet once
shorter than now it is.

Thirdly, But, commonly brevity is attended with obscurity; Brevis esse laboro,
obscurus fio; short and concise expressions many times wrap things up, as it
were, in clouds; whereas Laws ought to be meridiana lumina, tanquam solis
radiis scriptae, so clear, as none need complain; so legible that he that runs
may read them; and so indeed are these divine demonstrations in the Text, where
the wisdom of God reconcileth brevity and perspicuity together (as Pliny speaks
of Trajans uniting Sovereignty and Liberty, by an happy temper of Government or
Empire, which neither diminished his own just Prerogative, as a Prince, nor
oppressed the peoples legal immunities as his Subjects) so the Lord, designing
these Laws for all sorts of people, fits them for all capacities in such a way,
that the very babes and simple ones may learn, and understand, and do them;
(...). Laws (says Plato) ought to be as common and catholic in their
expressions, as they are in their injunction or obligation, that none may plead
ignorance, either by the prolixity or obscurity, by the ennormious number, or
by the tedious length of them.

Fourthly, We may observe the order and situation of the particulars; First,
Justice. Secondly, Mercy. Thirdly, Humility; there is (as Calvin and others
observe) an ((...)) inverting of the Primacy and order due to that dignity
which humility (as the summary of all Religion, or piety to God) justly
requires before that of justice toward man; yet this is placed first, as most
obvious for man's advantages and discerning, though not as most eminent in
nature; as if the Lord more minded the welfare of mankind than his own service;
importuning first for Justice and Mercy, and last for humble walking with
himself; not but that religion toward God is and ought to be the chief
intention; but Justice and Mercy may go before in the execution, especially in
case of eminent danger and distress private and public; here ( necessitas
pellit Sabbatum) the Sacrifice, Shewbread and Sabbath yield to necessity, not
immoral; God will have Justice and Mercy rather then burnt-offerings; yea in
cases of fire, shipwreck, or sickness, and like exigencies of life and safety;
it is venial to break off fastings, prayings, preachings, and communicating at
the Lords Table, in order to save others or our selves.

. As in private so in public cases, when things are upon a precipice or
extremity, the first care may be of the man, next of the Christian; to cure the
Commonweals urgent paroxisms, and then the Churches chronick distempers; which
was David's method, who first composed the civil disorders, which war had
occasioned, before he applied to bring the Ark to its rest, and establish the
solemnities of religious services. It is certain (as Optatus observes) that the
Church is imbarqued in the Commonweal; and though the lading be better worth
and more to be valued then the ship, yet there will be an ill account of the
first, if the latter be not secured from great leaks, and desperate rocks of
war and sedition, which to prevent is not only a mercy justly due to mankind,
but an acceptable service to God; He were a very preposterous Zealot and
ridiculous Divine, who in the exigents of pleuritick pains, and present
faintings of spirits, would impose upon heart-sick Patients his long prayers,
or tediously obtrude godly discourses, and other ghostly counsels, rather than
give way to the Physicians or Chyrurgeons skill and applications, for
blood-letting or cordials; this were to act the part not of a pious and prudent
Confessor, but of a devout and imprudent Executioner.

. It is certain (as Minutius Faelix observes, Apud nos Christianos, quo quisque
religiosior, eo justior) among good Christians, the best are most ready to
mercy, and exactest in justice. Yea reverend Calvin observes on the place,
Injustitia erga homines est certissimum impietatis argumentum; although men may
do many just things, and yet have no true Religion; yet injustice toward men is
(as Leprosy on the forehead) a certain token of Irreligion toward God.

. They are found liars to God and man, and will be deceivers, yea damners of
their own souls, who pretend to build Religion and Reformation on the ruins of
Justice and Civil Laws, by sacrilege, and violence, by robbery and rapine;
they trust in lying words which cannot profit; who steal, Ie^. 7.9.
and murder, and lie, and swear falsely, and yet come, and stand before God in
his house, and say We are delivered to do all these abominations; these are the
projects of John of Leyden and his accomplices, full of Enthusiastic folly and
fury; men cannot be holy men with John Baptist, nor devout with Cornelius,
unless they be just with both; and also how can they be just to God whom they
have not seen, if they be unjust to man whom they have seen! as St. 1 Ioh. 4.20.
John speaks of loving God! hence the blessed God puts the rendering to Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, before the rendering to God the things tha^ are
Gods; not as to the dignity or duty of our obedience, Luke 10.25.
but as to the evidence and outward testimony of our inward subjection to God,
by that which is outward to our lawful Superiors, who are in Gods stead, having
both power and commission from God, and in serving of whom, in things lawful,
we serve the Lord.

. After the like method is that of the Apostle, which tells us, that the grace
of God that brings salvation, Tit. 2.11.
teaches us first to live righteously, next soberly, and then godlily in this
present world; the first and pregnantest instances of pure Religion and
undefiled are first to man and then to God; not but that the root of piety, and
our Closet-religion to God is before the fruits of Justice and Mercy, but those
are more hidden, and these most manifested, so as men may see our good works,
and glorify our heavenly Father.

Fifthly, Nor is the juncture of these three inobservable, because indeed they
are inseparable where they are sincere; This is ( sancta and individua trias)
an holy and undivided Trinity; where one is, all will be; the root of Humility,
the leaf of Mercy, and the fruit of Justice; if men be proud they will be cruel
and covetous, void of Mercy and Justice too. So if they be unjust and
uncharitable, you may conclude them to be without humility; for these three are
as one, which united bear witness to God, our own Conscience and others: Proud
men are prone to envy others, to overvalue themselves, and to use such unjust
means as may gratify their inordinate appetites, suitable to their high
opinions of themselves; proud, and so unjust thoughts betray men to unjust
actions.

Sixthly and lastly, We may observe the ((...)) common epithet or predicate to
all of them; The Lord has showed what is good; jointly and severally,
absolutely and respectively, to all men at all times, in all occasions and
conditions ((...)) in private and public stations, for Church and State, in
war and peace, in revenge and restitution, for souls, bodies, and estates, for
selves and others; good to begin, continue and increase all blessings, that
mankind can desire to enjoy in this life; for liberty, honor, peace and plenty,
joined with piety; these are ( divinissima and amaenissima bona) profitable and
pleasant as well as most necessary.

1. Without Justice there can be no good in the greatest plenty, which either
exposes to injury, or prospers by rapine and violence.

2. Without Mercy there is no relief or succor in the many miseries to which
humane infirmities, and our mortal state is subject.

3. Without Humility neither Equity nor Charity will profit us, or please God;
when they are as the virtues of Heathens, more from Pharisaick pomp and love of
applause, than any sense of duty to men, or devotion to God; these may have
their reward from men, but neither good nor great, because proportionable to
what they sow, either formal or hypocritical, or incomplete and partial; while
their lusts and passions either transport them beyond, or keep them short of
that true and pure fountain of living waters, which while they forsake, to
follow broken cisterns, and unfaithful pits, they cannot fail to suffer evil at
last, because they do not follow that good which God has set so free and full
before them; Et ideo miseri quia mali; they are not miserable for Gods defects,
as if he had decreed them to be so, or denied them, the way of being, doing and
enjoying good; but because they do or easily may know the way, and works, and
rewards that are good, but will not; Maxima pars humanae impotentiae fluit
exvoluntate; the most if not all of our immoral and sinful infirmities, flow
from our want of will rather than of skill. God is not wanting to teach us the
good we should choose and do; but we are wanting to choose and do the good he
evidently teaches us; we cannot complain of Gods not convincing us, but God
complains justly of our not complying with, and converting to his conviction.

. Thus I have considered these three things jointly; now we may look on them
distinct or severally.

First, In the subject or substance, spirit and quintessence of each of them,
Justice, Mercy and Humility.

Secondly, In the predication or addition to each; to do Justice, to love
Mercy, to walk humbly with thy God.

. First, Lets take a summary view of the subject or substance of each; not by
the way of common place, wherein the three Preachers of this day might have
found matter enough to have entertained both their meditation and your
attention; but in such a short summary, as may only take the (...), the topmost
and fairest fruit of each, and leave the other large harvest or vintage to your
own gathering.

. The first is (...), judicium, (...), such justice as directs in judicature,
not speculative, 1 I^stice.
or habitual and dispositive justice, but transitive, decisive justice;
forensis justitia, which from an inward principle brings forth the fruits of
Justice or Righteousness to all. Io^. 18.38.
Here we are to enquire as Pilat did of truth, What is Justice? Quest.


. 1. Some measure it by their power, Ans. What Justice i^.
by the length of their sword, and strength of their arm; when indeed (Id
tantum possumus quod jure possumus) and in maxima potentia minima debet esse
licentia. The best and valiantest men neither can nor will do ought but what
they lawfully may; they count ((...)) unjust things impossible.

. 2. Others measure justice by their wills, passions, lusts, interests, etc.
quicquid libet licet (meram voluntatem imperii limits ponunt) what serves
their ambition, and covetousness, or their revenge and envy, or their faction
or partiality, this is just with them though never so unlawful.

. There are that measure justice by their fancies and imaginations, by their
dreams and Enthusiasms, by their presumed gifts and graces, as if they had a
right and merit to all they can get; that they are the only Israelites, who
have Gods commission to spoil the Egyptians; that all things are theirs,
because they challenge Christ to be theirs; that civil dominion is founded in
grace, and justice is to be measured only by faith and assurance of salvation,
of which themselves will be the only Judges; these are the paultry pretentions
of some Hucsters of Religion, and devout Beggars, who with the Pharisees,
Euchites and Circumcellians, find it easier to devour others by long prayers
and preachings, or (if these will not do) by fighting, than to get their own
living by honest industry.

. 4. There are that measure Justice by necessity; as if necessity justified all
its commands, and gave checkmate to all laws: It Is true in some public
exigencies, private rights must yield to public necessities; yet so as to make
just compensation, after the tide of necessity is retired: but there is no
immoral necessity to be allowed. Nullum peccatum necessarium; no sin is
necessary unless there be a necessity to be damned.

. The first fallacy of measuring Justice by forcible power and possession, is a
giant or monster arising from the earth; The second which measures gain by
godliness, and godliness by gain, or propounds a necessity of doing evil that
good may come thereby, are Meteors which rise from an higher region indeed, but
they are both alike prodigious to any Church or State where they appear, and
prove very pestilential to mankind in both respects civil and sacred.

. My answer (then) to the Question, What Justice is? must be no other than
that, which of old all wise men and the Apostle gives, that is, To render or
preserve to every one their due; Justitia est quae suum cuique tribuit. Id suum
cuique quod debitum; Id debitum quod a Deo and natura datum, aut lege
designatum; that is a man's own and due to him which is either by God or Nature
given, or is by Law assigned to him.

. The Platonists answer well to this ((...)) what is just? That which is
according to law; What is lawful? That which is rational; What is rational?
that which is divine; what is Divine? that which is best and eternal; most
worthy of God and most useful for mankind.

. Justice is to be considered in three main things; Justice in the fountain.
first in its fountain and original, the wisdom and will of God, which is the
exactest measure, and infallible rule of Justice in it self; sufficit quod Deus
voluit, as Salvian speaks; voluntas Dei summa ratio and lex suprema; not only
in the divine nature, as the Arch-type of all perfections, but in those
revelations of it to Angels and mankind; either by those, (...) common
principles of reason, to which all men (in their wits) must and will consent,
which are ( lex nata) the law written in our hearts; Romans 2.
as it were the common law of all mankind ( jus gentium) or by those further
express mandates which God gives to any either by immediate revelation, or by
such credible derivations of it to others, for the tradition of his word, by
speech or writing, as his wisdom thinks fit to use.

Hence are all good laws of Church and State, of civil and religious concerns
derived: By these all are tried and confirmed as good and just, and accordingly
ought to be established as valid by civil sanction or consent; by these all
matters of commutative or distributive justice are dispensed, which either
exchange for such compensations as are mutually agreed upon, according as one
wants, and another abounds in any thing; or else such distributions are
adjudged to any as are grounded on the law; Or lastly; such recompenses are
made to every man by reward or punishment as his actions do merit, either good
or bad, in reference to the public welfare, for the encouraging of well doing,
or suppressing of evil.

. Here the moral law of God binds all men always; the Political laws of God
bind no further than that proportion of moral justice, piety, and prudence
which appears in them, according as the parallel state of times, and persons,
and actions may be; in which the consent and submission of the major part of
men, or long custom, and settled constitutions in any Polity have the force of
a law, and are a rule of Politic Justice; provided they bind to nothing
immoral or irreligious.

Justice in the c^stern.
Secondly, Justice is considerable in the grand cistern and conservatory (as the
brazen Sea in the Sanctuary, which served the Temple with water) which is the
Sovereign and Legislative power in every Society and Polity, as it is
circumscribed and contained in its proper bounds, and peculiar limits; this is
the center of Order, Unity, Justice and Peace politic; this dividing and
dashing against it self by Caesar and Pompey, by Senate and People, by King and
Parliament, by Emperors and Electors, all Justice, Order and Peace are
destroyed; the leak in this sinks all; there must be a fixed Sovereignty under
God, to whose Justice and Power paramount, all must submit according to law;
contestations in this run all things to confusions, as our sad experience has
taught us: Here either Prince, or State, or Peers or People, may severally have
the Sovereignty of Justice, under several polities or forms of government; or
there may be such a temperament, both as to legislation, jurisdiction, and
execution of Laws by legal power, as may best relieve people in their
grievances by Parliamentary representatives; and best judge of differences by
sworn Judges, and best execute all legal sentences and decrees by an eminent
power in a Sovereign Prince, King or Emperor, which is best for all estates;
and such is that admirable constitution of Sovereign Majesty in England, from
which all Laws are enacted, by which they are declared, and with which they are
justly and effectually executed, inclusive of and adapted to all just interests
of King, Lords and Commons.

. 3. Justice in the conduits.
Justice is considerable in the pipes and conduits of a^l subordinate
Magistrates, through which, (as blood in the veins) it flows from the chief
Justiciaries to the very petty Constables, for the relief of all sorts of
people, which are as parts and members (noble or less honorable) of that Body
Politic, according as the Law does adjudge to every one their due; the measure
of all is either (recta ratio) right Reason, or sacra Scriptura, the holy
Scripture, or ( lex terrae) the law of the Land, to which all are subjected by
their consent; He is just who looks to these; who willingly submits to them,
and exactly observes them.

Justice to God
. 1. There is a Justice due to God above all, on which his commands in the
first table are founded; To own him, love, fear, reverence, adore, admire,
obey, trust in, depend on, joy in and enjoy him as the supreme good: Mal. 5.6.
If I be a Father or Master, where is my fear?

Selves*
. 2. There is a Justice due to our selves, in chastity, sanctity, and sobriety,
to keep up the ((...)) Imperial power of Reason and Religion, above that
((...)) Democracy and Anarchy of lusts and passions which fight and rebel
against God and the soul; here every virtue is a branch or fruit of Justice, as
every vice is an act or habit of Injustice ((...), as Clem. Alex. out of the
Platonists observes) every sinful and inordinate passion or action, either
comes short, or shoots beyond, or wide of Justice, which consists in the
medium, as in a line or point indivisible.

Others.
. 3. There is also a Justice to others, void of all fraud or force; of which as
the Word of God in general, and the Laws of every Polity in special, so the
dictates of every man's own reason, his duly reformed, and well composed
conscience, are domestic Dictators ((...), as Synesius observes) God has made
every man's rational Will the Monitor of justice; hence men are a law in many
things to themselves, and their own thoughts do accuse or excuse their actions;
hence unjust men, who act by fraud or force, though never so successful, yet
are ((...) and (...)) self-condemned, and without any Apology; Prima est haec
ultio, quod se Judice nemo nocens absolvitur; And Exemplo quodcunque malo
committitur ipsi Displicet autori; every unjust doer, as he is his own greatest
tempter and Traitor; so he will be his own summoner, accuser, witness,
tormenter and Executioner; (sibi poena omnis inordinatus animus) as St. Genesis
4^.^1.
Austin: So Joseph's brethren accuse themselves first as guilty of their
brothers blood; they must needs be sooner or later ( Magor-missabib) terrors to
themselves, who are by their unjust dealings injurious to others, and a terror
to the land of the living by their oppressions. But I have done with the Theory
of Justice, in its Source, Derivations and Practiques.

I come now to the second main Postulate or demand of God; mercy, (...): 3
Demand, Mercy.
misericordia, or benignitas as it is variously rendered; This is divinissimum
in divinitate, and humanissimum in humanitate opus. Mercy is the most orient
gem in the Crown of Gods attributes, and the greatest ornament as well as
relief of humane nature; It is the glory of God to pass by offenses, to pardon
sins, Exodus 34.^.
to temper the rigor of his Justice: to supply defects, to help infirmities,
and to save those sinners in his exceeding great mercy, whom he might have
condemned in the extremity of his Justice.

. By mercy God is sui victor, and seipso major, as it were greater than
himself, and a conqueror of himself, A denyer of himself, and a sider with our
interests; All our hopes and happiness are founded upon, and bound up in the
mercy of God, Psalm. 103.8.
which is above all his works and ours: In this fatherly benignity all our
blessings are contained; nor are we capable as St. Bernard speaks; of any other
merit, than that is made up of Gods mercy; which is perventive and plenary,
beyond desert and desire, so ample, that none is denied it, upon the terms
offered; Psalm. 1 6
Nor can it be ever exhausted for it indures for ever; yea and it is peculiar
to mankind above the Angels.

. From this great pattern of Gods mercy to such worthless wretches as we are,
springs this demand, and demonstration, by which God requires us to be merciful
as he our heavenly father is merciful; to imitate God in this, which is not
more necessary so others, than our selves, since no man can show so much mercy
to others, as he either wants, or has received himself.

Mercy in God.
. Mercy in God is a perfection of goodness, by which he moderates the severity
of his Justice, toward sinful mankind, yet without any diminution or blemish of
his Justice, since it is by the suffering of Messiah so satisfied, that while
mercy rejoices, Justice has no cause to complain.

In Man
. Mercy in man, is an affection, by which he lays to heart the misery of
another, and is disposed to relieve them. Private mercies flow from a tender,
soft, and compassionate heart, sensible of Gods mercies to it self, which
command it to recede in many things from the rigor of Justice, and what of
right it might either exact of, or inflict on another; No habit brings us
nearer to God, or makes the face of man shine with a diviner beam of Glory,
being the establisher of Princes Thrones, Prove. 20.^8.
which are supported by Justice and Mercy.

, In public transactions, (whose weight most-what lies upon, the carriage of
Justice,) mercy does not overthrow Justice, or divert it out of the way of
rectitude (which is Gods Highway) but only smooths the paths, and oils the
wheels, and supplies the joints, that Justice goes on with less cry and
complaint, Mercy does not take away the edge or point the of sword of Justice,
but only that rust and cancker which makes it wounds fester too deep.

. Mercy is an inseparable attendant to humane Justice; yea and to the Divine,
in this world where God punishes less and later than we deserve; and whatever
is short of hell is mercy; It is because his compassions, fail not that we are
not consumed. Lam. 3.22.
Says Jeremiah in his bitterest lamenting.

. Where Justice falls heaviest on men's lives and estates, for the enormity of
their sins, yet there is a beam of mercy to be shown them, as to their souls,
by our prayers for their repentance and pardon of God; the thief on the cross,
justly suffering (as he confessed) for his misdeeds, yet tasted of the Divine
mercy mixed with that bitter cup.

. This mercy, benignity, moderation and compassion, (of which you have had a
large and good account in the former exercise) is a debt, or Justice, we owe to
others, as much as we desire it our selves; Matthew. 18.27.
and it is there seasonable, where common errors and infirmities, or vulgar
simplicity and credulity, or easiness and sequaciousness do imitigate the
malice, by mistake of doing Justice, or of reforming the Public state (as in
the silly peoples case, ^ Sam. 15.11.
who followed Absalom in his popular rebellion) having so great a friend and
wise a Counselor as Achitophel to delude them Errabant sed bone animo, they
meant well, though they did ill; Here Justice ought to look more at the malice
of the heart, than the iniquity of the fact; As that is true ( comittunt eadem
diverso crimina fato; so diverso affectu) men do the same things from different
designs and principles; some out of zeal to Justice, reformation and religion,
others out of faction, Ambition, Courteousnes, Envy and Rebellion.

. As common infirmities, epidemick errors, and popular delusions, do make way
for mercy, so also multitudes of offenders. Christ had compassion on the
multitudes more then once; Mat^h. 9.36. and 14.14.
not only quia miseri, but quia multi; to make promiscuous massacres and
havocks of them, when it is in the power of Justices to punish or spare them,
is barbarous and inhumane: It was a word of Clemency worthy of Cesars great
mind, at the Pharsalian battle, Parcite civibus: Spare our Countrymen and
fellow Citisens.

. Multitudes of Offenders are best punished in their Ringleaders, setters, and
agitators: whose sufferings due to their malice, are not more just and
necessary for the public, then remissions are to the ((...)) many, who do as
it were so crowd up Justice, that they pinion its arms; it cannot well exert
its power upon them. Too much blood-letting is as dangerous, as some may be
necessary for health.

. So also penitents are objects of mercy; who so confess and deplore their
former errors, and offenses, that they give great hopes of future
compensations, by the revenge they take of themselves. Pene innocens ^uem
peccasse poenitet Greg. M. when more ashamed for their sin, then afraid of
their punishment, these are objects of mercy and moderation; especially if
there be any thing to plead for their excuse, as free from the great offenses
and presumptious sinnings, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 13
as in point of wilful murder and destinate villainy, of which God has said
thine eye shall not pity, nor thy hand spare; least the Land be defiled with
blood, or idolatry.

. Here it is crudelis misericordia, and stulta clementia, to spare such, whose
impunity would not not only seem to lessen the enormity of their sins, but
expose the public to infinite hazards: in giving encouragement by such cruel
pity and foolish clemency; In some cases, severe Justice is the greatest mercy
to the public, that men may hear and fear and do no more so presumptuously;
ne crudeli and intempestiva miserecordia plectatur respublica; Thousands of
innocents are often punished, when some few facinorous nocents are spared; Their
impunity becomes many times the public sin and punishment, and the Nation is
make Godfather, or dry nurse by not punishing those sins, of which it justly
abhors to have been the Father or doer.

. Yet are there but few cases, wherein summum jus is required; although that
saying be true in grand and publiques concerns, which are the polar points and
hinges of civil peace, fiat justitia ruat caelum; let Justice be done what
evercome of it; Yet it is as true in most cases, which are capable of any
remission and moderation, Fiat justitia, ruet caelum; if thou (Lord) should
be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who can abide it; Psalm. 130.3.
without Gods mercy to us, and ours to our brethren the offenders, our heaven
is lost; judgment without mercy shall be to those, James 2.13.
that show no mercy.

. Delays also, as to execution of Justice, (as David used to Joab and others,)
are public mercies many times, when the factious influence of criminous men
is so great and popular that they cannot at present be punished without
endangering the public peace.

. But I have done with this second particular, which God requires, as to mercy;
which who so shows to others, shows it to himself; for of all things we do
well, the works of mercy shall not go unrewarded.

3. Humility. Luke 17.10.
Thirdly, Humility is required; which is a most most Christian grace, no less
than a most manly virtue, becoming all men. 1. In the sense of their common
infirmities, and mortal condition. 2. In the conscience of their many sins, and
deserved miseries. 3. In the reflection upon their best actions, full of failing
and defects; besides their unproficiency as to God when they have done all.

Here nothing becomes man more, or more sets off what he does, than the deepest
shadow of humility; both toward all mankind, who are of the same metal, mould
and make with him; and toward God, to whom he ows all he is, or has, or can
do; for what has he in nature or providence, in soul, body or estate, 1 Cor.
4.7.
which he has not received?

. Pride destroys and sowres all the good even of Justice and Mercy that any man
does: It has its first pattern from the Devil, who by pride fell from the
Heaven of blessed Angels, to the Hell of damned spirits: Humility has God for
the great example, no less than Justice and Mercy have; by this we draw nearest
to God, and are fittest to accord with him; by this we are partakers of the
divine nature, of Christ's Spirit, graces, and rewards.

. Pride, (which is its own Idol and Idolater) its own Carver and Comforter,
has its reward only from it self, or the vain world; for God resists the
proud; and they must be sure to be destroyed who dash against God.

. Hell is the pit and prison of proud Angels and men; 1 Per. 1.4.
the first ((...) and (...)) they kept not their station or rank; but lifted up
themselves to be like to the most high, beyond what was due to them: The
second, because as Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar, they rob God of his glory, both
as to the justice which forbears to destroy them as they deserved, and as to
that Mercy which was conferred upon them beyond any merit in them.

Secondly, These three considered in their practicks
As I have thus briefly considered these Three Subjects, Justice, Mercy and
Humility in themselves; so I am with like brevity to consider the predicates or
actions applied to each of them.

1. To do justice. First, Materially, The acts or exercises of three Virtues.
as to the merit of the cause and person.

Secondly, Regularly, as to the Law prescribed by God or man, not by private
opinion, 1. To do Justice.
presumption or passion.

Thirdly, Authoritatively, by due order and commission derived to thee, from
the lawful supreme power; for however all men must have the inward principles
and desires for justice; yet the doing or executing of it is not given to all,
but only those to whom the sword of justice is committed by the Law of God and
man; Romans 13.4.
Christ's question must be asked before a man does justice, Who has made me a
judge or Ruler? Luke 12.14.
A man may be very unjust in punishing the greatest and most notorious
offenders, without due authority derived to him.

Fourthly, Do justice, formalizer; as to the inward form, principle, or
conscience, for justice sake, not for ambition as Absalom, or reward, or
revenge, or glory, etc. A Judge may give a just sentence before man, and yet be
an unjust Judge before God, when he does what is just materially, but not
mentally, as to his end and design; in doing Justice men must be sincere (and
hoc agere) make it their ((...)) business for Gods sake; or from a good
conscience; for judgment is the Lords, as Moses tells the Elders. Deuteronomy. 1.17.


5. Do Justice, practice, effectually; not only think and meditate, consult,
vote, decree, enact and declare, or talk and plead, and dispute, and cavil or
contend, but bring forth the fruits of righteousness, that all may see them,
and enjoy the benefit of them; just Laws made and never executed are as good
seed sown upon barren ground, which never comes up beyond straw and wild oats.

6. Do Justice, (...), Impartially ((...)) in all things, to all persons, poor
and rich, not oppressing the rich because his fleece is large, nor the poor
because his strength is small, and friends few: Exodus 11.25. and 23.3.
Aequum dicitur, quia aequat leges omnibus, as Varro observes: Justice must be
straight or right, without warping, as equal and indifferent to all, blind as
to the persons, though Eagle-eyed as to the cause and rule.

7. Do it speedily, especially in such cases, when the effects of justice are
not penal but beneficial; Delays of Justice are so far denials, and so long
unjust, when it is in the power of a Judge, or Prince, or Magistrate to do it;
no usury is so unjust, as that which makes advantages by dilatory justice: In
penal effects of Justice, there dilatory executions may be more venial, and
tolerable, because they are mixtures of mercy, and reprieves in order to
repentance; for which God gives us the great pattern, in his giving us space to
repent, and being so slow to excute vengeance on us, Psalm. 106.
though daily provoked by us.

8. Do it (...) (not (...), in rigor, but) in measure, judgment and
proportion, as they said of old ((...)) God is an axact Geometritian, duly
measuring and weighing, or pondering the actions of all men, and proportioning
his judgments to them; so ought men to demean themselves in doing justice
calmely, as in the cool of the day, without passion, or transport. Perit
judicium quum res transit inaffectum; the eyes of judgment are blinded, when
the mists of any passions arise; either prejudicating the person for the cause,
or the cause for the person.

9. Do justice, (...), with humanity, pity and compassion to the person, in
the greatest severities against, and justest detestations of their sins;
Justice among men, much more among Christians, must have not only vulnera, but
also viscera, bowels as well as blows; Ingenuous Justice ( dolet quoties
cogitur esse ferox) is afflicted when compelled to inflict punishment; and
feels the strokes it gives, condemning the Judge to commiseration, when he
condemns others to misery; this tenderness or temperament it learns from God,
who deplores when he executes, Hosea^ 11.8.
or denounces his judgments; his bowels are turned within him, when he is
forced to give over his people to the destroyers; hence are his many
forewarnings, importunings and beseechings of men to fly from the wrath to
come; as why will ye die? etc. and How shall I give you over to be as Admah and
Zeboim? how shall I make thee as Sodom and Gomorah?

To love Mercy Isa. 28.21.
Secondly, To love Mercy; here first the order is observable, That Justice must
first be done before Mercy; else it is as very preposterous to exclude Justice
to make way for Mercy, as it is presumptuous to do unjustly under pretense of
showing Mercy.

. Like the design of some men's cruel charity to get an estate by all imjurious
ways, in order to do works of charity, or to build an Almshouse, like the
giving alms or legacies before we pay our debts.

. Such Sacrifices are abominable to God; we must not rob the Exchequer of
Justice, to put into the Corban or poor man's box of the sanctuary.

. 2. We may observe the emphasis of the word put to Mercy, beyond that is to
Justice; this must be done as a work and task, which is enjoined us; but the
other Mercy, must be loved and delighted in: Justice is opus necessarium and
alienum, a necessary, but strange and unwelcome work, compared to Mercy; in
this also we have the precedent of the divine goodness; whose (...), pleasure
and delight is in showing mercy, where there is any capacity; but his
executions of Justice, are as it were a pressure and distress upon him; not
that he is not infinitely just to all the extents of Justice, but he is
superinfinitely merciful, so as to set even bounds to the infinity of his
justice, which as a consuming fire would in a moment have destroyed the whole
creation of lapsed sinful natures, if Mercy had not interceded.

. This Affection of Love is conjoned to Mercy: Mercy must be loved.
First, As (res in se amabilis) a thing in it self most lovely and desirable,
one of the brightest beams of the divine beauty. Secondly, As that which is
most beautiful and comely for mankind, Col. 11.
especially the Church of God, and children of their heavenly Father, who are
commanded to put on, as the elect of God, bowels of mercy: Bowels, as to the
inward principle or love of it, and putting them on, as to outward
manifestation in good works, which are the royalest robes and richest ornaments
of Christians.

3. Love mercy, as that which is most beneficial to our selves and others too;
He that shows mercy to others, shows it to his own soul; by way of rebound it
returns into his own bosom; Mercy is that which all need, all desire in their
distress, all have tasted of, and received from God.

4. Love it in obedience to Gods commands, and in imitation of his divine
perfections; among which not any is so commended to us as this; Not be ye wise
and strong, and infinite and great, as your heavenly Father, but merciful. What
Mat. 5.48. is put Be ye merciful, is Luke 6.26. Be ye perfect, etc. as if ( in
una misericordia omnes perfectiones) this one prefection of mercy included all.

5. Love mercy (in augmentum gratiae) for the advance of all graces, for this
is the compass or manure, which makes the richest soil of a Christian soul; as
a man sows mercy liberally, so he shall reap graces.

6. Love mercy in ornamentum religionis Christianae, the best trial of the best
religion is, that which abounds most with mercy, as the true God, who is
optimus maximus, is greatest by his goodness, and best in his mercifulness. 2
Kings 20.31
The Kings of Israel are esteemed merciful Kings; as mercy is the most humane,
so the most Princely quality, because the divinest endowment. Cruelty is one of
the highest scandals of Christianity, which makes Lambs of Lions, and tames the
feircest tempers.

7. Love mercy ( memor propriae. indigentiae and miseriae) remembering that sin
which exposes thee to misery, and that necessity thou have of Gods mercy, yea
and the want thou may have of man's; for no state of mortality, is so fixedly
happy, but it may be (as Job was) the object of pity, which the Tragedies of
our times have evidenced in the highest nature; voluit deus, ut sibi quisque
sit mensura misericordiae, as St. Jerome tells us; they that flow most with
mercy, shall be filled most with it.

8. Love mercy ( in spem and Augmentum gloriae) in order to confirm thy hope,
and increase thy reward of Glory, there is no better evidence of a gracious
heart and an excellent spirit, than this merciful propensity, even natural men,
who have most humanity, are least distant from the Kingdom of heaven; there
wants but faith in Christ, (who is the highest instance, and grand exemplar of
divine mercy, to raise up the grosser allayes of natural softness, compassion
and gentleness, to the pure Elixir of that grace of merciful-mindedness, which
God requires, and which denotes a Divine and heavenly disposition; doubtless
the mites of mercy, which we show here to others for Christ's sake, will be
repayed with Talents in heaven, nor shall a cup of cold water be unrewarded.

3. To walk humbly, the LXX. 3. To walk humbly with thy God.
render it (...): to be ready and prepared to go with God, and the Latin vulg.
humiliare se ambulando; the words imply.

1. A freedom and familiarity of conversation, which cannot be had unless two
are agreed; nor can there be any agreement with God, except where the heart is
humble. God resists the proud, (quia congreditur cum deo tanquam hostis ex
part adversa) who does not walk with God, but against him, as one that
justles, assaults, encounters, and fights against him

2. Walking as it is a social and friendly motion, so it is progressive and
parellel, in a way of conformity, not contrariety, when we keep pace with God,
neither out-running his word by a precipitant wantonness, and
over-righteousness of our own imaginations, nor yet so lagging behind as we
lose God, nor yet straying to the right or left hand diverticles, of
prophanness or superstition, of despare or presumption, but keeping close with
God, who looks on the proud afar off, because they are still at distance from
him, one way or other.

3. As an humble man is only fit for Gods presence, and company, so the more a
man walks with God, the more he will grow humble, when he sees what an
inconsiderable nothing himself is, Nihilo nihilius, Psalm. 19.4, 5. and 61.9.
less then nothing; at his very best estate altogether vanity; at his worst
only sin, hell and misery, fit company for none but Devils, and that fatal
sentence, Go ye cursed; nothing in merits, nothing in graces, nothing in
gifts, nothing in duties, Toti sumus indigentia, we are altogether defect and
emptiness, till grace fills us, and Christ supplies us; we shall easily vanish
and disappear as to all self conceit, and pride of heart, when once we
assiociate with God; then Abraham and Job abhor themselves in dust and ashes,
(both eminent persons, the one the great Father of the faithful, the other the
great pattern of patience) so Jacob, less then the least of Gods mercies; and
St. Paul who was not inferior to the chief Apostles, and labored more
abundantly then any one of them, yet sums up his all in this, 2 Cor. 11.12.
though I am nothing, esteeming Christ to be all in all to him.

4. Walk humbly (cum Deo quia Deus, and quia tuus) because with God, and with
thy God; a Son and Subject will know himself best when with a King and Father,
who is their own; however they may carry themselves high to others their
betters, yet not to those, whose near relation and high merit command
observance. If the thought of Gods excellency does not abase us in our own
eyes, yet the consideration of his condescending to us, to be ours in so many
undeserved mercies, and favors, to a transcendency of desert, and unrequitable
obligations, this will deplume us, and pull down all high immaginations in us,
It is ignorance of God, and distance from him, which make us so conceited of
our selves, a spark or star cannot glory in the light of the sun.

5. Especially when we remember ( humilem deum and humiliatum Christum pro
nobis) an humble God, in our humbled Savior for us; the sight and sense of
Christ on the Cross, for our sakes, will make us ashamed of one proud thought
or high look, which is not tolerable in any estate, in the greatest gifts and
graces, the best endowments, and highest successes, wherein we are but
instruments, and seconds, not principals; And in the greatest afflictions, when
we are ( humiliati) most humbled and debased by Gods providence, it is very
insutable then to boil and swell with thoughts of repining and murmuring
against God, as if he injured us, or treated us unworthy of us. No, here to be
humble, is to be silent, Lev 16.41.
and submisse to pray, to prostrate at Gods feet, to accept of the punishment,
and own it as from a Father, who chastises us, that we may not be condemned,
with the world; humility disarms God, and is a salve, shield and cordial, in
the worst estate, which is then best for us when we grow more humble, as pride
is a moth or curse, that blasts all, even the best we are, enjoy or do,
Alienating God from us, and driving away his good Spirit, when it finds us our
own Gods and worshippers. It is but just to leave us to the heaven of our own
fancies, and to be satisfied with our own delusions.

Third General, Cui, to whom God shows, so whom this Demonstration and demand
is made.
and of whom he requires these great lessons and duties; Thee O man.

1. To all mankind in general, as creatures capable to know good and evil, just
and unjust, and accordingly to choose and do as they are directed from the
inward dictates of right reason, and those self-convincing principles which are
within their own consciences.

2. To thee O man more especially, who enjoyest the light of Gods Word in the
pale and bosom of the Church, where the righteous precepts and merciful
commands of God are more evidently set forth, by laws repeated, by examples
multiplied, by judgments and rewards proportioned to men's works; none here can
plead ignorance of duty both to God and man.

3. Thee O man, in thy particular station, as occasion and power are put into
thy hand, whether Jew or Gentile, great or small, rich or poor, Prince or
Peasant, Lords or Commons, Priest or people; no man is unconcerned in these
Demonstrations; to every one God says as Nathan did to David, Thou art the man.

Of Kings and S^^^^aign Magistrates.
. God requires Justice, Mercy and Humility of thee O King, who sit on the
throne of Majesty, who art in Gods stead, as his Vicegerent, a kind of mortal
Deity; honored with the name, and vested with the power of God, and much more
with the imitations of the divine excellencies of Justice and Mercy toward man,
Ier. 22.15, 16.
as of Humility toward God; Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in
cedar, and art compassed about with strong guards? Did not thy Father do
justice and mercy, and then it was well with him: He judged the cause of the
poor and needy, was not this to know me, says the Lord? Thou, even thou, O
King art to fear him who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, higher than the
highest; the terror of Tytants, who pulls Princes from their seat, and
pours contempt upon all their glory; thy surest policy is true piety, and the
best reason of State is this pure Religion and undefiled, even to do Justice,
to love Mercy, and walk humbly with that God by whom Kings reign, Whose thrones
are not to be established without Justice, Mercy and Humility; Nor can they be
injured so much by any as by themselves; their Pride before God, like
Nebuchadnezzars and Belshazzars, will abase them; and their oppression of their
people, will most oppress themselves at last.

Secondly, Of Thee O wise man, Of Counselors, etc.
and mighty Counselor, who art esteemed by others and thy self as a great
State Intelligence; digging deep for counsels, and wrapping up thy self in the
darkness of thy cloudy projects and designs; thou who gloriest in thy Oracular
Policies as Achitophel; and disdainest to be nonplust in thy wisdom, or
defeated in thy designs: Of thee the Lord requires to give no counsel but such
as is just, nor to decree other than righteous decrees: To agitate nothing in
Councils of State and Parliaments by partiality, faction, and oppression, to
sinister ends and unjust interests either of Prince of people; because the Lord
sits among Senators, and will cause a just decree without mercy to be
executed upon those who either execute or decree unrighteous and cruel things.

Thirdly, Of Magistrates.
Of Thee O subordinate Judge and Magistrate: O great Lawyer and eloquent
Pleader, the Lord repuires not to turn Justice into gall, and Judgment to
wormwood; not to judge for reward, or pervert the cause of any, either for fear
or favor, or for respect of persons; not to make pleadings of Law to be as
gins and snares to innocent simplicity, by a fallacious sophistry, and dilatory
felony, which robs the Clients purse, as the bushes and brambles do the sheep
of his fleece, when he seeks and hopes for shelter from them.

, No temporal advantage can counterpoise the detriment and danger which unjust
and merciless actions bring upon those who willingly offend against the laws of
the just and merciful God, and thereby incur eternal damnation, deserving to be
beaten with many stripes, because they know the will of God, and do it not. St.
Bernards Motto to all judges is, omnia judicata rejudicabuntur, what comes
short in man's measure, or weight of Justice, shall be made up by Gods eternal
recompenses.

Of Soldiers and men of might.
4. Of thee O Soldier; O valiant and mighty man, who have power in thy hand to
save or destroy, to kill poor men, and lay wast fenced Cities, of thee God
requires justice and mercy, which must be the measures of War, as well as of
Peace; there are ( jura belli) laws of righteousness and moderation, which God
exacts in wars, even defensive, which seem the only wars that can be just: For
sure to make war without some precedent or threatened injury, must needs be very
injurious. Not might but right must be looked at, where the lives of men are
concerned; justice is not to be measured by the length of thy sword, or the
strength of thy Arm, or the number of thy Soldiers, but by the Laws of God, of
Nations and of every polity: The Justest war, must not by passionate transports
be carried on to unjust, exorbitant, and cruel oppressions, either to harmless
and unarmed people, or to immoderate demands, in point of reveng and
compensation, much less to build ambitious Babels, and covetous confiscations,
upon others ruins; The Soldiers had their lesson of John Baptist, what to do,
when they had so much grace as to ask the question, Luke 3 14.
they are not commanded to lay down their Arms, but to do violence to no man,
etc.

5. Of thee O man, (God requires Justice, mercy and humility) whose prosperity
either in violent or injurious ways, have made thee rich and great, Of the most
prosperous.
or who increasest thy estate by that, which is not thine in equity and
conscience, who make no scruple of Extortion, rapine, racking rents,
sacrilege, oppression, and rigorous extortions; who have built thy nest on
high, and feathered it with the spoils, either of thy Neighbors and Tennants,
or of Church and State, of the Crown and Crosier, where cheap purchases,
witness to your faces, and upbraid both byars and sellers of the injustice of
the bargain; thou, even thou, must so repent by making restitution of unjust
acquisitions, as may make thee capable of Gods pardon, who will not be mocked
by lame and cracked titles; nor may be robbed, without making the curse
threatened to light on such injurious and presumptuous sinners, who neither fear
God nor reverence man; though great, and rich, and many, though Courts and
Councils, and Armies, and whole Nations conspire to do injustly, yet will God
be a swift witness against them, and bring his Justice upon them.

O Ministersf of the Church
6. Of thee O godly gull, and holy-cheat, who pleadest an hypocritical nonplus,
and a state necessity of doing somthings, both injust and cruel, in order to do
good, to advance Justice, to glorify God, to reform Church and State, as if
the reasons and interests of both Religion and Justice did sometimes want
unjust proceedings, (as pills to keep them in health) which Aristides pleaded
by way of Irony, to those who impatient of exact Justice, forced him sometimes
to deviate from it, by their popular peevishness; he told them he did it
((...)) in order to the public good: God will discover these impudent
fallacies, and so punish the presumption of doing evil, that good may come
thereby, that all men shall shall hear and fear, and confess there is a God
that judges the earth, when they shall see vengeance to overtake these men,
and the iniquity of their heels to compass them about.

. Better to follow Gods counsel by doing Justice, though we perish with Lazarus
on a dunghill, and suffer the last strokes of humane Justice in this world,
than to fall under Gods eternal and inexerable Justice, which will strip thee
of all the goods thou gettest, and bring upon thee infinitely more evil than
that, which by unjust and wicked means thou soughtest to escape; there is no
necessity ( scelera sceleribus tueri) to make evil deeds good by doing worser;
it is the Devils hardening Maxim to damn souls by desperation; as if a theif
should plead it necessary to kill that man whom he has robbed, lest he be
pursued and taken by him.

7. Of thee, Of the glosing Hypocrites.
O Minister of the Church and Pastor of souls, God requires, first to do
justice to thy brother of the same tribe and calling, by not intruding thy self
into his work, against right and reason and law, that thou may have a plea or
pretense to the profits of his living, and so thou may feed thy self by
feeding another flock against his will; when Justice requires us not only to
eat our own bread, but to do our own business, and not ((...)) to Vsurp on
another either emolument or employment, which they are able and willing to
perform.

Of thee, O Churchman, great and small God requires this Justice, to God, to
Christ, to the Church, to peoples souls, to the holy word and worship of God,
to the truth of Doctrine, to the solemnity of his service, to the necessity of
men's souls, by feeding them with wholesome food, by giving them their portion
in due season, by not denying the children their bread, for fear of dogs eating
it, by administering the blessed Sacraments duly and reverently, according as
the Church, in which thou servest, has appointed thee, not setting up and
urging thy own fancies and whimseys, thy novel inventions and schismatical
partialities, thy humane traditions, and unauthentick because uncatholick
observations, instead of Christ's institutions, not so shy and startling at the
shadow of some decent and innocent rites or circumstances and ceremonies in
religion, as to fly from the unity, order, harmony and authority of the whole
Church, by a supercilious, unjust and merciless severity, which savors too much
of pride, and self conceit, hereby shaking and overthrowing the faith of many
poor souls, who are ignorant, weak and instable, by the perturbatious thy
pragmatique and popular activity gives them.

Of the whole Nation.
8. Lastly of thee, O whole Palestina, O Church and State, O my native County,
and Nation, both in thy latitude and diffusion, and in thy Parliamentary*
Epitome, or representation; of thee the Lord requires not only to do justice,
but to show mercy there, where is the cryingest injustice and cruelty in the
world; There is a voice from abroad and at home, which cries ( Oro miserere
laborum Tantorum, miserere animi non digna ferentis) O do not approve, confirm
or adopt that pride, injustice and cruelty of some sons of Belial, who lifted
up themselves above all that is called God; all Laws of God and man, all duty
to their betters and Superiors.

. If what has been done in this sorely afflicted and abused nation, with
expense of so much blood and treasures, with so much terror and extravagancy,
be well and worthily done; it will be an act of your Justice to assert it, and
of your Mercy, to absolve other of us poor scrupulous souls of those scruples
of conscience which we have; of those fears and jealousies, lest the Nation
lying under so great sins, may be exposed to Gods sorest judgments, even to an
utter vastation.

. But if it appear to your wisdom, piety, Justice and Mercy, to have been a
violent and unparalleld method of presumptuous wickedness, of unjust cruelty,
and most cruel injustice; in which was neither matter nor form essential of
Justice, under the formality of high justice; if men have killed and cosened,
and taken possession, even the spoil and price of blood: I doubt not but you
will so far remember Gods Demonstrations and demands, as to do Justice to God,
to your Country, to your Laws, to your Superior, to Sovereign power, to the
whole Nation, and to all mankind, as to testify a just abhorrence and perfect
detestation of those things, to which as you would not have been Fathers, so I
believe you will not be Godfathers. It is an usual saying among Statists to
excuse their excentricities and deviations, from the exact rules of justice
(Nullum magnum exemplum justitiae sive aliqua injustitia; I am sure we have
known magnum exemplum injustitiae sine aliqua justitia; a transcendent
injustice, which had not any grains of justice in it) in the vindication of
which, I do not so urge the rigor of justice, as not to require also such
temperament of mercy, as may distinguish between the flower and the bran, the
vile and precious, the pertinacious and penitent; such as sinned with malicious
wickedness, with an high hand, and those that were only carried down the rapid
torrent and strong delusions of times.

. There is yet one instance of doing justice and showing Mercy to the whole
Nation, which I cannot but recommend to my Country, and to you the Fathers of
our families, and heads of our Tribes; which is in reference to the souls of
many poor people, that in a land of plenty they may not be famished, for want
of able and industrious Preachers, which cannot be had or expected (whatever
verbal severities are pretended of Reformation, of Religion, and propagation of
the Gospel) unless there be some way found, by the wisdom, piety, honor and
bounty of the Nation, of Prince, Parliament and People, for the competent
maintenance of such Ministers as may do the work of God, and take care of men's
souls: with what Justice or Mercy can you exact a full tale of bricks from poor
Ministers when they have no straw? Alas, when shall the scandal of livings not
worth fifty, or thirty, or twenty pounds a year be taken away by the
generosity, justice, liberality and mercy of England? How many years tax, how
much treasure has been spent, to maintain Soldiers and a war, of which the
public has no fruit but those of tears, oppression and repentance; me thinks
it should not seem much to allow one years tax to be gathered in some
convenient time, by which to begin a banck or treasury (an aerarium sacrum) for
the making some augmentations and purohases of Impropriations to poor livings:
One good foundation laid for so great and good a work, many other
superstructures would easily be added by the piety, wisdom, and charity either
of the public or of the private, and well-disposed persons.

. If this may not be put upon the account of Justice to be done to the Church
and Clergy of England in compensation of the many diminutions, depredations and
indignities, which they have of late, or long since sustained, by the policies,
powers or superstitions of later times; yet I beseech you look upon it as a
signal and eminent act of Mercy, for which thousands of poor people in the
Countries ( who perish for want of knowledge, having no Prophet nor seer among
them) will bless God and you to many generations.

. And since God has by a most miraculous return of mercy, brought you thus far
to the morning of your redemption from civil slavery and oppression, where we
were under Chams curse to be servants of servants. O bethink your selves,
whether it be not worthy of your munificent piety and gratitude to offer some
oblation of thankfulness as a peace offering and Eucharistical monument to God
and his Church; but I may not so far distrust your nobleness, as to urge you
too far in this thing, which is so much its own Orator, and wherein many
thousands both Ministers and people are silently and humbly importune for your
favor in so great a concern of Church and State, yea of men's souls eternal
welfare.

The Fourth and last General Head is ((...)) the manner of Gods showing and
requiring these duties of all sorts of men, in all occasions, times, 4. The
manner of Gods Demonstrating.
in all dealings and administrations, in the whole tenure of their
conversation, to God and men, civil and religious.

I formerly gave an account of this, which will excuse me if I here briefly
insist on some main heads only.

1. God has showed it to mankind ( in principiis internis) in those inward
principles of right Reason, and that standard of Justice which is set up in
each man's own heart, besides the Chancery of Mercy; both which he cannot but
desire in his own case; yea he expects and exacts humility, reverence and
submiss respect from those that are his descendents and inferiors, especially
if many ways obliged to him, by undeserved favors; so as every man's case is
toward God.

2. Praeceptis scripturae, by the Letters pattents of the holy Scriptures,
whereof no man in the light of Religion which shines in the Church can without
sin be ignorant; because no lessons are easier to be learned, and set out in
greater characters, or text letters, both of the ten Commandments and the
Gospel, than these three of Justice, Mercy and Humility. Nor is any man meet to
learn or observe the more abstruse mysteries of Christianity, who does not
first apply to these plain morals of humanity, and native Divinity; in which
instructions who so profited most among the Jews or Gentiles, and lived
accordingly, were most capable vessels of Gods Mercies, although they had not
such an explicit faith in the Messiah, as we Christians are now obliged to, as
a condition of the Evangelical Covenant.

3. God has showed us these demonstrations, magnis exemplaribus, and exemplis;
by the greatest exemplars of holy men in all degrees; in the best of Kings, and
vvisest of Counselors, yea in his blessed self and his Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom Justice was satisfied, Mercy Magnified, and Humility most
exalted for man's imitation; To these are added the great examples of his
Judgments on those whose exorbitant lusts and passions, forgetting God and
themselves, presumed to do beyond these bounds and prescriptions, which the
Divine Justice and Mercy had set to mankind, running out to violence and
cruelty, in order to gratify their pride: On the other side, God has by many
blessings on Prince and People; manifested his approbation of their ways, when
conform to those grand Precepts, which suppress first all private
extravagancies by humility, and all public oppressions by justice, mixed with
mercy; no man that is humble can be unhappy, nor any people or Prince
miserable, who keep to Justice and mercy, except in martyrly cases for trial of
their faith, patience, and constancy, which are found most in those (if not
only) who are most endued with principles, and wonted, as to Justice, so to
the practice of mercy, and humility.

. Lastly God has showed and required these things ( cum gravi interminatione
poenae) not lightly and arbitrarily, but with great earnestness, and frequent
obtestation, threatening punishment, answerable to the neglect, and executing
vengeance on the presumptous, nor are they Laws of ((...)) diurnal justice, to
day loyalty, to morrow Treason, this week lawful and just, next week illegal
and unjust, like a Lesbian rule, but they are standards, fixed in Gods
immutable Justice, mercy, and excellent Majesty, which no men at any time may
dispense, withal, nor can they be dispensed with, as to Gods judgments, if
they break them.

. But it is now time for me to relieve your attention with the variety of my
successors pains; only I crave your Christian patience so far, as to give me
leave, to make some such improvement of this Text, as the grand occasion and
present sollemnity do require.

. You are all this day, Application or Uses.
as the Representatives of the Commons of this Nation met before the Lord, to
fast and pray, to humble and afflict your souls, to confess your sins, and the
sins of your people, among which none are more crying to heaven for vengeance,
then the want of Justice, mercy, and humility; for pride, ambition,
covetousness, cruelty, and oppression, the land has mourned these many years,
and the more deploredly, because it has suffered by all these pests of Church
and State, under the name and pretensions of humility, sanctity, liberty and
equity. It was a small matter for us to be miserable by the insolency of some
men; but we were commanded, by their hypocritical and cruel mocking to believe
our selves to be an happy, and free people; in a glorious and reformed way of
Religion, laws and liberties.

. It is a saying of that great Orator, as acute as true ( Totius injustitiae
nulla est capitalior, quam eorum, qui quum maxim fallunt, ita tamen agunt, nt
viri boni videantur.) No men are more criminally injust, than those, who when
they most deceive and oppress, yet then boast of their justice and piety.

. What have been the effects of some men's justice, mercy and humility, all the
English, yea British world has seen, and your selves have felt; to whom have
some men's factious and Phanatick humors showed any tokens of these virtues,
except to themselves, and their accomplices? to others who are persons far more
righteous then themselves, their very mercies have been cruel, and their
highest justice the highest injuries to the public; indeed it is of the Lords
mercys that we have not been all consumed; that a remnant is escaped to see the
Salvation of the Lord; in the land of the living. O with what pride, petulancy,
haughtiness and disdain, have, mean men and vile persons carried themselves
against the honorable, far their betters and superiors, yea against the whole
honor and Majesty of this Nation! how have we seen servants riding on
horseback, and Princes going on foot! this is their humility; they have
flattered both Prince and People in their sore distresses, as if they would
relieve them, when they proved at last Physicians of no value, miserable
comforters, very severe exactors, and tragical destroyers; This is their mercy;
They have subverted all law, order, and government, troubled the fountains,
cut off the conduits, and inverted all the course of civil Justice, and
ecclesiastical authority, as well as unity; this is their Justice.

. Can a Nation be sick of its health, and weary of its happiness, or thus daily
and bitterly complain, if it enjoyed such a glorious state of Justice; and
mercy, by the humility and sanctity of its Governors; as some have pretended?
Why does the whole land cry out of burdens and bloodshed, of its oppressors
and exactors, of its endless troubles and terrors? if our estate were so settled
and blessed, as some men have told us, why, as Dromedaries, do they every month
so traverse their ways, destroying what they build, and building what they
destroy, like so many foolish builders! it is strange, that neither these
Baalams nor their asses which carry them; in the ways, and after wages of
iniquity, can yet see the Angel of the Lord, with a drawn svvord, stopping
their way; all laws of God and man, all good men's votes, and prayers, are
against their madness, pride, presumption, cruelty, hypocrity and injustice, by
which they have brought shame and dishonor, a blot and great reproach, upon
the nation and the reformed Religion.

. You have enough to do (honorable and worthy) to undo what some men have done
amiss, to rectify their crookedness, to bring to the standard of Justice and
rule of mercy, what their injurious cruelty and vvanton wickedness have
perverted and distracted, as their pride, ambition, and various lusts have
driven them.

Josh. 7.13.
. You work is not only as Josuah, to fall down before the Lord, as ye do this
day, but to Arise and to do the work of God, of the Church, and of the State,
with justice, mercy and humility; For if you still fast for strife and
oppression, to smite with the fist of wickedness, and to bind heavy burdens on
us, you will be found mockers of God as others have been, your prayers will
be turned into sin, and your counsels will turn to confusion.

. The appeals and petitions of all honest-minded people ( next God) are to your
prudence, justice and charity, that you would judge betvveen the daughter of
your people, and her shameless ravishers, her cruel vvounders, and endless
oppressors.

. Three ancient and sometimes flourishing Kingdoms, and the adjacent Dominions
call to you for mercy, and you cannot show them greater mercy, then to do them
justice, in restoring them to their former happy governments, and excellent
constitutions.

. All estates of Soveranity, Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, Commonalty call upon you
for justice and mercy; so the poor and rich, the City and Country, so God
himself, and your Savior, so true Religion and its now so deformed
Reformation, so your own and your posterities interests, do daily importune;
it will be your justice and mercy to them all and us, not to bring upon all
our heads the guilt of that innocent blood, which the cruelty, pride and
injustice of some men have shed, even the blood of War in a time of peace, and
after a long Treaty, When God makes inquisition for this blood, let him not
find it, and avenge it upon you and your Children, by your not expiating,
deprecating and detesting of that sin, with infinite horror and abhorence; to
leave it unexamined and unpunished is every day to contract the guilt of a new
regicide.

. The Sovereign fountain of honor, civil power, and secular authority in Church
and State, calls for, and expects your Justice, where it has been injured;
your Mercy, where unrelieved; your humble subjection, where duly established.

. The House of Peers cannot but own your Justice, Modesty and Humility, in
removing those obstructions which some men's pride and injurious insolency had
for many years put in the way of that House, which was ever one of the highest
points of this Kingdoms Wisdom, Honor, stability and happiness.

. The House of Commons also, and whatever becomes the dignity and freedom of a
Parliament of England, calls to your Justice and Mercy, to redeem that almost
sacred Senate (than which in its full constitution, the world had not any thing
more august and venerable; when Lords Spiritual and Temporal, when the Gentry
and Commons, all concurred to advance next the glory of God, the majesty of
this Empire, and the Throne of its Sovereign;) to redeem this (I say) from
those abominable desolations of tumultuary and military insolences which for
many years have made that house a Charnel house, or a kind of Augean stable,
full of all faction, fury and and fanatic filthiness.

. Our Church and Religion, our Bishops and Presbyters, our Ministers and
Ministry, all call to your Justice and Mercy to redeem them from popular
dependencies, from vulgar impudence and usurpation; at least to relieve them
from those Harpyes which have driven them to, and defiled them with so many
shameful disorders; divisions and distractions unbecoming men, much more
Christians and Ministers, who are pretenders to Reformation.

. The famous Universities, and all Nurseries of good literature implore your
Justice and Mercy, to defend these eyes of the Nation, from those birds of
prey, foraign and domestic vultures, which hope when these are pulled out, to
seize upon the blind and deformed Nation, with greater freedom of Romish
superstition, and fanatic Usurpation, who gape to devour all that is lest of
the civil or sacred patrimony, of Gods, or the Kings, the Churches or the
Crowns portion.

. We have once again (by Gods wonderful mercy, and his blessing upon one great
heroic and steady soul) got the wind of the Jesuitick, Anabaptistick and
fanatic designs, who have abused us with their long wiles; O lose not the
advantages which God has given you to bring your Church and Country into a
fair and happy haven, after so many tempests and agitations of infinite loss
and hazard.

. There are many holy Duties, and Christian Rites which call for your Justice
and Mercy; the two blessed Sacraments which have a long time been either wholly
despised, or profanely abused, or very partially used; The Lords Prayer also,
the Ten Commandments and the Creed, all sacred and wholesome forms, of excellent
use to the people of Christ's flock, but despised and neglected by some of their
supercilious Pastors, to the great detriment of true Religion and abatement of
piety; these expect your exemplary Justice, to restore them to their primitive
and Catholic honor, which will be a mercy to the whole Nation, which by
extemporary novelties and crude varieties in Religion, has been wholly
deprived of all those pristine forms of liturgical devotions by which the
generality of Christians were best informed and most affected, as to the grand
fundamentals of Religion; Sure it is but the effect of crafty or crazy brains,
to deny us all use of Our Father in English, because we gave over the Pater
nosters, the Ave Mary's, and other prayers which were in Latin, and so of
little use to the vulgar. It was once thought a blessing to have prayers and
holy duties in a language which people understood; Now it is a seraphick
stratagem of Satan to make people forget those things which they could easiest
remember and best understand.

. Lastly, There are many prevalent and epidemical sins of Sacrilege,
Profaneness, irreverence, Perjury, rash swearing, Duelling, Uncleanness and all
manner of licentious discoveries of Atheism and irreligion which call for your
Justice to suppress them, for they are the cruellest enemies of Church and
State.

Conclusion.
If you will (indeed) do Justice, love Mercy, and walk humbly with your God; if
you will show loving kindness and sense of honor to your Country, resolve upon
all those dispensations, restitutions, and exercitations of Justice and Mercy,
which are before you: Which you will best do if you

1. Be pleased so to fix our Laws, yea our legislative and Sovereign authority,
so that we may be no more tossed too and fro with every wind of men's ambitious
fancies; qui malunt leges quam mores mutare, who had rather change our good
laws, than mend their own ill manners.

2. To remove all obstructions which are inward in your own souls, and outward
in other men's passions or actions, by which either Justice or Mercy are most
hindered of their free course.

3. If you listen not to that wicked maxim of the Devils politics, Fieri non
debuit, factum valet, as if evil actions did call for perseverance not
repentance. Nullum tempus occurit Justitiae, no time or fact must prescribe
against justice, truth, God and the Church.

4. When you have undone by justice what has been done by injustice, to the
undoing of Church and State, Prince and People; Then will mercy be seasonable,
by acts of such amnesty, pardon, and oblivion, as may rather compose than
irritate the spirits of men; praestat motos componere fluctus.

5. If you needed (which I hope you do not) any motives to these great
endeavors and discoveries of justice and mercy, it is no small one which the
Platonists observe, as to the difference between just and unjust, the good and
evil men, which is as great as between light and darkness, order and confusion,
men and beasts, good and bad Angels, as between a King and a Tyrant, God and
the Devil. God is the first fountain and grand example of justice and mercy, as
the Devil is of injuriousness and cruelty.

6. If you inquire Cui bono? what their reward shall be? First the conscience
of well doing, and this to your Country and in its greatest distresses; Next,
you shall have that reward of lasting honor, and renown, by which your names,
as repairers of our breaches, shall be embalmed in the love of their Country,
and transmitted with a sweet resentment to all posterity; where as the names of
proud and cruel oppressors, shall rot and perish like their own dung; the blood
thirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; not only, as to
those dies naturales; but as to those dies civiles, which preserve the living
fame of worthy men to many generations as blessed; he is but short-lived whose
infamy only survives; as the damned in hell, are counted dead, because they
only live to shame and torment.

. As for your direction what and how to do excellent things, you need not
search Achitophels brains, or rake the skull of Matchiavel; you need not call
up the Ghost of Richelieu, or conjure up those subtle spirits of Government,
which may tell you the Adyta imperii, and arcana principum, the depths,
mysteries, intrigoes, and riddles of States; you need not listen any longer to
those Seraphick Sirens, and Phanatick Counselors, who under the title of Gods
cause and the Saints interest, which I know not what blessed projects or
gainful godliness, had made a shift to undo all, but themselves, yea and
themselves too, as to all sense of justice, or mercy, or honor, or conscience
of modesty or humility; You need not advise with flesh and blood, with humane
passions and lusts ( facilis and parata est ad virtutem via,) the counsel of
God is at hand, ((...)) you cannot easily miscarry by following his wisdom in
justice, mercy and humility; however, you had better perish in Gods way, as to
temporal effects, then prosper for a season in the Devils, which must end in
endless infelicities.

. There can no better course be followed in civil justice, than that which was
given by the Oracle to the Sicilian Pirates, when afflicted by the plague,
after they had gotten much booty, they enquired What they should do to be
releived? Answer was given in these letters; R. A. S. P. P. which some cunning
man interpreted, to import by the Acrostick letters thus much, Reddite Aliena,
S'ultis Possidere Propria, Restore to others what is theirs, if you hope to
preserve to your selves your own; else your common weal will be but a common woe.

. There is neither darkness in your way of justice and mercy, nor will there be
much difficulty. God has and will remove mountains of malice, hypocrisy and
injustice before you, yea he has prepared the way for you by levelling the
levelers, and confounding the confounders of all things civil and sacred. His
word and the laws of the Land will tell you what is to be done, State super
vias autiquas and bonas, stand and enquire for the good old ways and walk
therein, that you and we may find that rest, which has been a long time and
ever will be denied us, in any of those fantastic and novel models which
make religion a nurse of rebellion, pretend that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ
will endure no temporal Christian Kingdom except such as they may rule and
reign in.

. But you have not so learned Christ; neither his law, nor his Gospel suggest
any such unjust and cruel counsels, nor do they favor any violent and
rebellious designs. Do (as I believe you will) what becomes your duty to God
and man, your love to your Country, your respect to true Religion, and your
care of your posterity, and no doubt God will be with you, both to strengthen
your hands, and to make your faces to shine with that glory in this life, which
is the first, but least recompense of just and honorable actions, and also with
that eternal glory, which is the purchase of Christ's blood, and the honorary
recompense of God, to all that in the way of well doing seek for honor and
immortality; to which the Lord bring you and all his Church, for Jesus Christ
his sake, to whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit be all glory and
honor now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

