THE DISPENSARY; A POEM.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold by John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. 1699.

The Dispensary.
SPeak, Goddess! since it is Thou that best can tell
How ancient Leagues to modern Discord fell;
Whence 'twas, Physicians were so frugal grown
Of others Lives, and lavish of their own;
How by a Journey to the Elysian Plain
Peace triumphed, and old Time returned again.
Not far from that most celebrated Place,
Where angry Justice shows her awful Face;
Where little Villains must submit to Fate,
That great ones may enjoy the World in state;
There stands a Dome, majestic to the sight
And sumptuous Arches bear its oval height;
A golden Globe placed high with artful skill,
Seems, to the distant sight, a gilded Pill:
This Pile was by the pious Patron's aim,
Raised for a use as noble as its Frame;
Nor did the learned Society decline
The propagation of that great Design;
In all her mazes Nature's Face they viewed,
And as she disappeared, they still pursued.
They find her dubious now, and then, as plain;
Here, she is too sparing, there profusely vain.
Now she unfolds the faint, and dawning strife
Of infant Atoms kindling into life:
How ductile Matter new Meanders takes,
And slender trains of twisting Fibers makes.
And how the viscous seeks a closer tone,
By just degrees to harden into bone;
Whilst the more loose flow from the vital Urn,
And in full Tides of Purple Streams return;
How from each sluice a briny Torrent pours,
TO extinguish feavourish heats with ambient showers;
Whence their mechanic powers the Spirits claim,
How great their force, how delicate their Frame:
How the same Nerves are fashioned to sustain
The greatest Pleasure and the greatest Pain.
Why bileous Juice a golden light puts on,
And floods of Chyle in silver Currents run.
How the dim speck of Entity began
TO extend its recent Form, and stretch to Man.
To how minute an Origin we owe
Young Ammon, Caesar, and the Great Nassau.
Why paler looks impetuous rage proclaim,
And why chill Virgins redden into flame.
Why Envy often transforms with wan disguise,
And why gay Mirth sits smiling in the Eyes.
All Ice why Lucrece, or Sempronia, fire,
Why S -- enrages to survive desire.
Whence Milo's Vigor at the Olympicks shown,
Whence tropes to F -- ch or impudence to S --
Why Atticus polite, Brutus severe,
Why Me -- nd muddy, M -- gue why clear.
Hence it is we wait the wondrous Cause to find,
How Body acts upon impassive Mind.
How Fumes of Wine the thinking part can fire,
Past Hopes revive, and present Joys inspire:
Why our Complexions often our Soul declare,
And how the Passions in the Features are.
How Touch and Harmony arise between
Corporeal Substances, and Things unseen.
With mighty Truths, mysterious to descry,
Which in the Womb of distant Causes lie.
But now those great Enquiries are no more,
And Faction Skulks, where Learning shone before:
The drooping Sciences neglected pine,
And Poeans Beams with fading luster shine.
No Readers here with Hectic looks are found,
Or Eyes in rheum, through midnight watching drowned:
The lonely Edifice in Sweats complains
That nothing there but empty Silence reigns.
This Place so fit for undisturbed repose,
The God of Sloth for his Asylum chose.
Upon a Couch of Down in these Abodes
The careless Deity supinely nods.
His leaden Limbs at gentle ease are laid,
With Poppys and dull Nightshade over him spread;
No Passions interrupt his easy reign,
No Problems puzzle his lethargick Brain.
But dull oblivion guards his peaceful Bed,
And lazy Fogs bedew his thoughtless Head.
As at full length the pampered Monarch lay,
Batt'ning in ease, and slumbring life away
A spightful noise his downy Chains unties,
Hastes forward, and increases as it flies.
Frst, some to cleave the stubborn Flint engage, The building of the Dispensary.

Till urged by blows, it sparkles into rage.
Some temper Lute, some spacious Vessels move;
These Furnaces erect, and Those approve.
Here Phyals in nice discipline are set,
There Gally-pots are ranged in Alphabet.
In this place, Magazines of Pills you spy,
In that, like forage, Herbs in bundles lie.
Whilst lifted Pestles, brandisht in the Air,
Descend in peals and civil Wars declare.
Loud strokes, with pounding Spice, the Fabric rend,
And aromatic Clouds in Spires ascend.
So when the Cyclops over their Anvils sweat,
And their swol'n Sinews ecchoing blows repeat;
From the Vulcano's gross eruptions rise,
And, with curled sheets of smoke, obscure the Skies.
The slumbring God amazed at this new din,
Thrice strove to rise, and thrice sunk down again.
Then, half erect, he rubbed his opening Eyes,
And faulter'd thus betwixt half words and sighs.
How impotent a Deity am I!
With Godhead born, but cursed, that cannot dye!
Through my indulgence it is, that Mortals share
A grateful negligence, and ease from Care.
Lulled in my arms, how long have I withheld,
The Northern Monarchs from the dusty Field.
How have I kept the British Fleet at ease,
From tempting the rough dangers of the Seas.
Hibernia owns the mildness of my Reign,
And my Divinity's adored in Spain.
I Swains to Sylvan Solitudes convey,
Where stretched on Mossy Beds, they waste away,
In gentle inactivity, the day.
What marks of wondrous Clemency I Have shown,
My bright and blooming Clergy hourly own.
Triumphant Plenty, with a cheerful grace,
Basks in their Eyes, and sparkles in their Face.
How sleik their looks, how goodly is their Mien,
When big they strut behind a double Chin.
Each Faculty in blandishments they lull,
Aspiring to be venerably dull.
No learned Debates molest their downy Trance
Or discompose their pompous ignorance:
But undisturbed, they loiture life away,
So wither Green, and blossom in decay.
Deep sunk in Down, they by my gentle Care
Avoid the Inclemencies of Morning Air,
And leave to tattered Crape the Drudgery of Prayer.
Mankind my fond propitious Power has tried,
Too often to own, too much to be denied.
And in return I ask but some recess,
To Enjoy the entrancing Ecstasies of Peace.
But that, the Great Nassau's heroic Arms
Has long prevented with his loud Alarms.
Still my indulgence with contempt he flies,
His Couch a Trench, his Canopy the Skies.
Nor Skies nor Seasons his resolves control,
The Equator has no heat, no Ice the Pole.
From Clime to Clime his wondrous Triumphs move,
And Jove grows jealous of his Realms above.
But as the slothful God to Yawn begun,
He shook off the dull Mist, and thus went on.
Sometimes among the Caspian Cliffs I creep,
Where solitary Batts, and Swallows sleep.
Or if some Cloyster's refuge I implore,
Where holy Drones over dying Tapers snore;
Still Nassau's Arms a soft repose deny,
Keep me awake, and follow were I fly.
Now since he has vouchsafed the World a Peace,
And with a Nod has bid Bellona cease:
I sought the Covert of some peaceful Cell,
Where silent Shades in harmless raptures dwell;
That Rest might past Tranquillity restore,
And Mortal never interrupt me more.
'Twas here, alas! I thought I might repose,
These Walls were that Asylum I had chose.
Naught underneath this Roof, but Damps are found,
Naught heard, but drowzy Beetles buzzing round.
Spread Cobwebs hide the Walls, and Dust the Floors,
And midnight Silence guards the noiseless Doors.
But now some busy Wretch's feavourish Brain,
Invents new Fancies to renew my Pain,
And labors to dissolve my easy Reign.
With that, the God his darling Phantom calls,
And from his fault'ring Lips this Message falls.
Since Mortals will dispute my Power, I Will try
Who has the greatest Empire, they or I.
Find Envy out, some Princes Court attend,
Most likely there, you will meet the famished Fiend.
Or in Cabals, or Camps, or at the Bar,
Or where ill Poets Pennyless confer,
Or in the Senate House at Westminster.
Tell the bleak Fury what new Projects reign,
Among the Homicides of Warwick Lane.
And what the Event, unless her Care enclines,
To blast their Hopes, and baffle their Designs.
More He had spoke but sudden Vapors rise,
And with their silken Cords tie down his Eyes.
The Dispensary. CANTO II.
SOON as with gentle sighs the evening Breeze
Begun to whisper through the murmuring Trees;
And Night had wrapped in Shades the Mountains
Whilst Winds lay hushed in Subterranean Beds. [Heads,
Officious Phantom did with speed prepare
To slide on tender Pinions through the Air.
He often sought the Summit of a Rock,
And often the Hollow of some blasted Oak;
At length approaching where bleak Envy lay,
He found, by the hissing of her Snakes, the way.
Beneath the gloomy Covert of an Eugh
That taints the Grass with sickly sweats of Dew;
No verdant Beauty entertains the sight,
But baneful Hemlock, and cold Aconite;
There crawled the meagre Monster on the ground,
And Breathed a livid Pestilence around:
A bald and bloted Toad-stool raised her Head;
And Plumes of boding Ravens were her Bed.
Down her wan Cheeks sulphurous Torrents flow,
And her red haggard Eyes with Fury glow.
Like Aetna with Metallic streams oppressed,
She breaths a bleu Eruption from her Breast.
And rends with cankered Teeth the pregnant Scrolls
Where Fame the Acts of Demy-Gods enrolls.
And as the rent Records in pieces fell,
Each Scrap did some immortal Action tell.
This showed, how fixed as Fate Torquatus stood,
And That, the passage of the Granick Flood.
The Julian Eagles, here, their Wings display;
And there, all pale, the expiring Decii lay.
This does Camillus as a God extol,
That points at Manlius in the Capitol.
How Cochles did the Tyber's Surges brave,
How Curtius plunged into the gaping Grave.
Great Cyrus, here, the Medes and Persians join,
And, there, the immortal Battle on the Boyn.
As the airy Messenger the Fury spied,
A while his curdling Blood forgot to glide.
Confusion on his fainting Vitals hung,
And fault'ring accents fluttered on his Tongue.
At length assuming Courage, he essayed
TO inform the Fiend, then shrunk into a shade.
The Hag lay long revolving what might be
The blessed Event of such an Embassy.
She blazons in dread Smiles her hideous Form,
So Lightning guilds the unrelenting Storm.
Then she, Alas! how long in vain have I
Aimed at those noble ills the Fates deny:
Within this Isle for ever must I find
Disasters to distract my restless Mind.
Good Te -- ns Celestial Piety
Has raised his Virtues to the Sacred See.
So -- rs does sickning Equity restore,
And helpless Orphans now need weep no more.
Pm -- ke to Britain endless Blessings brings;
He spoke and Peace clapped her Triumphant wings:
Unshaken is the Throne and safe its Lord,
Whilst M -- d or O -- nd wears a Sword.
The noble ardour of a Loyal Fire,
Inspires the generous breast of De -- re.
Like Leda's shining Sons, divinely clear,
P -- land and I -- sey decked in Rays appear
To Guild, by turns, the Gallick Hemisphear.
Worth in Distress is raised by M -- gue,
Augustus listens if Maecenas sue.
And V -- ns Vigilance no slumber takes,
Whilst Faction peeps abroad, and Anarchy awakes.
Since therefore by no Arts I can defeat
The happy Enterprises of the Great,
I Will calmly stoop to more inferior things;
And try if my loved Snakes have Teeth or Stings.
She said; and straight shrill Colon's Person took,
In Morals loose, but most precise in look.
Black-Fryar's Annals lately pleased to call
Him Warden of Apothecaries-Hall.
And, when so dignified, he would not forbear
That Operation which the learned declare
Gives Collicks ease, and makes the Ladies Fair.
In vain Formality his Talent lies,
And the empty Head's defects, the Band supplies.
Hourly his learned Impertinence affords
A barren Superfluity of Words.
In haste he strides along to recompense
The want of business with its vain pretense.
The Fury thus assuming Colon's grace,
So slung her Arms, so shuffl'd in her Pace.
Onward she hastens to the famed Abodes,
Where Horoscope invokes the infernal Gods,
And reached the Mansion where the Vulgar run
TO increase their Ills, and throng to be undone.
This Wight all mercenary Projects trys,
And knows that to be rich is to be wise.
By useful Observations he can tell
The sacred Charms that in true Sterling dwell.
How Gold maks a Patrician of a Slave,
A Dwarf an Atlas, a Therfites brave.
It cancels all defects, and in their place
Finds Sense in Br -- w, Charms in Lady G -- ce.
It guides the fancy, and directs the mind,
No Bankrupt ever found a Fair one kind.
So truly Horoscope its Virtues knows,
To this bright Idol it is, alone, he bows;
And fancies that a Thousand Pound supplies
The want of twenty Thousand Qualities.
Long has he been of that amphibious Fry,
Bold to prescribe, and busy to apply.
His Shop the gazing Vulgar's Eyes employs
With foreign Trinkets, and domestic Toys.
Here, Mummies lay most reverendly stale,
And there, the Tortois hung her Coat of Mail;
Not far from some huge Shark's devouring Head,
The flying Fish their finny Pinions spread.
Aloft in rows large Poppy Heads were strung,
And near, a scaly Alligator hung.
In this place, Drugs in Musty heaps decayed,
In that, dried Bladders, and drawn Teeth were laid.
An inner Room receives the numerous Shoals
Of such as pay to be reputed Fools.
Globes stand by Globes, Volumns on Volumns lie,
And Planitary Schemes amuse the Eye.
The Sage, in Velvet Chair, here lolls at ease,
To promise future Health for present Fees.
Then, as from Tripod, solemn shams reveals,
And what the Stars know nothing of, foretells.
One asks how soon Panthea may be won,
And longs to feel the Marriage Fetters on.
Others, convinced by Melancholy proof,
Would know how soon kind Fates will strike 'em off.
Some, by what means they may redress the wrong,
When Fathers the Possession keep too long.
And some would know the issue of their Cause,
And whether Gold can sodder up its flaws.
Poor pregnant Laijs his advice would have,
To lose by Art what fruitful Nature gave:
And Portia old in expectation grown,
Laments her barren Curse, and begs a Son.
Whilst Iris, his cosmetick Wash, must try,
To make her Bloom revive, and Lovers dye.
Some ask for Charms, and others Philters choose
To gain Corinna, and their Quartans loose.
Young Hylas, botch'd with Stains too foul to Name,
In Cradle here, renews his Youthful Frame:
Cloyed with Desire, and furfeited with Charms,
A Hot-house he prefers to Iulia's arms.
And old Lucullus would the Arcanum prove,
Of kindling in cold Veins the sparks of Love.
With pleasure those dull Frauds bleak Envy sees,
And wonders at the senseless Mysteries.
In Colon's Voice she thus calls out aloud
On Horoscope environed by the Crow'd.
Forbear, forbear, thy vain Amusements cease,
Thy Wood-Cocks from their Gins a while release;
And to that dire Misfortune listen well,
Which thou shou'd'st fear to know, or I to tell.
It Is true, Thou ever wast esteemed by me
The great Alcides of our Company.
When we with Noble Scorn resolved to ease
Our selves of all Parochial Offices;
And to our Wealthier Patients left the care,
And draggl'd dignity of Scavenger;
Such Zeal in that affair thou did express,
Naught could be equal to it, but the Success.
Now call to mind thy generous Prowess past,
Be what thou shou'd'st, by thinking what thou wast.
The Faculty of Warwick Lane design,
If not to Storm, at least to Undermine:
Their Gates each day ten thousand Night-caps crow'd,
And their attempts their Mortars speak aloud.
If they should once unmasque our Mystery,
Each Nurse e're long would be as learned as We,
Our Art exposed to every Vulgar Eye,
And, none in Complaisance to us, would dye.
What if We claim their right to assassinate,
Must they needs turn Apothecaries straight?
Prevent it, Gods! all Stratagems we try,
To crowd with new Inhabitants your Sky.
It Is we who wait the Destinies command,
To purge the troubled Air, and weed the Land.
And dare the College of Physicians aim
To equal our Fraternity in Fame?
Crabs Eyes as well with Pearl for use may try,
Or Highgate Hill with lofty Pindus vie:
So Glowworms may compare with Titan's Beams,
Or Hare Court Pump with Aganippe's Streams.
Our Manufacture now they meanly sell,
And spightfully, the intrinsic value tell:
Nay more, (but Heavens prevent) they will force us soon,
To act with Conscience, and to be undone.
At this, famed Horoscope turned pale, and straight
In silence tumbled from his Chair of State.
The Crowd in great Confusion sought the Door,
And left the Magus fainting on the Floor.
Whilst in his Breast the Fury breathed a Storm,
Then sought her Cell, and reassumed her Form,
Thus from the Sore although the Insect flies,
It leaves a brood of Maggots in disguise.
Officious Squirt in haste forsook the Shop,
To succor the expiring Horoscope.
Often he essayed the Magus to restore,
By Salt of Succinum's prevailing power;
But still supine the solid Lumber lay,
An Image of scarce animated Clay;
Till Fates, indulgent when Disasters call,
Bethought the Assistant of a Urinal;
Whose Steam the Wight no sooner did receive,
But rowz'd, and blessed the Stale Restorative.
The Springs of Life their former Vigor feel,
Such Zeal he had for that vile Urensil.
So when Pelides did blue Thetis see,
He knew the Fishy smell, and owned her Deity.
The Dispensary. CANTO III.
ALL Night the Sage in pensive tumults lay,
Complaining of the slow approach of Day;
Often turned him round, and strove to think no
Of what shrill Colon spoke the Day before. [more,
Cowslips and Poppies over his Eyes he spread,
And S -- nd's Works he laid beneath his Head.
But all those Opiats still in vain he tryes,
Sleep's gentle Image his embraces flies.
Tumultuous cares lay rolling in his Breast,
And thus his anxious thoughts the Sage expressed.
The Earth has rolled twelve annual turns, and more,
Since first high Heavens bright Orbs I Have numbered over.
Such my applause, so mighty my success,
I once thought my Predictions more than guess.
But, doubtful as I am, I Will entertain
This Faith, there can be no mistake in gain.
For the dull World most Honor pay to those
Who on their Understanding most impose.
First Man creates, and then he fears the Elf,
Thus others cheat him not, but he himself:
He loathes the Substance, and he loves the show,
It Is hard e're to convince a Fool, He Is so:
He hates Reallities, and hugs the Cheat,
And still the Pleasure lies in the deceit.
So Meteors flatter with a dazzling Dye
Which no existence has, but in the Eye.
Prospects at distance please, but when we are near,
We find but desert Rocks, and fleeting Air.
From Stratagem, to Stratagem we run,
And he knows most who latest is undone.
Mankind one day serene and free appear;
The next, they are cloudy, sullen, and severe:
New Passions, new Opinions still excite,
And what they like at Noon, despise at Night:
They gain with labor, what they quit with ease,
And Health for want of Change grows a Disease.
Religion's bright Authority they dare,
And yet are Slaves to superstitious Fear.
They Counsel others, but themselves deceive,
And though they are cozened still, they still believe.
Shall I then, who with penetrating sight
Inspect the Springs that guide each appetite;
Who with unfathomed searches hourly pierce
The dark Recesses of the Universe,
Be passive, whilst the Faculty pretend
Our Charter with unhallowed hands to rend?
If all the Fiends that in low darkness reign,
Be not the Fictions of a sickly Brain;
That Project, the Medicines made up there for the use of the Poor.
Dispensary, they call,
Before the Moon can blunt her Horns, shall fall.
With that a glance from mild Aurora's Eyes,
Shoots through the Crystal Kingdoms of the Skies;
The Savage Kind in Forests cease to roame,
And Sots o'recharg'd with nauseous Loads reel home.
Light's cheerful smiles over the azure waste are spread,
And Miss from Inns of Court bolts out unpaid.
The Sage transported at the approaching hour,
Imperiously thrice thundered on the Floor;
Officious Squirt that moment had access,
His trust was great, his vigilance no less.
To him thus Horoscope.
My kind Companion in this dire affair,
Which is [more light, since thou assum'st a share;
Fly with what have, thou used to do of old,
When Clyster was in danger to be cold:
With expedition on the Beadle call
To summon all the Company to the Hall.
Away the trusty Coadjutor hies,
Swift as from Phyal steam of Hartshorn flies.
The Magus in the int'rim mumbles over
Vile terms of Art to some infernal Power,
And draws mysterious Circles on the Floor.
But from the gloomy Vault no glaring Spright,
Ascends to blast the tender bloom of Light.
No mystic sounds from Hell's detested Womb,
In dusky exhalations upwards come.
And now to raise an Altar He decrees,
To that devouring Harpy called Disease.
Then Flowers in Canisters he hastes to bring,
The withered product of a blighted Spring,
With cold Solanum from the Pontick Shore,
The Roots of Mandrake and black Ellebore.
And on the Structure next he heaps a load,
Of Sassafras in chips and mastick Wood.
Then from the Compter he takes down the File,
And with Prescriptions lights the solemn Pyle.
Feebly the Flames on clumsie Wings aspire,
And smouldring Fogs of smoke benight the Fire.
With sorrow he beheld the sad portent,
Then to the Hag these Orizons he sent.
Disease! thou ever most propitious Power,
Whose soft Indulgence we perceive each Hour;
Thou that would lay whole States and Regions wast,
Sooner than we thy Cormorants should fast;
If, in return, all Diligence we pay
TO extend your Empire, and confirm your Sway,
Far as the weekly Bills can reach around,
From Kent-Street end to famed St. Giles's-Pound;
Behold this poor Libation with a Smile,
And let auspicious Light break through the Pyle.
He spoke: and on the Pyramid he laid
Bay Leaves and Vipers Hearts, and thus he said;
As These consume in this mysterious Fire,
So let the cursed Dispensary expire;
And as Those crackle in the Flames and dye,
So let its Vessels burst, and Glasses fly.
But a sinister Cricket straight was heard,
The Altar fell, and the Offering disappeared.
As the famed Wight the Omen did regret,
Squirt brought the News the Company was met.
Nigh where Fleet-Ditch descends in sable Streams,
To wash his sooty Naiads in the Thames;
There stands a Apothecaries Hall.
Structure on a rising Hill,
Where Tyro's take their Freedom out to kill.
Some Pictures in these dreadful Shambles tell,
How by the Delian God the Pithon fell;
And how Medea did the Philter brew,
That could in Aeson's Veins young force renew;
How sanguine Swains their Amorous Hours repent,
When Pleasure's past, and Pains are permanent;
And how frail Nymphs, often by abortion aim
To lose a Substance, to preserve a Name.
Soon as each Member in his rank was placed,
The Assembly Diasenna thus addressed.
My kind Confederates, if my poor intent,
As it is sincere, had been but prevalent;
We'd met upon a more serene Design,
And on no other business but to dine;
The Faculty had still maintained their sway,
And interest had directed us to obey;
Then we'd this only emulation known,
Who best could fill his Purse, and thin the Town.
But now from gathering Clouds Destruction pours,
And threatens with mad rage our Halcyon Hours:
Mists from black Jealousies the Tempest form,
And late Divisions reinforce the Storm.
Know, when these Feuds, like those at Law, are past,
The Winners will be Losers at the last.
Like Heroes in Sea Fights we seek Renown,
To Fire some hostile Ship, we Burn our own.
That Jugler which another's Slight will show,
But teaches how the World his own may know.
Thrice happy were those Golden days of old,
When dear as Burgundy, Ptisans were sold.
When Patients chose to dye with better will,
Than live to pay the Apothecaries Bill.
And cheaper, than for our assistance call,
Might yield to Fine for Sheriff Spring and Fall.
But now late Jars our practices detect,
For Mines, when once discovered, lose the Effect
Dissentions, like small Streams, are first begun,
Scarce seen they rise, but gather as they run.
So Lines that from their Parallel decline,
More they advance, the more they still dis-joyn.
It Is therefore my advice, in haste we send,
And beg the Faculty to be our Friend.
As he revolving stood to speak the rest,
Rough Colocynthis thus his rage expressed.
Thou scandal of the mighty Paeans Art,
At thy approach, the Springs of Nature start,
The Nerves unbrace: Nay at the sight of thee
A Scratch turns Cancer, the Itch a Leprosy.
Cou'd'st thou propose that we the Friends of Fates,
Who fill Churchyards, and who unpeople States,
Who baffle Nature, and dispose of Lives,
Whilst Russel, as we please, or starves, or thrives;
Should e're submit to their imperious Will,
Who out of Consultation scarce can kill?
The aspiring Alps shall sooner sink to Vales,
And Leaches, in our Glasses, swell to Whales;
Or Norwich trade in Implements of Steel,
And Bromingham in Stuffs and Druggets deal:
The Sick to the Hundreds sooner shall repair,
And change the Gravel Pits for Essex Air.
No, no, the Faculty shall soon confess
Our Force increases, as our Funds grow less;
And what required such Industry to raise,
We'll scatter into nothing as we please.
Thus they will acknowledge to Annihilate,
Shows as immense a Power as to Create.
We Will raise our numerous Cohorts, and oppose
The feeble Forces of our Pigmy Foes;
Whole Troops of Quacks shall join us on the Place,
From great Kirleus, down to Doctor Case.
Though Such vile Rubbish sink, yet we shall rise,
Directors still secure the greatest Prize.
Such poor Supports serve only like a stay,
The Tree once fixed, its Rest is torn away.
So Patriots, in the times of Peace and Ease,
Forget the Fury of the late Disease:
Imaginary Dangers they Create,
And loath the Elixir which preserved the State.
Arm therefore, gallant Friends, it is Honor's call,
Or let us boldly Fight, or bravely Fall.
To this the Session seemed to give consent,
Much liked the War, but dreaded much the Event.
At length, the growing difference to compose,
Two Brothers named Ascarides arose.
Both had the Volubility of Tongue,
In Meaning faint, but in Opinion strong.
To speak they both assumed a like pretense,
But the Elder gained his just preeminence;
Then he: It Is true when Privilege and Right
Are once invaded, Honor bids us Fight.
But to the fatal Field before we fly,
We'll first reflect, and then consider why.
Suppose the unthinking Faculty unvail,
What we, through wiser Conduct; would conceal;
Is It Reason we should quarrel with the Glass
That shows the monstrous Features of our Face?
Or grant some grave Pretenders have of late
Thought fit an Innovation to Create;
Soon they will repent, what rashly they begun,
Though Projects please, Projectors are undone.
All Novelties must this success expect;
When good, our Envy; and when bad, neglect:
If things of Use were valued, there had been
Some Workhouse, where the Monument is seen.
Or if the Voice of Reason could be heard,
E're this, triumphal Arches had appeared.
Then since no Veneration is allowed,
Or to the real or the appearing good;
The Project that we vainly apprehend,
Must, as it blindly rose, as vilely end.
Some Members of the Faculty there are,
Who Interest prudently to Oaths prefer.
Our Friendship with a servile air they court,
And their Clandestine Arts are our support.
Them we will Consult about this Enterprise,
And boldly Execute what they Advise.
But from below (whilst such resolves they took)
Some Aurum Fulminans the The Room the Apothecaries meet in, is over the
Laboratory.
Fabric shook.
The Champions daunted at the crack retreat,
Regard their Safety, and their Rage forget.
So thus at Bathos, when the Giants strove
T'invade the Skies, and wage a War with Jove;
Soon as the Ass of old Silenus brayed,
The trembling Rebels in confusion fled.
The Dispensary. CANTO IV.
NOT far from that most famous Theater,
Where wandering Punks each Night at five re-
[pair;
Where purple Emperors in Buskins tread,
And rule imaginary Worlds for Bread;
Where Bently by old Writers wealthy grew,
And Briscoe Iately was undone by New:
There triumphs a Physician of Renown;
To scarce a Mortal, but Himself, unknown.
None e're was placed more luckily than He,
For the exercise of such a Mystery.
When Bu -- ss deafens all the listening press.
With Peals of most seraphick Emptiness;
Or when Mysterious F -- n mounts on high
To preach his Parish to a Lethargy:
This Aesculapius waits hard by to ease
The Martyrs of such Christian Cruelties.
Long has this happy Quarter of the Town,
For Lendness, Wit, and Gallantry been known.
All Sorts meet here, of whatsoever degree,
To blend and justle into Harmony.
The Politicians of Parnassus prate,
And Poets canvass the affairs of State;
The Cits never talk of Trade, and Stock, but tell
How Virgil writ, how bravely Turnus fell.
The Country Dames drive to Hippolito's,
First find a Spark, and after lose a Nose.
The Lawyer for lac'd-Coat the Robe does quit,
He grows a Madman, and then turns a Wit.
And in the Cloister pensive Strephon waits,
Till Chloe's Hackny comes, and then retreats.
And if the ungenerous Nymph a Shaft lets fly
More fatally than from a sparkling Eye,
Mirmillo, that famed Opifer, is nigh.
The Apothecaries thither throng to dine,
And want of Elbow-room's supplied in Wine.
Cloyed with Variety they surfeit there,
Whilst the wan Patients on thin Gruel fare.
'Twas here the Champions of the Party met,
Of their Heroic Enterprise to treat.
Each Hero a tremendous Air put on,
And stern Mirmillo in these Words begun.
It Is with concern, my Friends, I meet you here;
No Grievance you can know, but I must share.
It Is plain, my Interest you have advanced so long,
Each Fee, though I was mute, would find a Tongue.
And in return, though I have strove to rend
Those Statutes, which on Oath I should defend;
Yet that is a Trifle to a generous Mind,
Great Services, as great Returns should find.
And you will perceive, this Hand, when Glory calls,
Can brandish Arms, as well as Urinals.
Oxford and all her passing Bells can tell,
By this Right Arm, what mighty numbers fell.
Whilst others meanly asked whole Months to slay,
I often dispatched the Patient in a Day:
With Pen in hand I pushed to that degree,
I scarce had left a Wretch to give a Fee.
Some sell by Laudanum, and some by Steel,
And Death in ambush lay in every Pill.
For save or slay, this Privilege we claim,
Though Credit suffers, the Reward's the same.
What though the Art of Healing we pretend,
He that designs it least, is most a Friend.
Into the right we err, and must confess,
To Oversights we often owe Success.
Thus Bessus got the Battle in the Play,
His glorious Cowardice restored the Day.
So the famed Grecian Piece owed its desert
To Chance, and not the labored Strokes of Art.
Physicians, if they are wise, should never think
Of any other Arms than Pen and Ink.
But the Enemy, at their expense, shall find,
When Honor calls, I Will scorn to stay behind.
He said; and Sealed the Engagement with a Kiss,
Which was returned by the Younger Askaris;
Who thus advanced; Each word, Sir, you impart
Has something Killing in it, like your Art.
How much we to your boundless Friendship owe,
Our Files can speak, and your Prescriptions show.
Your Ink descends in such excessive Showrs,
It Is plain, you can regard no Health but ours.
Whilst Poor Pretenders trifle over a Case,
You but appear, and give the Coup de Grace.
O that near Xanthus Banks you had but dwelt,
When Ilium first Achaian Fury felt,
The Flood had cursed young Peleus Arm in vain,
For troubling his choked Streams with heaps of slain.
No Trophies you had left for Greeks to raise,
Their ten Years toil, you would finished in ten Days.
Fate smiles on your Attemps, and when you list,
In vain the Cowards fly, or Brave resist.
Then let us Arm, we need not fear Success,
No labors are too hard for Hercules.
Our military Ensigns we'll display;
Conquest pursues, where Courage leads the way.
To this Design fly Querpo did agree,
A worthless Member of the Faculty;
Drained from an Elder's Loins with awkard gust,
In Lees of Stale Hypocrisy and Lust.
His Sire's pretended pious Steps he treads,
And where the Doctor fails, the Saint succeeds.
A Conventicle fleshed his greener Years,
And his full Age the envenomed Rancour shares.
Thus Boys hatch Game Fggs under Birds of prey,
To make the Fowl more furious for the Fray.
Dull Carus next discovered his intent,
With much ado explaining what he meant.
His Spirits stagnate like Cocitus's Flood,
And naught but Calentures can warm his Blood.
In his chill Veins the sluggish Puddle flows,
And loads with lazy Fogs his sable Brows.
The brainless Wretch claims a Preeminence
In settling Lunaticks, and helping Sense.
So when Perfumes their fragrant Scent give over,
Naught can their Odor, like a Jakes, restore.
When for Advice the vulgar throng, he is found
With lumber of vile Books besieged around.
The gazing Fry acknowledge their Surprise,
Consulting less their Reason than their Eyes.
And He perceives it stands in greater stead,
To furnish well his Classes, than his Head.
Thus a weak State, by wise Distrust, enclines
To numerous Stores, and Strength in Magazines.
So Fools are always most profuse of Words,
And Cowards never fail of longest Swords.
Abandoned Authors here a Refuge meet,
And from the World, to Dust and Worms retreat.
Here Dregs and Sediment of Auctions reign,
Refuse of Fares, and Gleanings of Duck-lane;
And up these shelves, much Gothic Lumber climbs'
With Swiss Philosophy, and Danish Rimes.
And hither, rescued from the Grocers, come
M -- Works entire, and endless Rheams of Bloom.
Where would the long neglected C -- s fly,
If bounteous Carus should refuse to buy?
But each vile Scribler's happy on this score,
He Will find some Carus still to read him over.
Nor must we the obsequious Umbra spare,
Who, soft by Nature, yet declared for War.
But when some Rival Power invades on Right,
Flys set on Flys, and Turtles Turtles fight.
Else courteous Umbra to the last had been
Demurely meek, insipidly serene.
With Him, the present still some Virtues have,
The Vain are sprightly, and the Stupid, grave.
The Slothful, negligent; the Foppish neat;
The Lewd are airy, and the Sly discreet.
A Wren's an Eagle, a Baboon a Beau;
C -- t a Lycurgus, and a Phocion, R --.
Heroic Ardour now the Assembly warms,
Each Combatant breaths nothing but Alarms.
And whilst the Scheme for future Glory's laid,
Famed Horoscope thus offers to dissuade.
Since of each Enterprise the Event's unknown,
Let Us quit the Sword, and hearken to the Gown.
Nigh lives Vagellius, one reputed long,
For Strength of Lungs, and Pliancy of Tongue.
Which way He pleases, he can mould a Cause,
The Worst has Merits, and the Best has Flaws,
Five Guinneas make a Criminal to Day,
And ten to Morrow wipe the Stain away.
Whatever he affirms is undeny'd,
Milo's the Lecher, Clodius the Homicide.
Cato pernicious, Cataline a Saint,
Or -- rd suspected, D -- comb innocent.
Let Us then to Law, for it is by Fate decreed,
Vagellius, and our Money, shall succeed.
Know, when I first invoked Disease by Charms
T'assist, and be propitious to our Arms;
Ill Omens did the Sacrifice attend,
Nor would the Sybil from her Grot ascend.
As Horoscope urged farther to be heard,
He thus was interrupted by a Bard.
In vain your Magic Mysteries you use,
Such sounds the Sybil's Sacred Ears abuse.
These Lines the pale Divinity shall raise,
Such is the Power of Sound, and Force of Lays.
K. Arth. p. 307.
Arms meet with Arms, Fauchions with Fauchions clash,
And sparks of Fire struck out from Armor flash.
Thick Clouds of Dust contending Warriors raise,
And hideous War over all the Region brays.
K. Ar. p. 327
Some raging ran with huge Herculean Clubs,
Some massy Balls of Brass, some mighty Tubs
Of Cynders bore. --
Pr. Ar. p. 189.
Naked and half burnt Hulls, with hideous wreck,
Affright the Skies, and fry the Oceans back,
Pr. Ar. p. 136.
High Rocks of Snow, and sailing Hills of Ice,
Against each other with a mighty crash,
Driven by the Winds, in rude rencounter dash.
K. Ar. p. 189.
Blood, Brains, and Limbs the highest Walls distain,
And all around lay squallid Heaps of Slain.
As he went rumbling on, the Fury straight
Crawled in, her Limbs could scarce support her Weight.
A noysom Rag her pensive Temples bound,
And faintly her parched Lips these Accents sound.
Mortal, how dare thou with such Lines address
My awful Seat, and trouble my Recess?
In Essex Marshy Hundreds is a Cell,
Where lazy Fogs, and drissing Vapors dwell:
Thither raw Damps on drooping Wings repair,
And shivering Quartans shake the sickly Air.
There, when fatigued, some silent Hours I pass,
And substitute Physicians in my place.
Then dare not, for the future, once rehearse
The offensive Discord of such hideous Verse.
But in your Lines let Energy be found,
And learn to rise in Sense, and sink in Sound.
Harsh words, though pertinent, uncooth appear,
None please the Fancy, who offend the Ear.
In Sense and Numbers if you would excel,
Read W -- y, consider D -- den well.
In one, what vigorous turns of Fancy shine,
In the other, Sirens warble in each Line.
If D -- sets sprightly Muse but touch the Lyre,
The Smiles and Graces melt in soft desire,
And little Loves confess their amorous Fire.
The Tyber now no gentle Gallus sees,
But smiling Thames enjoys his N -- bys.
And gentle Isis claims the Ivy Crown,
To bind the immortal Brows of A -- son.
As tuneful C -- greve trys his rural Strains,
Pan quits the Woods, the listening Fawns the Plains;
And Philomel, in Notes like his, complains.
And Britain, since Pausanias was writ,
Knows Spartan Virtue, and Athenian Wit.
When St -- ny paints the Godlike Acts of Kings,
Or P -- r some Facetious Fancy sings:
The Banks of Rhine a pleased Attention show,
And Silver Sequena forgets to flow.
Such just Examples carefully read over,
Slide without falling, without straining soar.
Often though your Strokes surprise, you should not choose,
A Theme so mighty for a Virgin Muse.
Long did Apelles his Famed Piece decline,
His Alexander was his last Design.
It Is M -- gue's rich Vein alone must prove,
None but a Phidias should attempt a Jove.
She said; and as She vanished from their Sight,
She cried, to Arms; so left the Realms of Light.
The Combatants to the Enterprise consent,
And the next day smiled on the great Event.
The Dispensary. CANTO V.
WHen the still Night, with peaceful Poppies crowned,
Had spread her shady Pinions over the Ground;
And slumbring Chiefs of painted Triumphs dream,
Whilst Groves and Streams are the soft Virgin's Theme.
The Surges gently dash against the Shore,
Flocks quit the Plains, and Gally-Slaves the Oar.
Sleep shakes its downy Wings over mortal Eyes,
Mirmillo is the only Wretch, it Flies.
He finds no respite from his anxious Grief,
Then seeks from this Soliloquy relief.
Long have I reigned unrivaled in the Town,
And great as my Ambition's my Renown.
There Is none can dye with due Solemnity,
Unless his Passport first be signed by Me.
My arbitrary Bounty's undeny'd,
I give Reversions, and for Heirs provide.
None could the tedious Nuptial State support;
But I, to make it easy, make it short.
I set the discontented Matrons free,
And ransom Husbands from Captivity.
And shall so useful a Machin as I
Engage in civil Broyls, I know not why?
No, I Will endeavor strait a Peace, and so
I save my Honor, and my Person too.
But Discord, that still haunts with hideous Mien
Those dire Abodes where Hymen once has been,
O're-heard Mirmillo reasoning in his Bed;
Then raging inwardly the Fury said.
Have I so often banished lazy Peace
From her dark Solitude, and loved Recess?
Have I made S -- th and S -- lock disagree,
And puzzle Truth with learned Obscurity?
And does my faithful Fer -- son profess
His Ardour still for Animosities?
Have I, Britannia's Safety to insure,
Exposed her naked, to be more secure?
Have I made Parties opposite, unite,
In monstrous Leagues of amicable Spite.
TO embroyl their Country, whilst the common Cry,
Is Freedom, but their Aim, the Ministry?
And shall a Dastard's Cowardice prevent
The War so long I Have labored to foment?
No, it is resolved, he either shall comply,
Or I Will renounce my wan Divinity.
With that, the Hag approached Mirmillo's Bed,
And taking Querpo's meager Shape, She said;
I come, although at Midnight, to dispel,
Those Tumults in your pensive Bosom dwell.
I dreamed, but now, my Friend, that you were by;
Methought I saw your Tears, and heard you sigh.
O that 'twere but a Dream! But sure I find
Grief in your Looks, and Tempests in your Mind.
Speak, whence it is this late disorder flows,
That shakes your Soul, and troubles your Repose.
Erroneous Practice scarce could give you Pain,
Too well you know the Dead will never complain.
What Looks discover, said the Homicide,
Would be but too impertinent to hide.
My Stars direct me to decline the Fight;
The way to serve our Party, is to write.
How many, said the Fury, had not split
On Shelves so fatal, if they never had writ!
Had C -- h printed nothing of his own,
He had not been the S -- fold of the Town.
Asses and Owls unseen themselves betray,
If These attempt to Hoot, or Those to Bray.
Had We -- y never aimed in Verse to please,
We had not ranked him with our Ogilbys.
Still Censures will on dull Pretenders fall,
A Codrus should expect a Iuvenal.
Ill Lines, but like ill Paintings, are allowed
To set off, and to recommend the good.
So Diamonds take a Luster from their Foil;
And to a B -- ly it is, we owe a B -- le.
Consider well the Talent you possess,
To strive to make it more would make it less;
And recollect what Gratitude is due,
To Those whose Party you abandon now.
To Them you owe your odd Magnificence,
But to your Stars your penury of Sense.
Haspt in a Tombril, awkardly you have shined
With one fat Slave before, and none behind.
But soon, what They Have exalted They Will discard,
And set up Carus, or the City Bard.
Alarmed at this, the Hero Courage took,
And Storms of Terror threatened in his Look.
My dread Resolves, he cried, I Will straight pursue,
The Fury smiled, and sullenly withdrew.
In omnious Dreams Mirmillo spent the Night,
And frightful Phantoms danced before his Sight.
At length gay Morn smiles in the Eastern Sky,
From rifling silent Graves the Sextons fly.
The rising Mists skud over the dewy Lawns,
The Chanter at his early Matins yawns.
The Violets open their Buds, Cowslips their Bells,
And Progne, her Complaint of Tereus, tells.
As bold Mirmillo the gray dawn descries,
Armed Cap-a-pe, where Honor calls, he flies
And finds the Legions planted at their Post;
Where Querpo in his Armor shone the most.
His Shield was wrought, if we may credit Fame
By Mulciber, the Mayor of Bremigham.
A Folliage of dissembled Senna Leaves,
Engraved round its Brim, the wondering sight deceives.
Embost upon its Field, a Battle stood
Of Leeches spouting Hemorrhoidal Blood.
The Artist too expressed the solemn state
Of grave Physicians at a Consult met;
About each Symptom how they Disagree,
But how unanimous in case of Fee.
And whilst one Assassin another plys,
With starched Civilities, the Patient dies.
Beneath this Blazing Orb bright Querpo shone,
Himself an Atlas, and his Shield a Moon.
A Pestle for his Truncheon led the Van,
And his high Helmet was a Close stool-pan.
His Crest an This Bird, according to the ancients, gives it self a Clyster
with its Beek.
Ibis, brandishing her Beak,
And winding in loose Folds her spiral Neck.
This, when the Young Querpoides beheld,
His Face in Nurse's Breast the Boy concealed.
Then peep't, and with the effulgent Helm would play,
But as the Monster gaped, he would shrink away.
Thus sometimes Joy prevailed, and sometimes Fear,
And Tears and Smiles alternate Passions were.
But Fame that whispers each profound Design,
And tells the Consultations at the Vine.
And how at Church and Bar all gape and stretch,
If Wi -- ton but plead, or O -- ly preach;
On nimble Wings to Warwick Lane repairs,
And what the Enemy intends, declares.
Disordered Murmurs through the College pass,
And pale Confusion glares in every Face.
In have a Council's called, the Occasion's great,
And quick as Thought, the summoned Members meet.
Loud Stentor to the Assembly had Access,
None courted business more, or knew it less.
True to Extremes, yet to dull Forms a Slave,
He Is always dully gay, or vainly grave.
With Indignation, and a daring Air,
He paused awhile, and thus addressed the Chair.
Machaon, whose Experience we adore,
Great as your matchless Merits, is your Power.
At your Approach, the baffled Tyrant Death,
Breaks his keen Shafts, and grinds his clashing Teeth.
To you we leave the Conduct of the Day,
What you command, your Vassals must obey.
If this dread Enterprise you would decline,
We Will send to treat, and stifle the Design.
But if my Arguments had force, we'd try
To scatter our audacious Foes, or dye.
What Stentor offered was by most approved,
But several Voices several Methods moved.
At length the adventrous Heroes all agree
TO expect the Foe, and act defensively.
Into the Shop their bold Battallions move,
And what their Chief commands, the rest approve.
Down from the Walls they tear the Shelves in haste,
Which, on their Flank, for Pallisades are placed.
And then, behind the Compter ranged, they stand,
Their Front so well secured to obey Command.
And now the Scouts the adverse Host descry,
Blew Aprons in the Air for Colors fly.
With unresisted Force they urge their Way,
And find the Foe embattel'd in Array.
Then, from their levelled Syringes they pour
The liquid Volly of a missive Shower.
Not Storms of Sleet, which over the Baltic drive,
Push't on by Northern Gusts, such Horror give.
Like Spouts in Southern Seas the Deluge broke,
And Numbers sunk beneath the impetuou Stroke.
So when Leviathans Dispute the Reign,
And uncontrol'd Dominion of the Main.
From the rent Rocks whole Coral Groves are torn,
And Isles of Sea-weed on the Waves are born.
Such watery Stores from their spread Nostrils fly,
It Is doubtful, which is Sea, and which is Sky.
And now the stagg'ring Braves, led by Despair,
Advance, and to return the Charge prepare.
Each seizes for his Shield, an ample Scale,
And the Brass Weights fly thick as showr's of Hail.
Whole heaps of Warriors welter on the Ground,
With Gally-Pots, and broken Phials crowned,
And the empty Vessels the Defeat resound.
Thus when some Storm its Crystal Quarry rends,
And Jove in rattling Showers of Ice descends;
Mount Athos shakes the Forests on his Brow,
Whilst down his wounded Sides fresh Torrents flow,
And Leaves and Limbs of Trees over spread the vale below.
But now, all Order lost, promiscuous Blows
Confusedly fall; perplexed the Battle grows.
From Stentor's sinewy Arm an Opiate flys,
And straight a deadly Sleep closed Carus Eyes.
Chiron hit Siphilus with Calomel,
And scaly Crusts from his maimed Forehead fell.
At Colon great Iapix Rhubarb flung,
Who with fierce Gripes, like those of Death, was stung;
And with an angry and revengefull Mien
Hurled back Steel Pills, and hit Him on the Spleen.
Scribonius a vast Eagle-stone let fly
At Psylas, but Lucina put it by.
And Querpo, warmed with more than mortal Rage,
Sprung through the Battle, Stentor to engage.
Fierce was the Onset, the Dispute was great,
Both could not vanquish, Neither would retreat.
Each Combatant his Adversary mauls
With battered Bed-pans, and stav'd Urinals.
But as bold Stentor, eager of Renown,
Designed a fatal Stroke, he tumbled down;
And whilst the Victor, hovering over him stood,
With arms extended, thus the Suppliant su'd.
When Honor's lost it is a relief to dye,
Death's but a sure retreat from Infamy.
But to the lost, if pity might be shown,
Think on Querpoides thy darling Son;
Mine Is small as He, just such an infant Grace,
Sports in his Eyes and flatters in his Face.
If he was by, Compassion He Would create,
Or else lament his wretched Parent's fate.
Thine is the Glory, and the Field is thine;
To Thee the loved Dispensary I resign.
The Chief at this the deadly Stroke declined,
And found Compassion pleading in his Mind.
But whilst He viewed with pity the Distressed,
He spied Those Members of the College that observe a late Statute, are called
by the Apothecaries Signetur Men.
Signetur writ upon his Breast.
Then toward the Skies He tossed his threatening Head.
And fired with mortal Indignation, said;
Sooner than I Will from vowed Revenge desist,
His Holiness shall turn a Quietist.
La Chase shall with the Iansenists agree,
And the Inquisition wink at Heresy.
Faith stand unmoved through S -- fleet's Defense,
And L -- k for Mystery abandon Sense.
With that, unsheathing an Incision Knife,
He offered at the prostrate Stentor's Life.
But whilst his Thoughts that fatal Act decree,
Apollo interposed in form of Fee.
The Chief great Paean's golden Tresses knew,
He owned the God, and his raised Arm withdrew.
Thus often at the Temple-Stairs we have seen
Two Tritons of a rough Athletick Mien,
Sowrly dispute some quarrel of the Flood,
With Knucles bruised, and Face besmeared in blood.
But at the first appearance of a Fare
Both quit the Fray, and to their Oars repair.
The Hero thus his Enterprise recalls,
His Fist unclinches, and the Weapon falls.
The Dispensary. CANTO VI.
WHilst the shrill clangour of the Battle rings,
Auspicious health appeared on Zephir's Wings;
She seemed a Cherub most divinely bright,
More soft than Air, more gay than morning Light.
A Charm she takes from each excelling Fair,
And borrows C -- ll's Shape, and G -- ton's Air.
Her Eyes like R -- agh's their Beams dispense,
With Ch -- ill's Bloom, and B -- kley's Innocence.
From her bright Lips a vocal Music falls,
Whilst to Machaon thus the Goddess calls.
Enough the achievement of your Arms you have shown,
You seek a Triumph you should blush to own.
Have to the Elysian Fields, those blessed abodes,
Where Harvy sits among the Demigods.
Consult that sacred Sage, He Will soon disclose
The method that must terminate these woes.
Let Celsus for that Enterprise prepare,
His conduct to the Shades shall be my care.
Aghast the Heroes stood dissolved in fear,
A Form so heavenly bright They could not bear,
Celsus alone unmoved, the Sight beheld,
The rest in pale confusion left the Field.
So when the Pigmies marshaled on the Plains;
Wage puny War against the invading Cranes;
The Poppets to their bodkin Spears repair,
And scattered Feathers flutter in the Air.
But soon as ee'r the imperial Bird of Jove
Stoops on his sounding Pinions from above,
Among the Brakes, the Fairy Nation crowds,
And the Strimonian Squadron seeks the Clouds.
And now the Delegate prepares to go
And view the Wonders of the Realms below;
Then takes Amomum for the Golden Bough.
Thrice did the Goddess with her Sacred Wand
The Pavement strike; and straight at her Command
The obedient Surface opens, and descries
A deep Descent that leads to nether Skies.
Higeia to the silent Region tends;
And with his Heavenly Guide the Charge descends.
Within the Chambers of the Globe they spy
The Beds where sleeping Vegetables lie:
Till the glad Summons of a Genial Ray
Unbinds the Glebe, and calls them out to Day.
Hence Pancies trick themselves in various Hew,
And hence Iunquils derive their fragrant Dew.
Hence the Carnation, and the bashful Rose
Their Virgin Blushes to the Morn disclose.
Hence Arbours are with twining Greens arrayed.
TO oblige complaining Lovers with their Shade.
And hence on Daphne's verdant Temples grow
Immortal Wreaths, for Phoebus and Nassau.
The Insects here their lingering Trance survive:
Benumn'd they seem, and doubtful if alive.
From Winter's Fury hither they repair,
And stay for milder Skies and softer Air.
Down to these Cells obscener Reptils creep;
And there the Nutes and painted Lizzards sleep.
There shivering Snakes the Summer Solstice wait;
Unfurl their painted Folds, and slide in State.
Now, those profounder Regions they explore,
Where Metals ripen in vast Cakes of Oar.
Here, sullen to the Sight, at large is spread
The dull unwieldy Mass of lumpish Lead.
There, glimmering in their dawning Beds, are seen
The more aspiring Seeds of sprightly Tin.
The Copper sparkles next in ruddy Streaks;
And in the Gloom betrays its glowing Cheeks.
The Silver then, with bright and burnished Grace,
Youth and a blooming Luster in its Face,
To the opening Arms of these loved Metals flies;
And in the Folds of their Embraces lies.
So close they cling, so stubbornly retire;
Their Love's more violent than the Chymist's Fire.
Near These the Delegate with Wonder spies
Where living Floods of Merc'ry serpentize:
Where richest Metals their bright Beams put on,
While Silver Streams through Golden Channels run.
Here he observes the subterranean Cells,
Where wanton Nature sports in idle Shells.
Some Helicoeids, some Conical appear,
These, Miters emulate, Those, Turbans are:
Here Marcasites in various Figure wait,
To ripen to a true Metallic State:
Till Drops that from impending Rocks descend,
Their Substance petrifie, and Progress end.
Nigh, livid Seas of kindled Sulphur flow;
And, whilst enraged, their Fiery Surges glow:
Convulsions in the laboring Mountains rise,
And hurl their melted Vitals to the Skies.
He views with Horror next the noisy Cave;
Where with hoars dinn the imprisoned Tempests rave:
Where Clamorous Hurricanes attempt their Flight,
Or, whirling in tumultuous Eddies, fight.
And now the Goddess with her Charge descends,
Where scarce one cheerful Glimpse their Steps befriends,
Here his forsaken Seat old Chaos keeps;
And undisturbed by Form, in Silence sleeps.
A grisly Wight, and hideous to the Eye;
An awkard Lump of shapeless Anarchy.
With sordid Age his Features are defaced;
His Lands unpeopl'd, and his Countries waste.
Here Lumber, undeserving Light, is kept,
And P -- p's Bill to this dark Region's swept:
Where Mushroom Libels silently retire;
And, soon as born, with Decency expire.
Upon a Couch of Iett in these Abodes,
Dull Night, his melancholy Consort, nodds.
No Ways and Means their Cabinet employ;
But their dark Hours they waste in barren Joy.
Nigh this Recess, with Terror they survey,
Where Death maintains his dread tyrannick Sway:
In The middle of a dusky Cypress Grove,
Where Goblins frisk, and Airy Specter rove,
Yawns a dark Cave most formidably wide;
And there the Monarch's Triumphs are descried.
Within its Dreadful Jaws those Furies wait,
Which execute the harsh Decrees of Fate.
Febris is first: The Hagg relentless hears
The Virgin's Sighs; and sees the Infant's Tears.
In her parched Eye Balls fiery Meteors reign;
And restless Ferments revel in each Vein.
Then Hydrops next appears amongst the Throng;
Bloated, and big, she slowly sails along.
But, like a Miser, in Excess she' s poor;
And pines for Thirst amidst her watery Store.
Now loathsome Lepra, that offensive Spright,
With foul Eruptions stained, offends the Sight.
She' s deaf to Beauty's soft persuading Power:
Nor can bright Hebe's Charms her Bloom secure.
Whilst meagre Consumption.
Phthisis gives a silent Blow;
Her Strokes are sure; but her Advances slow.
No loud Alarms, nor fierce Assaults are shown:
She starves the Fortress first; then takes the Town.
Behind stood Crowds of much inferior Name,
Too numerous to repeat, too soul to name;
The Vassals of their Monarch's Tyranny:
Who, at his Nod, on fatal Errands fly.
Now Celsus, with his glorious Guide, invade
The silent Region of the fleeting Shades.
Where Rocks and ruful Deserts are descried;
And sullen Styx rolls down his lazy Tide.
Then shows the Ferry-man the Plant he bore,
And claims his Passage to the further Shore.
To whom the Stygian Pilot smiling, said,
You need no Passport to demand our Aid.
Physicians never linger on this Strand:
Old Charon never refuses their Command.
Our awful Monarch and his Consort owe
To them the peopl'ing of their Realms below.
Then in his swarthy Hand he grasped his Oar,
Received his Guests aboard, and should from Shore.
Now, as the Goddess and her Charge prepare
To breathe the Sweets of soft Elysian Air;
Upon the left they spy a pensive Shade,
Who on his bended Arm had raised his Head:
Pale Grief sat heavy on his careful Look:
To whom, not unconcerned, thus Celsus spoke:
Tell me, Thou much afflicted Shade, why Sighs
Burst from your Breast, and Torrents from your Eyes:
And who those mangled Manes are which show
A sullen Satisfaction at your Woe?
Since, said the Ghost, with Pity you will attend,
Know, I Am Guiacum, once your valued Friend.
And on this barren Beach in Discontent,
Am doomed to stay till the angry Powers relent.
Those Specter seam'd with Scarrs, that threaten there,
The Victims of my late ill Conduct are.
They vex with endless Clamours my Repose:
This wants his Palate; That demands his Nose.
And here they execute stern Pluto's Will,
To ply me every moment with a Pill.
Then Celsus thus: O much-lamented state!
How moving's the Disaster you relate.
Methinks I recollect your former Air,
But ah, how much you're changed from what you were?
If Mortals e're the Stygian Power could bend,
Entreaties to their awful Seats I Would send.
But since no human Arts the Fates dissuade,
Direct me how to find blessed Harvy's Shade.
In vain the unhappy Ghost still urged his stay,
Then rising from the ground, he showed the way.
Nigh the dull Shore a shapeless Mountain stood,
That with a dreadful frown surveyed the Flood.
Its fearful Brow no lively Greens puts on,
No frisking Goats bound over the ridgy Stone.
To gain the Summit the bright Goddess tried,
And Celsus followed, by degrees, his Guide.
The Ascent thus conquered, now They towr on high,
And taste the indulgence of a milder Sky.
Loose Breezes on their airy Pinions play,
And with refreshing Sweets perfume the way.
Cool streams through flowery Meadows gently glide,
And as They pass, their painted Banks they chide.
These blissful Plains no Blites, nor Mildews fear,
The Flowers never fade, and Shrubs are Myrtles there.
The Delegate observes with wondering Eyes
Ambrosial Dews descend, and Incense rise.
Then hastens onward to the pensive Grove,
The silent Mansion of disastrous Love.
No Winds but Sighs are there, no Floods but Tears,
Each conscious Tree a tragic Signal bears.
Their wounded Bark records some broken Vow,
And Willow Garlands hang on every Bough.
His Mistress here in solitude he found,
Her down-cast Eyes fixed on the silent ground:
Her Dress neglected, and unbound her Hair,
She seemed the mournful image of Despair.
How lately did this celebrated Thing
Blaze in the Box, and sparkle in the Ring,
Till the Green Sickness and Love's force betrayed
To Death's remorsless arms the unhappy Maid.
Cold and confused the guilty Lover stood,
The light forsook his Eyes, his Cheeks the Blood;
An icy horror shivered in his Look,
Then softly in these gentle words, He spoke:
Tell me, dear Shade, from whence such anxious care
Your Looks disordered and your Bosom bare?
Why thus you languish like a drooping Flower
Crushed by the weight of some unfriendly shower.
Your pale Complexion your late Conduct tell,
O that instead of Trash you would taken Steel.
Then as he strove to clasp the fleeting Fair,
His empty Arms confessed the impassive Air.
From his Embrace the unbody'd Spectre flies,
And as she moved, she chid him with her Eyes.
They hasten now to that delighful Plain
Where the glad Manes of the Blessed remain:
Where Harvy gathers Simples to bestow
Immortal Youth on Hero's Shades below.
Soon as the bright Higeia was in view
The venerable Sage her Presence knew.
Thus He --
Hail blooming Goddess, Thou propitious Power,
Whose Blessings mortals next to Life implore.
Such Graces in your heavenly Eyes appear,
That Cottages are Courts when you are there.
Mankind, as you vouchsafe to smile or frown,
Finds ease in Chains, or anguish in a Crown.
With just resentments and contempt you see
The mean dissentions of the Faculty;
How sickening Physic hangs her pensive head,
And what was once a Science, now is a Trade.
Her Sons never rifle her mysterious Store,
But study Nature less, and Lucre more.
I showed of old, how vital Currents glide,
And the Meanders of their refluent Tide.
Then, Willis, why spontaneous Actions here,
And whence involuntary Motions, there:
And how the Spirits by mechanic Laws,
In wild Cariers, tumultuous Riots cause.
Nor would our Wharton, Bates and Glisson lie
In the Abyss of blind Obscurity.
But now such wondrous Searches are forborne,
And Paean's Art is by divisions torn.
Then let your Charge attend, and I Will explain
How Physic her lost Luster may regain.
Haste and the matchless. Atticus Address
From Heaven, and great Nassau he has the Mace.
The oppressed to his Asylum still repair,
Arts He supports, and Learning is his care.
He softens the harsh rigor of the Laws,
Blunts their keen Edge, and cuts their harpy Claws;
And graciously he casts a pitying Eye
On the sad state of virtuous Poverty.
When ever he speaks, heavens! how the listening Throng
Dwells on the melting music of his Tongue.
His Arguments are the Emblems of his Mein,
Mild, but not faint, and forcing, though serene;
And when the power of Eloquence, He Would try,
Here, Lightning strikes you, there, soft Breezes sigh.
To him you must your sickly state refer,
Your Charter claims Him as your Visiter.
Your Wounds he will close, and sov'reignly restore
Your Science to the height it had before.
Then Nassau's Health shall be your glorious Arm,
His Life should be immortal as his Name.
Some Princes claims from Devastations spring,
He condescends in pity to be King:
And when, amidst his Olives placed, He stands,
And governs more by Candor than Commands:
Even then not less a Hero he appears,
Than when his Laurel Diadem he wears.
Would but Apollo some great Bard inspire
With sacred veh'mence of Poetic Fire;
To celebrate in Song that God-like Power,
Which did the laboring Universe restore.
Fair Albian's Cliffs would Echo to the Strain,
And praise the Arm that Conquered to regain
The Earth's repose, and Empire over the Main.
Still may the immortal Man his Cares repeat,
To make his Blessings endless as they are great:
Whilst Malice and Ingratitude confess,
They Have strove for Ruin long without success.
Had some famed Hero of the Latin blood,
Like Julius great, and like Octavius good,
But thus preserved the sinking Latian Power,
Rome had erected Columns every hour;
Loud Io's her proud Capitol had shook,
And all the Statues of the Gods had spoke.
No more, the Sage his Raptures could pursue,
He paused: and Celus with his Guide withdrew.
FINIS.

