THE CONVERSION OF PHILIP CORWINE A FRANCISCAN FRIAR, To the Reformation of the
PROTESTANT RELIGION, Anno 1589.

Formerly Written by JOHN GARVEY Sometime PRIMATE of all IRELAND.

Being a Copy of the Original Remaining amongst James Usher, late PRIMATE of
the same, his Papers; and now Entered amongst Sir JAMES WARE'S Manuscripts.

Published for the Good of the Protestant Church of England, by R. W. Gent.

DUBLIN, Printed by Jos. Ray at Colledge-Green, for a Society of Stationers.
1681.

TO THE READER.
ZEal, Acts 13. 50.
the Mother of all Religions, caused the devout (and otherwise honorable)
Women to persecute St. Paul: Phil. 3. 6.
the same stirred up St. Paul to persecute Christ before he had knowledge of
him. Thus was the Zeal of this Convert, which a Reverend Father of the
Protestant Church wrote to be reserved for future Memory.

This Narrative I shall lay before Protestant and Papist upon two accounts:
First, That all men may behold the Danger of immoderate Zeal against those of
another Judgment. Secondly, To show how that Zeal and Knowledge ought to walk
together.

1. The Evil Event of Immoderate Zeal.
Immoderate Zeal, says Nazianzen, was in his time the cause of great Broyls
and Troubles; insomuch that Truth it self has been stretched too far; so that
by a vehement dislike of Error on one side, men have run into an Error on the
other, Vide Alexand. Ross his View of Religions.
as Dionysius and Alexandrinus did, being too fervent against Sabellius: for
these two first laid the Ground of Arrianisme.

2. Ovid lib. 2.
Zeal without knowledge may well be compared to Phaeton in the Poet, who took
upon him to drive the Chariot of the Sun, but yet through his inconsiderate
Rashness set the world in a flame. St. Bernard hits full on this point, in
these words; Discretion without Zeal is slow paced, and Zeal without Discretion
is strong headed: let therefore Zeal spur on Discretion, and Discretion reign
in Zeal.

Thus the Zeal of this Convert, having joined with the knowledge of the holy
Scriptures, became a lively Faith in Christ, not choosing Saint or Angel to
plead his Cause, but the best of Advocates Christ Jesus, who is the only
Mediator between God and Man.

R. WARE.

The Conversion of Philip Corwine a Franciscan Friar to the Reformation of the
Protestant Religion. Anno 1589.
PHilip Corwine, Nephew unto Hugh Corwine late Archbishop of Dublin, supposing
our Predecessor John Long late Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of all Ireland
had been then living, wrote this Epistle following; which came to my hands,
thinking it had been to me directed, my Name being John, and his Successor,
within a little time after the Expiration of our said Predecessor, I opened it.

Reverend and Worthy Father,
AFter my long and tedious Travels, wandering like a Jew finding no settlement,
(ever since the Reformation of the Church of England revived, and was appointed
to be observed by our Gracious Sovereign the Queen and Her High Court of
Parliament) I departed from Ireland into England, from thence into Spain, and
so into Italy; being ambitious to visit Rome, purposely to behold her Modes and
Forms: but being not satisfied with the Passages and cruel Objects which I
there beheld, I returned into Spain, and took up my Lodging in St. Francis his
Monastry in the City of Sevill, where I have hitherto remained, expecting your
Gracious acceptance, and encouraging of a Prodigal Son to come home to the
Church of Christ: For were it no other then the Tyranny of the Romish Church,
and the large Indulgences which she has sent abroad into most Nations, for to
massacre those whom she esteems Heretical, purposely to advance her Coffers,
and to raise up her luxurious Appetite it would be, for a rational man, a
sufficient president to lay before him what an Idol, or rather what a devouring
Dragon, he and his Ancestors have hitherto worshipped.

I acknowledge I have feared this Monster beyond my Creator or Redeemer, and
depended upon his sinful Indulgences more than on the bitter Passions of my
Savior Jesus, for which I only crave mercy from above, whose Power is most
infinite.

Also I have from my youth upward wandered in the paths of Idolatry, worshipping
of Stocks and Stones framed into humane shapes by the Art of Man, whose Eyes
behold neither my Bowing or my Kneeling, whose Ears heard not my Petitions, nor
their Mouths able to return me an Answer: therefore I cannot but lament, both
for the precious time which I have lost, and for the Happiness of which I have
all this while been bereaved, all thus justly happening unto me through my
perverseness in not embracing those comfortable Offertures which my Gracious
deceased Uncle, Hugh late Archbishop of Dublin, proposed unto me, in case I had
adhered unto the Protestant Faith, as it is now, according to the Apostolic
manner, established.

Yet knowing your Fatherly Clemency, and pious Inclinations, by your former
Correspondence with my deceased Uncle. I shall return with the Prodigal Son,
and come over, if I may be so happy to receive your Encouragement, and so end
the residue of my days to Gods Glory and mine own Salvation.

Sevill March 29 th. 1589. Your trusty and obedient Servant Philip Corwine.

To the Reverend Father in God John Archbishop of Armagh.

Upon the Receipt of this Epistle, The Archbishop of Armagh makes the
Archbishop of Dublin acquainted with this Letter.
rejoicing to embrace especially the Reformation of so understanding a Man as
this Convert was, I returned an Answer; yet beforehand, I showed this his
Epistle unto our Judicious and most Learned Brother in Christ, Adam, now
Archbishop of Dublin, and Chancellor of Ireland, with whom I consulted, and
then We gave him all the encouragement imaginable; and sent him this Answer
following, by a Portugal Merchant then going from Dublin to Waterford, and from
thence being bound for Spain.

To Mr. Philip Corwine in St. Francis his Convent at SEVILL.
Mr. Corwine,
YOur Epistle is Welcome, though not coming to the hands of that Reverend
Father in God John, our Predecessor, who lately departed this life, to obtain
an everlasting one in the Kingdom of Heaven; although he was deprived of this
happy offerture of yours (by his death) yet was it as acceptable to me his
Successor, who with the rest of our Brethren in Christ, do rejoice at your
Recantation, (in a manner) as the Angels and Saints of Heaven do at the
Repentance of a Sinner, which causes his Soul to enter therein. Whatever you
expected from our Predecessor, shall be granted by his Successor, your humble
Servant, who embraces any one who desires to become a Member of Christ, and one
of his Flock. My weak endeavors shall not be wanting, neither shall the
ability of our Church here be slack to assist you accordingly. I and our
Brother Adam, now Archbishop of Dublin, and Chancellor of this Kingdom, have
unanimously embraced your Learned Epistle, and in token thereof we have sent
you this small testimony of our affection, toward your journal expenses.
Therefore let this be unto you an assurance of your kind reception by us the
Clergy here; And for the future, Brotherly Love and Correspondency between You
and Us your Brethren and Clergy of this Nation.

Dublin, June the 27th. 1589. Your True and Loving Friend, John Armachanus.


Upon the receipt hereof, This Converts return to Ireland.
this Philip beholding the Clergies Invitation, together with the Sum, (being
50 l. English) which Adam our Brother aforesaid, and my self, had sent him for
his supply in his journey, upon the first convenience made toward Ireland,
first coming into the Netherlands; where meeting with a Vessel bound for
Waterford, he there landed, being civily entertained by our Brother Thomas
Whitherhead, the then Bishop of that Diocese. He landed on the 22 th of October
following, after the Date of this our Epistle; where this Philip tarried for
some certain days, discoursing with the Bishop, wherefore he came over hither,
as also showing him our encouragement, our Brother conveyed him (sending a
Guide along with him) to Drogheda: Of which I having notice, sent word to the
Mayor and Corporation to receive him kindly, which was accordingly performed.

Some few days after this his kind reception at Drogheda, The Convert designs
to make an open Recantation.
this Philip Corwine being minded to make an open manifestation of his true and
hearty Conversion, desired me to give notice beforehand to the Town and
Corporation, that he intended (God willing) to make a Recanting Speech, and to
declare therein the Reasons why he fell from the Church of Rome, and the Causes
of his Adherence to the Protestant Faith. Which Speech was declared in St.
Peter's Church, where he chose this following Text for his Discourse.

THE TEXT;
Acts the 9th. Ver. the 14th and 15th. And he fell on the Earth, and heard a
voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? And he said, who
art thou, Lord? And the Lord said unto him, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest;
it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.
Beloved Brethren,
HEre Saul, who became afterward an Apostle of Jesus Christ, breathed forth
threatenings and slaughters against the Church of Christ; supposing and
intending to have persecuted her with much rage and fury, thereby to have spilt
innocent Blood, which he at that time thirsted after.

This furious Intention of his declares how much a man is led by rashness,
envy, and malice, and also by a rash and blind zeal, before he can obtain the
true knowledge of good. Man purposes, With what Intention the Convert went,
before his Conversion, toward Rome.
but God disposes, even so did this Sinner. My self, when I departed last this
Kingdom, which was upon the coming in of our Graciour Sovereign Lady, Queen
Elizabeth to the Crown of these Realms, departing hence with a blind zeal full
of contention, proposing to my self how I might have persecuted the Church of
England now Established by her Sacred Majesty, and her Parliaments of these
Realms: Intending according to my ability to have fallen thereon with as much
fury as Saul, when he journeyed toward Damascus to have persecuted the poor
Christians.

It is true, The Converts Offers which he rejected: as also the Policy of Rome,
in absconding the Truth of the holy Gospel.
I had several good proffers unto me by my deceased Uncle Hugh, late Archbishop
of Dublin, but rejected them, being at that time puffed up with the cruel Zeal of
Rome, as ever St. Paul was with Judaism against Christianity: supposing (with
my self) it to have been a meritorious act, if I could but have extinguished
the light of the holy Gospel, which the Lord has been pleased to restore again
unto these Nations, which for several Ages now past, through the Policies of
Rome) has been detained from our Ancestors, both to the diminishing of Gods
Glory, and to the detriment of many millions of Souls. Rome and her Emissaries
thus contriving purposely to be the abler to usurp over Kings and Princes, and
to Rule their Subjects after their power. But of late the Lord has opened the
eyes of Princes, and made them hearken to a Princely admonition: Be wise
therefore O ye Kings, and he Learned ye who be Judges of the Earth.

During my Travel into Spain and into Italy, Philip Corwine his sensibility of
the Laws of England. how near they be to the Truth, to what other Country Laws
are.
where I beheld the Slavery of the common sort of those parts, and what
hardships they endure. I compared (comprehending in my mind) these Slaveries to
the liberties of her Majesty's Subjects of these her Dominions, and to the
great Blessings of God, that though he had for a while taken away the Truth,
yet he had permitted the ancient Laws and Liberties to Rule and Flourish
amongst our Ancestors, which was a great sign that he intended to have restored
these Nations again to the Truth, as he did the Children of Israel after a long
thraldom. These cogitations ran in my mind upon my return from Rome, journeying
back to Sevil: which upon my first insight of the Romish cruelty, caused me to
say within my breast, that doubtless the Protestants of England were in the way
of Salvation, because their Lives were so agreeable to their Faith.

Secondly beholding the horrid Wickedness and Cruelties imposed on the poorer
sort, He compares Romes tyranny to the heathen Persecutions and sets forth how
they rob Kings of their Titles.
I then recollected the Persecutions of the Primitive Fathers and Christians
under the Heathen Emperor, and said within my self, O Christ thou art merciful,
but how unmerciful are thy pretended Vicars (naming the Popes of Rome) which
assume to themselves that Title, which their Predccessors formerly gave to all
Kings and Princes, within their several Dominions.

During mine abode at Rome, The cruel Martyrdom of eight persons at Rome for
the Truth.
before I returned into Spain, eight persons were condemned to die for no other
Crime, than for saying, Christ was their only Mediator between God and them,
and that neither Saint nor Angel was able to mediate between God and them. Upon
saying of these words they were brought into St. Peter's Church to confess their
Crimes, (as they imputed them) where they were to kneel before the Images
therein; but with the three Children they resolved rather to endure the Flames
of the Fiery Oven, than to bow to an Image, or to go from what they had
declared; they unanimously spoke in the Italian Language these words: If a
Saint or Angel cannot remit our Crimes, much less an Image, which is but
dedicated to either.

This strong Union, How their Union amazed the Convert, and was a means of his
Conversion to the Truth.
Resolution and Courage of these eight persons, being neither daunted nor
flinching at Romes fury, started several standers by, especially pinched my
Conscience, being a Spectater of these Massacres, that I fell into a deep
melancholy fit, being then ashamed that the Church of Rome should be guilty of
so cruel a Fact.

This melancholiness increasing more every day then other, How the Convert
thought to divert himself, and was pricked in conscience.
and still running in my mind, to divert my self, I took St. Hierome's
translation of the Bible, and opening the same, mine eyes beheld this very Text
of Scripture, which I here chose for my Recantation. So whereas Paul was
Converted by the voice saying unto him, (Why persecutest thou me, etc.) Even
after the same manner was I to the Truth recalled; miraculously lighting on the
same words, though I heard not the voice.

Taking this saying so soon into consideration after this Massacre; His second
shift to divert himself, and how he lighted on the xciv Psalm, being suitable
for persecution and tribulation.
I thought still to divert my self into some other Text, and opening the same
Book, I let mine eyes light on the xciv Psalm; which thus begins: O God the
Lord, the Avenger; O God the Avenger, show thy self clearly, etc. Then was I in
greater trouble of mind then before, thinking as if I had heard their voices
crying up for vengeance; then I said, doubtless the Prophet here desired
Justice, complaining of the Tyranny and Impiety of those days: And how he sets
forth the Providence of Almighty God, and the Happiness of Affliction, and that
he is the Defender of the Afflicted; which Psalm coming so opportunely, I fell
into a worse fit then before, so that I began to despair, having complied with
the Church of Rome so long in her Tyrany, as being one of her Members.

Yet to divert my self from these thoughts, How the Convert resolved to leave
Rome, supposing thereby to divert himself, but still was troubled in mind.
I at last resolved to leave Rome, and so to turn back to the Franciscan
Convent at Sevil. Coming thither, I had not long tarried, when I heard a
hideous Cry in the Street, and enquiring what that Clamor might be, one
replied, a Heretic is seized on for speaking of evil words: Then searching
further into the Cause, I found it out, which was thus.

A Man named Leopald Donsever, How the Spanish Inquisition troubled this
Convert.
an Innkeeper of that City, having said before two of mine own Order,
Franciscans, that the new Law there made, called the Inquisition, would make
more Heretics than Romanists, calling Protestants Heretics; and therefore he
could wish that the Church of Rome had never set up that Statute.

These words this poor Man spoke innocently, out of pity and compassion to
those who had felt that Roman lash; but these two Franciscans turning the
interpretation otherwise, purposely for their own ends, to have their
forfeitures given to their Convent, making the sense worse; informed the rest
of the Convent of what this innocent Man had spoken. Immediately upon their
relation of the words, they all concluded that he had spoken Blasphemy against
the Powers of the Church of Rome: Thereupon they not only seized on this poor
wretch his person, but also upon what little substance he had, being all in
this World for to have maintained his Wife and Children, who (by this
Injustice) were in a short space after forced to beg the Charity of others,
having before in an honest way labored to get a livelihood for themselves and
their Family.

Coming to the Convent, How the Convert was rebuked by the two Franciscans for
his Commiseration to the poor Innkeeper.
and beholding these two Informers, I spoke thus unto them. Could ye not have
privately checked the poor man, and have laid some small penance on him, but
run thus violently on him, his Wife and Children. By this saying of mine, I
received a check in these words: We believe you will be such another. At which
I withdrew, and held my tongue.

Then returning into the Garden belonging to the Convent, How the Convert
returned into the Garden to bewail himself.
where there be walks both private and public, I contemplating with my self
what warning I had by the former two Texts of Scripture: Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? etc. As also what afflictions poor Protestants endure when
by the Romish Clergy Orders seized on, and the Courage the eight Persons in
Rome had upon their Deaths, being brought to the Stake of Persecution, which I
compared with the Psalm aforesaid, being terrified that I had persisted so long
in the Romish Bloody paths, and had not returned sooner to the Faith of Christ
as now I am in.

Then being in a manner totally in despair of ever receiving any Salvation;
Here the Convert receives comfort, and is steadfast to his end.
I in a grievous passion opened the Translation the third time, and vowed where
ever I chanced to fix mine eyes, there to contemplate and lay hold on the
Living God. Then as if it had been with his Finger pointing out a way for
Salvation, I cast mine eyes on these Words in the Prophecy of Ezekiel.

Again, Ezekiel, cap. 18. ver. 27, 28.
when the wicked turns away from his Wickedness that he has committed, and
does that which is lawful, he shall save his Soul alive. Because he considers
and turns away from his Transgressions that he has committed, he shall
surely live and shall not dye.

Upon reading of this saying of the Prophet my Soul was immediately changed;
How he was altered, and gave God thanks for his deliverance.
so also was my Reason and Understanding, that I fell into a passion of
weeping, which was a Joy (at that present) rather than a Grief unto my
distressed Soul; yet the fierceness of my Tears brought two of the Brethren
into the same Walk, who had heard my voice, and demanded of me wherefore I
wept, to whom I replied, for the multitude of my Sins. But they leaving me to
my self, not considering how it was because I had so long continued in the
Church of Rome, and that I lamented that ever I became of their Order, and how
I had worshipped a Devouring Dragon more than my Creator or Redeemer, in
observing of the Romish Laws more than the Commands of the living God, or the
Precepts of Christ and his Apostles, I immediately gave my Savior thanks that
he had opened my Mouth to speak the Truth, and these two Friars not to
comprehend my meanings.

During the remainder of my stay within the Convent from that instant, How he
concealed his Conversion.
I carried my self warily, least I should have been discovered, and have
endured what this poor Innkeeper had suffered, which according to their Cruelty
by this new found Inquisition, is worse then present death.

Then taking the first opportunity, And how he confesses he wrote the Letter
before mentioned.
I wrote a Letter to this Reverend Fathers Predecessor, supposing him then
living, which, though missing its direction, came to this good Fathers hands,
who is able to testify the reality of my Conversion to the Protestant Faith,
and how earnestly I sought to become a Member thereof; who received my proffer,
and assisted me in my Journal Expenses, which by me was not expected: For
which, the Lord reward him in the World to come.

Beloved Brethren, Thus he concludes with this Rapture.
In this Mercy of God I ought to conclude with an hearty acknowledgment of the
Goodness of my Savior toward me, who has recalled a Sinner, and has raised
me up so many Friends, nay Strangers, who have received me a poor wretch
wandering (as it were in a Wilderness) as I was, during my being of the Church
of Rome a Member thereof; and in danger of being devoured by the Dragon every
moment.

Therefore the Lord of his mercy grant me a broken and a contrite heart, that I
might say with thy servant David, I am a worm, and no man, by reason I have
defiled the works of thy hands, who has fashioned me, and all mankind. O
Christ be thou merciful unto me a Sinner; that I may say also with thy Servant,
I cried unto the Lord, and he heard my complaint.

Then shall the Soul of thy Servant rejoice, which was driven even to the Gates
of Hell, and through mercy snatched out of the paw of that Roaring Lion, who
goes about seeking whom he may devour. Praised be thou, O Lord, from this time
forth and for ever more. Amen.

This the Convert presented me with after he had reviewed the same, and
published it before the Towns People of Drogheda in mine own hearing.

I entertained this Mr. Corwine as one of my Chaplains for the space of ten
Months, The Converts death.
all that while not having a place sufficient enough for his parts, and also to
bestow on so true a Convert, who indeed ought to have been cherished. But being
troubled with a Flux which seized on him, continuing for several weeks before
he expired; at last it took him out of this World upon the third of September,
1590. having during his sickness received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and continuing a true Churchman unto his end.

During that small time whilst I was so happy as to converse with him, The
projects of the Council at Trent against Engl. confessed to Archbishop John
Garvey of Armagh, by this Convert.
I delighted in his conversation, and several times discoursed with him
touching the late Grand Council of Trent, and of what things that Council had
done, as touching the Protestants of these Her Majesty's Realms, to which he
seriously related, as I took the words from his own mouth, at several times
upon discourse, as follows.

1. That the Council had Enacted in their Litany to be said upon every Good
Friday, as also upon any great Fast proclaimed, or to be proclaimed, to Curse
all Heretical Kings. Princes and States, personally naming them, amongst whom
he assured me they have named her Majesty, and also all their Heretical
Subjects obeying their Commands and Powers.

2. That Her Majesty's Kingdoms of England and Ireland are to be given to any
Prince or Nation Conquering them, especially to Spain, as He married the Queens
Sister, yet to the first who shall attempt it. Ireland being not to be disposed
of in case of Conquest, but to be restored to the Ancient Race lineally
descended of the Princes of that Nation. They swearing unto the Chair of St.
Peter's, to own that See the Chief Head thereof, as it is called Insula Sacra
upon Record.

3. That every Roman Catholic in England or Ireland having two or more Sons of
any Quality or Estate, should train them up in either of these Callings or
Trades, Doctors of the Law, Lawyers, Physicians, Clerks, Agents, Vintners,
Innkeepers, Apothecaries, Grocers, Brewers, Victuallers, etc. for several
Causes best known to the Mother Church, as being most convenient for her Aid in
service, when ever required.

4. That all Deeds held by Roman Catholics or other Ecclesiastical Lands, be
Entered and Reposed privately under the Signet of Rome, the Party enjoying the
same until the Catholic Faith be restored; then such Deeds appearing upon
Record, the possessor, if Catholic, to be reprieved out of Heretics Estates.

5. A good reason why Papists Oaths against Protestants should not be credited.
That all Oaths taken by compulsion, or otherwise, are of no force or tie, as
the translation of their Bible is heretical and false; therefore the Catholic
swearing thereupon, is all one as upon any common Book; the Catholic esteeming
the same so to be; his Oath, though false, is no sin.

6 That no Catholic marry with any Heretic, unless it be upon great
necessity, or advancement for the Catholic, who affirms beforehand, he or she
does it for no other intent but to advance the Roman Faith, and so to continue
to the end. Then by a Dispensation from the Confessor, vowing to continue
steadfast, and to perform the promises confessed, before the Marriage to be
granted and permitted.

7. That Dispensations be granted to the Wise and Learned sort of Catholics
for Oaths, for Religion, for Place, for Office, or otherwise; provided that the
Party shall four or more times in the year confess unto any Secular or Regular
he is in his heart a Romanist; and so after upon Confession to testify the
certifying thereof, to show signal assurance of their fidelity to the Sea of
Rome.

8. That any of these sorts permitted or so licensed, shall in all Protestant
Courts of Princes give monthly Intelligences more or less, as signal assurances
of their stedfastness to the Sea of Rome.

9. That Excommunication, or a perpetual Curse light upon the Families of all
those of the Mother Church, who will not promote or assist by means of Money,
or otherwise, Mary Queen of Scotland to the Crown of England.

10. That all Roman Catholics be and shall be obedient to those Archbishops,
or other Popish Priests set over them privately, as if they were openly ruling
over them, and to relieve them, pay tribute or tax proportionably for the
advance of the Mother Church.

11. And lastly, that underhand they propose a Match for the Queen, of some
Catholic Roman King or Prince; or if she dye, to set up Mary Queen of
Scotland, or some other Romish Prince, for the advancement of the Mother Church.

These and several other like passages I heard from this good and glorious
Convert, who during his life, after his Recantation, made great progress in the
conversion of others, and that not in vain, having converted the Mayor of
Drogheda his Wife, and several others in the Town before his death. I dare not
say that he was poisoned, but there was much suspicion as if the Friars had
done something to him; for he was ever and anon arguing with them in
Disputations.

FINIS.

