(...) sive MEDICASTRI: SLIGHT HEALINGS OF PUBLIC HURTS.

Set forth in a SERMON PREACHED In St. Paul's Church, London, before the Right
Honorable the Lord Major, Lord General, Aldermen, Common Council, and
Companies of the Honorable City of London February 28. 1659.

Being a day of solemn Thanksgiving unto God, for Restoring the Secluded
Members of Parliament to the House of Commons: (And for preserving the City) as
a Door of Hope thereby opened to the fullness and freedom of future Parliaments:
The most probable means under God for healing the hurts, and recovering the
health of these three British Kingdoms.

By JOHN GAUDEN, D.D.

Ezekiel. 21. 26, 27. Thus says the Lord, Remove the Diadem, and take off the
Crown: this shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase him that is
high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until
be come whose it is, and I will give it him. Restat ut (...)ciores pluribus
ce(...): hoc uno ^ta^t popularia imperia, abter cas^^ra. H. Gro. Hist. Bar. 1.
17. page 1^0.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard,
1660.

Aleyn Major.
A Common Council holden the 29. of February 1659.

Ordered that the thanks of this Court be given to Dr. Gauden, who preached
Yesterday before them at St. Paul's Church. And that he from this Court be
desired to print his Sermon.

SADLER.

To the right Honorable THOMAS ALEYN Lord Mayor of the City OF London. THE
Court of Aldermen and Common-Counsel.
AS by your Desire I was induced to preach the following Sermon; so by your
Order in Common Council I was requested to print what I preached; I have obeyed
you in both, and supererogated in the later: adding something prepared, but
omitted for want of time, and a respect due to your expectation of a second and
better course ^n that Festival. This I have done not only as compliant with
your Christian Commands, but as solicitous to conform all my endeavors to the
public Good of your City, and our common Country. In which. a great part of the
Church of Christ, and many precious souls, as well as men's bodies, Lives,
Liberties, Honors and Estates are embarked: All which have for our sins been
long engaged in a tempest of War and sea of Blood; nor have they been able to
make any fair Port or happy Haven these many years, since they lost their
Pilots and Compass, their Kings and Parliaments, by the various Euroclydons of
men's passions, Lusts and Interests; which have tossed them to and fro with
every wind; and made great waste of all that is precious for Religion, Justice
and Honor, besides Estates and Lives of men in the three Kingdoms; threatening
all either with speedy and utter Shipwreck by foreign Invasion, or an
everlasting storm by domestic confusions; until the unexpected and
undescerned providence of God began to open to your and the Countries prayers
some door of hope, by the prudent, valiant and succesfull Conduct of the
present Lord General Monck: from whom all good men expect all good things: nor
can he deceive them without deceiving and destroying himself and his Country.

Your gratitude to God for this seasonable dawning of Mercy (which seems to
bespeak a great calm) occasioned your solemn Convention that day; and my
preaching to you. In which work you cannot wonder if I endeavored to show my
self a Workman that needed not to be afraid or ashamed; being very sensible
with you of the great, many and long hurts of the daughter of my people, both
in Church and State: I then declared them to you: I deplored them with you; I
proposed the methods of cure to you, as fully as the time would permit; and as
freely as became my duty to my God and my conscience. As I would not injure any
man, or fester the times: so I abhor to flatter them, which is the greatest
injury a Preacher can do to Church and State.

Some I hear were offended (the fate of Christ's, of John Baptists, and of Saint
Paul's preaching) at the plain dealing I used (which possibly was from their own
rawness and soreness, more then from my roughness or sharpness) As I aim to do
things faithfully and seasonably, so decently and discreetly: Nor do I think I
am to learn those Censorious Catos how to preach, any more than they will learn
of me how to buy and sell; or how to fight and war. No man may wonder if I dare
to reprove those sins which some dare to do, or approve, but dare not hear of,
or repent.

The parrhesie or freedom of my speech as a man, a Christian, and a Preacher
was such, as became my feeling of the public miseries; my desire of the
public tranquillity, and my sense of that fidelity I ow to God, to my Country,
to you, and to my own soul.

Thest are not times to palliate and speak smooth or soft things: Never age had
fouler humors or prouder tumors; more felt and more painful; more hard, and
less mollified; These I would help to cure, that so we might recover public
health, together with out wits, and reason; our Laws and Religion, our good
Conscience and Government: our Peace and Unanimity: all which we have lost,
since we lost our heads in Church and State. Our full and free Parliaments,
consisting of King, Lords and Commons; in which the soul and life, the honor
and happiness of these Nations are bound up.

And no part of it is more concerned then your famous sometime flourishing, and
still populous City; in whose happiness the whole Nation will be happy, and in
its misery all must be miserable. Since London is not only as a ponderous Byas
to the great bowl, (which draws all parts toward it) But it is as the
Mistress, Lady or Queen, to which every Village, City and Country of the
Nation (as officious Handmaids) study to present all manner of costly
comlyness; not only feminine, as the superfluity of peace and plenty; but also
masculine; for London is (like Pallas furnished as with men of Counsel and
Conduct; so with Treasure and Strength, with all sorts of Arms and Aminition;
Being Camera Imperii Britanici, The Metropolis of the British Empire, a vast
Magazine of men and money, a nursery of all Arts, Mechanic, Ingenuous and
Military: a great entertainer of Learning; and a noble encourager of Religion,
wanting nothing to make it self and the Nation happy, if it have such heroic
minds and honest hearts, as become so rich, so great, and so Christian a City.

It Is true, like pl^thorick bodies, great care must be had how ill humors, yea
and good ones too, are put into motion; since the first cannot well be long
kept in, nor may the second be purged out: The first threatening dangerous
inflammations; the second no less dangerous Eva^uations. Here Prudence, Order,
Moderation, Conscience and Unanimity are required; besides Zeal and Courage, in
order to recover your and our former health in Church and State; which was made
up of an admirable temper and constitution; until sins, tumults, violence, and
war, cast us into these Fevers, Convulsions and Confusions, with which we
have wrestled for many years. Indeed your City ows some Reparation (and now
pays it) to the whole Nation: not only for the advantages it has from all
parts; but for the disadvantages which all have suffered: not from the ill
intentions, but from some tumultuating dispositions, which (as Porpusses) were
pregnant in your sea of people, when our troubles first began.

I hope God has prepared blessings for you, and by you for the whole Nation;
by opening your eyes, humbling your hearts, disposing your minds, and exciting
your spirits to thoughts of Justice and Piety; of Repentance, Restitution and
Peace: We have had wounds and hurts enough; slight healings, and strong
Delusions too many. It is high time (if it be Gods time) to speak comfortably
to Zion, to tell her, Her Warfare is accomplished; to pour in the Balm of
Gilead by sober and equanimious Counsels; to bind up by orderly and just power,
what has been long broken; to make up the grand defects in our Government, and
to lay foundations of future peace and happiness in Righteousness and Truth:
That the enemies of our reformed Religion, and this renowned Nation, may not
rejoice in our continued miseries, and say, So would we have it.

I have sought to do my duty: if some think I have overdone it; I must crave
your patrociny to assert that, which by your acceptance seemed to be your
sense, as well as mine; and is, as I hope, the sense of all honest and
judicious men: For men that are fanciful and fanatic, we need them not, to
make us happy: I am sure they have made a shift to make us very miserable. And
if God had not in mercy set bounds to the rage of that sea, and the madness of
that people, they would have made your City an heap of ashes, and our Country
a field of Blood; It will be your Wisdom, Honor and Happiness to keep in the
bounds of just, moderate, religious and sober Counsels; to aim at legal, honest
and tried ways of settlement: to choose and use such Physicians as you find
most able and faithful; so will health and salvation break forth upon you, and
the three Nations, which is the earnest prayer

Of your humble servant in Christ, J. GAUDEN.

Books written by Dr. Gauden, and sold by Andrew Crook at the Green-Dragon in
Paul's Churchyard.
1. HIeraspistes, A Defense for the Ministry and Ministers of the Church of
England. 2. Three Sermons preached on public occasions. 3. Funerals made
Cordials, in a Sermon preached at the Interment of the Corpse of Robert Rich,
Heir apparent to the Earldom of Warwick. 4. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of
Dr. Ralph Brounrig Bishop of Excester ( December. 17. 1659.) with an account of
his Life and Death. 5. A Petitionary Remonstrance in the behalf of many
thousand Ministers and Scholars.
A SERMON PREACHED Before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, etc. of London.
IER. 8. 11. For they have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my people
slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.
BEing called to this public service by The preface or address.
the piety and civility of this great City (Right honorable and worthy
Auditors) I could not well tell how to avoid it, because it seemed so good a
work; nor yet (upon so short warning) how to accept of it, being so great a
work, if either I regard the importance of the occasion, which looks like a
door of hope opened to the healing of these Nations, and composing of their sad
distractions, by the counsels of a full and free Parliament, and by the
assistance of regular and orderly power.

. Or if I consider (as I ought in prudence) The difficulty and danger of the
work.
the difficulty and danger of touching, though in order to heal the old sor^s
and sistulating ulcers of this Church and State, which are now ( vetustesceutia
mala, and annosi morbi) inveterate dolors, obstinate evils and pertinacious
maladies; not only impatient to be touched freely, and searched thoroughly, but
are prone to plead as the Devils in the Gospel (who had possessed the poor man
now a long time) against all health and recovery. Many men like Canters and
Lazars are in love with their wounds and ulcers, getting their living more
easily by keeping their sores open, raw and running, than if they should quite
heal them up.

. I am further conscious not only to the touchiness Touchiness of times.
of the times, and the tenderness of many men's minds, who are only for
lenitives and oils, for soft, smooth and supple applications, even to their
most desperate hurts; but also that my own native parrhesia, or freedom of
speaking, which is both customary and conscientious; not that I affect
unseasonable severities of speech, and such rudeness under the pretense of
freedom, as rather exasperates the wound, and inflames the humor, than purges,
allays, or eases them.

. But I profess to choose not to preach at all, rather Ossre^ speaking in
preaching.
than to preach timorously or precariously ( Ut Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad
aram) as if I should ask men leave to be honest, or were afraid to speak the
Word of God to them.

. When I am called to speak in Gods name, I must be Parrhesiastes as well as
Ecclessiastes; I am to do it as a workman that needs not to be ashamed, either
for his ignorance, or cowardice, or indiscretion; whether men will hear, or
forbear, the whole counsel of God must be delivered in its season, so as
becomes the words of soberness and truth, for the Church or Pulpit must not be
a sanctuary for insolency, or a burrow or a retreat for rudeness: No, however
men may become our enemies for speaking the truth, yet it is better so than to
have God our enemy for smothering it, when it is just and seasonable; and such
it is when necessary and sovereign to heal the hurt of a Church and State.

. It has been my fate frequently to offend Offense easily taken from free
preaching
some men, when I have been most intent to serve them, by Texts and Sermons,
which I thought most apt, useful and innocent. When I preached at the Court
Anno. 1640. upon that Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see God: When before the long Parliament, at its
first convening, upon Zach. 8. 19. Therefore love the truth and peace: When at
another great and epidemick Assembly, upon 1 Cor. 3. 19. For the wisdom of this
world is foolishness with God: Of all three, though wholesome and innocent Texts,
and (I hope) accordingly handled, yet I heard some unpleasing Echoes and
reflections; 2 Timothy 4. 2.
the sore and itching ears of some men in all ages are such, that they will not
endure ((...)) healing or sound and wholesome Doctrine, though the pain rises
from the soreness and inflammation in themselves, and not from the plaster or
hand which honestly applies it; yet they are prone as in fell boles, and acute
tumors, when touched, though but gently, to fly upon those that are next them,
and cry ^loud O you hurt me, when the hurt is within and from themselves.

. Sound parts will endure free and rough healing; such as are unsound, do most
want it; and therefore if we will be faithful to God, to our own souls, and to
our hearers, we must not flatter their sores to their ruin; but rather choose
Prove. 36. 28
to heal them, though at present we be thought to hurt them; nor shall our
labor of love be in vain either in the Lord, or before good men; who H^re^t
freedom is best.
at length will find by experience, that the wounds of a friend (which let out
the putrified matter of painful tumors) are better than the kisses of an
enemy, which do ( insides cicatricibus cuticulam obducere) skin over with
unfaithful scars, the ill searched and ill purged vnlcers of men's hearts and
lives, saying peace, peace, all is, all will, all must be well in Church and
State, when ( bona fide, or mala and misera experientia) in true, but sad trial
and sense of things, there is no peace, inward, or outward, 2 Ci. ron. 15. 5.
to him that goes out, or him that comes in; no peace religious or politic,
civil or ecclessiastial, foraign or domestic, either to the Estates,
Liberties, Laws, honors or lives of men; nor yet to their opinions, doctrines,
devotions and consciences, in any rank or degree; but as the Prophet Isaiah
complains, The whole head (if we have any head) i^ Isa. 1. ^. ^
sick, and the whole heart is faint; from the sole of the foot to the crown of
the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises and pu^rifying
sores; they have not been closed, nor bound up, nor mollified with ointments.

. Yet there are that have cried amain Peace, Pre^en l^^s to pe^ce and h^al^^.
peace; men that are either so merry or so mad in our common calamities, as to
command us to call our sicknesses health; our wounds salves; our slavery,
liberty; our divisions, union; our deformities reformings; our unset^ledness,
settling; our sands and quag^^i^es, rockie foundations; our wars, peace, our
oppressions, ease; our Commonwo, a Commonweal. The Prophet seems thus to
complain, That either Physicians of no value ((...)) many and unskilful
Empiricks have unfaithfully tampered with us, and ( dum vulnera publica in
lucra privata vertunt) while they make private gain by our public pains; they
have turned ( ipsa remedia in morbos) our very remedies to new diseases, and
have kept us long uncured, under pretense of cure; or else we are by the venom
of our own inbred and malignant humors, become incurable; as ( immedieabile
vulnus, ense recidendum) a gangreen only fit for the saw and sword: and such
indeed do our proud and dead flesh (or proud minds and dead hearts rather)
portend our case to be, whilst so many tough obstructions, so many high
inflammations, such new tumors and cruel biles daily arise of various
interests; such a constant fall of ill humors, sharp and undigested, not only
upon the outward and grosser or more Mechanic parts of of the body Politic,
but also upon the most vital and noble, the head and heart; where the counsel
and courage, the strength and wisdom, the best blood and spirits of the Nation
are or ought to be contained and exserted to the public welfare.

Although, as the woman in the Gospel, we have Mark. 5. 26.
spent all, or most, or much of our substance on Physicians, and their
attending Chyrurgeons, on Counselors and Soldiers, yet we do not find our
selves any whit the better; still we are scared and threatened by our sins,
which are Gods discontents; and our utsettlednesses (which are the Nations
discontent and sufferings) with daily breakings out and angry tumors, with new
purgings and loathsome potions, with lancings and bloodlettings, with cutting
off and cauterisings, which will not heal, restore, close and redintigrate the
body, but maime and defame, and cripple it for ever.

. To prevent which successive miseries (or the The scope or design of the Text.
like) from the daughter of my people here in England (as much as in me lies) I
have sought to improve the sanctity and solemnity of this occasion, this
thankful and hopeful opportunity of future mercies, be presenting you with my
meditations on this Text; because it is not only ( querela defallacia
medieorum, and medelae mendacio) a just complaint of the falsity of Physicians,
and inefficacy of the past applications, which some Medicasters had with great
vapor and confidence applied, as bold Mountebaks are wont to do, when they
wound their slaves to show their skill in healing them.

. But farther, the text is monitio de vera medendi methodo) a dirction for the
right method and an honest way of curing an afflicted Nation; It does not only
deplore the public maladies, but denotes their right remedies, which may
easily be known, and followed, if the healers were but honest; For the hurts
are not so fatal, necessary and unavoidable, Hurt of a Nation not fatal and
incurable.
that men should despair, and sink under them, Saying, There is no hope, it is
in vain to wait on the Lord any longer; God has condemned and decreed us, as
poor diseased, and desperate creatures, to lie always in the Hospital under
sores and pains, expecting no cure but that of death, and utter dissolution; If
it were ^er. 6. 14.
so, God would not here and elsewhere greivously reproach and perstring those
cheating undertakers, those false* Quacksalvers, these wanton and cruel
Leeches; who did not want, skill, and knowledge, of what would heal Church and
State, in Law and Government, in true Religion and Justice, in Mercy and
Humility, Which are the best balsoms of both, and clearly revealed to them by
the Lord; but they wanted honesty and fidelity; therefore God pleads against
them; is there no Ier. 9. 22.
balm in Gilead? is there no Physician? etc. Why then is not the hurt of the
daughter of my people re^overed? The question ( Is there no Balm?) is a
ve^ement affirmation, a Satyrick (...); There are ways and means ( parabiles
and ad manum) sufficient, easy, apt, obvious and at hand to cure the wounds, or
bruises, or tumors, or hurts of any Nation; if men did not either wilfully shut
their eyes against them, and refuse to use them, or if God had not for their
hypocrisy, fraud and baseness, justly blinded their eyes, and hid from them
the things belonging to their own and the Nations peace, by leaving them to the
mists and clouds of their own partial, covetous and ambitious lusts; Then
(indeed) nothing is to be expected, but daily ( recrudescentia ulcera) relapses
and recruitings of our wounds, until God gives us Physicians of better eyes and
hearts, that may both wisely discern our maladies, and both speedily and
faithfully encounter them with seasonable and fit remedies.

. To which posture of providence we are The hope and expectation of this day
for our healing.
prone to hope that we are this day restored by the valor, honor and
integrity of those who now have the conduct of power and counsel; I pray God we
may have cause ( seri^ gaudere) to rejoice long and in good earnest; for every
days delay of our our is a chargeable, uncharitable, and painful delusion to
the Nation, threatening such a consumption of Spirits, and such debilitation of
the Nations strength and estate (besides the debasing of its honor and
reputation) as must necessarily (at Kast) betray us with our posterity, with
our Estates, Laws, Liberties and Lives, yea and with our Reformed Religion
(which ought to be dearer to us, as it was to our forefathers, than our live^
and estates) to that f^raign invasion, and Romish superstition, which is the
((...)) the great design of the Jesuitick agitation, whereto are subservient
all the fanatic factions of those who are such enemies to the just and legal
closing, or composing of our hurts in Church and State.

. It will be found true by us at last (as well as hitherto some others have
felt it to their smart) That a Commonwealth as well as Kingdom M rk. ^. 25.
divided against it self cannot long stand; Et sero medicina paratur, Cum mala
per longas invaluere moras; In vain shall we at last cry out, How have we been
deluded? how have we despised counsel, and neglected such plain and safe
remedies, as would have cured us long ago? There want not birds of prey (
Eagles, Ravens and Vultures) that wait for the feebleness and fall of this
Church and State; that they may pick out its eyes of Religion and Learning, of
Law and Justice, the Universities and Inns of Court, that the life and soul of
Christian and humane Societies, Equity and Charity, Reason and true Religion
being departed, the ( cadavarosa Patria and Ecclesia) carcass of our Church and
Country may be their spoil and booty, which God of his mercy forbid.

. In the Text there are six things to be enquired. Division in six parts.


1. Persona laesa, icta, afflicta, the Patient or afflicted; whom the Prophet,
yea God himself deplores and owns; she is called the daughter of my people.

2. Plaga or laesio; the grief or malady, her hurt or lesure.

3. Ficta medela, or insana sanatio, the pretended cure or verbal healing; they
have healed, with saying Peace, peace, slightly and superficially.

4. (...), or mendacium; the fallacy and cheat, when there is no peace.

5. Medicorum turba; the Physicians or Empericks; They, great Statists, grave
Politicians, formal pretenders to do great feats, and miraculous cures in
Church and State, when really they are no other than imperious Hypocrites,
magniloquent Montebanks, cruel and covetous, confident and careless Boasters of
their skill; but no way Effecters of a real cure.

6. Vera medendi methodus; the true way of curing a diseased Nation a
distressed Country, a sick and languishing Church, which is implied and
supposed to be

First, As evident in it self.

Secondly, As easy and as feasible by these Pretenders, if honest.

Thirdly, As it necessary, apt and seasonable for the poor Patient; hence the
great blame and reproach imputed to these Tamperers or Medicasters; They, to
their sin and shame; They with their pride and policy; Thy with their cunning
and cruelty; They, more for want of honesty than ability, have thus
superficially skinned over, and perfunctorily healed the hurt of the dauhhter
of my people; saying, etc.

. Of these I intend by Gods blessings to speak, not as a Ruler or Magistrate,
nor as a Statist and Politian, nor as a Soldier and Commander, nor as a Citizen
and Trader, but as a Preacher or Minister of God to his Church: And since we
are excluded beyond all men in the Nation, from being chosen to meet or advise
in any other ways of public Counsels, Civil or Ecclesiastical; you may not
think much if as men and Christians, no less than Divines, we use the freedom
of this place to acquaint you with the sense and sympathy of our souls; yea of
Gods Spirit, in and by the Prophet; when he was not a Spectator only, but a
joint suffer (as we Ministers have been more than any order of men) in the
common hurts and miseries of Church and State.

1. I begin with the Patient, who is called here The Patient or diseased and
hurt daughter of my people.
both by God and the Prophet, The daughter of my people, (...), That is gens
mea, or populus meus.

First, In relation to God, the people that I 1 As related to God.
have bred up with so much care and tenderness; the Nation that has been to me
as a Son or Daughter; the Vine that I have planted, watered and fenced for my
self; That Polity of Church and State to which I was Lawgiver, the chief
Counselor and Constitutor, the supreme Head and Governor; the Captain,
Shepherd and Bishop; their great King and Protector: My peculiar people, whom
had preferred beyond all Nations, as a Theocracy or holy Monarchy, or royal
Priesthood; This is the Patient with whose hurts, sores, bruises, wounds and
sorrows, these practicants have most impudently padled, and cruelly pleased
themselves, in turning public miseries of Church and State to their private
advantages.

2. In relation to the Prophet; the daughter of 2 As related and indeared to
the Prophet
my people, which are of the same lineage and derivation; of the same Father and
Family; of the nearest blood, both by parentage and alliance; with whom I have
the same Laws and ^ivil immunities; also the same Religion and sacred
communion; Natural, Civil, Ecclesiastical kindred endears me to them; they are
as flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone; yea we are, or ought to be of the
same spirit and soul, as having the same God and Savior, the same holy duties
or solemnities, to engage us in love and dearness as well as nearness to each
other, so as the public and common good should be the supreme good of every
particular: We cannot be happy or miserable alone; as members in one body, all
our enjoyments are social, and all our sufferings are sympathetick; This is the
daughter of my people, for whom I am so concerned and afflicted, that I preach
and pray, I write and weep, I wake and dream, lamentations and tears for her a
man, as a Citizen, as a true Israelite, or Jew, as a Christian, as a Protestant
or reformed Professor.

This Tittle of the Daughter of my people, is so The importance of the Title.
The Daughter of my people.
frequent in Scripture, that it seems to importune the Reader to consider the
importance of it; Isa. 1. 8. and 22. 4. Jer. 4. 12. and 9. 1. and 6. 14, 19.
Lam. 2. 11. Zach. 9. 9. So Daughter of Sion, and of Jerusalem, or the like
expressions.

First, To show, not so much the fruitfulness 1 Fertility.
of a Nation, whom God so blesses, that they increase and multiply, as that
softer and procreative or mother sex does, to great numbers, which are as the
off-sets or fruit of a pregnant womb; as the people of God are sometimes called
his first born, and his sons, in respect of that masculine Romans ^. 19.
vigor and valor which was among them while God with them; so the daughter of
his people, as apt to bring forth.

Secondly, But further to express the tender 2 Tenderness and indulgence*
care, and fatherly indulgence that God has toward such a people as are called
by his name, who have had the special signets and bracelets, the Jewels and
Ornaments of his favor, the glory of his Ordinances and presence among them:
God himself is afflicted in her afflictions; such as torment her torment him;
he feels her wounds, 3 Sympathy in God and the Prophet.
and faints as it were to see her blood prodigally shed as water on the ground,
either by open enemies, or fallacious Physicians, and cruel Phlebotomists; who
under pretense of healing the hurts they have made, or festred, venomed and
inflamed) do cut, and lance, and sear, and lop, and purge, and let blood, to
such evacuation, and superfluity, as quite exhaust the best and vital spirits
of a Nation; bringing it to fainting fits and con^ulsions, to weakness and
consumption. As a Father would be affected to see his tender daughter thus used
and abused (which cannot endure pains like the hardier and rougher sex of Sons)
so is God and so is his Prophet; and so is every good man and woman to the
Church and Country whereto they are so nearly related.

. God is so concerned and touched to the Ier 31. ^0
quick, that his bowels are turned within him; he deplores himself as if he
were a miserable God, while his people, his sons and daughters are miserable,
either by their sins or sufferings; God has his sympathies with them, his
reputings toward them, his returns with tears and kisses for them, as a
compassionate and good natured parent has toward his daughter when he has
been forced to use her hardly; and has in his anger either wounded, or
bruised, and hurt her.

. The kindnesses that in mankind are humane affections, in God are Divine
perfections: None can be so good natured, so (...), as the good God is; if we
were not cruel to him and our own souls, he could never be other than most kind
to us; for he does not afflict us willingly; We compel him to be froward by our
frowardness, 2 Samuel 22. 17
and to break upon us by rebelling against him; we bruise our selves by dashing
against that rock which would be our refuge and shelter; we wound our selves by
running upon that sword which would only be our defense: God never cease to
be our father, till we cease to behave our selves as his children.

. From the blessed God, the best men learn and derive this tender love, care
compassion and Of the love due to our Country.
indulgence toward the Daughter of their people, both in civil and sacred
relations; the concernments or interests of both are great endearments to
gracious souls: hence as other Prophets so specially Jeremiah, becomes a man of
sorrows; his eyes run down night and day with rivers of tears, nor can he be
comforted while Sion is afflicted; Though he be wel-nigh drowned in his own
tears, yet he wishes, Jer. 9. 1. O that my head were a fountain of tears.

His bowels, his bowels are pained within him (by Ier. 4. 19
that coarctation or compression, which great grief, fear and horror makes upon
(by the retirings of spirit and blood) the lactes and smaller bowels, which are
near the heart;) he is weary of life, which does but daily torment him with so
many sad spectacles, such dreadful diurnals, such unwelcome news, of breach
upon breach; such a dying and self-destroying Church and State; all things
growing worse and worse and no remedy: Still the alarm of war, and sound of the
Trumpet: The Church and State Physicians are wholly for corrosives and no
lenitives; for fraud and force, not for Reason and Law; they pretend necessity,
and pursue providence till they are in wilderness of woe and confusion; far
from peace, Lam, 3. 17
health, salvation and establishment; which are the effects and fruits only of
Righteousness and Justice, of Reason and Religion. Hence the Prophet with
vehemence demands, and demanding he deplores, and deploring he reproacheth the
folly and defect, the stupidity and cruelty of those in power; Is there no balm
in Gilead? is there no Ier. 8. 22.
Physician? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered.

The best of the Heathens had very quick strokes The heathens compassion and
courage for their Country.
upon their heart strings, by the love and care they had of their Countries;
they thought it ( dulce and decorum pro patria mori) most worthy of a good man
not only to live, but also to die for his Countries safety and honor.

. It argues minds without natural affection not to have compassion for their
Country, and more for their Church; They must be Cyclopick monsters of brutish
Barbarity, who can like Cannibals feed on the flesh and drink the blood of
their Country and neighbors, of their kindred, of their parents and of their
children; yea of their very daughters, who have a privilege and plea from
their sex for greatest tenderness.

. The daughter of our people in respect of our Our Country is both our Mother
and Daughter.
posterity and descendents from us, whom we leave to succeed after us, in our
lands, houses, and estates; is also our Mother and Parent, communis parens, if
we look backward, as we are derived from our Forefathers; Patria est and matter
and silia; our Country is our parent or mother, also our child or daughter, in
different aspects, and so requires different respects:

First, Of reverence, as to our majores, progenitores) Father or Mother, that
begat and bare us.

Secondly, of Indulgence, as to our Daughter or posteri, which derive from us:
In both, that love and kindness is expected, and by the Law of Nature (which is
Gods Law) so commanded; that they sin highly who are so cruel, as either to
sacrifice their Sons and daughters, or their Fathers and Mothers, their Church
and Country, root and branch to the fires and flames of civil Wars and
dissentions, begun and continued by their sinful cruelty, and tyrannous
hypocrisy.

. Can a Mother forget her child, or a Father Isa. 9 15
cast off his Son, or sheath his sword in the bowels of his daughter, without
the just imputation of madniss and inhumanity? Judge then, what men, yea what
Sea Monsters they are, that can be studiously, designedly and industriously
cruel to that Country wherein they were bred; and to that Church in which they
were baptized, to deform the beauty and destroy the blessings of peace, plenty,
order, good government; and true Religion left them by their Progenitors, and
to leave to posterity nothing but poverty and pain, terrors and Wars, blood and
confusion, hypocrisy and cruelty, fanatic fury and military insolency;
nothing but either oppression or Anarchy; either the cries of the oppressors
threatening, pillaging and exacting as grievous tax-masters, or of the
oppressed, mourning and deploring their sad condition in vain, while either the
cords of unrighteous decrees do bind a Nation captive to the lusts of
unreasonable and merciless men, as to the rack and torture, or such daily
executions of violence, exasperation and rigor, as fills the land with
discontent, blood and tumult; the daughter of his people, daily appearing as
the slain wallowing in their own blood; and her voice Ezekiel. 3^. 14
is as the groans of a deadly wounded and dying man.

Fourthly and lastly, this denomination or title The dangerous and desolate
estate of a Nation deprived of her true Fathers.
of the daughter of my people, imports, as the happy estate of any Nation, that
is thus under Gods eye and tender care; also under the protection, or
guardianship of wise Governors, of just and lawful Magistrates, who carry
themselves as Nursing-fathers and Nursing-mothers to Church Isa. 43. 23.
and State; yea as kind Husbands, and indulgent Spouses to their beloved Brides
or Wives: So it shows how sad, desolate and helpless, yea how dangerous and
exposed to miseries, both of dishonor and death, and all manner of hurts,
incident to any Church and State, the condition of any people is, that is not
under Gods care, or is deprived by their sin and madness, of good Governors, of
lawful Magistrates, of able Ministers, and Pastors; such a Nation or Church is
as a poor, weak, helpless daughter, that is an Orphan or fatherless, without
any friend, father or husband to defend and take care of her; she becomes as a
forsaken virgin, subject to all those insolences and indignities, to which her
own weakness; and the power of others lusts may expose her; nor can she have
any safety, health, honor security, or handsome subsistence and defense until
she be restored to the care and protection of those who under God deserve to
be, and by law are Patres patriae, the true Fathers of the daughter of their
people; All others that usurp on a Nation are, as unjust, so hard Fathers,
Fathers in law, because without and against law, having neither the Law of God
nor man for their usurped authority, nor the Law of love and tenderness in
their stony hearts; but as Physicians (who unsent for, obtrude their visits and
practice, more for their fee and gains than for any love to their Patients
welfare) are most welcome when the Patient is soonest rid of them, whose
project is rather to protract and perpetuate their Patients Afflictions, than
to cover them; nor are they afraid of killling them, further than their gain
may dye with them, and their pragmatick humor have less mischief to do.

. But I have done with the first particular, the Conclusion of the first part
of the Text.
import of this style, and compellation, the daughter of my people; thus God,
and thus the Prophet, thus all good men, and all good Christians are wonted to
speak, and think, and act, to love, to pity, and to pray for their country,
both- Church and State. What I beseech you must they be, who wound her with the
wounds of an Enemy, and smite her with the strokes of a cruel one, as if all
their policy, and power, served to no other use, but to execute animosities,
and exercise antipathies, against their country, to eat out (as the generation
of vipers are vulgarly said do) the bowels of their mother, who pray not for
the peace of Jerusalem, but seek to make a prey of her, both in peace and war,
in things sacred and civil, condemning her to everlasting enmities, wars,
divisions, confusions, taxes and exactions, which cannot be removed, till
health is restored; nor can this be, till the great wounds and wide breaches
made and continued, yea enlarged by some, are closed and drawn together; till
there be a ( redintegratio continui, et reparatio disjuncti,) restitution of
all noble parts that are necessary for the public integrality and unity; its
order and beauty, its honor and safety; Which what they are, and how to be
done, I leave it to wise, honest and impartial men, who have counsel to guide
their power, and power to executeor put in practice their good and healing
counsels, in spite of all the Leeches and Empiricks, that would hinder
public health, that they might from the open Orifices of their bleeding
Country, suck more advantages for themselves and their parties to the ruin of
the whole.

Secondly, Having visited the Patient, and finding it to be our near Relation,
as a Sister, or Daughter, or Mother, even our Country and Church; It is time
for us to consider its hurt or affliction, to see what it ails; what that
plaga, or vulnus, or laesio, or morbus is, wherewith it is so pained that it
cannot rest night nor day: Our work is not only to behold her a far off with
silence and stupor (as Jobs friends) in her grief and anguish, but either apply
suitable remedies, or at least such prayers and words of comfort ((...) to her
heart) as may show our pity and compassion, which is some relief to those that
are in bitterness of soul.

The Hebrew word (...) (whence our English shiver may well be derived) is
rendered by the LXX. (...), and by the Latin contritio, which properly imports
some injury or hurt inflicted ( ab extra) from an outward aget, by violence, so
as to wound or bruise, or batter, or break, or tear; any thing that causes (
solutionem continui) separation or dissipation of parts which should be united,
and in whose right union is ease, as in their dissolution or dislocation is
pain.

. But the latitude of the word may well extent to the larger scope and intent
of the place and complaint; which is not only upon the account of outward
force and violent impression, made upon Church and State, against all Reason,
Justice and Religion; but as in bodies natural, so in these politic (both
civil and Ecclestastical) there are many kinds of hurts or maladis incident to
them, both from within and from without.

. There are besides ( v^lnera) or flesh wounds, Of ^^bred hur^s or distempers.
and ( ulcera). which are inveterate sores; and ( gangrenae) gangreens which
are deadly; if not speedily cured or cut off, their are pustuli, venomous
tumors, or angry biles, which arise from some putid or corrupt humors in the
body, also running issues and sistulas, which are most at ease when they have
some vent, and most dangerous, when suddenly and indisretly stopped; these are
hurts too, and very grievous ones, when times are such, by the discontent of
men's minds, by the dissolution of their licentious manners, by weakening the
authority of Laws, and overturning the course of Government in Church and
State, ( ut nec morbos, necremedia far possint;) that either the pertinacy of
customary disorders and prevalent mischiefs, or the petulancy of people
overgrown with epidemical and tolerated diseases, will not endure fit remedies,
yet are undone if they linger under their distempers uncured.

. Sometimes a body grows plethorick, and is Hurts by ^eduudancy of humors
hurt by its excess of humors, crude and indigested, which are prone to gather
together and fall on any weak disaffected part; there to ferment and inflame,
to high feavors and verry great anguish of the whole; so is it in a Nation when
either over-peopled to an indigence and idleness, through want of work; or when
grown luxuriant by long peace and plenty, which runs to sottery in many, and at
last to the armed man poverty; whose free quarter pressing on people provokes
them to discontents, and so to design publiqe troubles ( quia multis utile
bellum) because they have nothing left them but their carcasses, and their
swords; dig they cannot, to beg they are ashamed, fighting is their only
fortune.

. Other while a Nation may be too much exhausted by war, by exactions and
oppressions, by decay and want of trade, so as it becomes consumptive, weak and
languishing, either the ( humidum radicale) native moisture, oil and balm of
competency is wasted for want of encouraged industry and commerce; or the calor
nuturalis, the spirits activity, and generosity of a people are (as the Modern
Egiptians,) quite extinct; being either sottishly idle, or so cowed and
overawed, that they are crestfallen, and below any gallant actions and
designs; living more like slaves under hard Masters, than like the Sons and
Daughters of a Fatherly Prince, or a free and legal Polity; much as poor
Hospital wretches, who are condemned to live aways under the hands of
Physicians, and Chyrurgeons, kept down by Janisaries, and daily terrified with
either taxes, or instruments of pain, or menaces of death. Certainly, as qui
medicae, so qui militariter vivit, misere vivit. It is a kiling and dying life,
to live always under the Chyrurgeons lance, or the Soldiers sword.

. The Hurts of a Nation may be distinguished 3 Civil hur^s or bod^ly diste^
pets by injustice.
into those that either disaffect the body and outward man, by Tyranny,
Injustice and oppression, contrary to the known laws, good constitutions and
venerable customs of a people (which are the native and self-healing balsom of
those great bodies) pressing upon the estates, propertys, liberties, limbs,
lives and hourrs of mankind; When either Superiors, like the disaffected head,
distill too sharp and corrosive humors upon inferior parts, or these send up (by
a kind of circulation, or exhaltation) pestilent fumes and vapors of mutiny and
rebellion against their Heads and Superiors, jealous of, and envying each
others welfare, also withdrawing that natural assistance from each other, which
is indeed the support and health of the whole.

. These hurts are very dangerous, and ought to be speedily composed to such an
harmony as is a tolerable state of health, by adjusting every one their rights
assigned to them by that Law, which so takes care and provides for the public
order, beauty, and welfare of all, that it permits no one private interest,
like a wen or leech, or Incubus to oppress, drein and destroy another, for as
in Nature so in States, the whole cannot be well at ease, if one part be
grievously pained or pierced.

. There are sometimes horrible rapes committed 4 Of violent rapes committed on
the Daughter of my people.
upon the daughter of my people, while vile and violent men ( sons of Belial)
to satisfy their own inordinate lusts of revenge, covetousness, pride or
ambition, apply by force or fraud, or both, to obtain that power and place,
that favor and preferment in the public, which they despair to get in fair and
honest ways of worthy industry and merit. These are like the incestuou^
ravishers of their own Sisters, or Daughters, or Mothers; men that have much of
Cateline in them; nothing of the true Christian; nor are they to be envied, if
they prosper for a time in their wicked devices and endeavors, since this is
all the shadow of greatness they shall ever enjoy; while for a moments glory
among a company of poor mortals they venture eternal debasement among the
Devils; where such great sinners shall be greatly tormented; nor will their
prosperity procure their impunity; though they dye in peace, yet they descend
to an eternal war, which is ((...)) never to be ended by peace or truce, nor
yet by annihilation or extinction.

. There are als^ grievous hurts, which may befall 5. Spiritual hurt^. 1. As to
Religion.
a Nation as to its very soul and better spirits, that is, its intellectual
powers and excellencies of Religion and Learning, of rational and ingenuous
improvements, most worthy of men, of Gentlemen, and Christians.

These hurts are when true Religion, which is founded on Gods word, confirmed
by the testimony of the Church of God in all ages, fortified by good Laws;
regulated by good Discipline or Government, and supported by honorable
encouragements; when this is either corrupted in its soundness of doctrine, or
overgrown (as the head with a scald) by superstition, or broken by faction, or
bafled by vulgar insolency, or persecuted by misguided zeal, or oppressed by
inordinate power, or robbed of its just maintenance, or discomposed in its due
order and government, or despised in its best Preachers and Professors, or run
out to the itch and s^ratch (the soabies and pruritus disputandi, as Sir Henry
Watton calls it) of disputing and jangling, which breeds uncharitable and empty
formalities; tending and ending in profaneness and Atheism, extinguishing truth
and love, sound faith, and sincere charity, which are as the oil and flame of
the lamp of Religion in any Church and heart; these are most dangerous
distempers, and hardly to be cured or recovered, unless such speedy cordials
and antidotes be applied by wise Magistrates, sober Ministers, and sincere
Christian people, as may recollect, refocillate and restore the power of
godliness, and spirits of true Religion, by dissipating and expelling those
noxious and pestilent oppressions, with which either Princes, or Peers, or
People, or Preachers have pressed upon true Religion, by Covetousness, or
Ambition, or Sacrilege, or Schism, or Popularity, or love of Novelty, or
Sedition, to the great disgrace of true Religion, and the best Ministers of it,
both Fathers and Sons.

. It is observed by Guildas and others, who give account of our English
subversions by S^xons and Danes (when we were Christian and civilized, but they
Heathens and barbarous) that nothing more presaged the deluge of those
miseries, which followed such invasions, than the great contempt and oppression
to which the Clergy and Religious Orders were brought; partly it may be by
their own sloth and luxury; but chiefly by the profane insolency of all sorts
of people; who were content to have all Religious cords broke asunder, that
they might enjoy the full sway of their licentious humors.

. Again when good learning (which is a most 2. Hurts as ^o good Learning
officious, useful and comely handmaid to Religion) when humane Arts and
Sciences (which are beams or structures of divine wisdom) when studies of good
Laws, and due administration of Justice accordingly, (which are the vital
spirits of a Nation) when these are villified and outraged by the vilest
people, by Jack-Straws and Wat-Tilers, whose ignorance makes them enemies to
knowledge, as darkness is to light (being like Mastiffs, the feircer for those
dark kennels in which they are bred and kept up.) When this ill kind of men cry
down (like the Ephesine rabble) with Acts. 15. 28.
dust and clamor, more then any show of reason, all Scoholes of Learning and
Universities, that they may run after false Prophets and Dreamers, whose
simplicity is so impudent to pretend inspirations and new lights, to so
eagle-eyed and quick sighted a people as the English are, till their delusions
and folly are manifested.

. These are as rough Satyrs, a kind of robust wild men, who trust more either
to their limbs and sinews, or to their wit and cunning, than to their
consciences, or our Laws for the getting of their Living; aiming to live more
like beasts by rapine, then like civil men and good Christians, by honest
labor and ingenuous industry.

. Nor are they small hurts which the teeth of such Foxes, and tuskes of such
Boars have given to any Church or State, where they have for a while prevailed;
being much fitter for Mohammedan conversation than Christian profession; for
there (among Turks) only force or fury makes men considerable; for they think
that their Princes and their madmen are highly favored and most familiar with
God and his Angels.

. These hurts on the mental spirits, or intellectual powers of a Nation, are
more dangerous than those that are incident by grosser wounds of outward
immortalities, which the Physic or dicticks of good Laws well executed, will
easily keep from predominating; but the hurts which fall on Religion and
Learning, on the Reason and Conscience of a Nation, are like frenetick
distempers, long a growing, and long a going, like the wounds on the head, or
cracks, as we say, of the brain, hardly ever thoroughly cured; when Heresy or
Schism, like a spiritual frenzy has seized on any people; as was evident in
the Manachies, Novations, Arians, Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians and others,
of ancient and modern ages.

. There are further, plagae per peccatum, and Public hurts from sins
predominant and unpunished.
propter peccatum; hurts from sin, and for sin; the first hurts are by our own
evil meritings, as the self wounds of a drunkard; the second by Gods just
inflictings upon malefactors; for he will not always leave the public sins of
a Nation, without visiting with sore and public punishments.

. The first hurts are those from sins, when they grow great and masterly,
boisterous and imperious, either countenanced in Court, or indulged in City, or
prevalent and neglected in Countries; when profaneness, and lying and
swearing, and Ier. 27. 10. Isa. 59. 3: Hos. 4. 2.
drunkenness, and uncleanness, and murders or the like faedities come to
pollute a great or a considerable part of a Nation, so as men make a mock of
sin, and glory in their shame; when Rebellion, Perjury, Innocent-blood-shed and
Sacrilege are drawn on) like strait and pinching shoes at first) with the
shooing horn of Religion and Reformation, of public necessity, thrift and
good Husbandry, with antipathies against Idolatry, and abhorrencies of
superstitions; when Prince is bad and people worse, and Priest or Prophet worst
of all: When from the Rulers or Teachers of a Nation, Ier. 5 31. and 6. 13.
wickedness as a plague of leprosy, is spread over all the Land: When there
is a loathing of the heavenly Manna, a contempt of Word and Sacraments, an
indifferency to all Religion, as little reverence in a Church at holy duties,
as in a Playhouse, and fat less than in a Shire-house; these fiery darts of
men's own wanton lusts and the devils temptations do wound very deep; they at
once pierce and sear, they hurt and stupifie, they make men past feeling at
length, and only fit them for vengeance.

. The second hurts are propter peccatum; those Hurts f^^ sin by Gods inflicting.
which the just and angry God in his sore judgments inflicts on a people now
incorrigible in ordinary ways and; most severely on those that Ier. 25. 29.
are called by his name, and owned as the daughter of his people; so the Jews
by various hurts and healings were objects of Gods wrath and mercy, till they
had filled up the measure of sin. See the Eastern, Asiatick, Greek, Egyptick
and African Churches; how famous, how fruitful, how flourishing, till wounded
with sins, overgrown with gross heresies and schisins, noisome lusts, base
opinions and bad actions: the sword of Gods vengeance by the barbarous
inundations of Scythians, Sacracens, Turks, and other Colluvies or scum of
people at last so divided them, that they are at this day almost utterly
destroyed.

. The arrows of presumptuous sins shot up against heaven, fall on the heads of
the shooters to their own hurt (as Lamech speaks) And as Solomon Prove. 6. 32.
tells us, wicked men sin against their own souls, and so against the peace,
plenty, honor, health and welfare of their Nation and posterity: sin (as Pliny
says of Quicksilver) is ( venenum omnium) the pest and poison of all things;
it urges God to be as a cruel one, it provokes till there be no mediation, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16
intercession or Remedy: when men proudly and impenitently treasure up sin,
they treasure up withal wrath against the day of wrath, till judgment break in
like the flood on the old world, or fall like fire from heaven without any to
help, or the earth open and swallow men up quick, as Korah and his accomplices.

. Here God is in Justice and Honor concerned to arise, to bend his bow, to whet
his sword, to be avenged on such a nation, which is grown wantonly Ier. 5. 9.
and 9. 9.
wicked, which dares fight against God, yea and challenge him, whether he
regard iniquity or no, Psalm. 6. 11.
whether he be not such an one as themselves; the wounds which men inflict on
the Spirit, Grace and Glory of God, force him to wound them; when there is no
fear of God, no shame, or remorse, or repentance for sin ( ideo conterimur quia
non conterimur; ideo vulneramur quia non vulneramur, as St. Bernard) because
our hearts are not broken, nor our spirits contrite with in us for sin,
therefore the Lord of hosts breaks in upon us, with one Isa. 27. 1.
breach in the neck of another, with famine, plague, and 9. 21.
sickness, and death, with intestine war, divisions and endless distractions,
till Ephraim rise against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and Judah
against both; to eat as Canibals one another flesh, and drink each others
blood, and thereby break the arm or strength of the whole Nation; yea the very
bones will be broken, as when one choppeth wood; when the sinews are cut in
sunder, all bonds of Law and Conscience, of Reason and Religion, of Justice and
Charity, of Unanimity and Unity, are (like Sampsons withs) snapped in pieces.
All these hurts men's own ways procure to Ier. 4. 18.
them, so that God appears either as a stranger and 30. 14.
and waifering man, or an enemy, yea as a cruel one in his sore judgments,
which like waves of the sea pursue one another.

. Yet there was some mercy in this severity as to There is good in the evil of
punishment out-wards.
Israel and Judah a long time, while God cut them short only, but did not
utterly forsake them, or cast them out of his sight: it may argue some hope,
that a Physician yet vouchsafes to mind and visit his Patient, to apply any
causticks or scarifyings, which by pain may bring to sense, and so to healing.

But there are ( coeca and surda vulnera) silent, The worst hurts are unseen
and unfelt.
and unseen, and at present unfelt, yet very sore hurts and deep wounds
bleeding inwardly, which God may inflict, as upon a particular soul, so upon
the spirit and genius of a whole Nation, as to Hos. 14. 17.
the generality of the people, by giving them over, by letting them alone; why
should they be Ier. 2. 30.
^mitten any more, being a rebellious, stif-necked and backsliding people!
profound to revolt, bold Apostates, Hos. 5. 2.
falling from their duty to God and man, Ier. 7. 9, 10.
yet glorying as if they were delivered to do all this wickedness, by the test
and approbation of providence, discovered as they fancy in the prosperity of
their impiety for a season.

. Whereas indeed as St. Anstin observes, Severissim^ p^nit Deus, cum poenalis
nutritur impunitas; There need no greater punishment of a gangrene, than to let
it alone, to leave it to it self; This ( crudelis misericordia,) severe mercy
St. Bernard passionately and wisely deprecates, ( po^iws u^e, seca, percute,
domine, ne parcas, ut parcas,) Rather lance (O Lord) and cut and burn, by a
merciful cruelty, than so spare me by a cruel clemency, as to spoil and damn me
for ever, says the devout man.

. There are spiritual maladies, and miseries too, which give a people over to
Dementation, and astonishment, to blindness and madness, to seek after and
trust in Lying va^ities and desperate hypocrisies, D^ut 28. ^4 a^^ 64.
to rest in the flatteries of successes, or the applauses of the vulgar, who
think every one th^^ ^^ospe^s to be a God or a good Angel; and every one that
is unfortunate to be a Devil, or a great offender, as the Barbarians did St.
Paul when the Viper seized on his hand, and he shaked it off Acts 18. 3.
unhurt.

. Hence any Idol of superstition, any meteor of Enthusiasm, any glowworm of
sanatick fancy and Fury serves the turn, and instead of Gods Candles and Lamps
of pure Religion in wellordered Churches, as golden Candlesticks. God takes
away these burning and shining Lights, and leaves a people to the Sparks they
have kindled, to be satisfied with their own delusions, to believe Isa. 50. 11.
Lies, to rejoice and glory in their evil and perverse Ier. 16. 5.
ways; and when God has taken away his Peace and Truth from them both in
Church and State, they will fall under grievous violences, oppressions, and
exa^tions of men, whose Mercies are cruel, and their healings further hurts,
which shall make their very souls bow down to the ground, that proud men may
pass over them; Isai. 51. 2^.
when nothing but Fury and Sedition at home; nothing but War and Invasion
from abroad is in reason to be expected; yet then some people will easily smile
and fawn on their Oppresso^s, they (poor Wretches) being prone to believe (as
Countrey-fellowes do the Mountebancks) that all is well and whole which
powerful hands undertake to touch; they will echo Peace, Peace in Church and
State, and cry up a Commonwealth, when indead it is a Common ^^e, as to the
grand Interests of the Nation, i^ the best and noblest, yea, in the most of its
parts and members, which can never be fully happy, unless they be of one heart
and mind, of one Law and Religion as to the main.

. Which leads me to the Third Particular, 3. part. The pretended Healing
The Medela or Sanatio; the seeming and pretended, yea professed and boasted
Healing of the Nations Hurts; They have healed with saying, Peace, Peace,
(...); repetita, duplicata, firma and certa pax; nothing but Peace enjoyed, and
Peace to be expected, says Zedekiah and Hananiah 1 King. 22. 11 Ier. 28. 15.
the false Prophets, who lied in the name of the Lord.

. We may observe the cunning of those Empinicks, those false Physicians, who
are of no value; they use 1 The craft of these Empirick.
this sweet welcome word of Peace to the people, which is a Catholicon,
comprehensive of all enjoyments (for every want is a kind of Waree) when they
cry peace, and repeat the crambe of peace, peace, and sing this song (or (...))
over and over again; they hope, (as Demetrius and his fellow-craftsmen) Acts
19. 35.
by crying Great is Diana of the Ephesians, even to a raving and hoarsenesss,
to make the people believe that the Image which came down from heaven, was
certainly a goddess; with this lullaby of peace, peace, do the Politicians and
Oppressors of a Nation seek to quiet the Trefe and Wayward people, when they
cry out of their Ails and Oppressions, Jud. 17. 13.
as poor Micah did, when the churlish Danites took away his gods and his
Priests, yet was he demanded what he ailed so to cry after them.

. So the great Artists of State, that they may the better set off their skill,
make (as Mountebanks) l^rg Haranges, specious and popular orations, like Herod,
most artificial speeches, mixed with preaching and praying, and sprincklings of
Scripture, and Gods cause, as gilded or syrupped bitter pills, to give the
better gusto; still concluding with the Epiphonema of peace, peace; when behold
nothing but usurpation and oppression, grievous exactions, and heavy loads,
bonds, and chains and prisous are every where prepared for those that dare cry,
or complain, or call for remedy; Pessime medicastry impensus ostentant artem:
None make ampler prefaces brags and spreadings of their skill, and salves and
rare feats than the most arrant Quaks and Cheats.

. These, as the Magicians of Egypt, some times so enchant poor people, that
they believe all to be miraculous, at least innoxious, which comes from the
tongues and hands of those who possess them; as Heathens ascribed all blessings
to their Idols; the most crying Injustice must be thought the highest Justice;
the greatest contempt and Curb, the strongest oppression and delusion of a
Nation, the wildest and most partial toleration must be voiced for liberties,
yea, for precious Christian Liberty, purchased with much blood and treasure;
the grossest Anarchles, and most snarled misgovernment, whose wheels are often
taken off, and whose weight drivces heavily over the very heads and bellies,
Laws and Liberties of the Nation (as that Roman Virago, Tullia Hostilia did
her chariot over her Fathers corpse) to the depression of the honor and freedom
of Princes Peers, and best of the people, this is voyced peace, peace; the most
irreligious licentiousness in doctrine opinion, speech and manners, must be
reputed freedom of spirit; the most novel and unjust cause that ever was on
foot, must needs be cried up for the Good old Cause; when it is indeed quite
contrary to the goodness of Equity, and the antiquity of truth.

. Such monstrous soloecisms there are in the The confidence and cruelty of
false hearers.
world between some men's words and actions, between the credulity of cowardly
people, and the reallity of their enjoyments: This is the cunning, this the
confidence, and this the cruelty of some State Juglers, and their Plebeian
Parasites, to boast of all they do or say, is in order to peace, peace; when by
Peace they mean (as Salust expresses it) nothing but the servility or the
solitude of a Nation, that all interests, sacred, civil and military, may
truckle under their high and mighty power, their tripple crowns; and submissis
faucibus defer imperium: All that search and try their ways, or Isa. 29. 21.
wounds rather, are offenders, even for a word, if they dare speak, whisper,
think or weep ought but peace, peace; When such valiant, such succesfull, such
holy, such praying, such preaching, such Saintly, such Seraphick men, have
gotten power, and place, and plenty, and palaces, O now all is peace, peace.

. And the better to color over the overthrow of three flourishing Nations
(which from the pile of three united Kingdoms are fillipped to the cross of an
ill sodered Commonwealth) some men must by all means pretend to set up (as
John of Leyden and his Accomplices did) the Kingdom of Righteousness, the Throne
and Scepter of King Jesus; Which is justly esteemed a Kingdom of peace, being
seldom or never advanced by an active war, but only by a passive; yet is this a
principal decoy to impose upon vulgar people; for who will not seem willing
and forward to submit to Christ's Kingdom; that he may rule and reign? But we
are not such children, nor have so learned Christ, as to expect his Kingdom to
be of this world; Ioh. 18. 16.
though in it, yet not after its methods of the sword, but by the word of Truth
and spirit of Patience; thus came the King of Sion; the other by the sword of
blood, is a rare project for Muncer and Knipperdolling, for Hacket and
Arthington, when they can be merry in peoples miseries, with ( populus vult
decipi, decipiatur) people have a mind to be deluded, and it is fit they should
be so, when credulous people will believe in any spirit, an hundred to one but
some lying spirits and deceivers, 1 Ioh. 4. ^. Mat. 24. 23.
false Christ's, and false Apostles will come among them, who shall make them
believe light is darkness, and darkness light? that good is evil and evil
Isa. 5. 20. Rev. 3. ^.
good; that their iron Chains are Bracelets of gold; that factious Conventicles
are purest Churches; that Synagogues of Satan are the truest Jews, or children
of Abraham; that partial Conventions, and Senates, sifted, and purged,
affronted and bafled by tumultuary or armed force are full and free Parliaments.

. Which name and thing of Parliament The honor of Parliaments when full and
free.
every sober and understanding English man justly venerates and highly esteems
in their due and only true constitution; so Parliaments are justly honored, as
^^os and corona gentis, the cream, flower and crown of a Nation, the anchor and
center (under God) of Laws, Liberties, Lives and honors of all that is dear to
us in this world, yea, of our Religion too: A Free and full Parliament is the
very Pall^dium pacis publicae, the best preserver and restorer of our peace,
public health, and all honest interests; the most august and honorable
Assembly in the world ( Quo s^l illustriorem non aspicit, as Bishop Andrews
calls it, in his Tortura Torti, page 291.) the best tempered constitutions of
spirits and humors, of power and counsel in a Nation; the oracle of public
wisdom, the magazine of public strength, the source and fountain of public
order and Authority; the treasure of our Riches, the sanctuary of true
Religion, the ark in which the Church of England is embarked; the Conservatory
of both sanctity and civility, the best Umpire of our civil differences, the
most equanimous Censor and reformer of manners; the grand Trustees of Church
and State, when so full and free as becomes men of conscience and honor; Who
would not submit their honor, estate, liberty, life, all things temporal to
such a Judicature of his Countrymen, such Arbitrators of the public choice?

. But to cry peace, peace; to the body, when Isa. 1 5.
the whole heart is faint, when the whole head is sick, when the very brains
are ^eaten out, when the vital and best spirits of a Nation, are almost expired
and exhausted, of when the military and pretorian insolence shall stand over
the Senate or Parliament, as Hercules with his clud over Hydra's many heads;
This Partiality is such a tyrannous Imposition on reasonable men, as if they
were commanded to believe and declare that a part is equal to, or more than the
whole; that glowworms are brighter than the Stars, and Meteors or Comets more
benign than the Sun and Moon; that all the wisdom and piety of a Nation, were
contained in a Knapsack, as the holy Ghost was carried in a Cloak bag from Rome
to Tre^t: Men need but count the pole or tell noses, to tell what a Free and
full Parliament means, which comprehends all the Representatives and Trustees
chosen by the Nation, besides the Peers, who were the great council to the
Prince.

. Peace, as health, includes the good constitution of the whole, but chiefly of
the most noble principal parts; peace of Church and State, at home and abroad,
will be far from that Nation, whose public counsels are at variance, and their
chief Counselors are either Fighters against themselves, or Oppressors of one
another, ^o serve some partial (which must needs be a) Sinister base and bad
interest; for no counsel is good, in or out of Parliament, which is not for the
publicks good, in which every legal and just interest is contained; Indeed its
a mere cheat, put on the poor patient the daughter of my people, when vain and
empty words of peace, peace are used; and yet either the sword or the exactor,
or the oppressor devoureth every way, and every day, when God and man, his word
and the violated Laws, peoples sad experience, and tired patience, their
exhausted Estates, and daily Alarms proclaim, there is no true Peace, no
honest and just; no safe and secure Peace, which indeed is not to be expected,
while such Witch-crafts are imposed, and such wicked purposes partially and
violently promoted, utterly to deceive, undo, and destroy a people; which
brings me to the fourth particular.

. Fourthly, The (...), Lie or Fallacy, 4. The lie or fallacy of healing
slightly.
which the Spirit of God by way of Irony expresses, they have healed, thus
they pretend and brag: but ( lightly ((...) super leve, ut leviculum, tanquam
rem ni^ili, (...), LXX. despicientes, vilipedentes: cum illusione, Sir. cum
ignominia, verbis mendaciorum suorum, Chald.) Thus Translators and Interpreters
render the word variously, but to the same sense, arguing the little respect of
Piety, Honesty, Equity and Charity, or Humanity, which was in these
vainglorious and ungracious Healers, who either wanted Skill or Will, or
Power, and Influence, or due Authority, or they were slighters* and Contemners
of the publiques Health, only intent to their private Wealth and advantages.

. They never searched the bottom of the Nations The ^^^ud of such.
great crying sins, Disorders and Sufferings, nor applied seasonable, just and
meet Remedies to either; yea, they festred and enflamed the Lighter hurts, to
grievous Ulcers, small Faults, Offenses, mistakes, Differences and Jealousies,
which did arise in Church and State, they either dressed these scratches with
Vinegar and gall only, with sharp and picquent corrasives, without any lenitive
or moderation; or else by a dilatory negligence, and supercilious carelessness,
they let public distempers and hurts run on, till they were less capable of
any cure, or patient of good applications; Yea, and by a superfluity of wanton
cruelty, they either widened the wounds, and made their probes their punniards;
or else dressed them with poisoned spunges, while they seem to purg them, as
one that is killed by a glyster or potion. And at best by a most impudent
hypocrisy, they have skinned over the hurts, with some show of settling what
was shaken, and of reforming what was amiss; when indeed no men did more deform
the beauty, or ruin the welfare and hinder the healing of the public, than
these Healers, by their enormious sins, and outrageous lusts, by their unjust
and violent actions, by their partiality, and impotency of their passions, by
their evil eyes, their foul breath, and their rough hands; which are the
instruments of bad hearts, and base minds.

. Little or no public healing is expectable Their Character.
from men that are inordinate self-lovers, covetous, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3.
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, (natural, civil,
ecclesiastical) unthankeful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers,
false-accusers, incontinent; fierce despisers of those that are solidly,
sincerely and constantly good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more then of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power
of it, as the Apostle gives their character by an holy Satyr.

. And can any thing, that is good for the Despair of cure by them.
health of the daughter of my people, proceed from such Galileans, such evil
men, who meditate mischief night and day, who decree unrighteous decrees, and
act wickedness with both hands, greedily? Who think themselves most hurt, if
the State and Church should be thoroughly and speedily healed; they fancy
themselves undone, if any public good be honestly done; it is pain and death to
them to have the bones well set, which by them have been broken; to see the
((...) rather than the (...)) gaping wounds or gulphs rather closed up, which
they have either made or widened, and kept so open, that they threaten in a few
years to swallow up all the wealth, and pea^e, and honor, and strength, and
happiness of the Nation and Church.

. Yet these are the men that say peace, peace; Their Monopoly of healing.
that would be thought the only blessed Peacemakers, the sovereign healers of
the hurts of the daughter of my people; such Monopolisers of all Medicines and
healing Drugs, that they are impatient any others should take the cure in ^and,
or have any thing to do in Church or State, beside themselves and their
Applauders. They tell the poor Patient which is full of wounds and putre^ied
sores, that they will do her more good with their tongues and lips, added to
their Launcets and Swords, than the best Physicians can do by their best
unguents and sovereign balsoms; while the poor sick, wounded and languishing
Creature cries out for some ease, and pity; yea roars for the very
disquietnesse of its soul, and continued Jer. 8. ^^.
pains; yet without any shame or blushing, these Physicians of no value, these
miserable Mountebanks, affecting a supercilious show of sovereign Majesty,
severely frown on the pitiful looks and tears of the daughter of my people;
with terror threatening her to hold her peace, to believe she has peace, nay to
say and swear it is peace, peace; yea and to abjure the use of any other men or
better means, which have been formerly very effectual for her healing and
recovery.

. Quis Coelum terrae non misceat and mare Impo. ^o^^ provoke to just impatience.
c^lo* Here Patience it self is a sin, and Impatience a virtue: Who, not
stupid, can forbear Isa. 1. 2.
with the Prophet to cry out, Hear O heaven, and give ear O earth? Was ever any
Nation so tampered with, so pestered by a company of fallacious Physicians;
pretenders to heal, superficial skinners, dilatory Empiricks, and miserable
Medicasters who resolve small hurts into grievous Ulcers; and green wounds into
virulent gangreens, and little braises into fell and inflamed tumors, yet cry
peace, peace; and we have healed you; why do you yet complain?

. As if the Prophet should say, it is high time (indeed) after so many years of
wasting and wounding, of war and trouble, of death and bloodshed, of undoing
and destroying, of cutting and dividing the Body Politic, turning the
daughter of my people (as on the Gridiron) from one side to the other, by
vicissitudes of burning Fevers, by continual tossings, and fits of high
diste^^pers (between the wrath of God and heavy hand upon her, beside the fury
of men against her) yet to cry peace, peace to her; when, as the Lord lives,
there is no peace; nor many steps between the patient and death; or at best
such a sorry peace as is no less chargeable, terrible and oppressive, than an
open war; Pax omni bello tristior, a peace patched up with popular pretentions,
and impious injuries; as the body of Lazars; whose plasters rather hide than
heal their sores: What true peace can that be which is founded only on sands
and quagmires, on violence and exaction, daubed over with the untempered mo^tar
of policy and hypocrisy, which holds not one winter; built up with cries,
begun with violence, carried on with oppression, and ending in desolation?

. Peace, or health, and salvation are far from Character of true healers.
the ungodly; What peace can there be to the wicked Princes or People, Senators
or Soldiers, Psalm. 119. 155. Isa. 57. 22.
whose feet are swift to shed innocent blood? whose hands are full of bribes,
whose hearts are hollow and double minded, whose power is usurped, whose
decrees are unrighteous, whose mouths are full of Isa. 32. 17.
fraud and flattery? Peace and Establishment in Church and State with God and
Men, are the fruits of Justice and Righteousness, of true Religion and good
Laws, of just Magistracy and legal Sovereignty, of fixed, free and united
Councils, of wise and honest Valor, the study, prayer and endeavor of men
fearing God and hating covetousness, Exodus 18. 21.
men of true public Spirits, who are not swayed by private interests and
passions to any novel designs and factious adherencies.

. Men of wisdom and honor fortified with just Authority, are only apt to make
a Nation happy by healing her, in those ways of honest decrees and impartial
dealing, which are legal and regular, not fanatic and extravagant, which every
night dream, and in the morning propose new receipts, Seraphick projects, and
untryed medicaments, which sufficiently show, that such Chyrurgeons and
Physicians, are either ignorant or pragmatick or impertinent; either not
knowing what to do, or not willing to do what they know, but are resolved to do
any thing, never so foolish and pernicious, rather than sit still and do
nothing, or give way to better heads and hands, who have more authority from
God and man, and so may better expect a blessing.

. What peace can there be or true healing, while the most crying sins that
mankind are capable to commit or conceive, the deepest wounds and sorest hurts
from the hand of man that a Nation can receive are unpunished and unrepented;
yea unconsidered, yea encouraged, yea cried up by some for rare examples of
Justice, of Liberty, of Piety, of Sanctity? when neither the holy God ever
commanded, or holy men ever practiced any such thing?

. What peace can there be while fleshly lusts, and all manner of evil
concupiscence in Rulers and ruled, fight against men's own souls, against Gods
Spirit, and against the public welfare? while worldly lusts of pride, envy,
covetousness, ambition and Sacrilege daily supply matter for general James 4. 1
discontents, public wars, and perpetual woes?

. What peace or healing can there be in Church and State, while men of the same
polity are like Pikes in a pond, or fish in the sea, or beasts of prey in a
wilderness, pursuing and devouring one another? while neither the bonds of the
same Laws, nor the same Oaths, nor the same Covenants, nor the same Religion
can hold them? while they will not endure the same Magistrates, nor the same
Ministers, nor the same form of Church and State? while they have so little
equity, so no piety or charity to each other? while every petty person among
the Prophets and people aims to set up a party of faction, and every party
designs to subdue others, to set up it self, and to oppress the common liberty
and public welfare, which are only contained in those Laws, that are made by
the consent of all Estates in the Nation.

. What peace can there be where there are so many tumults and strifes, so many
whispers and jealousies; so many fewds and animosities in the breast and bowels
of the same Nation? for want of that rare Elixir of lawful and just government
which only is able to compose the distracted spirits, to give a just allay and
temperament to all humors and parts in their due places and proportions, except
they be such as are indigestable to any good order, and are better purged out,
than kept in the body?

. Alas these pitiful partial applications, these diurnal doses, these borary
medicaments, these slight and superficial plasters; these verbal and decretal
healings which some men have so gloried in, and vapoured of, are as ridiculous
as they have been inefficacious; unless these great Masters of their new arts;
these Galens and Hypocrates of Church and State were so in favor with some
Esculapius, as to partake of his Diety; and so by the words of their mouths, or
shadows of their bodies, or touch of their garments, to rebuke the Fevers of
the body politic, and immediately to cure, as by miracle, what they have so
long tampered about to very ill purpose.

. But as an illfavored Physician is an ill omen to his patient, especially if
he look ill from his being ill; therebeing no great hope that the Physician
Luke 4. 23.
should cure others, who does not, or cannot cure himself; so the busy
Practitioners on the Daughter of their people, should do well, first to commend
their skill to the public, by giving some good experiments on their selves,
by curing their own corrupt hearts, or crazy heads; by recovering themselves
from those vertigo's, megrims, and falling sicknesses, with which they have
been so often afflicted; let them wash their own foul hands, and cleanse their
double minds, let Isa. 1. 16, 17.
them cease to do evil, and learn to do good; James 4. 8.
Let them do all things not arbitrary ( ad libitum, and libidi^^^) but as exact
Physicians and Apothecaries per pondus and mensuram, by weight and measure; by
the rule and standard of the Laws of God and man; which give, or restore, or
preserve to every one what is their own, by such purchase, donation, descent
and honest industry; wherein their rights are made good by Law; and which they
have no way forfeited by any injury to the public, of which the Laws of the
Land and lawful Magistrates, are the only lawful Judges.

. Let them not think by a little Fasting-spittle Isa. 58. 6, 7, 8.
to cure the hurts of Church and State, nor yet by their solemn feasts; This
is the fast, and this the feast, the Lord has chosen, comely for true
religion, and wholesome for the Nation, To loose the bands of wickedness, to
undo heavy burdens, to break every yoke of unrighteous decrees and acts; to
restore what is unjustly, that is without law, taken away from any man, to do
as they would be done unto, to deal justly to all men, to show Micah 6. 8.
mercy, even in deserved Justice; and (after all) to walk humbly with God, This
do, (O ye Physicians of my people) and you shall live; This do, and the
daughter of my people shall live; being thoroughly Zach. 13. 6.
healed of the wounds she has received in the house of her seeming friends;
(For it was not an open Enemy of the heathens round about, which has done her
all this hurt: But her own Children,) Isa. 1. 23.
Let them cease from being Rebellious Children, companions of Adulterers,
Robbers, and Murderers, return to that duty, they owe to their God and their
civil Parents, to their Country, and their Church, or to that pity and
compassion, they owe to their Children and Posterity, whose teeth will
certainly be set on edge by the ^ower grapes their Fathers have eaten, Jer. 31.
29. Then shall health spring forth speedily, righteousness shall go Isa. 58. 8.
before, and the glory of the Lord be thy rearward. Then shall they be as
Fathers and Sons too, of the Nation; who shall build the old wast places,
repair the breaches, and raise up the foundations of many Ezekiel. 21. 27.
generations, which have been overthrown, overthrown, overthrown, after they
had continued firm for many Ages, as to the stability of Church and State,
under Gods indulgence and the care of good Magistrates.

. But since these Tamperers are so justly and Particular instances of slight
healing.
severely reproached by God and the Prophet, for their slight healing, which
was indeed none at all; the more cruel, by how much they were more cunning, to
keep the daughter of my people in continual pain, and themselves in constant
practice and pay; It will not be amiss more particularly to examine in the
sense of Gods Spirit and his Prophet, whence this malice or mistake had its
rise; how this slight healing did befall the daughter of his people; and how it
is to be avoided as much as Death, and Hell, and Devil.

First, it comes by unskilful Empiricks, such as 1. By unskilful undertakers
to heal.
neither understand the Science of Physic, nor the Art of Surgery; neither
the cause, nor the symptoms, nor the proper and specific medicines for such
hurts and diseases as Church and State may labor under; which possibly may be
as many as the natural bodies of men are subject to; if a man had a true
Anatomy of the parts and constitution, with all accidental distempers incident
to the body Politic, from within or without: When men of little or no
literature, of as little experience in matters of policy and prudence, of mean
capacity and education, of small minds and narrow souls, do undertake the cure,
who are easily deluded and gulled, biased and swerved with fair words,
specious pretenses, and partial, yea pivate interests; (especially if these
novel interests have any smack or tincture, fucus or form of more than ordinary
godliness) 4 Tim. 3. 5.
when these easy, shallow and inconsultive men, of giddy heads and rash hands,
full of childish credulity, and popular formalty, come to the helm of Church
and State, to rule and steer all, they look more to the spreading of their
sails, then to that due balast and lading, or to that right cynosure and
compass of Law and Justice which God and their Country have prescribed.

. Gonsalvo, whom Guicciardine calls the great Captain of his time, was wont to
say, that a General, or chief commander of an Army, had need have thirty years
experience, to breed him accomplished to all the abilities, requisite to such a
place; on whose prudent conduct the lives of so many men depend; Yea, and whole
Nations too; truly no less time is needful to train up a complete Counselor
of State, a meet Physician for the daughter of my people; It is not a
pragmatique forwardness, a bustling activity, or a projecting impudence, or an
unblushing ignorance, or a voluble impertinence of tongue, or a military
strength of hand, and Robustnesse of body, which makes men fit to undertake the
healing of a Nation; every Fool and evil doer, is capable to be meddling, and to
do mischief, Prove. 20. 3.
only the work of closing and healing, is expectable from wise and good men,
of ingenuous and learned educations, and of exemplary lives; and adorned with
competent estates, men who know how to temper their Physic and Plasters, so
as are commensurate to the nature and degree of the disease, to the spirits and
strength of the Patient, neither over-doing by precipitancy, nor under-doing by
presumption; neither fearful to use tried and fit medicines, nor rash to
tamper with every new receipt propounded.

2. By unfaithful Empiricks, such as are crafty 2. By unfaithful.
enough to do evil, but to do good they have no Isa. 5. 13.
knowledge or honesty; they have heads able enough, and hands active enough,
but they have corrupt hearts and base ends; they can boast, as Jer. 42. 22.
much as any of a public spirit, and the commonweal, or bonum publicum; but
while they look one way, they row another; the tide of private benenefit
secretly carries them contray to the sail and wind, with which they clamor
amain for the public good; full of pretended necessities, and impatience for
an hudling and preposterous Reformation in Church and State; and the work is
well done, if their crasie estates, and waining Fortunes, or cracked credits be
once well recruited; if they find no gain in true godliness, yet they make
good gains of the form of it, having the Cretian faculty to speak lies in
hypocrisy for filthy Tit. 1. 11.
lucre sake; every one looks to the profit which is to be made from their
quarters; if their Purse Isa. 56. 11.
prosper, all is peace and prosperity; though all things public are worse and
worse, as to Religion, Laws, Liberties, as to freedom and honor of public
Councels, as to trade and commerce, as to peace and concord in Church and
State; they care not how snarled the skain of things be, so as they can draw
some good threads out of it to stitch up their affairs, and mend their rents.

. Though the daughter of their people have scarce rags to hide her sores of sin
and shame, to dry up her tears or dress her wounds by reason of oppression and
anguish; yet these grand Geniusses of State (whose gracious nods are sanative,
and their touch or presence must be thought sovereign) must be clothed in
scarlet and finelinnen; in robes of silk and embroidery, and fare deliciously
every day; that they may appear rather as Princes in splendour and majesty, than
as Mountebanks and Quacks; who care not how little they heal their Patients,
nor how much they help their own purses; yea some of them are so false that
they conspire the total subversion and destruction of all the health and wealth
of the daughter of their people, which sat as a Queen among the Nations in
former ages; that they may either keep or increase the spoils they have already
got, and further hope for, from her final expiration and dissolutions; where
from an ancient, united and flourishing Kingdom, to a puny, peeled and divided
Commonwealth, the change is not like to be 1 Cor. 15.
(as that of our vile bodies at the resurrection) from dishonor to honor,
from corruption to incorruption; but from peace, glory, plenty and Renown, to
everlasting war, dishonor, beggary and cont^mely; the fruit and fate attending
the silly or subtle tamperings of false more then foolish Physicians, who are
neither good for others bodies, nor for their own souls; for while they through
ambition, covetuousness and unfaithfulness neglect to heal the one, they
damnably hurt the other. Certainly no want of honesty or charity is more
damning than that which is due to the public, but denied or withdrawn, when it
is in the power of our hand to do a Nation or a Church good: Nor are any
Traitors more dangerous and detestable, than those Lopes was Physician to Q.
Elizabeth and suborned to poison her. Cambden.
Lopesses, who are rather carnifices than medici; empoysoners, torinentors, and
executioners, more than healers or Physicians; then most betraying their trust,
when most trusted, for the public welfare of a Church and nation, on which
not only many thousand bodies but souls do depend.

3. When the pretending healers are either tainted When transported with
passion and opinion.
with the contagion, and leavened with the sowreness of other men's odd opinions
and passions, or transported with their own; sometimes Physicians are such
Gentle Sirs, that they symbolize too much with the humors of their Patients,
and are so indulgent to their diseases, or compliant with their ulcers, that
they dare not tell the people their real dangers, and the tendency of their
unreasonable distempers, if not prevented and moderated; sometimes people love
to have such Physicians, such Magistrates, such Parliament Men, Jer. 3. 31.
and such Preachers too, who shall speak soft and smooth things, sow pillows
under their broken bones, Isa. 3. 9.
and bind up the unsearched sores with silken bands; This is the way ( non
sanare sed palpare morbos and vulnera; and ipsa remedia in morbos vertere) not
to heal but to humor an hurt; not to mend it to the better, but to change it to
worse; for an impatient Patient many times needs a plaster of moral
Philosophy, and Divinity, more then of Physic or Surgery, and stands more
in need to have his passion than his sore cured; which (as in bodies full of
sharp humors) is worse by their fretting than by the first wounding.

. Hence Patients and Physicians, like Idiots and Simpletons very gravely
conspire to lay aside all use of what things are known to be good in order to
health? out of a great zeal against the abuses some have formerly made of them,
and a like jealousy for hereafter.

. Thus they transfer by an ((...)) impatience The (...) or transport.
of prejudice, and transport of their own or others passions, the faults and
frailties of persons to things, condemning with the Turks all wine, because
some men are drunk with its excess; and all good cheer, because some are apt to
surfeit, blaming the meat, when the fault is in their ill stomach or digestion;
hence they study so to dry up Hydropick bodies, till they kindle in them
calentures, and make them as tindar, apt fuel for a Fever; they draw away so
much blood pretending it is bad, till the Patient (Church and State) loses,
withal, much of its best blood and purest spirits; so falling at last into fits
of convulsion, and such emaciatings as betray to desperate consumptions: Thus
they are prone totally to abandon a good, an excellent, a long tried, yea and
the only adequate way of Government, that can be adapted to all just interests
in Church and State, out of a popular prejudice, against some misgovernments
incident to the Governors, and to the best Governments; which are sooner
remedied, then a new one modelled and fitted; as a cracked silver vessel, is
sooner sodered and new burnished, then a new one malleated out of the rough
m^ss or wedge of metal.

. Thus ( Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria currunt) for want of wise, honest
and steady Physicians) remedies over-driven prove worse than the diseases; and
a Nation is further off from cure after twenty years passionate practice, than
it was at the first cause of complaint.

. This false out, when Physicians, grow so sympathysing, or symbolising, with
their petients pevish passions and humors, that they flatter their diseases,
and fear nothing so much, as to cure them, with that discreet severity and
moderation which permits not the outcry* (when greater, than the grief) nor the
importune clamor of the patient, either to keep him short, or carry him beyond
the reality of the disease; Since health of the body, as virtue which is the
health of the mind, consists ((...)) in the mean between extremes. It Is too
true, as in Patients, and Physicians, so in people, and Parliaments (perit
judicium, quum res transit in effectum) when Physicians so much mind their
patients distemper and clamor, that their minds contract a disease that sets
them next door to a kind of raving or madness, or dotage, of which all men are
thought in some degree guilty, who either much over-do or underdo, what they
undertake to do; as he that broke the pitcher which he was to wash; and burnt
or pulled down that house, which he had commission only to sweep or repair; and
cut off that head for aching, which was only to be shaved, and forrified with
some defensive plaster, against the rheum; To these transports of some men,
who were much swayed by the passionate outcries of some people, we owe the loss
of our ancient Government, and have run the sad ventures, yea shipwracks, of
Anarchy so long in both Church and State.

4. When these pretended healers look more 4. When they too much intend petty
symptoms, and neglect the main distempers.
at the lesser symptoms of the diseases, or at the putid excrescencies of the
sore, than at the ro^t and fountain of the malady; when they regard more the
sufferings of a Nation, then their own or other men's gross sins, and are more
sensible of man's prejudices and displeasures, than Gods.

It is a rule in Physic, (In complicatis morbis acutiori attendendum) In
complicated diseases the maine care must be to give check to that, which is
most accute, malignant and predatorious of the spirits; for if these fail, or
be not refocillated, both nature and art, (as Hippocrates says) must needs
fail; they are then very impertinent Physicians, who seeing a Patient in an
high feavour, are more solicitous to take away some cloths or covering, which
seems too hot on them, then to mitigate the flames of that fevorish furnace
which boyles within them.

Sect. Here, by gross mistakes, some Physicians take ( non causam pro cause;)
angry at some Ceremonies, and scared with mere shadows, more than with gross
sins, that are most immoral and substantially evil (as I may say:) This runs
even Reformation it self many times to a Deformity, while Physicians look so
much to some appearances of evil, that they neglect what is most apparent evil.
Thus men quarelled (in their little cavils, at The slight healing by taking
away the Liturgy.
the Liturgy) so much about some things they less fancyed, or understood, as
to the Antiquity, and Innocence of their sense and use, that they never
regarded either the excellent matter and form of the Prayers and
Administrations in it, or their own dull, cold, and formal application to them,
when indeed they deserved for their Divine Truth to be believed, and for their
public use and charity to be entertained with humble, intentive, fervent and
devout affections; the fault was not in the holy forms, but the unholy
formality; Nor (lastly) did they bethink themselves of the great want which
plainer people have of such wholesome, complete, wonted forms of Public
Prayers, and administrations, which they can best learn and understand, and
intend; For daily variety in Religion, (such as some men affect) is almost as
inedifying to poor country people as Latin service; nor is any Symbol of
Christian union more proper in any Church (and if it could be in all the
Churches,) then to have where ever they come, the same Summary sense and
solemnity of holy mysteries; and such duties are ill left to all private men's
fancys, yea or to all Ministers sudden and extemparary abilities, though they
be able men.

Sect. If lying and swearing, and riot, and luxury, Grand neglects, and petty
severity.
if Schism and perjury, and sacrilege, and Hypocrisy, and bloodguiltinesse,
if covetousness and ambition, and immoderate revenge, if discontent and
impatience against God and Superiors, if malice and high uncharitableness, if
bribery and corruption, if popularity, formality, idleness, and debauchery in
Ministers, if peoples immoralities, and profaneness, factiousnesse, Atheistical
indifferency, and rude insolences; if these and the like great hurts of the
daughter of my people had been cordially reformed, and by reinforced Laws with
due execution of both Civil and Ecclesiastical discipline had been so purged
out, or curbed and abated that the flagrancy and predominancy of them had been
generally allayed; doubtless the public welfare might have consisted with
those other things of convenient and comely use, in Church and State, at which
some men's zeal did so rise and over-boyle, that it almost quenched all Religion
and Civility to sordid confusions.

Sect. 5. When these pretended healers, do either by immoderate tampering and
dilatoriness, multiply 5. By immoderate and dilatory tamperings.
diseases, or by stopping one orifice indiscreetly make a score, or force ill
Humors to shift their seat, and transfer Diseases (alike the running gout) from
one part to another, from the head to the hands, thence to the feet, and at
last to the heart; still the inward malady remains unpurged, the daughter Of
curing the hurt of Monarchy by Democracy, and Episcopacy by Presbytery.
of my people as to the main is not healed; so to rectify the more feared than
felt excesses of Monarchy and Episcopacy, a greater Tyranny may be easily
raised, not only in a downright Anarchy, but there are tyrannous and tedious
burdens to be feared even in the best Democracy or Aristocracy that can be
modelled for Church or State: where, as the teeth of harrows are worse than the
point of one sword, so many Reguli or Masters are like to be more inaccessible,
more untractable, more intolerable, more chargeable to the people than any one
can be; and no less both severe and supercilious, besides less satisfactory and
honorable; For it is more ingenuous to be a Subject under some person of
ancient honor and eminency, then to have a snip of Sovereignty among others
that are but upstarts and equals.

Sect. I believe the Peers and Gentry of England lived much more freely, amply
and magnificently, though Subjects under one Sovereign, than the best Here Is or
Burgomasters do among the Lowcountry-men o^ Swisses* And so did the Clergy of
England under excellent Bishops, beyond what they ever will under the rigor of
others who have their horns, though they endure no head; The little finger of
rigid Presbytery, has been heavier than the loins of moderate Episcopacy.

Sect. It is a Monstrous either want of skill, or Of Medicines become Maladies.
of conduct, or constancy, for public Physicians to let things run to such
impolitick lapses, (under the pretense of curing the hurts of the Daughter of
their People) as while they sought to recover the frequency of Parliaments,
(thereby to moderate all enormities, and remedy all burdens inconvenient in
Church and State,) that (at last) the public welfare should come to that sad
pass or ill fare, that some things called Parliaments, should be thought the
greatest public grievance (and what convention is there so illegal and
contemptible, which some flatterers of times and powers will not christen and
consecrate with the venerable name of that almost sacred Senate?) How desparate
and sad a State is it when any grievance should be called a Parliament, or any
Parliament prove a public grievance! as that Parliament had the name from (
Parium and Populi and Principis lamentum;) The lamentation or complaint of
Prince, Peers, and of People, or their contempt till at length even military
insolency dared to adventure (as the requital of the long and great pay, which
they as Soldiers had received from their dear Countrymen) to garble and purge,
to shufle and cut, to lay out and take in Parliaments at their pleasure, like a
Stock at Gleek, yea and not only to act against them, and without them, but
above them, in a game of Government, wholly new to England, called Stratocracy.

Sect. Mean while ( good God!) what became of the wits of some of our wise
Physicians, and our confident Surgeons! Could they not have foreseen and
prevented (by discreet counsels and moderate methods of seasonable applying
State Physic) those swoonings, and heart-faintings; those convulsions, and
dyings; those groans and bleedings of Church and State, of Kingdoms and
Commonwealth, of Laws and Religion, of Magistracy and Ministry, which have all
suffered in twenty years of tedious attending their cure, more hurts than they
ever did for an hundred years by all the diseases that were pretended so
necessary to be cured, that rather than fail, all, even head and members, limb
and life it self must be ventured! Where was the virtue of former Oaths, of
late Protestations, of all their Covenants and Vows, the Antidotes which they
had taken or given against Anarchy and Apostasy!

Sect. Sage and well-advised Physicians must still The lubricity and subtilty
of ill humors.
consider, how subtle and Proteus-like distempered humors and spirits are in a
body that is foul; they instantly, being moved but not removed, slide as from
one part, so from one disease to another; as easily transmuting interests and
dangers, as the scales of a balance go up and down when more weight is cast
into one than the other, it presently follows the preponderancy, and grows
lower when heavier, which was before higher, because lighter.

Sect. So in public or epidemick distempers, preventive and prophylactick
medicines must be used as well as Cathartick and purgative; else things will by
secret and insensible steps, suddenly vary from one extreme: and oppression to
another, as the cold and hot Fits of a Quartane, especially if the grievances
of sharp and unseasonable remedies (like some corroding plasters) follow the
grievances of the sore and disease, so either stupifying instead of suppling;
or exasperating instead of mollifying; or cutting noble parts quite off instead
of reducing them to due temper and proportion: State Physicians must be as wary
of using too much of the salt of popular Proposals, and the niter of levelling
principles, as other Physicians are of using Quicksilver uncorrected, or
unmortified; for they are both most acute poisons if not well prepared and
aptly applied; by which either unfit, or unseasonable, or immoderate, or rude,
or forcible applications, men are quickly carried beyond their own duties, and
others deserts, for want of that Caution, Conscience, Charity and Discretion,
which is necessary for all those who meddle in matters of life and death; in
private, much more public healing and welfare; else the quick as well as the
dead flesh may be cut off and consumed; the vital as well us vitiated spirits
and humors may be exhausted. The very Arteries and Sinews of Government are
prone to be rotted, and the whole fabric of the Body will fall one limb from
another.

Sect. Especially when by the fury or fear of Of violent ways of Healing.
Prince, or People, things are brought to that pass, that all other medicines
being laid aside, nothing is made use of but the weapon-salve, that unguentum
armarium, the Sword of War, which has seldom the virtue of Achilles his
Sword, which was to heal as well as to Wound; hence follow those horrible
healings, which (like Genesis 34. 25.
Simeons and Levi's cure of the Sichemites when they were sore,) destroy both
Prince and People, Prove, 14. 28.
either lopping off the arms and legs of the body Politic, the strength and
multitude of the Nobility, Gentry, and Communalty, which is the glory of a King
and Kingdom, or else by a dreadful abscission, cropping off the very head of
Sovereignty, from the body of the polity; the first reduces a Nation to its
stumps, and makes it a cripple a long time; the other makes both its
appearance, and its motions, as monstrous and desormed, as if a body should
move without an head, (as it was in those days when there was no King in
Israel.) or as the Giant Polyphemus did; Judge. 21. 25.
when blind, he gropeth for Ulysses; so are a great people, when in the
darkness and confusion of Anarchy, they seek in vain for that order, Wisdom,
and authority, which are the Body, Soul, and spirit of Government, and are
eminently comprehended in the head, with which the whole body best corresponds,
when happily compacted together. This principal part once taken away by
violence, the body (like fouls, whose heads are wrong off) may flutter for a
while, with blind inordinate and dying motions; but no better can be expected,
unless (as in Hydra) many heads could presently spring up in stead of one,
which is neither easily nor suddenly done in Nations, whose native courage,
emulation, spirit and metal raises up many rivals for sovereignty, and as many
disdainful enemies against all that either obstruct their pretended power, or
affect to enjoy it themselves.

6. When these pretending healers are much Slight healers by new inventions and
unexperienced applications.
for a new Paracelsian practice, for unexperimented applications or medicaments
of their own inventions, which are occasionally extracted and Chimically made
(with sin and force) by themselves, and such as are of their faction; but they
do not natively flow as the balm of Gilead does from the Tree of good
Government and polity, that is from those Laws and Constitutions, which have
been long approved as most proper for the Nations Welfare, which (without
doubt) are best able and most apt, both to preserve and restore the health of
the Daughter of my people; no counsel, practice, or power of Prince or
Potentate, or Parliament, that are praeter, or contra legal, can be for long or
sound healing, but rather proves more noxious and infestive at last to the
public peace: For the Law (which is power regulated by Wisdom, and Wisdom
Law the most healing.
asserted by just power, and both confirmed by the Parliamentary consent of all
estates concerned) this is the Radical moisture or native balsome, by which the
lamp of life is preserved in the body politic; as this decays, so spirit and
vigor, health, and harmony, peace and protection, love and life decays.

. Yea, where force is necessary to be used, yet it must be limited, and
commissionated by law; else it is but a Lion broke loose, or a ranging Bear, or
a ravening Wolf, or as a mutinied Army, no better then a tumultuary riot, and
violence, like the fighting of a body with it self in fits of the falling
sickness, such new pits and cisternes will not hold any water; for they are not
only cracked in the making, and marred upon the wheels, but they presently dash
against one another, as earthen pitchers; they are bypath of extravagant
power, and fallacious pretentions, Ier. 6. 16.
but not comparable, in point of health and safety, to the good old way, ( and
bona, and antiqua, and probata) which long time had liked and attested to be
very good.

Such as put on in all haste Saul's Armor of Sovereignty, which they never
before essayed to wear, nor have shoulders fit for it, will soon find it not
only inconvenient for them, but combersom, dangerous, and in the end
pernicious; if they mean indeed to kill those Giants, those Goliahs of
uncircumcised enormities, which defy God and Law, it is better to take those
smooth stones, and that sling, to which as Masters of assemblies, or
Magistrates, or Parliament men, or Justices, they are wonted, according to the
Law, and the duty of their place, than to cumber and engage themselves in such
uncoth* high and heavy undertakings, which are seldom other than
disadvantagious, and destructive, as always dangerous to the counselors and
actors, no less than to the public peace and welfare; for as Tacitus well
observes, ( Consilia callida and inhonesta, prima front laeta, tractatu dura,
eventu tristia) new and illegal projects, are commonly pernicious, and crying
at last, however they smile and flatter at first; nor can any violence or
success heal a Nation or a conscience, where the Law smites by accusing, and
the conscience by condemning men for their wicked principles and unjust
proceedings.

7. When these pretended Healers, leaving all 7 Healing by charms and
Parliaments.
wonted and approved medicines, which Gods word and the laws of the land, right
reason and true religion do warrant or allow, fly to their enchantments, as if
they would heal by charms, and cure by Philters or amulets, as by carrying
Bibles in their hands, by using much Scripture phrase and expression, by
following sermons and fasts and prayers, by affecting an odd kind of canting
way of writing and speaking, by zealous pretending of sanctity and Christian
liberty, or through reformations of advancing the cause of God, and Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, by crying up providence, and successes, by conjuring up strange
fears and hopes, jealousies and expectations, like so many Ghosts and Goblins,
to scare and amuse the common people: Lastly by flying to raptures,
inspirations, enthusiasms, holy convulsions, and such like quaking and quacking
tricks as pretend no less to the skill of healing all the hurts of the daughter
of my people, than Wizards and cunning men do to cure all diseases of man and
beast.

. Thus the Temple of the Lord, the Temple Ier 7. 4.
of the Lord is urged, when they intend to destroy Church and State; it is
superciliously yea very surlily spoken, to persons much better every way then
themselves, Stand by, we are holier Isa. 65. 5.
than you, we are Abraham's seed, and the true Israel of God. The work of
healing Church and State, is the work of Saints; as soon as they can agree
what way to take, what plasters to make, and what power to get into their
hands, that they may apply their rare Cataplasmes or Emplasters.

Thus some tell us there must be no King but Mat. ^0. 21.
King Jesus, and themselves sitting on his right and left hand, in all power,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, judging the twelve tribes of Israel; for
they strongly fancy England to be Judea, or the holy land, and most of the
people to be of late turned Jews; Others will have no Bishops, nor The spo^les
of those Egyptians.
any thing that belonged to Bishops, but only their good lands and houses, the
spoils of those Egyptians; others will have no presbyters, nor tithes, nor
Temples, but arbitrary, and unmercinary Preachers, in occasional Barnes and
Stables, or ( sub dio) in open fields, who will do the work of Christ without
man's wages. It were well if their Soldiers would do so too, in their holy
wars, which are voted by some to be the work of Jesus Christ; some would have
they know not what themselves, but they attend further light, by which they may
better discern the way of healing the Nations, and their own hurts.

. Mean time they look neither to the Law Is^. 5. 2^.
nor the Testimony, neither to the rule of piety, equity, nor charity, as if a
little chattering of pious, or rather impious nonsense, were sufficient to cast
out the legions of Devils, or the clay and spittle of their lips were able to
cure the many distempers of these Nations, especially when the blindness,
boldness and folly of such Operators and Circulators, is so manifest to all men
that have eyes enlightened by reason or religion, by Laws of God or man, that I
hope it shall proceed no further. Have we need of mad men, as Achish King of
Gath, speaks of David, disfigured 1 Samuel 2^. 15.
to a frenzy! Are they likely to be healers of others, whose diseases are so
got into their crowns, that they are not only fantastic but fanatic, to the
tune of the Maniches and Circumcellians; that is, people of no just and honest,
of no settled or constant, no rational or religious principles ( morbus
destruit artem) a good Physician is not fit to be his own or others Physician,
if he be distempered; much less these men, than who no men have discovered more
craziness of mind, and crookedness of manners, having little fear of God, and
less reverence of men; either their ambition, or their indigence, or their
idleness, or their Jesuitick juglings, or their desperate designs to turn all
into rapine, blood and confusion, makes them impatient that any men of better
skill, and honester wills than themselves should come nigh the Patient, or
apply those All-heals, or Panaces and Catholicons, which are no where to be
found in their Pedlars packs or Apothecaries shops (where poisons are set off
with the specious titles and inscriptions of sanctity, and liberty and light)
but in the known Laws of God and man rightly interpreted and impartially
executed according to Equity, Order* and Charity; not in those godly
formalities, or gracious extravagancies, or illegal irregularities, with which
some vaporers have made so great flourishes for some years, and so long
afflicted the daughter of my people; and would for ever have done so (according
to the method of those rare cures they sometimes wrought in Germany about the
1530. by the seduction and slaughter of an hundred thousand people in the
Anabaptistick and fanatic ways of mutiny and rebellion) if God in his mercy
(as we hope) had not prepared to put the Patient into better hands, which may
be guided by wiser heads and honester hearts, who will not so cry up Religion
and Reformation, as to Romans 3. 8.
run out to horrid violence and crying injustice; nor fancy and teach that any
evil of sin and injustice may be done that a public good may come thereby: One
may as well expect to heal wounds by poisoned plasters or venomous
instruments: Men must not lie for God, nor commit robbery for Isa. 61. 8.
burnt offering, nor do things unwarrantable or unjust by man's Law, in order to
magnify Gods cause, much less their own, though just; and may they do it for
causes wholly unjust? this is only to dash the two Tables against each other at
best, or to break them both in pieces against the rocks of hard hearts, as is
usually done when fantastic heads, and foul hands dare without authority from
God or man, to set up the golden Calves which they list to Idolize, and which
all men must presently fall down and worship; such was that popular and
plausible invention of the Jews at first, but it cost the wickedly wanton
people dear at last, when their Exodus 32. 28. 35
new Diety and rare invention was consecrated by the blood and death of many
thousand of the people; Nor was that fire of mutiny and rebellion with Korah
and his faction raised against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. 7.
quenched at a cheaper rate, whatever they pretend of holiness. Yea St. Austin
observes in his 162 Epistle ( ex poenae differentia peccatum censeri) by the
honor of that new punishment which fell on them one may easily see how the sins
of mutiny Rebellion and Hypocrisy being twisted together do outweigh any other
sins.

Lastly, Then they heal slightly, 1. When Physicians 8. Slight healing ^^r want
of constant^ application of good prescriptions.
either give good words, or make good salves, and spread good plasters, but
never effectually apply them to the Patient, or suffer them to be pulled off as
their impatience lists: When bones are broken, as well as the flesh deeply
wounded, the ligatures and splinters must be good as well as the plasters:
There must be no dislocation where we expect a perfect cure; Parts must be set
and kept in their proper places; else they either heal not at all, or to a
great deformity and continued infirmity.

Or 2. When both Healers and Patient, like 2 Chronicles. 16. 1^ For too much
trusting to Physicians.
King Uzziah, trust so much to themselves, to the skill of the Physicians and
Chrurgeons, that they less look up to God, and lean to their own understanding:
They will find the wisdom of the world foolishness, and the arm of flesh an
Egyptian Isa. 17. 5,
reed; to lean so much on them as to neglect God, is not only a vain but a
noxious and cursed thing; for God will bring to naught the counsels of Princes,
who begin not their wisdom and end it in the fear of God; as the most pious and
learned Primate Bishop Usher, in the beginning Of Patients idolizing their
Physician.
of the long Parliament would often with earnestness foretell, That God would
confute and punish the too great glory and confidence which people generally
had in Parliaments, as if the sins of the Nation could not outvie all the
care, skill and power of Parliaments; who may have their infection and diseases
too, if they do not exactly look to God and their consciences, to Religion and
Justice both; to duty more than applause or reward, or success; which can never
be good or comfortable, unless it be First the fruit and effect of good
counsel, (that is religious and legal;) Secondly, of humble prayer to God;
Thirdly, of a gracious submission to his will, when we have done our duty; men
lose themselves when they seek not God first in all their public counsels. For
Eccles. 9. 11. Psa. 3. 8* and 29. 11: Psa. 147. 14.
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but the Lord gives
the blessing of peace, and health, and salvation to his people; He, as the
sovereign Physician can best, and only heal our public wounds, by making men
to be of one mind in the Lord, by pouring out his spirit of wisdom and
moderation, of repentance and compensation, of mutual pity and compassion, of
Justice and judgment, of an holy and happy reformation, which heals the hurts
of men's hearts, and the wounds of their consciences, and the running issues of
their evil lives; these are the happiest and surest methods of a Nations
healing. We see in the often relapses of the Jews, no sooner had they by sins of
public scandal and notorious contagion hurt themselves, but Gods hand smites
them by famine or plague, or Ier. 2. 30.
sword, or war and oppression; no sooner had they repented and turned solemnly
from their sins to him that smote them, but God turned from his wrath and
healed the Land.

. We have had in England many days of humiliation, in order to our humbling and
healing, but hitherto we have been more and more hurt; because we fasted not
for sin, but to sin, as God reproacheth the Jews; for strife, and Isa 58.
debate, and oppression, to smite with the ^ist of violence, etc. We laid on a
formal plaster of Reformation, but we never thoroughly searched the wound, nor
purged out the putid matter; yea we multiplied the corruption, and added
hypocrisy to former iniquity; the sins of War and violence, of inordinate
revenge and cruelty to those of peace and luxury.

I find, the Parliaments of England never 2. Parliament Prayers, in a Book
called The Ancient(...) Prayers of the Church.
thrived better, nor kept the public in better health, than when those two
excellent Prayers (lately reprinted) which very gravely and plainly minded them
of their duty in that place, were daily used among them; which were much more
significant, grave and pertinent, than such Seraphick or rambling, and loose or
odd Expressions, as some men are prone to use either in their affected
varieties, or in their tedious Tautologies; which have often more in them of
Invention than Judgment, and stick more upon fancy and faction, than conscience
and the common good. Certainly, where men are solemnly and jointly to ask of
God the same proper blessings every day, they may very well use the same words,
and petitionary Forms, as Christ did thrice in his Agony; For Gods
immutability is not weary of any holy constancy, nor delighted with any
novelty, but that of a new heart, and new spirit, which I hope and pray he
would give both the Physicians and to the Daughter of my people: That neither
the later may be miserable, by not being well healed, nor the second blameable
for healing only slightly, and superficially; which is the fault here laid to
the charge of some persons, and leads me to the fi^t Particular proposed;
namely,

5. They: that is, Those public persons, who of 5. The persons charged for
slight healing.
right ought, or in fact do, or in their action may manage the Affairs of the
Church and State; who have Councels, power, and Authority, interest, and
influence, fit to advance the public welfare; by correcting the distempers,
and reducing all to a due constitution of health.

They: that is, 1. Those Princes or Kings, Kings and sovereign Princes slight
heaven.
Judges and Chief Magistrates; who being themselves vicious, or Idolatrous, or
Hypocrites, or vain, (turning Piety into Policy, and Religion into reason of
State) not only infect the people by the contagion of an impious example; but
are willing the people should be as bad as themselves; That, for their
enormities being followed by their Subjects, they may seem less by the
Imitation; and, as it were, Approbation: Kings that rule their people not by
Law and Justice, but Ep^* 22. 26, 27.
by will, and Passion, more for their own pleasure, Pro. 28. 15, 16.
than the Public Welfare; that are great Oppressors, staying as well as
^lee^ing their people; yea, breaking their bones, and eating their flesh:
Mic^^* 3. 2, 3.
Ruling men, not as rational creatures, of the same Creator, nor as brethren in
the same Savior, Sons to the same Father of their Country; but as mere Slaves
and Vassals, forgetting, that every King has a King in heaven above him, to
whom he is subject, and must give account, not only of the hurt he has done,
and the wounds he has made, on the souls and bodies, the estates and
consciences of his people, but also of their Health, and good he has left
undone, when it was in his place, and power, like the Sun in the firmament: or
as a little God among men, to have been ((...)) a Catholic good to Church and
State, that thousands might have been blessed by them in this world, and to
eternity blessed God for them. Not only the hands, but the mouths and eyes of
Princes are healing of their peoples evils, if they will but rebuke and
reprove, frown upon, and discountenance evil doers. Men's sins and Accounts
enlarge according as their influence and relations ampliate; which carry their
obligations with them, to God and man. Great place and power are of all things
most to be avoided, if they only serve to aggrendise a man^ sins, either of
omission, or commission, for to augment his Judgment, and Eternal torment.

^. Those subordinate Counselors, and inserior 2 Counselors and subordinate
Magistrates slight Healers.
Magistrates who are under the command of man, and more of God, these heal
slightly, when they are not men of Integrity, fearing God, and hating
Covetousness, but orafty Complyers with Exodus 18. 21.
the inordinate lusts and passions, with the illegal commands of either*
Princes or people, contrary to their oaths: so by flattery, or faction, to make
way for their Ambition, and gain, by the undeserved favor of either, or
dividing one from the other, by a most unnatural wa^ and jealousle; such as
please man rather then God, and love Gal. 1. 10*
themselves more then their Country, or* the Church; such as prefer their
bodies and Est^^es before their Souls; and put the healing^ of the Church, and
true Religion in the last place, or Rear of affairs: and when they profess to
heal the Irreligion of others by severe Acts and Ordinances against Adultery,
S^earing, Proph^nes^, debauch^ry, drunkenness, corruption, injustice, etc. yet
themselves are higher by the shoulders, than the most of the people in these
and other enormaties: As if Peers, or privy- Counselors, or Counselors of
State, or Parliament Men, had a Privilege to sin more, or to repent, and
suffer less than other men.

Nothing weakens the credit and Authority of any public Laws so much as when
the Lawgivers least observe them, or are the first that break them; like
Physicians that prescribe strict diet to their Patients, but themselves indulge
all manner of Epicurisme: Here every one is prone to retort; Physician heal thy
self: The Luke 4. 23.
best things are commonly done by the best hands; Religio Medici, Conscience is
here required as well as his Science: They will hardly do their Country good,
who care not, either to serve God, or to save their own souls.

Men should make conscience of private actions, much more of public
adventures, which are of grand consequence (as the undertakings in war) and not
to be done rashly, slovenly, slightly, and indifferently. Nor may public
Counselors, or Ministers of State like Achitophel think they do wisely, or
safely, because they go with the vogue and stream of times, with the wind, and
tide, or humor of some people, in their prevalent Factions, discontents, and
clamors, by which vote Christ himself was crucified, Mark 15. 13.

Common people in their Paroxismes, or fits of discontent, like sick and pained
patients, are ill Dictators to their Physicians; who must advise better for
them than they would for themselves; else they will heal their hurts very
slovingly, slowly, and ill-favouredly, to their own sin and reproach as well as
others pain and charge; Nor is it enough for Aarons excuse to say, The people
are set upon mischief; when they would needs Exodus 32. 22.
have him make them visible Egyptian Gods, to go before them, under the figure
of a golden calf, to be instead of their true and invisible God: public
Persons, and Honorable Counselors, (as Joseph of Ari^^thea) must not go ( qua
^tur, Luke 93. 53.
sed qua eundum) as peoples fury, or the prevalent Factions drives them: but as
the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land direct them; else they shall bear
not only their one, but the iniquity of their people, who sin and suffer
unwarned and naked, hurt and unhealed, upon Ezekiel 33.
the account of such cowardly Counselors, and corrupt Magistrates, or
Ministers of State; all whose wisdoms will come to naught; and they 1 Cor. 2.
6.
will at length (like Achitophel) be snared in 2 Samuel 17. 23
the halters of their own twisting.

3. Those Priests and Prophets; those Pastors 3 Priests and Prophets, Pastors
and Ministers slight Healers.
and Teachers, those Bishops and Presbyters, who are in Public Place, and
sacred Authority, as to the things of God; the matters of Religion, and men's
souls good: These heal slightly, when they do the Work of God negligently; when
they skin 1 Samuel 2. 22.
over scandalous public sins, (as Ely to his Sons, with soft reproof; when
they sow pillows under Princes, Parliaments, and peoples elbowes, when Ezekiel.
13. 18.
they fear the face and offense of men, more than of God; when they are workmen
that need to be ashamed, their Lives and Actions confuting their Instructions;
and their doing, making their Doctrine to blush; when they heal public
Enormities or calamities by I know not what novel Inventions, and magic spells
of fine words: which are no better than the powder of a post; compared to the
approved Catholic prescriptions of 1600 years, which were sovereign for Clergy
and Laity; to preserve order and unity; soundness of doctrine, and
ins^andalousness of manners in the Church of Christ, under Christian Kings and
Queens (who were bountiful nursing Fathers, and Mothers, to the Church of
Christ, and the Clergy): yet not by the Dominion and pomp, luxury and tyranny
of Bishops, nor yet by the Factious and refractory humors of Presbyters; much
less by the schismatic sauciness of people, who cast off both Bishops and
Presbyters; but by the fatherly gravity, prudence, and Eminence of godly and
Reverend Bishops; by the brotherly assistance, and son-like subordination of
sober and orderly Presbyters, by the service and obsequiousness of humble and
diligent Deac^^^; and by the meek submission of Christian people to the Care,
Monition, Council, and respective Superiority of every order; as sheep to their
Chief Shepherds, and their Assistants, o^ The Harmony which ought to be in the
Church, in order to Healing.
Attendants.

Divide this chain of Church-Union, Order and Communion, in vain shall we talk
of bealing the Flock of its scabs and scratches, or hurts; I confess, that I
own, and ever shall do, Primitive Episcopacy with Presbitery; so that as St.
Paul speaks in another case, Neither of them should be without the other in the
Lord; Neither of them oppressed or extirpated, but so regulated and encouraged,
as I believe, all moderate and learned men desire; if it be my fault and
Error, that I prefer this Holy and Catholic Composition before any other late
simple receipts of Church Government, by which to heal any Church; Truly I ow
this my Judgment to all the Councils, to all the Fathers, to all the
Church-Historians, to be best witnesses of truth in all times, who have
unanimously conspired to lead me into this Opinion; agreeable to the word of
God, the Example of Christ, the practice of the Apostles, and the parallel
Customs of all Churches* which is, besides, mightily confirmed in me by the
misdom, Piety, and Prosperity of this Church under good Bishops, since its.
Reformation, which none in the world exceeded, for health and happiness, for
sound and sincere Christians, till some men's itching and scratching too much
(even till the blood came)* and others, either not applying seasonable Salves,
or else sharper Remedies than perhaps were necessary (or prescribed by the
wisdom of our Church and Laws) have festred the ^urts and sores of Religion,
that they now feem almost incurable, till such ^^nds are by Gods goodness
applied, and such Medicines used, as are most proper for a sick* and diseased
Church: which hands and Medicines I cannot think ought to be Secular, but
rather Ecclesiastic.

Such in a free Synod of learned Divines Of Ecclesiastical Council, or Free
Synods.
should, as a College of spiritual Physicians, advise and prepare; (for there
is as much need of calling for free Synods, as Free Parliaments) The want of
the former G. Naz. deplores as the occasion of so much Faction and Vexation in
the Church in his times. Laymen, though learned, able and honest, have enough
to do in Lay-matters. Churchmen have nothing left them to do, as to Secular
Councels, or State Concernments, and therefore ought not to be excluded from
their proper sphere, Church affairs; being the best skilled of any men (else
they are ill employed in the things of God) for the searching, supplying, and
healing the hurts of the Church, and true Religion, in its Doctrine,
Discipline, Order, Unity and Authority; That maxim is true of the Clergy, as
well as of other Orders of men, Unicuique credendum est in sua art, Every man
is most to be credited in what he is most skilled. I am sure (as to the point
of Physicians) no people that are wise, and would be healed in good earnest,
but are careful to get the best and ablest, unless they undervalue their
health and lives, and to save charges will venture to dye.

Fourthly, They; that is, Those Soldiers Soldiers and Commanders slight
healers.
and Military men, Chief Commanders and Others under them; these heal but
slightly, when either they will be (as the Clowns all-heal) the only
Professors of State Physic, and undertake all cures in Church and State, or
else they think and act, as if there is no such way to heal soundly, as to make
greater wounds and bruises, by irreconcilable distance, preposterous power, and
violent impressions, even on those that both commissionate them, and recompense
them.

They are Iron Heads, Brazen Faces, and Stony Hearts, who cry, that Might
gives Right; And all power is of God, (though unjustly gotten, and so used
against the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land: such a commission the Devil
may boast of, as well as any evil doers, but little to the comfort of either:
when men's will is their only warrant in Law, and sad successes their only
security in Conscience; when Soldiers make their backs and bellies the
Commonwealth, putting their Interest of pay and power into the balance against
all others, when they are but as the dust of the balance to the weight of the
Nation, for numberand estates. When men of War know not the way of peace, but
only to avoid it, seeking to make themselves necessary by keeping the wounds
open, and the sores raw of a Nation; pleading necessity and native Liberty, and
I know not what Good Old Cause, or Metaphysical godly interests, unknown to our
Lawer or forefathers; and it had been happy if we never had known them.

Lastly, When Military men are injurious, rapacious, and insolent, lovers of
themselves more than of God or the Church or their Country; when they look
more to their Guns, and Pistols than to God or godliness, to their swords than
to his Word, and to the Riddles of Providence more than the Rules of
conscience: resolved to sacrifice the daughter of their people, as Agamemnon
did Iphigenia, or Jephta his, on the Altar of the Military interest.

These will be smart and chargeable beatens of the hurts of the daughter of
their people, when they shall be such as prepare Wan^^ against any that speak
of Peace, when such as esteem the speedy healing of their Country, to the
public peace, to be their greatest hurt, when they grow so desperate, as they
had as live be damned as fairly disbanded, though in order to the public ease
and tranquillity.

When as no good Soldier that either fears God or loves his Country, or
reverences the Church, or hopes to save his own Soul, but will most seriously
strive to avoid the latter, and most willingly submit to the former* without
the sin of Rebellion or Mutiny, being content with his wages; and more, that
his sharp work is at an end, and no more need of cutting and lancing,
remembering that it is not multitude, or Power, or Armies, or (...) that shall
keep injurious and dissolute Souldier^ from the vengeance of God, when they
have deserved it by such wicked Counsels and Actions, as cannot be carried on
but with the Devils maxim ( Scelera sceleribus tuenda) continued injuries and
cruelties to the daughter of their people, to Church and State, to their
brethren and Country men; yea, to their fathers and posterity.

But our hope is, that God has by his sore rebukes and defeats of some (who
trusted too The present hope of better things from Soldiers.
much in their swords and spears, in their own Arms and their horses legs)
taught others more wisdom, justice and modesty; yea, and stirred up such a
spirit of Christian valor, moderation and honor in some gallant Soldiers of
more just Principles and nobler Spirits, that they will not rest till they have
put the hurts of the daughter of their people (which are now chronick or
inveterate, of many years continuance, and very deep, reaching from head to
feet) into such a posture of healing, and into such healers hands as may be
best able and honest; on which account as these Soldiers (who can do nothing
against the truth and Law, against Church and State but for them) will deserve
2 Cor. 13. 6^
great honor and rewards from the Nation, and its Parliaments full and free:
So people must blame themselves, if they chase for Healers or Physicians such
men as are neither for wisdom and skill, nor for courage or conscience, nor for
honesty or virtue, nor for good example or reputation, or yet for well gotten
estates of any value, or public interest; nor ever probable to heal others,
since themselves are sick and sore either of fear and guilt, or of Schism and
Faction, or of superstition and sacrilege, or of Rebellion and Anarchy, or of
the itch of novelty, and mange of popularity, or of the plague, of immorality
and debauchery: From such Healers, both Civil, Sacred, and Military, so
unhealed, so unwholesome, so infectious, so destructive to Church and State, to
Law and Gospel, to Justice and Religion, good Lord deliver the daughter of my
people.

5 Lastly, Not only these unskilful, or unfaithful, 5 The patient blamable for
its own slight healing.
or unwilling persons of public influence, are blamable for not healing the
hurts of a Nation, when they have authority and opportunity as well as power:
or for healing so slightly, that things are never the better, nay worse and
worse. But further, there lies no small sin and blame upon the Patient, the
people or community; First, when they are not conscienciously careful, 1 By
not* carefully applying to good Physicians.
what Physicians or Surgeons they make choice of, and put themselves with their
lives and estates, liberties and laws, bodies and souls into their hands, but
adventure upon every pragmatique Emperick, and confident Undertaker.

Next, when this is done commendably (as truly I am prone to believe it was in
the first Elections of the long Parliament, if they could have quietly kept
together without tumultuating factions, and fatal divisions) for people then
not to acquiesce (as they ought under God) in their skill and honesty, only
following them with such modest Petitions, as are necessary, and such
complaints as are comely: also with their prayers to God for a blessing. But
for the populacy, then to cluck into parties and conspiracies, according 2 By
popular conspiracies against them.
to the cunning of some Agitators for novelty, and factors for troubles, then
to break out into tumultuary rudenesses and seditious menaces, and at last to
become dictators to their Physicians, and like gonty feet to threaten the head
and shoulders and hands, if they be not cured of their anguish after their own
fancy, not after the Rules of Art and Law of Health: ^ These are so far from
being Healers, that they are the greatest hinderers of their own and others
public health in the world; yea, the venom and acrimony of these fretting
and turbulent humors, sub^idy diffused among the divided vulgar, and by their
means re-infused into the public hurts and real grievances, cannot but
strangly increase the malignity of distempers throughout the The danger of
popular distempers.
whole habit of the body; which (...) pestilent and depraved state of the
generality of the people, divided and distracted (like Demoniacks, or
possessed) with fears and jealousies, with envies and hatred, with hopes, and
other unreasonable passions, is much harde^ ^o be c^red, and more dangerous to
the public than the disaffection or inflammation; the discontent or ambition
of any one part of the body, which is easily corrected or counter-ballanced
with the Antid^te, as it were of all other sound parts, which are far the major
number.

When therefore a s^ok Nation has done Peoples due regard and submission to
their right Physicians, full and free Parliaments.
its duty in the choice of its ^^ealers* The way is to ass^^^ the Honor and
Authority of those orderly Physicians, not to suffer any intruding Empyricks,
or extruding Mountebanks, by fraud or force to drive these away, that way may
be made for their cruel activity and unsatiable gain; It will prove an endless
and costly cure, which permits it self to every one that has a mind to be
tampering? The best way is, patiently to submit to their own Parliamentary
choice, and to Gods dispensation by their means: In this way there is hope, if
people can be still, they may see the Salvation of God: Patients will make mad
work if they may control and ^^dgel their Physicians.

Although, it is possible that the crying sins Some sins may keep the hurts of
a (...) ^^cur^^^.
committed in a Nation may be such that no (...) means can cure its sores, and
ma^ms; especially, if the noblest, and most vital parts of the body being cut
off, or grievously w^^^ded, there be a clamor of blood unjustly ^^ied, crying
to heaven for vengeance; which vengeance if a Nation will hope to escape, and
be healed, they must be sure not to ad^pt the sin by after (...) or (...); But
rather so publicly to (...) ^^ in (...) of R^pentance, as it may not be
imputed to the whole Nation, and then Posterity* As the desp^ra^e (...) (...),
His blood be upon (...) 27. 25.
us and our children, in the (...) ^^ christ's being put to death, by envy and
faction; by popular clamors, and State policies, when against all justice of
God and man, yea, against the since and conscience of Pilate, none of the
juste^^ judges, he was condemned to dye, to gratify a popular and military
importunity; to which some Scribe^ and Pharisees, Hypocrites, together with some
covetous and ambitious Priests, had exalted the credu^o^s and cruel common
people, who are pron^ to (...) in the Tragic executions, and (...) of their
betters and Superiors; a^ a kind of victory over the others greatness, and a
levelling of eminent honor to their own meanuess and ^a^eness.

6. But, ^t is now time for me, in order, to give way Part. 6. The true method
of sound ^ealing.
to the pains of my learned, and reverend Success^^, and to avoid the tyring of
your patience, at the first Stage, when you are to g^ a second* ^^ is time (I
say) for me to bring up the Ro^^, and to present you in the Sixth particular,
with the (...) s^^andi methodus, the true method of public cures, of healing
the hurts of the Da^ghte^ of my people, in Church or State.

For the precipitan^, preposterous, or presumpteous neglect of which, these
Medieasters are here blamed, reproached, and threatened by the Spir^^ of God;
with whose Phila^thropy (as with (...) good man) that politic and indeed pio^^
(because charitable maxim bears s^^y; (...) (...) suprem^ l^x, The (...)
(...) the (...) in all its integral members, and essential parts, as compacted
by the constitution and order of the public polity, is the supreme Law, rule,
measure, and end of all just Councels and honest actions, which aim at the
health or healing of a Nation.

As (...) is (...), Beauty is the due proportion of parts, with decent color;
So (...) Health cousists ((...) in the harmony, and orderly constitution of all
the humors, and parts of the body; That nothing necessary for the well being of
the whole be wanting; That all grand defects be supplied: That what is weak be
strengthened, what is dislocated be restored to its place; That there be no
dividing of what should be united: That, what is divided be gently closed, and
composed; That there be no such redundancy, or overgrowing of any humor or
tumor in any p^^^, as to rob and weaken others; or to swell and exceed in
themselves; or to deform and inflame the whole.

In brief, the true and safe method of healing effectually the hurt of the
daughter of my people, is,

1. Medicos optimos accersendo, By calling to her 1 By putting themselves into
the hands of good Physicians, able and honest.
help wise and worthy Physicians, (as I have formerly touched); men of skill
and experience, of Honesty and Ability, of honor and conscience, who prize a
public Good Work above any (...); and think it the highest temporal reward, to
do their country good, in which they serve their God, and their Savior, the
Church and State. they must be Physicians that are not by much study and
practice run out to Atheism (as some corn in lasty ground does to straw and
halm) but such as know what belongs to ( Religio medici) the piety of a
Christian, as well as the mystery of a Physician; my meaning is, people must
take special care in their choice of Parliament Men, that they be not
Mechanic, or Mercenary, or Military obtruders of themselves, who have much to
get and l^^tle to lose by troubles, whose fortunes and estates must be vampt
and mended by their practice upon the Church and State; But such Gentlemen of
quality and repute, for wel-gotten and wel-used estates, that they may deserve
to be esteemed Heads and Fathers of their Tribes, and not the Tails or
Posteriors, as the Scripture speaks to the reproach of some public persons;
Such in whom the Country may have sufficient caution and security for their
love of Justice, Order, and Peace, by what they have to venture and lose in
tumults, wars and oppressions: Commonly desperate minds attend desperate
fortunes; and the motto of such is Quocunque modo rem, and oportet habere. The
( multis utile bellum) hoped advantages, (as Lucan observes in the Cesaria^,
and Salust in the (...), and Appian in the other Civil Wars) is the spark,
fuel and bellows for the most part to civil perturbations; private not
public interests are usually looked at. For how can it be that the full and
sound parts of the body Politic should hope to mend their condition by war,
any more than men that are well, and not de^^rant or raving in a Feavor and
madness should by bruising, and beating, and cutting, and wounding themselves
and all that are near them, expect to make themselves more strong, or more
comely.

. 2. When the Patient has done himself so much right as to get good
Physicians, able and honest, for the public care:

Their work is, First, Morbum decernere, and The Physicians right discerning
the disease and thoroughly searching the wounds.
vulnera, perserutari, to find out the true disease* to search the wounds
througly, and impartially, yet with as little pain and disorder to the Patient
as may be, with a clear and judicious eye, with a gentle but faithful hand,
with a tender, but honest heart; neither Physicians passion, nor compassion,
must divert them from doing their duty.

. It is the first step, and a good advance to health, to know truly what the
hurts and disease is; herein to be only conjectural, (...) over-confident, or
fearful, or perfunctory, or palliating, or complying, not daring to search and
discover the ( pudenda vulnera) shameful wounds, and ( lethales morbos) deadly
diseases, which are discerned in the Patient, but with smiles, and fair words,
with healing questions, with Physical or Anatomical lectures about Government,
as with lingering lenitives, and petty cordials, to supple and skin them over,
to silence and smother them, with crying peace, peace, till we have done our
work, which is to undo you and all men but our selves; or for State Physicians,
so to regard by a superpolitick policy, the several partial novel and pretended
interests, that have been or are on foot, as to take in among others, even that
of the very disease, as if it were to be considered other ways than to be
cured, as if it must be continued, tolerated and indulged, yea and fed as a
Wolf or Cancer, in the body or breast, with good nourishment, least it prey upon
the whole body.

. This is for Physicians to be afraid, and Of fainthearted, foolish, ^alse and
flattering Physicians.
overawed by the Malignancy, and predominancy of the disease; at this rate, (
Grex totus in agris, Unius scabie perit and porrigine porci) the whole herd, or
flock must be infected; the patient will be like Gehazi, condemned to an
eternal plague and Leprosy of civil dissentions and oppessions, of war, and
its black consequences. Physicians after this course must turn very fools, and
become parasites to putrefactions; if they dare not own, or cannot attaque
either the sourse and head of the disease, or the streams and potency of it,
what do they meet and sit and consult (or rather constult) together? they had
as good cast their caps, as thus lay their heads together, when they have no
mind to do the work, nor courage to go through with the cure.

. Not but that all great and noble cures (not miraculous) are the children of
time and discretion; for a while the sons of Zerviah were too hard for David;
and Solomon did not those acts of remarkable Justice against Joabs, and
Shi^eis, and Abiathars factious Priests, insolent Soldiers, and cursed cursers,
until the Kingdom was strengthened in his hand; but this is certain, as Christ
did not raise to life Jarus his daughter till the Minstrils were all Matthew. 9.
23.
turned out; So nor can the daughter of my people be recovered to firm and sure
health, till all pretended Civil Interests are by degrees, either satisfied, if
just, or crushed, quashed and removed, if not consistent with our Reformed
Religion, also with the Laws of the Land, and the fundamentals of our excellent
Government, which are the true principles of public health; and till all
Religious or Ecclesiastical pretended Interests are so tried and examined (for
many say they are Jews that are not, Rev. 2. 9.
and cry up their new Church ways; when they may be but factors for the
Synagogue of Satan; vaporing of Christ, and the Spirit, when they are
Antichrists, and full of unclean spirits) till I say, all these, on all hands
be faithfully reduced and subjected to the grand interest of God, and of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which consists in Justice and true Religion: The measure of
the first is our Laws enacted in full and free Parliaments: The rule of the
second are clear truths of Scripture, which set forth the ( facienda) morals
necessary to be ^one by all to all men; the ( credenda) mysteries of Faith
necessary to be believed, also the special practiques of Christian Piety and
Charity, of Worship and good works, which are to be exercised decently and in
order by all Christians in public as well as private: Till these be settled
Healing of the Church and Religion.
there is no hope of soundness or health in Church or State.

. Now of these things which properly tend Lev. 13, and 14.
to the health of the Church, and the right constitution of Religion in piety
and polity, for Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, I humbly conceive
(as the Priests of old were by God appointed to be Judge and Physician of the
plague of Leprofie) the Clergy or Evangelical Ministry are fittest men to
discern the distempers, and to prepare those plasters or applications, which
by the sanction of the civil Magistrate, may best be laid to the Patient, or
the parts affected.

. And here for any part to plead that it may Of scandalous toleration in
matter^ of Religion.
have liberty or toleration for that, which by public advice, and upon due
search is found to be such as is prone to endanger, or disorder, and infect the
whole body with that itch, and scab, or scalling humor, which that part
pleases it self to scratch and scatter, this is such a presumptuous motion as
ought not to be made by any Patient, nor granted by any Physicians, who have
either justice or charity for the ( salus publica) common welfare* none
inclining to those sad indulgences but they who have neither ability nor
authority to cure the hurt and disease; but must to their shame cry out (
Morbus superat artem, and Chyr^rg^^^ vulnus) the ill humors are too strong for
the best Physicians, and the ulcers conquer the Chyrurgeons* Truly in such
deplorable cases, where not the disease, but the Physicians are desperate, as
in the raging plague, the way is to shut up the doors of the Physicians
College, and the Chyrurgeons Hall, and write upon them in behalf of Church and
State ( Miserere Domine) Lord have merey (...) and for nothing remains in so
deplored and desperate cases, where Healers cannot or will not do their work;
but the prayers and patience of the poor Patient, the miserable daughter of my
people; as in a State where either the disease is ( contemptor artis) a
despiser of all remedies; or the Patient is of nothing more impatient than to
be well cured; or the Physicians are of nothing more afraid than to make too
speedy and sincere a cure.

Thirdly, But if Physicians of the daughter of The practice o^ sincere and
speedy healing
my people are so blessed of God, and encouraged by the Patient, that they may
freely and do seriously apply to their work of public healing; ^. To purge a.
way what is noysom.
they have but these main things to do. 1. Noxia and morbifica purgare;
discreetly to facilitate, and constantly to follow the purging away of the most
peccant and pestilent humors, which either are the main cause, occasion, or
increase and continuers of the hurt and disease: Here every presumptuous and
prevalent sin, which is most spread among the people, is to be repressed by
good Laws, and the due execution of them; when sins grow epidemical, and by the
multitude of commiters either threaten or plead their impunity, Psa. 119 126
they provoke God to punish what man does not; he takes the matter into his own
hand, when his Laws Moral and Evangelical are openly and impudently broken.

. Here it were good for Physicians of Church and State, in extraordinary
diseases, long distempers, and obstinate hurts, admitting no cure, such (as
those of the daughter of our people) are to make accurate search (as Joshua,
and David, and the Mariners in Jonah did) for what special cursed thing, or
crying sins sake all this evil, this long storm is come on us, and still so
continues for many years, as if there were no peace or calm to be expected; no
effectual Physician or cure to be had, till those Vipers teeth, or Serpents
stings be pulled out; till then no balm in Gilead will do us good.

. Doubtless every honest Englishman and good Christian would be glad of health
and peace to Church and State; whence then are our so dreadful wounds, so
raging humors, and our so dilatory healing? We must needs conclude (as he did
Matthew 13. 28.
of the Tares ( inimicus homo fecit) an enemy has done, begun, or augmented
this evil: Some whose bloody designs, and sacrilegious interests (as Achans and
Saul's) are contrary to the Word of God among us, and the vows or oaths of God
upon us; contrary to the principles of the Protestant and Reformed Religion,
which once so flourished in England, and contrary to the peace, honor and
freedom of this Nation, which some foraign and domestic Policies would bring
down as a Dromedary on its knees, that it might at length, take upon his back
the burden of foraign tyranny and usurpation, of Romish Trumpery and
superstition.

. Hence no doubt are our distempers so horribly inflamed, our healing so
cruelly protracted, our Physicians so shamefully baffled, our body so woefully
maimed; Hence our wounds are made so deep, and our abscissions so desperate,
that (according to Achitophels counsel, to make the breach irreconcilable
between Absalom and David) some things have been done to so high a rage and
exorbitant indignities, and so intolerable injuries, without any authority from
God or man, that they are not capable of full reparation, nor yet patient
(hitherto) to bear such a measure of public repentance or reparation, as are
not only most just but most necessary for the appeasing Gods wrath, and for the
perfect healing of the Nation, without which there can be no soundness of
constitution, no compleatness of parts, no decency of motion in the Body
Politic or Ecclesiastic. Nor will the wrath of God be turned away, but his
hand stretched out still.

. Here not only Justice must be so done, to take away the guilt and curse from
the Nation of crying and notorious sins; but also such penitent deprecations,
and compensations as (are possible, and) may best expiate those horrid sins,
which are and ever will be (while unrepented, uncorrected, and uncured) the
maim and ulcer, the sin and shame, the defect and deformity; yea, the
consumption and death at last of the daughter of my people: For tragical
Judgments sooner or later follow tragical sins; and presumptions bring a a
Nation to consumptions; England will never be it self, till it does it self
this right, both in honor and conscience, in Reason of State, and for the
repute of the Reformed Religion; from whose face such black and bloody stains
must be washed if ever she will appear lovely to the world, and not as the
Whore of Babylon, who was drunk as well as besmeared with blood. All the
inventions and projects of making supplies and amends by some other
Commonwealth way, is no better than getting a wooden leg, or hands of clouts,
instead of such as are natural; or as ^ bolster of g^ats hair instead of David:
The body cannot have ease or orderly motion, or beauty and complexion, till
every part is restored to its place, office and proportion.

2. When the venom and core of the main distempers 2. To apply such who e^om
medicines as are tried and p^oper.
is removed, the next work of a wise Physician and Chyrurgeon, is, Sana
Medicamina applicare, to follow the Patient with wholesome medicaments, as are
(1) probata, approved upon the file of long experience, (2) propria and
specifica, as apt, proper, and specific, as can be had, considering the genius
and constitution of the Patient; also the original, continuance and progress of
the disease; cures are by contraries; those medicines M^dels of new Governments
^heal not.
will most certainly help, which most encounter the principal causes of our
maine disease; and are proper antidotes, against the malignity of our sores.

. It is but the capricious and ridiculous conceit of some fine men who want
employment, to send this now languishing State of England, and the other two
adjacent, ancient and united Kingdoms, to Mars his hill in Athens, or to the
Lacedemonian Sparta, or to the Roman Capitol, or to the Venetian Arsenal, or to
the State-house of the low Countries, and so to send the Church to Geneva,
Edinbrough, or Amsterdam, as if we were Churches or Nations of yesterday, in
our bibs and swaddling clouts, to be dandled in the laps of such dry nurses, and
this in order (for sooth) to learn some unwonted models of civil and
Ecclesiastical Government, which like new garments will hardly fit, for they
will be either uneasy because too straight, or unhansome because too loose.

. Doubtless in Governments, that Scripture Proverb of Wine holds true, the
elder is the better, Luke ^. 29.
if it have not lost its spirits, especially when not only time and use, but
great wisdom had proportioned it to the true interests of the Nation, and of
all estates in it, which follow much the genius of the people, if they be
either soft, slavish and pesantly, as in some countries, Government must fit the
genius of people.
or robust, manly, and generous, as in England; the first will easily croutch
under any burden, and truckle under any prevalent power; the second is hardly
contained in any bounds but those that are Soveragine, and Imperial, by way of
monarchical, yet legal Majesty, which having something in it nearer the Divine
Idea, than any other way of Government, by the perfection of wisdom guiding
power, and power assisting wisdom, is only fit to govern those Nations, whose
high spirits are impatient to be ridden by their equals, much more*to have
their inferiors to become not only their rivals, but superiors. When the
Cappadocians had leave to be a Province, or popular State, under the Roman
Empire, they refused the freedom, and craved the favor of having a King to
rule them, as they ever had, time out of mind, professing the temper of the
people was such, that they would not be subject to any, but those in whom
Majesty was so concentred, by the Laws and customs of the Nation, that they
could without shame and disdain, pay an homage as subjects to them.

. Herein experience has been, and will be Novel essays of Go^vernment
dangerous.
our teacher; but then it will be and has been as Hippocrates begins his
Aphorisms, (...), a costly, painful difficult and dangerous experiment, and if
at last it do not fit the Genius temper and desire of these Nations, so as to
ease them of their terrors and vast charges of civil War, to free them of the
fear of Enemies at home, and abroad, to settle them in such peace and plenty,
as many yet remember they enjoyed before the flood of our civil wars, to open
the obstructions of trade, and those veins of industry, by which the body is
maintained, by the secret circulation of commerce, as of the blood; if all
these Symptoms, Concomitants, or effects of health, do not follow the essays
of new forms of Government, alas what do we all the while, but keep the
daughter of our people upon the rack of pain and expense, using a kind of a
State Strappado, by which to bring the arms to hang backwards, rather than
forwards, so as they can neither lift up themselves to their head, nor yet
defend and help the body or themselves, so by a dreadful convulsion, to bring
all things of ancient order, honor, and beauty in the nation, to the
distractions and deformities, which must needs attend such novelties as are not
proper for the public, nor practicable without continued force, and endless
charge.

3. Their healing medicines must be plenaria, and To apply Catholic^ and
completing medicines.
Catholica, such as may in time do the work completely, yet with leisure and
discretion (For momentary cures, are only miraculous,) So as carefully to
preserve the good spirits und humors, to strengthen the sound parts yet
remaining, to follow the grand crises of the disease, and the indications of
health, which way evil humors are easiest discussed; breathed out, or purged,
still conserving the two main principles, pillars, and supports of health, life
and subsistence in the body politic, the radicale humidum (as I call it)
Psalm. 144. 14
which is plenty, by trade and industry, that there be no crying out, nor
complaining, by those whose mouths cannot eat if their hands be idle. 2. That
calidum radicale, the sacred fire, or celestial flame, which Prometheus is said
to have kindled in mankind, which shines in reason and religion, in Justice by
good Laws well executed by Magistrates, and in devotion by the holy public
worship of God, solemnly discharged by able and autoritative Ministers; both
which are the grand designs of good learning, which is the souls school for
improvement and education, during its minority or absence from its Fathers
house, till it comes to vision and fruition, which sets it beyond all learning,
but that of the Fathers glorious example.

. No civil laws can be wholesome for the public which do enterfeer with true
Religion; which either rob God, or his Church, or his Vicegerents, and
Ministers, or his poor, of what is their due; nor can any Ecclesiastical laws
be healthful, which cross the civil laws, and authority, so, as to bring in
licentionsness, injuriousness, rebellion, or any thing that is for Doctrine
fanatic, or for practice injust and immoral, all which like poysonons
touchings, or unwholesome feedings, are destructive to the public health.

. The perfect healing of the Church and Religion, Of Ecclesiastical Synods to
heal a Church.
as Christian and reformed (whose divisions, hurts and deformities are many)
will hardly be done without calling those spiritual Physicians together, after
the primitive pattern in Ecclesiastical Synods or National Councils, who are
best skilled Acts 15. 6
in the true state of health, in the nature of the diseases, and in the aptest
remedies, which in Religion ought to be very humane and charitable, convincing
with meekness of wisdom, and healing as much by prayers and tears as by
reasonings and persuasions. I confess I cannot see how a Committee of
Parliament for Religion is proper for this work, further than to be (...); the
promoters of it, when put into fit hands of able Ministers.

. Herein, the first grand work is to bring us to be again one National Church;
from which honor and happiness we fell as Lucifer from heaven, when some men's
ambition affected to make the chief Magistrate of a Commonwealth to be similis
al^issimo, as high as the highest in three Kingdoms, which unity of this
Church, those have sought most subtly to divide, whose interests and purposes
was to destroy it; that by balancing of parties they might better keep up
themselves, as dancers on the rope are wont to do. This restoring of the Church
to its pristine unity, is to be done by such an harmony of Doctrine, as may be
publicly owned and confessed, by such an uniform way of worship, as shall be
publicly recomcomended and eneouraged; by such an authoritative and orderly
Church Government among Bishops, Presbyters and People, as may carry on the
Discipline of the Church, for Ordination and Censure, with gravity and honor,
with piety and charity, redeeming both holy things, and the Ministers of them,
from that vulgar insolency and Plebeian contempt, under which they are fallen
and have long lain, either by their own indiscretion, levity and divisions; or
by the petulaney, force, or fraud of others, whose aim is to have no Presbyters
as well as no Bishops, yea and no Churches of the Reformed Religion.

. That lenitive of equanimity, forbearance, and moderation, in respect of
conscientious Dissenters charitable ration.
from the public consent, customs and constitutions in the Church (which
Christian charity requires, and public peace with safety may bear) will best
be prepared and applied, when we fully see what is noxious, malicious and
intolerable; what is only inconvenient, and imprudent, or infirm, and venial in
men's opinions and pretensions; to be sure such a wise method may be used, and
such a course taken, to have able Ministers, and honest Magistrates concur in
their judgment and joint endeavors, that the Justice of the one, and the
gentleness of the other; the ability and sanctity of both in their places and
performances, may be such, as shall render the established Religion so
venerable and conspicuous as will in a few years draw all sober men to it, when
they shall see nothing in it, but what is for the main conformable to Gods
Word, and necessary either for the being or wel-being of Humane and Christian
Societies.

. As Civil, so Ecclesiastical hurts are best (that is, Civil hurts healed by
recourse to the Laws.
soonest, easiest and surest healed) revertendo ad leges bonas and antiquas) by
returning (as the wounded Heart to Dictamnum) to those Laws and Canons which are
not therefore ( bonae quia antiquae; but therefore antiquae, quia bonae* in
which the aequum, and unum, and bonum make the vetustum) Their verity, equity
and piety gave rise to their antiquity; and their antiquity gave reverence and
solemnity to their equity or goodness; It Is certain, there can be no complete
health in the body till every part, every limb, every vein, every vessel does
its Office in due time and place; irregularities must be rectified, defects
supplied, excesses repressed, ill humors purged, and all reduced by Law to good
order.

. A blessed work, and to be done with as Of I ni ives and moderatin in healing
much Moderation and gentleness as the fidelity of the cure will permit, and
the spreading of the disease does require; wherein many parts may by weakness
or by nearness to the ( fons morbi) the first peccant or ill affected part,
have contracted sad distempers; which will easily be cured of their anguish if
the evil neighborhood be mended: Here generous and gracious remissions are just
and Christian, to misled multitudes, and to such whose penitent errors show
they were not of malice, but credulity and mistake, who are more zealous now
for health, than ever they were to be debauched and disordered, so much to
their own and the public affliction.

. Acts of pardon, Amnesty, or Oblivion, are Acts of Oblivion.
excellent lenitives, (Publico bonotam publicae quam privatae simultates and
injuriae sunt condonandae, to pardon as well public as private losses and
injuries to the public peace, to interpret the intent and meaning of either
side to have been good, who persist not in evil; the zeal of some to maintain
their Loyalty to the King, for which they thought they had the clearest
commands of Gods Laws and man's; The zeal of others, to preserve the lawful
privileges, and fixed authority of Parliaments, against any thing, that by
violent overthrowing of those, must needs hazard the overthrow of all; possibly
neither of these parties might be so bad or blameable, as to the first
intentions, but that they may easily be reconciled in the medium which both
first professed to intend, namely King and Parliament, settled laws and
established Religion; if this had been kept to, the quarrel had been soon ended
in Church and State; the misery was that by jealousies and misunderstandings,
the passions and transports of both sides, might so overbear them, as to
occasion those sad conflicts and consequences upon both, which neither of them
at first intended, but deprecated and detested; mean time while humors were in
motion, new and unexpected diseases got head, under the name of interest of
State, of liberty and common equity, which had no law, little reason or
Religion.

. So, between the Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Independent Parties, much of the
acidness and sharpness of the humor would be allayed, if this Poltice of
charitable censure and interpretation were applied one all sides that the first
did but aim to maintain the order and eminency of presidential Episcopacy,
which was so universal, so ancient, so primitive, so apostolical, and so
prosperous in the Church of Christ; the second designed only to bring
Episcopacy to such a paternal temperament with Presbytery, that the whole
Clergy of a Diocese, and the concerns of Religion, might not be exposed to one
man's sole jurisdiction, without the such joint counsel, consent and assistance
of Ministers, as is safest for Bishops Presbyters, and People; the third of
Independents' or Congregationists, which seemed to stickle for' the iuterests
of people in religious transactions, where their souls are so much concerned,
what Minister they have, and how both he and others of their congregation
behave themselves, either to the edification and comfort, or the scandal and
grief of that part or members of the Church, with which they actually
congregate and communicate. It seems but agreeable to the ancient usage of the
Churches of Christ, in St. Cyprians, Tertullians, and Ireuaeus his time, that
no public transactions, much less impositions, touching Religion, should be
made, without fairly aquainting the Clergy and Christian people too with the
grounds and reasons of them, that Church Government, might not seem to be a
tyranny, or an 1 Pet. 53.
arbitrary and absolute domineering over the faith and consciences of Christ's
flock, but a mutual and sweet conspiring of the Shepherds with the sheep, to
make each other happy* in truth and love, by orderly authority, and due
subordination.

. I should be glad to see the beams of this candor, this kindness, this
charity, shine in all faces Charity and candor among Christians.
from all sides, that the Shiboleths of different dialects and designs, the
carnal and unhappy discriminations of I am of Paul, I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas, might be laid aside, by being all for and of Christ, who is not, and
ought not, and 1 Cor. 1. 12 and ^, 3
cannot, either truly in himself, or comfortably as to any Christians and
churches be divided; let all, like straight lines from the several points of
the circumference, be drawn true to the center of Gods glory, the public
peace, and the good of souls; no doubt we shall by meeting in those, come so
nigh to each other, that all will rejoice in the harmony and concurrence, who
do not seek the ruin of this Church, and the reformed Religion; and indeed the
differences of honest Protestants are but small, compared to the bonds of union
in which they do agree, as to doctrinals, morals, and essentials; nor are we
hard I hope to be reconciled as to prudentials, if we could meet freely, debate
soberly, and submit humbly to the public votes and results of the Major part
of Parliaments and Synods, without which submission, all counsels, and all
government, depending upon suffrages, must needs be vain, and dissolved either
into Tyranny or Ataxy, as the learned Grotius observes, in his Batavick
history, (Restat ut pauciores pluribus cedant; hoc uno stant populorum Lib. 17.
p, 115*
imperia, aliter casura.)

. To conclude, let every one keep in Gods Follow holiness, and peace will
follow.
way, which is the way of peace and holiness, of duty to God and man let good
Christians entertain good thoughts, and give good words to each other; good
air conduceh much to recovery; uncharitable speeches, and sinful courses
(which are but halitus Diaboli, the breath of the Divil, or the exhaltation of
our own foul hearts, or the eructations of hell) render the very air, in which
men live unwholesome, and the very Senates or Synods, where such men meet, grow
infective by foul lungs and putid breaths.

. Let us privately mourn over the daughter of Mourn for sins
our people for the hurts, which our sins have either first inflicted on her,
or deserved for her, or festred and inflamed, or at least hindered from healing,
by childish peevishness, or popular pertinacies, or Sinister designs, or
politic jealousies; lay these aside, the work of healing will go on; for not
outward applications so much, as inward sound principles and honest persuasions
do heal; as the outward plasters and unguents or balsoms do not heal wounds by
adding any matter to the part, or the whole, but healing flows from an internal
native principle, so soon as the noxious humors are purged, and the proud or
dead flesh removed, which hinder the closure of parts, and the digesture of
good supplies.

. Lastly let us in patience and prayers possess Pray with patience.
our souls, and wait for the saving health of Gods salvation, who can best
ordain peace for us, who Isa. 2^* 12 Isa. 19. 20
has smittenus, and only can heal us, by allaying and composing, the spirits
of honest-meaning men, by making them to be of one mind, by suggesting good
counsels, which no passions shall stop, or private interests prevent, by
showing us the way of peace, and guiding us in it. It is time for us to accept
of the long punishment God has inflicted on us; take heed (like King Ahaz) of
sinning more and Lev. 26. 41
more in our affliction, by adding drunkeness to thirst, 2 Chronicles. ^8. 22
confusion to rebellion, and desolation to division.

. Do not listen to those charmers and cheaters Beware of false healers.
who will pretend you are healed, or the daughter of your people is not hurt,
or she is much mended, or she is not to be cured but only in those ways which
their popular, partial, tumultuary, bloody and violent heads have invented,
practiced, and pursued to the into lerable charge and anguish of the Nation.

. If it be public, perfect peace; peace (as some have pretended) if she be
indeed healed, whence are those ( moribundae palpitationes) deadly pantings and
fainting fits into which she falls so often? What means the running Issues, the
putid sores and purulent matter which daily is vented in such pamphlets of
scurrility, and papers of discontent as show the fedity, pain and shame of our
times and Nation? what a scorn and derision, what a hissing and ashonishment is
she become at home and abroad, by the impatience and contempt of those useless,
yea hurtful means which some Empiricks have rudely applied, and variously
tampered with!

. Ask all parts of the body politic if they Appeal to all esteats whether
healed.
be yet healed; what an Asthma or difficulty of breathing have we had since the
breath of our nostrils has been oppressed as to that order and government,
that sovereign public honor and highest authority which belongs to the
Nation, as its crown and glory, no less than those properties, Liberties and
Laws, or that industry, peace, and security, which are due to every private
honest man!

. Ask the Nobility, and Peers if they think themselves yet healed of the wounds
which some of their honor's received in Iezreel, when they gave themselves the
first great blow by separating their Spirituals from their Temporals, and
instead of grave, venerable Bishops (who had for many hundred years sat in
Parliament as Patres and Pares to counsel with them) they submitted their
honors to such Presbyters as affected to be not only their Confessors but their
Dictators!

, Ask the Gentry and Commons in Parliament, if they are yet fully healed of the
hurts which first tumults and afterward mutinies with armed force have made on
them.

. Ask the generality of the Clergy or Ministers (that are truly such) if they
are healed of the hurts which Schism and Heresy, profaneness and
licenciousness, Sacrilege and Ataxy, contempt and confusion, inordination and
new Ordinations have made upon all holy Orders and Offices, upon all public
duties of Religion and devotion: Particularly, Ask those poor, but worthy
Ministers (who flagrante bello, and in cautelam) were by way of caution (ne
noceant) or by way of castigation (quia nocuerunt) for some light offenses
sequestered from their Livings, and after silenced from all Officiating; whether
their punishment which was greater than their sin be yet taken off? whether
their first sequestration be not made a total and final deprivation of all
livelihood; and their Purgatory become an Hell, out of which is no redemption
by a summa justitia, which looks like summa injuria.

. Ask the whole People, when their Representatives or Deputies meet, as their
mouths, whether they are healed, or have any hope to be healed of those stabs
and wounds which Oaths and Covenants, and cross Engagements have made upon
their souls; by either ill taking the latter, or ill keeping the former* which
were thefirst just and lawful ones, which no Pope or People can dispense withal.

Ask all degrees of men whether they are healed as to their Laws, Liberties,
Properties, Peace, Plenty, Estates and Trade, except it be very slightly, or
whether they expect to be soundly healed till such methods of healing are taken
by wise, honest, impartial, authoritative, free and unanimous Physicians, as
may bring them to those tried and good applications, both for diet and physic
(both repenting what has been done amiss, and returning to do what is just) by
which they enjoyed health so many years, without any considerable aches or
pains, which was easily and speedily remedied, by the justice and discretion of
honest Physicians, complete and conscientious Parliaments, with a learned and
godly Synod.

. You know the unanimous cry and vote of The sense of the Nation.
far the most and best people of the Nation is for healing, which shows that
they do not yet find themselves healed; the cries and complaints of poor and
rich, of great and small witness, We are not yet healed: All testify this so
loudly in Cities and Country, that none contradict it, but those who (as
Sylla's lice, or Herod's worms) feed on our soars, and hope to make a prey of
Church and State, of our Bodies, Estates and Souls by continuing the hurts,
putrefactions and miseries of both.

. Whose cruel policies and impressions I hope the mercy of God by the valor
and wisdom of godly men, will speedily (if our sins hinder not) frustrate and
defeat, when they see, that next our sins, the instruments of all our miseries
have been Fanaticorum spicula, Jesuitarum venen^ tincta: Fanatic darts and
arrows, dipped in the Jesuits poison.

. My only ambition and design in this freedom Necessary freedom to speak of
our hurts*
of my speaking to you, is, to help to heal and close hurts, and to arm you
against them for the time to come. It Is high time for every honest heart to make
use of a discreet tongue, pathetically to set forth with the Prophet the hurts
of the daughter of his people, to cry mightily to heaven and earth, to God and
man, to honest Counselors and just Commanders, to give us leave to use, or in
pity to put us into such hands, and such ways as may effectually and speedily
heal us, and not by a supine silence and sottish slavery suffer our selves, and
our posterity to wallow in our sanies or putid effluxions, or to sit for ever
on a dunghill, like Job, scraping our sores with potsheards, and there is none
to help us.

. We do not desire to be happier than our religion and laws would make us, and
did so Pristine health was best.
before might affronted right, and force cut the sinews of Justice, to put us
off with fine words, Good words ^eal not.
(godly phrases) and Saraphick fancys of cures, beyond the proportions of this
mortal condition, as if we must all be healed to Angelick perfections, and
setledby Mathematical ballancing of a Commonwealth, or a Church, beyond all
humane infirmities, or worldly vicissitudes; these are but the phil^ers and
delusions of those who meditate nothing less than a speedy and honest healing;
to which if my freedom used this day may any way contribute, who am (I thank
God) exempted from base fe^^s or flatteries of any man, I may hope that it will
not only be pardonable but acceptable to you, as from one that has no design
so upon his heart (next the saving of his soul,) as to see, before I dye, the
salvation of God in the right healing of the hurts of the daughter of my
people, both in Church and State (whose welfares are unseparable.) For this end
I have now preached to you upon your desire, and shall ever pray to God, the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Savior of his Church, that after the many
public troubles we have for our ^ins seen and suffered to our sorrows, at
length the waters may be so moved, by some good Angel, that the daughter of my
people may be effectually healed, (by a sovereign and celestial influence) of
what ever disease or hurt she has, either in Church or State; and this for
Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the Father and blessed Spirit, be everlasting
glory.

FINIS.

