The Vanity of Judiciary ASTROLOGY. Or DIVINATION, By the STARS.

Lately written in Latin, by that great Scholar and Mathematician the
Illustrious Petrns Gassendus; Mathematical Professor to the King of France.

Translated into English by a Person of Quality.

Facile crediderim aliquod esse Namen, quod in vindictam impiae credulitatis
nonnunquam repraesentet, mortalibus ea ipsa, quae sibi non a Dijs, sed
Syderibus metuerunt.

Joh. Barclaij Argenid. lib. 2. LONDON. Printed for Giles Calvert, and sold at
his Shop at the West end of St. Paul's Church, at the Sign of the black Spread
Eagle, 1659.

To the Reader.
AMong all the Deceipts that have bin put and endeavored to be obtruded on very
many men, especially the Vulgar in this last Age, none has prevailed so much
to get an Opinion with them as that of Astrology: as it is understood commonly
to be the Art of Prediction or divination by the Stars: which abuse being
observed by diverse Learned Men in Foreign Parts has given some of them
Occasion, by their writings to discover the Vanity of that pretended Science,
and the impostnre of such as (for Gain) makes a profession of it: amongst all
who have taken Pains to disabuse the World, noone has more rationally from the
principles of Astronomy and Philosophy performed the same then the most Learned
Gassendus, in that tract whereof this ensuing discourse is a Translation: which
in it is original having so well satisfied persons of greatest Learning and
Reason in this Nation, has bin the occasion, and at their desire of putting it
into the English Tongue, that it might be a means to un-deceive all Men here,
as well as in other places of the World; which they are confident it may do to
all such as will hearken to Reason, and are un-byassed. The discourse it self
is written without passion or railing, speaking only to the purpose, and not
against any man's Person, by which it commends it self sufficiently to the
Reader: As for what Morinus has written (not with the like Calmness, but full
of Canting terms and Choler) in vindiof Astrology; we shall say nothing; but
leave the same (if it happen to be published) to be Balanced, with this
treatise, in point of Reason, by the Ingenious and impartial Reader.

O sors, Sydera, Pythij recessus,
Et Fati been praesciae volucres,
Vos saevis Anus en verendarugis,
Vos illo vocat efferata cultu,
Quo lunam quatit Aemonis rubentem,
Quid Rex cogitet, aut Dei minentur,
Quid sub pectore delitescat omni,
Novit scilicet, indicatque nummo
Unum dicite, quod Misella nescit;
Ecquis stercore limen omne pavit?
Quae nunc auguria, O potens Apollo,
Quae lux, quae via ducet ad nocentem?
Frustra sollicitas, sibylla, Divos,
Sorts, Sydera, Pythios recessus,
Et Fati been praescias volucres.
Nam Phoebus Pater, O verenda Phoebus
Haec oracula Naribus reliquit.
Joh. Barclius Argenid. lib. 2. The Contents.
Chap 1. TThe Difference betwixt Astronomy, and Astrology Judicial. fol. 1 2.
Whether it be possible for Man, from the inspection and Observation of the
Heavenly bodies, to acquire the foreknowledge of such Events, as these Judicial
Astrologers pretend they can divine; as well concerning the Variety of Weather,
as great Colds, Heats, Droughts, Winds, Rains, Fertility, Barrenness,
Epidemical diseases, and the like effects, referrible to Meteorology: as
concerning the particular Fortunes of Men, as their Marriages, Children,
Friends, Dignities, Wealth, Dangers, Misfortunes, Sicknesses, Time and manner
of their Death, and almost all remarkable occurences of their lives. 3 3. The
Antiquity, Original, and Inventors of this Astrology. 5 4. That the Risings and
Settings of the Stars are not the Causes, but only Signs of Tempests, and
Mutations happening in the Air; contrary to the Vulgar opinion. 15 5. The
Fundamental Maxims of Astrology examined. fol. 22 Chap. 6. The Astrologers
suppositions concerning the Fixed Stars. 27 7. Their suppositions concerning the
Planets. 32 8. Their suppositions concerning the Celestial Houses. 38 9. Their
Chimeras of the 12. Signs in the Zodiac, and their Virtues, derided. 41 10:
Their Attributes of the Planets, destroyed. 47 11. The Celestial Houses
demolished. 52 12. Astrological Predictions, concerning Changes of Weather,
uncertain. 57 13. The Astrologers Plea, and the Answer thereto 68 14. The
Genethliacal part of Astrology examined, and exploded. 85 15. The Moment of an
Infants Nativity, uncertain. 94 16. Their Method of investigating the times of
Personal Accidents: and the Fallacies thereof. 102 17. Their Questions,
impertinent; and Elections of Times for sundry affairs, ridiculous. 111 18.
Their Plea of Antiquity, Authority, Reason, and Experience or Observation. 115
19. Their Pretense of Antiquity and Ancient Authors, confuted. 119 20. Their
pretense to Reason excluded. 125 21. Their Pretense to Experience, Unjust. 130
The Vanity of Judiciary Astrology.
CHAP. I.
The Difference betwixt Astronomy, and Astrology Judicial.

AMong the simple and honest Ancients, who were the Founders and Advancers of
that Noblest of Sciences, which speculates those glorious Bodies shining above
us, and causing the necessary vicissitudes of Times and Seasons; Astronomy and
Astrology were names indiscriminately importing one and the same thing. But
after a long process of time, when the fraudulent and superstitious Chaldeans
had corrupted the purity of this Science, by foisting in their Vanities, and
ascribing certain prodigious virtues to Heavenly Bodies over inferior ones, as
if their influences were fatal and inevitable; it came to pass, that men made a
Difference betwixt the one and the other: defining Astronomy to be that, which
considers the motions, distance, order, magnitude, light, and other adjuncts of
the Stars, both fixed and erratique; and Astrology to be that, which teaches
the way of foreknowing and foretelling the effects and events of such their
Motions, Conjunctions, oppositions, etc. whereupon the Grecians infected with
the fooleries of the Chaldeans, called the same (...) for distinction sake.

This distinction some have thought to be a Novelty; but we find it plainly
mentioned by Simplicius (in 2. physic. text 18.) by Olympiodorus (in lib. 1.
Meteor.) and by Sextus Empiricus (advers. Mathemat.) The last of whom adds
also, that Astrology was called, by way of excellency, the Mathematics; as
being that Art, which the Chaldeans professing with great ostentation,
arrogated to themselves the proud title of Mathematicians: which I the rather
take notice of, to intimate with how little reason, and ridiculous authority,
the Prophetique Astrologers of our Age usurp that noble attribute to
themselves. Agellius (lib. 14. cap. 1. 4. and 7.) notes moreover, that the
same Professors named themselves Genethliacks, from the calculation of Men's
Nativities: and St. Augustine (in Confession.) inveighs with judicious severity
against them, under the title of Planetarians. That in our days, they call
themselves Judiciary Astrologers, and their mighty Art, Astrology Judicial; is
well known. I wish the fallacious and cheating Fundaments of their Art were as
well known; And to show I have good reason for this my wish, be pleased to
consider with me.

CHAP. II.
Whether it be possible for Man, from the inspection and Observation of the
Heavenly bodies, to acquire the foreknowledge of such events, as these
Judicial Astrologers pretend they can divine; as well concerning the variety of
Weather, as great Colds, Heats, Droughts, Winds, Rains, Fertility, Barrenness,
Epidemical diseases, and the like effects referrible to Meteorology: as
concerning the particular Fortunes of Men, as their Marriages, Children,
Friends, Dignities, Wealth, Dangers, Misfortunes, Sicknesses, Time and manner
of their Death, and almost all remarkable occurences of their lives.

Hermogenes, by Diophantus told,
He should not live nine months more; said, my Friend
In telling me my Destiny, you are bold,
But (believe me) your life's now at an end:
And then he struck him fatally; so fell
The Prophet, while he another fate did tell.
Two General Rules, concerning the prenotion of Future Events.

IN the First place, that we may the better comprehend what shall be delivered
in the sequel of our discourse, let us premise this general Rule. That
whatsoever does import the knowledge of any effect to come, ought to be either
the necessary Cause of that particular effect, or which being posited, such an
effect does always follow; or as a necessary Sign, or which being given, such
an Event does always succeed.

For Example, because the Sun, as often as it approaches to the Vernal
Equinox, does cause the Plants to bud forth, and produce Flowers; and because
when the daybreak is perceived in the East, the Sun does soon after show it
self above the Horizon: therefore is it easy for us in Winter to foretell the
approach of the Spring, and the Budding forth of Flowers; and in the Morning
twilight, to foreknow the approach of perfect Day; the former, in respect of
the necessity, of the Cause, and the latter in respect of the necessity of the
Sign. But, if there were no such necessity, and that either such a Cause, or
such a Sign were not always attended with such an effect; or that such an
effect did sometimes succeed without the precession of such a Cause, or such a
Sign: it is manifest, that we might have indeed a Conjecture, but no certain
foreknowledge of either of those Effects.

I say a Conjecture, and that is the most. Because unless many Observations
concur to attest, that such a Cause, or Sign is more frequenly attended on by
that particular effect, than not; or that that effect does more usually succeed
upon that Cause, and after that Sign, than upon any other; in that case, our
Conjecture would be a mere Hariolation, or Divination, at best.

In the next place, let us propose this considerable truth. That the Certain
and Infallible Prenotion of things to come, whose necessary connection to their
particular Causes or signs is unknown to man, ought to be ascribed to none but
God himself, who made and orders all Causes, Signs and Events, For
substracting the knowledge of this necessary Connection, we have no help
remaining for our prevision that such things will come to pass; unless God, who
sees into the darkness of Futurity, shall please to reveal them to us. And
hence doubtless is it that such as use to prophesy of things to come, are
called Divines; and their Prediction is called Divination.

Nor is it sacred Writ alone, which declares the knowledge of future Events to
be the prerogative of God; according to that of Isai. (chap. 41.) Tell us what
is to come hereafter, and we shall know you to be Gods: but even the Ethnicks
generally acknowledged the same, as Horat. Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus, etc.


And thereupon they enquired concerning future successes, of only such, as they
believed acquainted with the secrets and Counsels of Divinity, and were Divino
Numine afflati, or Entheati.

CHAP. III.
The Antiquity, Original, and Inventors of this Astrology.

REflecting upon the Antiquity of this Divining by the Stars, we perceive, that
for certain the Inventors of it were the Chaldean, or Babylonian Philosophers.

For, though the Egyptians, who of all other Nations seem to have the best
pretext to rival them in that honor, gloriously boast, that the Chaldeans were
at first an excrescence of themselves cast off in a Colony, and sent abroad to
make themselves more room, as Diodorus reports, (lib 1.) yet the Egyptians with
scorn and indignation have denied that extraction. Again, whereas the Egyptians
accounted fifty thousand years from the time their Ancestors first made
Celestial Observations: the Chaldeans have been much larger in their fiction,
and reckon no less than four hundred and seventy thousand years, from the
original of that science among their Forefathers; as I have more expressly
declared, in my Preface to the life of Tycho Brahe, etc. But, to wave their
fictious titles to this invention; it is well known, that from the most ancient
memory of that Nation, the Chaldeans and Astrologers were taken for the same
Men; and easily proved, that the Astrology which first came to the Grecians
(from whom it was afterward derived down to the Latins and Arabians, was
translated thither by Berosus. who (as Vitruvius lib. 9. cap. 7. says) First
sat down in the Isle and City of Cous, and there opened a School for the
teaching of the Art of Astrology. Moreover it is evident, that the Chaldeans
were generally possessed with this opinion, that the Planets, because they
observed not the same course with the Fixed Stars, were Interpreters of the will
of the Gods, and did declare their determinations and purposes concerning
sublunary affairs, to us Mortals here below; and this sometimes by their Rising,
sometimes by their Setting, sometimes by their Colure, sometimes by their
Positions, and sometimes by other Adjuncts and Circumstances and that they did
conform their wanderings to the tract of the Zodiac, only because therein were
twelve Princely Gods presiding over the twelve Signs; there being besides
thirty other Stars, as privy Councillors to those Deities, which did Observe
and recount all occurrences upon the Earth, that the Celestial Senate might
consult and decree accordingly. All which Diodorus relates more expressly then
any other Author, And though the first Inventors of this Dream, might perhaps
design it as a plausible Fiction to gull the Common People, who otherwise
would have derided the Contemplation of the Stars (for I need not tell you,
that the Vulgar esteem this Study wholly vain and useless, unless in respect of
the supposed virtue of it, for the foreknowledge of things to come) yet those
who came after, seriously endeavored to advance their reputation by promoting
the same as a truth, while they enquired how, by the inspection of the Stars,
they might attain to the prescience of future Events, and taught a certain
method for the traduction thereof to others.

But this among the rest is well worthy our remark; that this Astrology was not
propagated without the concurrence of Superstitious Credulity; and that in no
small proportion.

It is objected (I know) That we ought not to account that Art Superstitious,
which seems to have God himself for its Author, according to that saying in
Genesis (1. 1.) that He created the Sun, Moon, and Stars, that they might serve
for Signs, and Seasons, and Days, and Years.

But they who make this Objection, ought to show us when and how He instituted
this Art; and where he has declared that he created those Luminaries to that
end, that we might come to a foreknowledge of future Events, such as the vain
glorious Professors of it boast themselves able to divine from the Observation
of them. Now, no such thing can be proved; for, as to that text of Scripture,
it must be understood only of the Signs of Seasons, of the Times of Festivals,
and other the like vicissitudes. And to rack the meaning of it to the
presignifications of particular Humane Accidents, as Marriage, or single life;
Children, or barenness; wealth, or poverty; love or enmity; honor, or infancy;
virtue, or debauchedness; length, or shortness of Life; health, or sickness;
Death natural, or Violent; prosperity, or infelicity in designs; War, or
Peace; plenty, or famine; victory, or captivity; and a thousand other the like
occurents and encounters both in States, and private families and persons (all
which our Star-prophets pretend to foretell:) I say to extend the sense of that
place of Scripture to the presignification of such Events, is manifestly
repugnant to the Scripture it self in many other places, wherein it does
expressly teach, that such future Events can be foreknown only to the Prophets,
i. e. men possessed with the Spirit of God, and selected for Supernatural
Revelations, not such as are addicted to Star-gazing. For, the Divine Spirit
does condemn the Chaldeans themselves, for professing that they could deduce
the knowledge of things to come, from their skill in observing the Heavens.
That place in the Prophet Isai (chap. 47.) is well known, where speaking to
Babylon, which he calls the Daughter of the Chaldeans, he says; Thou have
failed (or art wearied) in the multitude of thy Counsels; let now the
Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save
thee from these things, that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as
stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not deliver themselves from the
power of the Flame, etc. So likewise is that of Jeremy (chap. 10.) Learn not
the way of the Heathen; nor be dismayed at the signs of Heaven, for the
Heathen are dismayed at them, and the customs of the people are vain.

But before we come to examine the Presignifications themselves, you perhaps
desire to be informed, what reasons I have to rest satisfied in that tradition
of Vitruvius I now mentioned, concerning the first introduction of Astrology
into Greece by Berosus, and that the Grecians had no knowledge thereof before
his days. And this because that introduction of it by him, and the advance of
it by Antipater and Achinapolus, were no higher than the Age wherein Epicurus
lived; and because all those more antique Poets, Philosophers, and other
Authors made frequent mention of Astrology and Predictions from the Stars: and
the Author of that Book concerning Astrology, which is ascribed to Lucian,
enumerateth Orpheus Tiresias, and others who taught Astrology to the Greeks.

Wherefore, to justify my opinion in that particular, I affirm; that as to
Orpheus, Tiresias, and others, the tradition is merely Fabulous, and grounded
only upon a presumption, that these men predicted things before they came to
pass, and especially Tiresias, whose fable is known to every Man. But here it
is memorable, that though this Author does confidently avouch, that the
Ethiopians and Egyptians were the first Inventors of Astrology; yet he
afterward confesses, that the Grecians heard nothing of that Art from either
of them: so that from his testimony nothing can be alleged to impugn that
probable opinion of Vitruvius, that Astrology was derived to the Grecians from
the Chaldeans. As for the rest; true it is indeed, that the name of Astrology
was of much greater antiquity among the Grecians, then that of Berosus; but
they thereby understood no other science but what Plato always called
Astronomy (as it is even in our days, to distinguish it from the Judiciary,
which has by custom acquired and appropriated to it self the honorable title
of Astrology; and this even from the time of Sextus Empiricus, when that
difference became Vulgar) but not this Divining Art, concerning which Plato,
Aristotle and other of the Ancient Grecian Philosophers are wholly silent;
except only where Aristotle (1. politic. 11.) refers to Astrology that
prediction of Thales, concerning a great plenty of Olives to come in the
following Autumn, which yet was only Meteorological, as I shall have occasion
to declare more particularly hereafter. For though (in prior. 30.) He has this
saying, Astrologicam Experientiam trudere principia scientiae Astrologicae; yet
he thereby intends only Astronomy, calling the Observations of the Celestial
Phenomena, Experience, according to which Hypotheses (or as He there terms
them) Demonstrations ought to be excogitated. And when Epicurus seems to deride
Astronomical Curiosities, calling them (...), Servilia Astrologorum
machinamenta, and (...) Inanem Astrologiam: we ought to understand him only of
the too scrupulous, and unprofitable study of framing several Hypotheses or
suppositions for the solution of the Apparences. I deny not but Eudoxus
(somewhat the ancienter of the two, as being an Auditor of Plato, and mentioned
with attributes of honor more than once by Aristotle) speaks plainly of
Chaldaicall predictions, as making it one part of his business to reprehend and
condemn them: and yet I must affirm that he did this, not that he had learned
them of his Country men, the Grecians, but that in his various peregrinations
in the East, he had gotten the knowledge of that prestigious Art from the
Chaldeans. Again though Vitruvius be positive, that Berosus first opened a
School for the erudition of Men in this corrupted Astrology, and taught it
publicly in Greece; yet that hinders not but that some other men, otherwise
well learned, may have traveled through Greece, and professing themselves to
be Chaldeans, and skillful in those studies, dropped up and down some rude hints
and imperfect rudiments of this Sophistry, as they wandered from place to place;
as in our days, we see a sort of vile and impudent Vagabonds, who run up and
down, owning themselves for native Egyptians, and deluding the credulous
multitude with pretenses of strange mysterious insight into the rols of
Destiny, and predictions of the fortunes of particular Persons. So that it is
no wonder, if Plato, Aristotle and other great Men had those obscure fellows in
such contempt, as they would not vouchsase so much as to name them in their
writings. For observe how Cicero, in whose time Astrology seems to have gotten
somewhat more of reputation among the People, does not only call it Monstra
Chaldaeorum; the monstrous issue of the Chaldeans brains; but also reproacheth
it with the odious terms of vis maxima erroris, and deliralis incredibilis, the
very quintessence of Error, and a madness incredible; adding withal, non omnem
errorem dicondum esse stultitiam, most ingeniously intimating the Fraud as well
as folly of Divinatory Astrology: in his 2. Books de Divinatione. Furthermore,
it is likewise true, that in the ancient Greek Poets, Philosophers, and other
eminent Authors, we read of various predictions from the Stars: but these were
very far different from the Art Astrological, which the Chaldeans of old, and
our half-witted Astromancers now a days so much glory in. For, such
Prognostications nothing at all concerned the Events of Human affairs (to which
Astrologers chiefly pretend) but only the several mutations of the Air, of
Tempests, of plenty or dear years, and the like: and these they deduced only
from the various Risings and Settings of the Stars as may be proved out of
Hippocrates (lib. de aer. aqu and loc.) Plato (in Epinom.) who speaks that
particularly of Hesiod, and some other old writers; but not from the casting of
Figures (as the Vulgar phrase is) or the laborious Erecting of Scheams, so much
used by our Astrologers, and admired by the ignorant, who address to them as to
the oracles of Fate, and the secretaries of Divinity.

It appears therefore, that those Predictions recorded among the Ancient
Grecians, were not called Astrologicall; but by the simple and modest
appellation of (...) Presignifications, or rather yet more simply,
Significations; and this, because the Stars, according to the variety of their
Risings and Settings, do signify as well the several seasons of the year, for
Seed time, for Harvest, and for other works of Agriculture; as the days, on
which the Husbandman may expect Rain, Winds, and other changes of Weather.

Nor was this observed only by the Grecians, but familiar to most, if not all
other Nations; as it is even with us frequent, for such Country People as have
no Kalenders, and cannot read them if they had, to observe certain Celestial
Signs, or Stars, which as they either Rise in the Morning, or Set in the
Evening; and as they are near unto, or far from the Sun at its Rising or
Setting declare at what seasons, through the whole course of the, Year, such
and such labors of Husbandry are most opportunely to be performed. And yet, I
must confess, the Grecians seem to have been more studious and exact than any
other Nation, not only in observing, but also in digesting into Tables, both
upon what days of the Year such and such of the principal Stars usually arise
and Set; and those mutations of the Air, or changes of Weather, which did
commonly succeed at such times, and so may be signified by them accordingly. I
dare not affirm that they took occasion for this their exactness from that vast
Golden Circle, erected in Egypt, and at last plundered by Cambyses; which
according to the account of Diodorus, was a Cubit in thickness, and three
hundred sixty and five Cubits in compass; with an inscription of each day in
the Year on a particular Cubits space, and the names and significations of
those Stars, that Rise or Set on each day respectively. Yet certain I am of
this, that Geminus (in Element. Astron. cap. 14.) tells us, that the Ancients
usually made this Observation, that taking the Sign, and the degree of that
Sign, in which the Sun was in the beginning of the Year, or first step of his
annual progress; and noteing afterward what changes of the Air or Weather did
commonly fall out upon each day, Week and Month: they might at length referr
that change to the places of the Sun through every Sign and degree thereof in
the Zodiac. His words are worthy the reading, and therefore I shall faithfully
recite them. Id autem per plures annos observantes, mutationes, quae maxim arc
a Zodiaci signa and loca contingerent, conscripserunt in Fabulis; non ex art
aliqua, neque ex certa methodo describentes, sed ab Experientia id, quod prope
verum, (...) congrueret, sumentes. And of these Observations were framed
Tables, such as the Grecians called (...) some whereof are extant even at this
day, as particularly those of Geminus himself, and of Ptolomy: and those were
collected out of the more antique ones of Democritus, Metrodorus, Dositheus,
Euctemon, Meton, Eudoxus, Calippus, Hipparchus, Philippus, Philemon, Caesar,
and others. For every one, according to his curiosity of experimenting, what
changes of Weather daily happened in his Country; composed a certain Diary of
such changes, and of many Diaries made Year after Year, framed at last one
great Parapegme or Table; the Risings and Settings of the Stars, and the
affections of the Air observed most commonly to ensue immediately thereupon,
being expressly referred to each day respectively. Hence some of the principal
of these Parapegmes were so translated into Kalenders, as that it is manifest
Ovid would from thence illustrate his Fasti. Tempora, cum causis, Latium
digesta per annum,
Lapsaque sub terras, ortaque signa canam.


And at this day our Vulgar Kalenders retain so much of the Ancient fashion, as
that in every month is inserted the precise time of the Suns ingress or
entrance into the Sign proper thereto; how many hours are in each day;
together with the image of Harvest, Vintage, and what is else the chief
business of the Husbandman in each Month.

Hence also were derived these General Precepts of Good Husbandry, which are
delivered in elegant verse by Hesiod among the Greeks, and by Virgil among the
Latins, in imitation of him in his Georgicks.

CHAP. IV.
That the Risings and Settings of the Stars are not the Causes, but only Signs
of Tempests, and Mutations happening in the Air; contrary to the Vulgar opinion.

THat this was the Tenent of Epicurus, and most other of the more sage and
orthodox Philosophers among the Ancients, is sufficiently inferrible from the
very modesty of the word (...) Significationes, as was before intimated; which
they generally used, as most proper to express this notion.

Besides, as for the General Cause of Seasons, and aereal mutations, they
referred them for the most part to the Sun, allowing nevertheless some activity
in the Moon, together with inferior causes, toward the production of Cold,
Wind, Rain, and the like changes of Weather: but the Stars both fixed and
erratique they accounted no other then mere Signs of those particular times,
wherein the Sun and other Causes do usually concur to the generation of Heat,
Rain, Winds, and the like mutations in the Air. That Epicurus was of this
opinion, is plain from his text, in the 10. Book of Diogenes Laertius; the
sense whereof is this. That whereas the Risings and Settings of the Stars,
according to the course of the Year, do signify the various mutations of the
temper of the Air, proper to each of the four seasons; in this they do no more
then the Swallows and other Fowls of the Air, which by their coming, presage
the advent of the Spring; and by their departure again in the end of Autumn,
foretell the approach of Winter; and no more then some certain changes of the
Air, as the Rainbow, Thunder, Clouds, which foretell other changes immediately
to succeed, as serenity, showers, etc. Because as the Swallows are not the
Cause of the Spring, nor the Rainbow of clear Weather; but only a sign
thereof; so is not (for Example) the Rising of the Dog star a Cause of the
great Heat and Drought that usually possesses the Air at that time; but only a
Sign of that time, when the Sun does annually parch the Earth, and roast the
inhabitants of it. As for other Philosophers; see what Geminus says among the
rest. Astrorum exortibus mutationes fiunt, non quod Astra vim habeant ad
mutationem ventorum, aut imbrium; sed quod signi gratia assumpta sint, ad hoc,
ut pernoscamus aeris affectiones. Et veluti Fax non ipsa est causa motus
bellici, sed bellici temporis signum; sic etiam Astrorum ortus non ipsi sunt
causa mutationum aeris, verum posita ut Signa talium affectionum. And
afterward speaking of the Rising of the Dog Star, he says; Omnes putant hanc
stellam vim habere propriam, and causam esse intensionis aestuum, dum simul
oritur cum sole: attamen res non sic se habet; sed quoniam juxta calidissimum
tempus, cum haec stella ortum faciebat; hujus apparitione, aeris in aestum
mutationem significarunt. And that you may not think Aristotle one of those,
who held the Rising of the Dog Star, Orion, or any other Constellation, to be
any more but a simple sign of the Mutations happening in the Air about those
times; please you to observe how among his Problemes (sect. 26. quaest. 12. and
13) enquiring, Cur^oriente Cane Auster moveatur? why the South wind commonly
blows, at the time of Dogs Rising; He answers himself, by referring it to the
Sun, not to that Star: and demanding further, why men are then exhausted with
immoderate Heat, he adds, ideo spiritus ixcitari callidissimos per idem tempus
congruum esse. The same he replieth concerning Orion, Rising in the Autumn, and
Setting again in Winter. And (in Meteorolog. 2. cap. 5.) discoursing of the
same Constellation, he has these words; Orion and dum oritur, and dum occidit,
incertus ac difficilis esse propterea videtur, quod ejus ortus, and occasus
tum, cum tempora evariant, commutanturque ille estate, hic Hyeme accidant. By
which you may perceive, that He remarketh the Rising or Setting of Orion, not
as a Cause of the Changes then contingent in the Air; but merely that its
Rising and Setting fall out at such times, as the Air suffers those changes
from the vicinity, and remotion of the Sun.

This Opinion of Epicurus and others might be confirmed with many strong
Reasons; but among them all I shall select only Three, as most memorable and
important.

The First,
That the Fixed Stars, in respect of their constant, though slow motion to the
East, do rise and set now in our days, near upon a whole month later in the
Year, then they did in the Times of those Ancient Grecian Philosophers; and yet
nevertheless the seasons, and general mutations are not retarded
proportionately (i. e. by a month but remain always adliged to the Sun, and
Observe its progress through the Zodiac. For Example, those great Heats, which
so long ago usually came about the middle of July, at which time the Dog Star
arose in those days, do now likewise invade us about the middle of July; nor
are they removed to the middle of August, when the Dog Star does now arise: nor
can any Men expect, that after the Flux of ten Thousand Years, in case the
World should last so long, the greatest Heats of the Year would fall upon the
middle of January; as it must come to pass, in case the Heats were derived from
the Dog Star, and not from the Sun.

Again, if these excessive Heats were the effect of the Canicular Star; why do
not we feel them in February, and chiefly in the Night time, during which, that
star remains above the Horizon? And if you conceive, that the burning of the
Dog Star is augmented by the virtue of the Sun; pray, why was it not augmented
long ago chiefly about the beginning of June, since now it is not augmented to
the highest at the end of that month being then nearest to the Sun? Perhaps,
you may enquire (by the By) why the greatest Heats of the whole Summer are not
co-incident to the Summer Solstice, but succeed some days after it? Why,
truly the Cause is manifestly this; that the Sun proceeding to inflame the
Air, both by the Direction of its Rays every day more and more Perpendicular,
and by its longer continuance above the Horizon, until the Solstice; this
Directness of its beams, and its longer continuance does persever sensibly the
same for many days together, in which the like degrees being added to the Heat
formerly acquired, it is necessary the same should be much increased; so that
unless both the Directness of its Rays, and its continuance above the Horizon
did sensibly decrease, the Heat of the Sun, darted upon the Earth, could not be
remitted.

The Second.
That these Signs are not the same in all Climates or Regions; but the
Dog Star (for Example) which to us is a significator of Heat, to the Antipodes
is a Sign of Cold. An argument certainly, and a sufficient one, that neither
our Heat, nor their Cold has any dependence on the Dog, but only on the Sun,
to us by its presence, to them by its absence. For otherwise the Dog, since he
does not change his situation, as the Sun does, ought to have an equal and
uniform efficacy; nay more, he ought so much the more to Heat the Antipodes
then us, by how much the more vertical he is to them, and so does ejaculate its
Rays more directly or Perpendicularly upon their heads. But the Antipodes are
somewhat too remote for us to have recourse unto in this plain case; and
therefore we shall deduce our plea from things nearer at hand. Besides the
general affections of seasons, as of Heat and Cold, which evidently arise, the
one from the presence, the other from the absence of the Sun; are not
particular Countries, and such as are near neighbors each to other, subject to
different changes of the Air, so that while it is Dark and Rainy weather in
one, the Sun shines clearly and serenely in the other? Is not (for Example)
England many times infected with Tempests and high Winds, while France at the
same time enjoys a perfect calm? And so of the rest. Consider then whether be
more seasonable to referr this variety of dispositions in the Air and
difference of weather, in Countries almost touching each other to the Rising
and Setting of Stars; or to the particular condition and nature of the
Countries themselves? The Ancients I am sure, chose to ascribe it to the
different Soyls and situation of Countries; and thereupon they thought fit to
compose particular Tables for particular Regions, and those too made up of many
Years Observations conferred together; because no General ones could serve the
turn. Hereupon also they conclude that the Tables of the Egyptians could be of
use (at the most) only to those Nations who lived in the same Parallel or
Climate; and had but 14. hours day at the longest: that those of Dofitheus and
Phillippus might be useful to such Nations, who had 14. hours and an half of
day: those of Democritus and Caesar, and Hipparchus, to such, who had 15. hours
of day: those of Callippus, Eudoxus, Meton, Euctemon, Metrodorus, and Conon, to
such who Inhabit intermediate Climates. I add moreover that these Tables
cannot be useful not only to such as live in diverse Parallels; but even not to
such as live in the same, but more toward the East, or toward the West: since
experience attesteth, that there are diverse mutations of the Air not only
toward the South and North, but also toward the East and West

The Third.
That these Signs afford but light uncertain Conjectures at best. For their
signification is most uncertain, even in respect of the same Country; which yet
would not be, in case they were as well Germane Causes, as Signs. And since
the most that can be justly said in this kind, is that the Air is made hot in
Summer, cold in Winter, and Temperate in the Spring and Autumn; but no man can
certainly foretell of what temper the Air will be in this or the next Year, at
the time the Dog Star does arise, or Arcturus set; because it is manifest, some
Years even in the midst of Summer there fall out very Cold days, and very
warm ones in the midst of Winter, and those days that chance to be very wett
and tempestuous this Year, may be dry and serene the next; and because in one
Year, it is wett weather all the Summer, and dry all the Winter, some Years are
very dry all along, and others continually wett: Therefore is it manifest, that
concerning the particular changes of weather, at set and punctual times, no
certain rules of prediction can be drawn from these Signs.

Hence we may come to understand, that those Tables do indeed contain what
their Authors observed to have hapened in those Years, during which they
addicted themselves to make and record their Observations; but yet cannot be
extended to another series of Years, in which perhaps there may be so great a
difference, as even to cross the former Tables in most things. Which Geminus
doubtless reflected upon when he so much commended Aratus, for that conceiving
the Signs, of such changes to be fallacious, as were taken from the Rising and
Setting of the Stars, he had recourse to others exhibited by nature, such as
are the Colors appearing in the Sun, or Moon, at their Rising or Setting; the
Circles about them called Halo's and Paraselenes, and the like: because these
having their Causes and production in the Air, hold some natural affinity and
connection with rain, clear weather, wind, heat, and other affections of the
Air. Of this sort likewise are the motions observed in some Bruit Animals,
which as are sensible of, so do they also prognosticate the changes of the Air,
both as they begin and increase; and this by running up and down, by
Drousiness, by Bellowing, by Crying, making certain unwonted Noyses, and the
like: according to that of the Poet, Cana fulix it idem fugiens e gurgite ponti,
Nunciat honibiles clamans instare procellas,
Haud modicos tremulo fundens e pectore cantus etc.


CHAP. V.
The Fundamental Maxims of Astrology examined.

THese considerations premised, by way of Introduction; let us now come up
close to Astrology it self, as distinct from Astronomy, beginning our
Examination first at the General plants, or fundamental positions thereof; and
then proceeding to the particular Praedictions thereof, as well concerning
Changes of weather, deduced from other Signs besides the Risings and Settings
of the Stars; as concerning the Fortunes of Men, which Astrologers commonly
deduce from their Genitures, or Nativity Themes. And these few things, among
innumerable others pertaining to this so promising Art will be sufficient to
demonstrate the Vanity and Frauds of it.

The First general maxim, whereby Astrologers endeavor to gain credit and
reputation to their documents, is what all men readily confess; viz. that the
Stars are not mere Signs, but also natural Causes of very many effects: as if
Men were bound to admit the same position for truth, concerning other effects,
which they boast the divination of before hand. It is well known (say they) that
inferior natures are not subjected to superior in vain; since they are so
manifestly cherished, moved and governed by them. That the Sun is the Cause of
Light and Heat; and that by its access and recess annually, it does induce the
series and vicissitude of seasons; that it does procreate plants, and animals,
and in particular men, according to that common saying, Sol and Homo generant
Hominem; that it does extract vapors from the Earth, which become the matter
of Rain, of Winds, and the like. That the Moon does fill and empty all shell
Fish, the bones of animals, the brains of Coneys, and has great power over all
moist bodies, and especially the Sea, whose Tides are conformed to her motion.
Lastly that there are certain Influences, by which not only these two principal
Luminaries, but also the other lesser ones exercise their virtues upon
sublunary bodies. For since the Stars ought not to be conceived idle and
ineffectual; and that there are some certain Effects, which cannot be referred
to any other Causes but them, as the Critical mutations of diseases, and the
inequallity of seasons etc. And this is the sum of what our Astrologers allege
for support of their pretense, and whereby they study to endear their Art, and
prepare the minds of men for the more smooth and easy admission of what they
afterward impose with prodigious confidence. And indeed what they urge
concerning the Sun and Moon, seems so plausible, as yet even judicious men may
at first diligently listen thereto, and conceive some expectation that they
would proceed to prove the rest of their suppositions with the like evidence;
not suspecting that upon such specious foundations, they would soon fall to
erect nothing but ridiculous Fables, and wild absurdities. But alas! how far
are they from making the members of their artificial body respondent to the
Head of it? For behold, they have no sooner laid down this ground; but they
instantly run out to such superstructures, which have no solidity nor strength
from either Experience or Reason. And indeed I cannot but wonder, and blush,
when I observe the First writers of this Art, Ptolomy, Firmicus and Manilius,
after they have begun their discourses seriously and with gravity beseeming
Philosophers, and Men professing the severity of reason; in a moment to fall
upon mere childish toys, and old wives dreams. It is truly dishonorable for
Learned men, by the pretext of such positions, as are generally confessed, so
to impose upon the credulity of their Readers: as if those Fopperies, which
they intend to foist in afterward, were of the same evidence and certitude
with the premises. Dishonorable did I say? Yea it is odious and detestable to
delude men by a manifest Paralogisme, and from a specious Antecedent to draw
such a Consequence, as really is no Consequence. For as I began to say it is
indeed attested by Experience, that the Sun does vary the seasons of the Year,
that the Moon does fatten shellfish, in her full, and make them lean again in
her wane: but does Experience attest the like of the 12. Signs in the Zodiac,
and of their several degrees, of Saturn, Mercury, and the rest of the Planets
and Fixed Stars? Certainly no; nor can our Astrologers by any Observation show
any one the least effect, that ought to be referred to this or that particular
Constellation or Star, rather than to any other, or rather than to any
sublunary Cause; as we shall more expressly evince in the sequel of this
discourse. What then? Have they any Reason to fly to? None at all, doubtless;
since all Reason rests on Experience, and of that, here can be none, and all
that can with probility be inferred, is this, that each Luminary being a lucid
body, does in proportion to its Orb, enlighten, warm, and work such effects,
as arise from such light and heat.

Hereunto I add, that forasmuch as the Stars are General Causes only, in
respect of sublunary things; we may well demand a reason, why any singular
effect may not be ascribed to some singular Cause here below, where are such
multitudes of natural and convenient Actives and Passives, rather then to those
remote ones, the Stars. For as when we give an account of the Causes of Odours
in compound Ointments, we referr one kind of smell to the Roses, another to the
Jasmine, a third to the Orange flowers, and no particular smell to the Oil,
which is the common matter of the composition, and the cause of the fragrancy
neither to the one, nor to the other of the ingredients. And as when we
explicate, why in a Garden, this Plant grows here, and not there; another
there, and not here: we referr it to their seeds, which were sown in those
places, where each one grows; not to the Water wherewith they are irrigated,
which is only a General Cause of the grows of all the plants, and indifferent
nourishment to each sort. So are we to Philosophise concerning those Effects
that are ascribed to heavenly bodies. For since the Heat of the Sun (for
instance) is General; why it should harden Clay, and soften Wax, is to be
referred to the different dispositions of those bodies not to any various
efficacy in the Suns heat. And why the Sun produces a plant in this place, but
not an Animal; an Animal in another place, but not a plant: this is to be
referred likewise to the virtue of the seed, which is Plantary in one place,
and Animal in the other. The same may be said of other things, that arise from
the influence of the Suns heat; as (for Example) the Sun raises vapors from
this part of the Earth, and not from another; because in one part is moisture,
in another none: one Year it raises more vapors, than in another; because one
year yields more moisture than another: one year the exhalations are healthy
and good, another infectious and pestilential; because of the different matter
from which they are drawn, etc. Hence we learn, that since it is besides all
reason, when there may be many Causes of any particular effect, without the
concurrence of all which that effect will not follow; for us to think it
sufficient to our Prognostication of that effect absolutely and positively,
that we know any one of all these various Causes, that must concur to the
production thereof: it must be likewise besides all reason, when besides the
Stars, there are other inferior Causes, that must conspire to the production of
particular effects; for any man confidently to foretell the contingency of
those effects, only because he knows the general influx of the Stars, but not
any one of the other inferior particular Causes, that are required thereunto.
Again, when there are some effects, which have no dependence at all (or what is
exceedingly obscure) upon the Stars; but a manifest and necessary dependence
upon sublunary Causes; I would willingly know, what reason there is, why we
should not rather have recourse to those sublunary and particular Causes, than
to those superlunary and general ones, the Stars? Thus when grounds manured and
enriched by compost, do yield more plentiful crops of Corn, than before; it is
plain, that we are to ascribe this fertility, not to the influence of the Sun
and Stars, but to the fatning of the ground by the dung or soil, seasonably
laid upon it, by the careful Farmer.

CHAP. VI.
The Astrologers suppositions concerning the Fixed Stars.

AS for the Fixed Stars, the Astrologers does ascribe little or no virtue to
them, unless they be comprehended in the Zodiac (for they only mention
Medusa's Head, the Dog, Arcturus, and a few others) nor indeed do they ascribe
much virtue to them in the Zodiac, as the Ey of the Bull, the Heart of the
Lion, Spica Virginis, the Heart of Scorpio; unless as they are referred to
certain degrees of the Signs in the same. Hereupon, their chiefest care is
about the distribution of the Signs and Degrees of the Zodiac, as the main
fundament of their Art, upon which they build whatever they afterward have
imagined of the Planets, and their Houses. That we much touch upon some few
things belonging to each Head, let us observe in the First place, how when they
have divided the Zodiac into 12. parts (called by the Greeks (...)) which they
name Signs, in respect of the Asterismes, of Constellations occurring in the
Zodiac, according as Shepherds, Plow-men, and Mariners at first imagined them
to refemble certain things on Earth, and gave them denominations; they have
distinguished not only each of those signs into thirty Degrees, and each
Degree again into Minutes, but have also considered, denominated, and compared
the 12. Signs, after innumerable ways and manners.

For they thought it not sufficient to distinguish those Signs into Vernal,
Estival, Autumnal, Hyemal; as also into Northern and Ruling; Southern and
obeying: and again into Ascendent, or Direct, and Descendent, or Oblique and
winding; into Cardinal, Moveable, Median (or Fixed) and Common: into Conjunct,
or such as behold and face each other, in a Trine, Quartile, or other aspect;
Disjunct, which have no Aspect each to other at all; Antisious, which are
equally distant from the Cardinal points etc. This (I say) was not enough for
them, but they made some of them to be Fiery, as Aries, Leo, Sagittarius; some
to be Earthy, as Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn; some Aereal as Gemini, Libra,
Aquarius others Watery as Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. And; these (forsooth)
are those so much celebrated Four Trigons of the Celestial Signs.

Again, some they have supposed to be Human, as Gemini and Virgo; others
Beastlike as Aries, Taurus; others Reptile as Cancer, Scorpio; some they
imagine to have a clear and pleasant Voice as Gemini; others a middle one, as
Leo; and others again none at all as Pisces. Moreover they call some of them
Masculine and Diurnal; others Feminine and Nocturnal; the former being
Masculine and Diurnal, as Aries, the latter Feminine and Nocturnal, as Taurus,
and of the rest. Some they assume to be Fertile as Pisces; others Barren as
Virgo; others Indifferent as Capricorn. Others of happy Wits, as Gemini;
others of Stupid as Taurus. To these you may add their further distinctions of
them into Hearing, and Seeing Stars or Signs; into Beautiful and Deformed;
into Fatt and Lean; into Ruminant, and Non-ruminant; into Wrathful,
Leacherous. etc.

When they come to compare the Signs with the Planets; then (First) some of
them are designed for the Houses of others; for Cancer is made the House of the
Moon, Leo of the Sun; Gemini and Virgo of Mercury; Taurus and Libra of Venus;
Aries and Scorpio of Mars; Pisces and Sagittarius of Jupiter; Aquarius and
Capricorn of Saturn; one being the Daily, the other the Nightly mansion of
their Guests assigned. Secondly some of them are the Exaltations of others the
Planets; for Sol is exalted in Aries, the Moon in Taurus, Saturn in Libra,
Jupiter in Cancer, Mars in Capricorn, Venus in Pisces, Mercury in Virgo. And on
the Contrary, the Sign opposite* to each, is called its Dejection, or
Depression; as Libra is the place of the Suns Depression, Scorpio of the Moons
etc. But in the mean while it is worthy our notice, that neither Leo, nor
Aquarius are either the Exaltation, or Dejection of any one Planet: but Gemini
and Sagittarius are both attributed to the head and tail of the Dragon.
Thirdly, some Signs according to the decads of degrees contained in them, are
consigned to several Planets; for the first ten degrees of Aries are consigned
to Mars. the next ten to the Sun, and the last to Venus; the first ten of
Taurus to Mercury, the next ten to another, and so consequently. Fourthly, as
there are five Planets besides the Sun and Moon, so have they imagined five
Terms or Ends in each Sign; for of Aries the first six degrees are given to
Jupiter; the next eight, or six to Venus; another seven or eight to Mercury
etc. Fifthly, to each degree are attributed, if not single Planets, yet at
least special Figures; as to the first degree of Aries they give the Figue of a
Man holding a Sickle in his right hand, and a bow in his left; to the second a
Man with a Dogs head, his right hand extended, and his left holding a staft:
and so consequently through all the degrees of the Signs. Sixthly, of the Four
mentioned Trigons the Fiery is appropriated to Sol and Jupiter; the Earthly to
Venus and Luna; the Aerial to Saturn and Mercury; the watery only to Mars: from
whence you may understand, which, and in respect of which, the Planets are said
to be Trigonocratores, or Lords of the Trigon, one in the Day time, another in
the Night, where they are two.

I need not insist upon other of their Comparisons. For in respect of things
subject to the Signs, they have particular Provinces allotted to their sway;
as (for Example) they subject France to Aries, Italy to Leo, Norway to Scorpio,
etc. Nay they proceed to the allottment of even Cities in the same Country, as
Marselles to Aries, Paris to Virgo, Avignon to Sagittarius, etc. Nor do they
rest here, but running on in the same prodigious subtility, they arrive at last
at consigning the parts of Man's body to the dominion of several Signs; as
Aries must be Lord of the Head, Taurus of the Neck, etc. Further, each year of
every Man's life does not want the tuition of some one of the Celestial Signs;
as the first year belongs to that Sign, in which the Sun is at the time of a
Man's Nativity, the second to the next, the third to the next, and so on to the
twelfth, and then you must begin at the first again, renewing the series each
twelfth Year, whence they are called Dodecaeterides.

I add, that when the Ancients first invented these strange things, by occasion
of the Asterisms, which they thought fixed fast in the Firmament, or eighth
Sphere, then accounted the Primum mobile; and moved only by a diurnal motion
from East to West: the succeding Astrologers observing that the Asterismes were
moved also, by an exceeding slow motion, from West to East, and that they had
changed their old seats. so that the Stars of Aries were now no longer in the
Vernal Equinox, nor the subsequent Signs in the same places, as in the days
of the Ancients; therefore imagining another Heaven above the eighth, that was
moved only toward the West, they affixed thereunto a naked Zodiac or [(...)]
one without Stars, and divided the same into 12 equal parts, which they called
still, not Asterismes, but Signs of them, as of Aries, Taurus, etc. Beginning
at the Vernal Equinox, and ascribing the same things in all points to the
imaginary Zodiac, which I have enumerated of the former; neglecting the
Constellations themselves, as being subject to change their places. Though we
are to note, that other whiles they call by the name of Dodecatemorion, that
part of the Zodiac, in which does end the number made of the degree 12. times
multiplied, which such or such a Planet possesses, beginning the account from
the first degree of that Sign, in which the Planet is. As if the Planet be in
the 5th degree and 5 minutes of Aries (which Example Firmicus long ago gave)
because this number 12. times multiplied gives 61. which being computed from
the beginning of Aries, ends in the first degree of Gemini: therefore is the
Dodecatemorion of that Planet said to be in the first degree of Gemini. And
these are the principal Chimera's that Astrologers have dreamt, and imposed
upon the Fixed Stars.

CHAP. VII.
Their suppositions concerning the Planets.

IF we remove to the Planets, we shall find the brains of Astrologers have been
as fruitful in Fictions concerning them, as they were in those ricited of the
Fixed Stars. For,

First, considering the Planets singly and in themselves, They assign them
certain great and admirable Virtues. The Sun (say they) does heat much, and
dry little; Mars dries even to adustion; Saturn cools largely; Jupiter,
Venus, and the Moon heat somewhat, and moisten more, yet of the three Jupiter
moistneth least, Venus more, and the Moon most of all; but Mercury is
indifferent. Then they ^ell us, that Jupiter and Venus are good and benificial
Planets; the one being called Fortune the Greater, the other Fortune the
Lesser; that Saturn and Mars are malignant in their influences the one being
therefore named the Greater, the other the Lesser Infortune: that the Moon is
rather benificial, than Malefical; the Sun and Mercury one wh^le good, another
while evil, according to various Conjunctions; Moreover, that Sol, Saturn and
Jupiter, and Mars, are Masculine; the Moon and Venus, Feminine; and Mercury an
Hermaphrodite, and that Planets are said to become Masculine when they increase
in their light, are Oriental and direct; but Feminine, when they diminish in
their light, are Occidental, and retrograde. Yet further, that Sol, Jupiter,
Saturn are Diurnal Planets; the Moon, Mars, and Venus, Nocturnal; and Mercury,
promiscuous, or Indifferent.

Secondly, if they are considered in relation to the Zodiac; then (say they)
they obtain Dignities, that are named Escential, and from which are derived
various testimonies of Fortitude: from the House five; from their Exaltation,
four; from their Triplicity, three; from their End, two; from the Decan (or
tenth degree one. Where you are to note, that that Planet, which has none of
these Dignities, is called Feral and Peregrine, and has five testimonies of
Debility: that which is in Exile, has likewise five; and that which is in
Dejection, four. Note moreover, that the aggeries, or conflux of many, or all
these Dignities, is called Vulgarly Carpentum, a Throne, Kingdom, or Emperial
Diadem; all terms of no small majesty. Besides these, there is also another
Dignity, called Gaudium, joy; namely when the Planet is in his Diurnal Sign:
and an other called the Person or Almugea, when the Planet is so much distant
from the Sun or Moon, as his House is distant from the house of an other. And
each Dignity has one testimony of Fortitude. Here I pass over the distinction
of the various virtues they attribute to the Planets (for Saturn, (as they
declare) in his own House designeth favor; in the House of Jupiter, the death
of ones Father, etc.) and that according as they are Direct, Retrograde, or
Stationary (for in the first case, they absolutely conferr that effect they
promise; in the second they revoke their grants; and in the third, they only
retard them) and the like.

Thirdly, if they are compared one to another, then there arise various sorts
of Aspects; in particular, a Sextile when they are distant one from another by
the space of two Signs, or the sixth part of the Zodiac; a Quartile, when
they are distant, by three Signs, or a fourth part of the Zodiac; a Trine,
when by four Signs, or a third part; an Opposition, when by six Signs, or the
whole Diameter; a Conjunction, when they are in the same Sign. And because
among these Aspects, the Sextile and Trine are beneficial; a Quartile and
Opposition, Malefical; and a Conjunction indifferent: therefore from these are
deduced those Dignities, which they call Accidental, and likewise their
contrary Infirmities, together with the various testimonies of Fortitude and
Debility. For a Trine of beneficial ones, has four Fortitudes; and of either
of them with the Sun, or Mercury, has three; with the Moon two; with Mars, or
Saturn, only one: a Sextile has always one less. A Quartile of Malignant
Planets, has four debilities; with the Sun, three, etc. and likewise an
Opposition. A Conjunction of Benign Planets, has five Fortitudes; of Malign
ones, five Debilities; of Benign with Malign, four Fortitudes; with
indifferent ones three. But pray observe, that the Beneficial Aspects of
Malefical Planets, or the Malifical Aspects of Benefical ones have neither
Fortitude nor Debility Observe again that the Aspects are not always precise,
or (as they speak) Partile; but are for the most part in some Latitude, or
Platical, so as the space somewhat preceding the true or precise Aspect, is
called the Application, or Address; the consequent space, is called the Deflux,
or Separation, as being caused by the swifter Planet of the two. Hither also
must we referr those various Signs or Testimonies of Fortitude and Debility,
which are imputed to the other Planets, according as they are in Cazimi, or the
Heart of the Sun, i. e. corporally conjoined with the Sun: or as they are
Combust, i. e. betwixt the margin, of the Sun, and the sixth degree, or there
abouts from it: or as they are Hypaugy, i. e. betwixt the sixth degree and the
fifteenth; when yet they lie hid under the Suns rays; or when they are free
from combustion; or Oriental and on the right hand, or Occidental and on the
left; or Direct, Retrograde, Swift, Slow, etc. I omit those mighty wonders
which they talk of, the Great Conjunctions, in particular of Saturn and Jove,
which happens only once in every twenty Years; of Saturn, Jove, and Mars, which
happens only once in 800. Years; as also of three or four of the Inferior
Planets: and this with grand respect to the Triplicities of those Signs, in
which are the Fiery, or Watery, Earthy, or Aireal. etc.

Fourthly, if they are referred to the Twelve Houses, which are distinguished
in the Nativity Scheam, or Figure, as they call it [for besides the Houses of
the Planets, of which we have said enough, and which are as it were Fixed, they
have assigned them other moveable Houses, according to their various situation
and Diurnal motion above and below the Horizon] there are many other strong
proprieties assigned to them, by our Celestial Heralds, the Astrologers. For,
First, say they, every Planet enjoys his or her particular House in which he
is chief Significator, as Saturn in the Twelfth, Jupiter in the Eleventh, Mars
in the Tenth, Sol in the Ninth, Venus in the Fifth, Mercury in the First, the
Moon in the third. But in others no Planet delights to be; albeit in them, as
well almost as in the rest, some one Planet be Consignificator, as Saturn in
the First, Jupiter in the Second, Mars in the Third etc. Again they determine
variously in various Houses, and especially in respect of Men; as in the first
House Saturn and Mars portend short life; Jupiter and Venus long life; Sol
Dominion; Mercury, Learning and Science; the Moon, Peregrinations: in the
second House, Saturn and Mars denounce poverty; Jupiter and Venus, plenty; Sol,
beauty; Mercury, favor; the Moon various changes of fortune; and almost
infinite other things. Observe here, that to the Planets are associated both
the Head and Tail of the Dragon; and the Place of Fortune (as they call it)
which is that particular place of the Zodiac, upon which by numbering from
Aries does fall the number arising from the degree Orient, or of the horoscope,
and the distance of the Sun from the Moon. In particular, in the first House,
the Head of the Dragon does promise honor from Great persons; the Tail does
threaten the loss of an Ey; the place of Fortune promises good luck at gaming
bargaining, and the like. Further, what Planet soever has most testimonies of
Fortitude, is thought to be the Lord, or Governor of the Theme, or Nativity
Figure. Thus, that is called Lord of the Year, which in a Figure Erected at the
beginning of the Spring is the strongest; unless it be that some collect
Fortitudes from the Figures made at the beginning of each season of the Year,
and also at the New moons, and Full-moons nearest to them. Thus he is called
Lord of the Geniture, which in like manner is strongest in the Natalitious
Theme: though some desume it otherwise. But that Planet which has more
testimonies of Fortitude in the Sign beginning each House; He O worderfull!)
is called (...) Lord of that House: that which has them in the degree
beginning the House, is called Dispositor Domus, Steward of the House, in
Arabic, Almuten. And thus we often hear of the Lord of the Ascendent, or
Horoscope; which according to his various habitations, is supposed to do
various strange feats. I omit the dominions of the Planets upon the several
Hours of the Day; upon the several Ages of Men; upon particular states or
conditions of life; as when Saturn is made overseer of Husbandry, Jupiter
president of Policy, Mars of Warfare, the Sun of Honors, Venus of
Love-matters, Mercury of Merchandise and Theeving, the Moon of Traveling etc.
Because in truth, I fear you may be as weary in reading, as I am in writing so
tedious a list of whimzies: and yet I must beseech your Patience a little
longer, while I look into these spacious Nothings, called Planetary Houses.

CHAP. VIII.
Their suppositions concerning the Celestial Houses.

HEre you may behold our Syderial Quartermasters dividing the whole Heaven into
twelve portions, or Cantons (but they call them Houses) by the help of six
Circles, which mutually intersect each other in two opposite points, and
particularly intercept the twelve parts of the Zodiac. And in order to this,
their first care is, that that part of the Zodiac, and so of the House should
be called the First, which is yet wholly under the Horizon, and beginning to
rise above it; that the second house which is next to that beneath the Earth;
that the Third, which succeeds the second, and so forward till they come to the
Twelfth. But here is a great unhappiness, they do not all agree about the
points of those intersections and portions of the Zodiacks. For some will have
the imagined Circles to intersect each other in the Poles of the Zodiac;
others in the Poles of the Equator; and others in the mutual sections of the
Horizon and Meridian.

They who pitch upon the Poles of the Zodiac, either divide the Zodiac into
12. parts exactly equal; or distribute the opposite Semi-diurnal, and
Semi-nocturnal Arches into three equal parts. The First of these two ways
seems most ancient, and was approved of by the Chaldeans, as may be collected
from Empiricus: the same also Ptolomy insinuates, when he treats de Aphelicis;
Julius Firmicus follows it; the Arabians do not recede from it; and among the
Neotericks, Schonerus and Cardan chiefly defend it: and it is commonly called,
Modus aequalis. The Latter is generally ascribed to Porphyrius; and Gauricus
defends it; and Scaliger attesteth that it is in use among the Indians; but
with a diminution of eight degrees, as well in the beginnings of the Houses, as
in the places of the Planets.

They who fix upon the Poles of the World, or Equator, referr the Semi-diurnal
and Semi-nocturnal Arches of the Zodiac to the Equator, which they cantonize
into 12. equal parts, each of the Quadrants thereof which are intercepted
betwixt the Meridian and Horizon, being again distributed into three equal
parts. And this way was pursued by the Author of Alcabitzij, and by him, who
wrote Commentaries thereupon, Ioh. a Saxonia.

Lastly, they who choose the mutual sections of the Horizon and Meridian,
either divide the Equator into 12. equal parts, and so distinguish unequally
the Zodiac intercepted (for only the opposite Diurnal and Nocturnal parts will
be equal among themselves according to this partition) or divide the First
Verticle Circle for the Equator, and so the Zodiac is distributed with the
like inequality. Nevertheless this way has pleased Campanus, and Gazulus: but
that the former by cutting the Equator pleased Ptolomy, may be collected out of
his Third Book, and out of the Paraphrase of Proclus upon his Fourth: Johannes
a Saxonia fathers it upon Abraham Aben-Ezra: and Regiomontanus embracing it,
and calling it the Rational way brought it most into request of all others.

Now the Disposition of the Houses, though it be accommodated to the
prognostication of changes of weather, and other Events; yet because the
Astrologers main aim and scope is the Prognostication of such things as happen
to Men; therefore in the Naming of the Houses have they had respect chiefly to
Human Events. Hence the First House (named the Ascendent and Horoscope) is
called the House of Life, of Complexion, and Corporeal Accidents: the Second
(or Infernal Gate) is the House of Wealth, to be acquired by ones own industry:
the Third (named Dea, or the Goddess) the House of Brothers, and short
journeys: the Fourth (Imum Caeli, the lowest of Heaven, and Pit of the
Planets) the House of Parentage and Patrimony: the First (Good Fortune) the
House of Children: the Sixth (E-vil Fortune) the House of Infirmities,
Diseases, Servants, and little Animals: the Seventh (the Setting the House of
Marriage, Buying, Selling, Conditions of Enemies: the Eighth the Beginning of
Death, and slow Animals) the House of Death, Labors, and hidden Treasures: the
Ni^th (Deus and Monomoeria) the House of Religion, Dreams, and long Journeys:
the Tenth (medium Caeli) the House of Diguities, and Condition of life: the
Eleventh (Good Demon) the House of Friends, and advantages by Friend-ship: the
Twelfth (Evil Demon) the House of Enemies, imprisonment, fidelity of Servants,
and great Animals. Risum tenealis?

I omit to take notice, how the First, Fourth, Seventh, and Tenth Houses are
commonly called Cardines, Angles, and in Greek (...): the other Four,
Succedent, in Greek (...); and the Four remaining Cadent, (...). I omit also,
that the first Three are called the Northern, the Winter old-aged, and
Phlegmatic Quarter: the second Three, the Occidental, Autumnal, virile,
Melancholic Quarter: the next Three, the Meridional, Summer, Youthful,
choleric Quarter: the Three last, the Oriental, Vernal, Childish, Sanguine
Quarter. I omit also the Colors with which they paint their Houses; the first
White; the second Green; the third Saffron-coloured: with other wild Romances
endless to be recited. And this I think enough to advance your admiration of
their impudence, above your laughter at their Folly.

CHAP. IX.
Their Chimeras of the 12. Signs in the Zodiac, and their Virtues, derided.

THese things I thought good to rehearse, because they are the General
Fundaments, and as it were First Principles, upon which all Astrologers
Praedictions depend. Nor need I mispend much time in Refuting them; since to
have heard the bare relation of them, is sufficient for every rational and
sober person to detect; not only how Uncertain, but also how Vain and
Ridiculous they are. For who does not, after all this Canting, plainly
perceive, that all those Fundamentals are mere Fictions, invented either at
pleasure and by chance, or upon very little and most vain occasions? Certainly,
this one consideration seems sufficient to argue, that if we lived among our
Antaeci, or Antipodes, this whole device or Machination would be turned topsy
turvy: for then the quite contrary to their Theory in all points, would come to
be ascerted, or the whole Art abandoned. And if we place our selves at the
Equator, or in the middle of the Torrid Zone; then either both ways, or
neither, or mixtly all their suppositions must be accepted: and if so, what can
be more confused? If we seat our selves under the Poles; pray, what an
Astrology shall we have, where no part is Orient, no part Occident; where the
State of the Fixed Stars, and of the Zodiac is always the same; where Saturn
shall Rise or Set but once in 30 Years, and all the other Planets in like
manner, according to their several courses and motions? And if we stand in
those Regions, which are in respect of us toward the Equator, and Antaeci or
toward the Poles how shall this whole Astrology consist, which on one part will
be so changed by degrees, as at length to become quite contrary to what it is
now; or on another part, will by little and little so Vanish, as at length to
become none at all? Is it not hence of inevitable necessity that every
particular Climate and position of the Sphere ought to have a particular
Astrology; that there can be no General one; and that though we should allow
the Chaldeans, or Egyptians to have had Astrological Principles of some
certainty, yet those cannot be of use in other Countries? How could the
Babylonians, over whose heads the Sky always conserveth its cleareness and
serenity; how could the Egyptians, who are scarce ever acquainted with Clouds
and Rain; how could These (I say) make Observations fit to yield Rules for the
prediction of those Rains, and all that turbulency and inconstancy of weather,
to which our Cloudy Countries are commonly subject?

But the truth is, They did not make any such Observations at all; since it is
manifest, that not the hundredth part of those things we have touched upon, are
to be observed in Nature. For though we do generally suppose such things as the
Four Elements, here below; yet who was ever so Strong-sighted as looking up to
Heaven, to discern a twelfth part thereof to be Fiery, with two others
Circumstant about it, the one Watery, the other Earthy? or has that Man any
brains, think you, who can believe any such thing observable? Who will be
persuaded that Aries is Fiery, when the greatest Rains commonly are under that
Sign: and that Cancer is Watery, under which are the greatest heats? And since
it is a mere imagination of men, that there are some Signs Human, and others
Bestial; how come we to discern which of them are of a milder, and which of a
Salvage nature? Likewise, because some persons of wild fancies have imagined
some Signs to be Barren, as Virgo; others fruitful, as Pisces: do we
therefore know what those contribute toward sterility, what these to fertility
of issue? Nor can they excuse themselves by saying that those Figures were not
invented but upon frequent Observations of their Effects, as I shall hereafter
more expressly declare. In the mean time, I demand of them, why Aries should be
a Diurnal Sign, and Taurus a Nocturnal? Is it because Taurus is observed
either more frequently, or more continuedly to remain under the Earth, than
Aries? Or why should the one be Masculine, the other Feminine? If so be it were
requisite to join a Feminine Sign to each Masculine, then certainly Aries
ought to have had a Yew to accompany him, and Taurus a Cow to attend him; but
not a Bull placed next to a Ram. Methinks, it is somewhat absurd to imagine the
Ram to be more Masculine than the Bull, which doubtless is the hotter and
stronger beast of the two.

What shall we say of the placing the Planets in the Signs, as in their proper
mansion Houses? Do not the Planets run through all the Signs indifferently,
and make their stations and Apogea's in all parts of the Zodiac? Do not the
Sun and Moon deserve as much honor in the Ethereal Republic, as the rest of
the Planets? If so, why have they but one single Palace apeece assigned to
them, when each of the others has two? But the reason (forsooth) is, that
otherwise the number of seven could not have been accommodated to the number of
twelve, well, let that be granted; yet there is some indecorum in the
assignement. For if the Sun, in respect of its vehement heat, was consigned to
dwell in Leo; why was not Mars, to whom they allow so great a share of heat,
placed next? Why was not the Moon the Queen of moisture consigned to remain in
Aquarius, since He is chiefly opposed to Leo, and it is reasonable to conceive,
that the Moon was created in opposition to the Sun? And it is the Astrologers
conceit, that the Planets hold and delight in their Houses, by no other title
but that of their being at first Created in them. And here I cannot but
observe, how skillful an Astronomer Firmicus has shown himself, when in the
Theme of the World, according to those Divine Men, he both placed the Sun in
the 15th degree of Leo; and set Venus in the 15th degree of Libra, as if it
were possible for Her ever to be, by the space of two whole Signs, absent from
the Sun.

As for their Exaltations; it is very strange with what ardency our Astrologers
have embraced what they had heard of the highest Absides of the Planets; and
yet now, those Absides being changed, they nevertheless still retain the same
Exaltations. Why do they not at least appoint them to receive their Exaltations
in their own Houses? Can they any where else provide them of a more illustrious
and sublime throne? If Mars must have his Exaltation in the House of Saturn,
why should not Saturn have his in the House of Mars, rather then in that of
Venus? What has a Malefical Planet to do in the House of a Benefical? The same
may be said of their Triplicity; for what community can Venus have with
Capricorn, an Earthly dull Sign, and in which Saturn has his House, and Mars
his Exaltation? Again, what relation has Mars with Pisces; a Watery Sign, and
in which Jupiter has his House, and Venus her Exaltation? What shall I say of
their Decades of degrees? If all Aries be the House of Mars, is it not
injustice to detract from him two third parts of it, by dividing the same into
Tens? And is it not injustice to banish Mercury quite from his House, while one
third part of it is usurped by Jupiter, another by Mars, and the last by the
Sun? What shall I say of their Fines or Bounds, which after the same manner
leave the least part of the Houses to be possessed by the right owners of them;
when the Builders of them fall together by the ears here below about them, as
about some weighty and difficult matter in dispute? What of their Monomaeria,
which some Astrologers cannot hold without laughing at themselves for it? Is
any thing more ridiculous, than to appoint particular Signs to be Presidents
over particular Provinces, and Cities? Indeed if the Heavens stood still, there
might be some slender pretense for the subjection of Countries to such Signs,
as were directly over them; but since the Spears are continually moving, with
what reason can that be imagined? Especially since in the allotment the
Dominions are not chosen according to parallels, so that the places to be
governed might be looked upon with an equal aspect; but as it were by leaping
from distant Parallels, and wholly confusedly toward the South and North; near
remote, coherent, interrupted, and however it chances without order. I confess,
I cannot but smile to think, how when they have assigned a whole Kingdom or
Country to the sovereignty of some one Sign, they yet referr particular Cities
therein, to the presidency of other Signs, and such as are remote from the
Sign, first made Lord Paramont thereof. Nor can I suppress the Rising of my
spleen, when I consider the dominion of the Signs over the several parts of
Man's body. For why should Aries be Governor of the Head, rather then Gemini,
or Cancer, that are the highest Signs of all? Why should Pisces rule the feet
of others, when they have no feet themselves? Why should Pisces that are next
to Aries, be appointed to preside over a part so remote from the Head? Again
nothing can be more wild and absurd, than to constitute the Signs Lords of
several Years; as if they Ruled successively, and the Government of one Sign
being expired with the Year, the Scepter were to be surrendered to the next
successor, at a set time, and then each Governor remain idle for the space of
eleven Years together.

To conclude; what shall we think of that poor refuge of our Astrologers, when
having observed, that the Asterisms have removed themselves from their ancient
places, they transferr the virtues formerly attributed to the same, to the 12.
parts of the first moveable Heavens? were not those virtues assigned at first
formally, and according to the conceived nature of each particular Asterisme?
Had the Heaven been (...), Star-less; do you conceive that the Ancients would
nevertheless have so named the twelve parts of the Zodiac, as they did in
respect of the Asterismes; and have endowed them with the same virtues? Nor can
you say, that their virtues were then observed, when the Asterismes were each
one in its proper twelfth part of the Zodiac; and that those virtues were
attributed to the Asterismes, which of right belonged to the twelve parts of
the Zodiac. For, since the Asterismes were in the twelve parts that bear
their names only two thousand Years ago; before that time, the Asterisme of
Aries was in the place of Pisces, Leo in the place of Cancer, and so of the
rest and then no such thing could be Observed in the (supposed) moist parts of
the Zodiac, that would be agreeable to Fiery Asterismes, by which they were
possessed, and from which the twelve parts, that were afterward possessed by
them, were accounted and named Fiery. And thus much in just derision of
Astrologers conceits of the 12. Signs.

CHAP. X.
Their Attributes of the Planets, destroyed.

AS for the supposed Nature and Virtues of the Planets; however something in
that kind might be, from what we formerly granted, inferred of the Su^ and
Moon; yet how we should come to determine the several natures of the other Five
Planets, I profess, I am yet to learn. In particular, because Mars appeare^
reddish; may we therefore conclude that he is a Burning, scortching Planet?
Saturn, because pale; Is he therefore Cooling? O this would be an admirable
Consequence, if a Carbuncle would but burn, and Lime cool the hand that
touches it! As if all things, that look reddish, must of necessity be Fiery;
and all that look pale or whitish, be Cold as Snow. But it Mars be so
scortching, why are not we sensible of his heats in the middle of Winter, and
especially when he is Acronycal? Why do we not feel the Cold of Saturn. in the
midst of Summer? Is it because there are other more opportune times for us to
experiment their virtues? Or how can we distinguish and say that such a degree
of heat does proceed from Mars, not from the Sun? And such a degree of Cold
from Saturn, not from some other cause. But let us grant that Mars is Hot, and
Saturn Cold; and will it then follow, that they are such Malefical and
destructive Planets, as that no Child is born, whom they do not, during their
tyrannous influence, invade with their poisoned darts? Methinks, it were more
reasonable to believe, that Mars does comfort and cherish us with his heat; and
Saturn refresh us with his cooling influence.

The same may be said of Jupiter and Venus; only it is somewhat more
tolerable, that Astrologers imagine them to be Good and Kindly Planets. But
oh! that they would not run out into Extremes! For, when they come to this,
that nothing of good and happiness befalls man, but by the dispensation and
favor of these Planets: is any thing imaginable more fabulous, more profane?
It is somewhat strange, that extolling this unknown beneficence of these
Planets; they blush not in the mean time to be ungrateful to the Sun, whose
sovereign benefits are daily proclaimed through the whole World.

For Mercury, I cannot much wonder his attributes are so few and uncertain;
considering he seldom renders himself conspicuous, and so they cannot discern
what sex he is of. And here it is not worth the while, to rehearse all their
fooleries, concerning the sexes of the Planets, and other the like
extravagances.

Only I would enquire, how they come to know, that the Planets in their own
Houses, have Five, not Four Testimonies of Fortitude: and in their Exiles,
Five, not Four Testimonies of Debility? Why have they in their Exaltations,
just Four not Five, nor three? And so of the rest. Have they measured with an
Ell, or Weighed in the scales, the forces of the Planets in each Place of the
Zodiac, that-they dare pretend to Calculate them so Exactly; and according to
the number of suffrages, to determine the fates of Mortals, and their affairs?
We might insist upon these particulars more expressly, and especially upon the
Fortitudes and debilities of Accidental Dignities: But that no man who
considers them, can doubt that they are all gross and ridiculous Fictions, mere
arbitrary inventions, having no ground either in Reason, or Observation.

We should likewise discourse of the Planetary Aspects, whose Energy is
conceived to be almost omnipotent. And truly were it not manifest that the Five
kinds of Aspects were transfered upon all the Planets, from the five principal
Phases of the Moon, there would be matter for our admiration: but there can be
no other cause given of that determinate number. For why should not there be
many more sorts of Aspects? Are there any degrees in the Zodiac in which the
Planets have not some special habitude, or position among themselves, in which
they are idle, un-active and ejaculate no rays from their bodies? Will they
have that number of degrees which is an Aliquotal part of the Zodiacks? We
allow it them Gratis. But besides a Diametre of an hundred and eighty; a
Trigone of an hundred and twenty; a Tetragone, of ninety; an Hexagone, of
sixty; are there not also a Pentagone, of seventy two; an Octagone, of forty
five; an Enneagone, of forty; a Decagone, of thirty six; a Dodecagone of
thirty; a Pentekoode cagone, of twenty four degrees? etc. But they demand whole
Signs which may arise to the equal number of Twelve. Well, grant them that
also. And will not a Dodecagone, or one Sign, do that? Perhaps the buisiness
is two minute; And is not a Conjunction Platical much more minute? Or do they
not call it an Oppression of a Planet, when one Planet is intercepted by evil
Planets, distant from it by one Sign, on each side?

In this place, I might enumerate how many sorts of new. Aspects have been, not
long since added to the former List, by Kepler; as a Biquintile, or one of two
Fifths, i. e. of an hundred forty and four degrees; a Tridecile, or of three
Tens, i. e. an hundred and eight etc. But it will be more useful for us to
discover what induced Astrologers to make some Aspects Benifical, and other
some Malefical; which is a profound Mystery, and worthy your notice. Because
forsooth we signify benevolence to a person, when we look upon him Sextily, or
very Obliquely; and malevolence or Spite, when we behold him Quadrately, or
crookedly, Torvo Aspectu, as we say: and express anger or indignation; when we
fix our eyes upon a man Dimetraly, or in opposition to him (all which
Anatomists declare, when they show and read upon the Muscles moving the eyes)
therefore our subtle Astrologers, transferring the names of these our Aspects
upon the Planets, have also given them the Passions, which we express in our
eyes; and (what is most admirable) not in respect of the Planets beholding each
other, but of man, in whom that passion should be expressed. It is an argument,
that they held a Conjunction to be indifferent; in as much as it respondeth to
no Aspect in us, but to our closing our eyes, by which we signify nothing, or
very obscurely at most. And indeed, who would imagine, that a Planet, which is
Good in a Sextile aspect, should not, while it proceeds toward a Trine (in
which it is yet better) rather continually increase its goodness, than put on
so great malignity, in the middle of its progress? Who can conceive, that Venus
and Jupiter should in a Trine have five Testimonies of Fortitude; in a sextile,
Four; in the intermediate Quartile, none at all? Certainly, if the Planets act
any thing at all, they should seem to act it continually; and though perhaps
their activity may be sometimes more, sometimes less powerful: Yet I see no
reason, why that activity should be sometimes changed to a quite contrary, and
sometimes be none at all? I am unwilling to trouble my self with subjoyning any
thing concerning those rare Effects, which the Planets are supposed to cause in
their own Houses; for what can be more ridiculous than those supposed
Rejoycings, and Decrees among them; especially when They call in to the
buisiness, those imaginary points, the Head and Tale of the Dragon, and that
point of Fortune, which whoever first introduced, has given us occasion to
doubt, whether he was in his right wits, or not. But they could not
conveniently imagine many Heads, where the Decrees were to be so often varied.

CHAP. XI.
The Celestial Houses demolished.

TO blow up those Twelve Glorious Mansions of the Planets, to which our
Astrologers impute such wonderful Efficacy and power over even whole Cities,
with their inhabitants here below; let us consider.

First, that the Division of the Heavens into Twelve parts, rather than into
eight, ten, sixten, twenty, or any other number; is merely Arbitrary: nor can
they give any Reason for it at all. For though that number admits of more
Quotal parts, than any other near it, above or below; yet this has no
relations to the nature, or variety of the parts of a Circle: the number Sixty
having far more Quotal Parts; and that of six being more naturally convenient
for the division of a Circle, in respect of the accommodation of its Radius.

Secondly, would not the Distinction of the Houses be more artificially made by
certain Circles Parallel to the Horizon or at least by such as might intersect
each other in the Vertical and opposite points? Since each Star does either not
act at all, or is in-observable, while under the Horizon; does not reason
require, that if it have any activity at all, it should exercise the same
chiefly while it is above the Horizon; and that so much the more effectually,
by how much the higher, or nearer to the Vertical point it ascends. But they
will have forsooth, that the Stars in the Zodiac do display their virtues
as well below, as above, the Horizon; and therefore that the division of Houses
is fittly made by Circles, which divide the Zodiac into twelve parts. We grant
them this; but why then do not all of them agree in the intersection of these
Circles in the Poles of the Zodiac? And why do not all divide the Zodiac in
the same places of it? Is not that part of the Zodiac made one House by some,
which by others is made another?

Thirdly, why must the First House be that part of the Zodiac, which is yet
wholly under the Earth, rather than that which is wholly above it? Ought not
one half of it at least to be already risen above the Horizon, that so the half
of that which is called Medium Caeli, might be toward the West? I do not stand
to object, that the Medium Caeli, or house in which the Sun is, ought rather to
have made the First house; since the Energy of the Sun is much more manifest
than that of any other of the Planets: but I demand, how it comes to pass, that
that House, which is yet wholly beneath the Earth, should be more efficacious
to life, than that which is risen above it. And if that house, whatsoever it
be, which begins to rise, be the House of Life; why should not that, which
begins to set, be the house of Death? Why is the Eighth House so destructive to
Mankind, above the rest? Whence bath it such malice and malignant virtue to us
poor Mortals?

But we shall do better to enquire, from whence in the general, these Houses
come to have their particular virtues? Is it from the Moveable Heavens? Then
why should the same part of Heaven, which is happy and benign in one House,
become unhappy and malign in others? Is it from the particular Place, or
Space? Then how can mere Dimensions be endowed with such and so great force of
activity? Nor can They excuse themselves by urging, that it is not the Houses
themselves, but the Planets inhabiting them, which work such wonders. For since
they suppose, that a Planet which is Good and propitious in its own nature,
does become Evil and destructive in an ill House; we must demand again, whence
comes that Malice, wherewith the good Planet is so strongly infected, as to
change its own benevolent native influence, into a dangerous and Offensive? How
can a man conceive, that Jupiter should dispense very great favors and
happiness, while he is in the First House; and soon after dart all the plagues
and mischiefs in the world upon our heads, when he comes to lodge in the
second, which is contiguous to the First? That he should, in the tenth House,
destine men to temporal Dignities; in the ninth, to Ecclesiastical: and yet
when he quartereth in the eighth (lying betwixt them both) he should make men
ignoble, base, mad, and the like? Moreover can we understand, why or how, when
any infant is born, the Fates of his brethren should be written on the third
House, of his Parents on the fourth, of his Children on the fifth, of his Wife
on the seventh, of his Friends on the eleventh, and so of the rest? Can any
thing be more manifest, than that all this accommodation of several Houses to
men's several Relations and Interests, is wholly Fictitious and Arbitrary? I
will not dissemble; truly that man had no very dull nor unpleasant Fansy, who
first made the Planets provide stables for Beasts, in the Heavens; and take
care of Greater Cattle, in the twelfth out-house, and of smaler, in the sixth.
Nor was his Imagination less active, who would have longer journeys made in the
ninth stage, and shorter in the third. It is not many years since the famous
Morinus, in a little Book, entitled Domorum Cabbala detecta, according to his
great ingennuity invented Four things, and made them presidents chiefly over
the four Cardines, viz. Life over the Horoscope; Good over the Medium Caeli;
Love, over the West; Passion, over the Imum Caeli: and then proceeding through
Trine Aspects, and that by retrogradation, He will have a threefold Life in
Himself, in God, in Sons, to be found in the First, Ninth and Fifth Houses: a
Threefold Good, Immaterial, Material Animate, Material Inanimate, in the Tenth,
Sixth, and Second: a Threefold Love, of Wife, Brethren, Friends, in the
Seventh, Eleventh and Third: a Threefold Passion, from Parents, Enemies, Death,
in the Fourth, Twelfth, and Eighth. And hereupon He conceived the Nature and
distribution of the Houses to be most happily established. But by his Favor,
however the whole buisiness seems subtilely disputed; yet until he shall have
more fully explained the matter, in his Gallica Astrologia, we must suspend our
assent to his nice Theory, because He has assumed most of his positions
Gratis, without probation. As in particular, why only those Four things, and
neither more nor fewer? And why that Division of them into Three members, nor
more, nor less? Besides may we not enquire, why Life in God, or God himself, in
whom all things live, should be confined rather to the Ninth House, than to the
First, than to all, than to none? Why if Life in God be made one member of the
triple division, is not Life in the Sun made the second, and Life in our
Parents the third? Why is not the House of Parents accounted, if not in the
Trine of Life, yet at least in that of Love: and why not conjoined with any
thing, rather than with Enemies and Death? And other the like incongruities,
which to avoid prolixity, I omit to mention. It may suffice, that since our
Morinus professes that other Astrologers, and particularly Ptolomie himself,
by reason of their ignorance of this Cabbal, preposterously made use of as well
the Horoscope, as the rest of the Houses: it is to be feared, least sober men
may from thence argue the Vanity and uncertainty of the whole Art; forasmuch as
it contains no one fundamental, which is not disallowed of and impugned by
some one or more of the Professors themselves, and so can afford no one
conclusion certain and ratified. Certainly, both Ptolomie himself makes the
judgments concerning Children, Servants, Infirmities etc. from other Houses,
than the rest of Astrologers usually do: and Manilius, when he describes
Altha, or Events, subverteth the whole reason and signification of the Houses
Vulgarly admitted; beginning the series or order of them, not from the
Horoscope, but from the Lot of Fortune, which is as far distant from the
Horoscope, as the Sun is from the Moon: and advancing to the Consequent Signs,
when the Nativity or Conception is in the Day, to the Antecedent, when it is in
the Night. But it is wearisome even to think of remembering, or refuting more of
these Trifles, Absurdities, and Contradictions.

CHAP. XII.
Astrological Predictions, concerning Changes of Weather, uncertain.

THe Argument of our next Consideration, must be those positions of Astrologers
which concern the Predictions of Changes of Weather. And these, indeed are
almost infinite; so that all we shall have time and patience to do, will be
only to touch upon some of their Capital Assumptions. Some they deliver
generally of the constitution of the Air, through the whole Year; some of the
constitution of the several Quarters, or Seasons; and some of the temper of
each Day in the Year particularly.

For the Praediction of the General Constitution of the Air through the whole
Year, they erect either Four, or Eight, or Twelve Celestial Figures; Four for
the four moments wherein the Sun enters into Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn;
four for New, or Full Moon immediately preceding each of those Entrances; and
four for the New, or Full Moon immediately subsequent: and then noting the
places of each of the Planets, as well in their Figure or Houses, as in the
Zodiac or Signs; they collect all the Fortitudes, and all the Debilities of
all the Planets; and taking those whose Fortitudes are more than their
Debilities, they regard that Planet, which appears the strongest of all, or
which has most Testimonies of Fortitude, and make that Lord of the Year,
conjoyning to him for a companion, that Planet, which has the most Testimonies
of Fortitude next after him. The Lord of the whole Year being thus elected;
according to his supposed constitution, or as he is Hott, Cold, Moist, Dry,
Benefical, Malifiical, etc. They give judgment of the future constitution of
the whole Year; or of the predomination of Heat, Cold, Dryness, Wett, Thunder,
Lightning, and Winds; as also of the wholsomness or unwholsomness of the Air;
of the Plenty, or scarcity of Corn, and other Fruits of the Earth, and the like.

For the Prediction of the Constitution of the Quarters, or Seasons of the
Year; from three Figures of each Quarter, they collect likewise the Lord of
each, according to the predominion of Fortitudes: and then pronounce what kind
of Spring, what Summer, what Autumn, what Winter is next to come, according to
the qualities of their respective Lords. For Mars (for Example) shall increase
the heat in Summer; mitigate the cold in Winter; make the Spring rather Warm,
then cold; and likewise the Autumn. Saturn the quite contrary; and so of the
rest.

Lastly for the Prediction of the Weather each Day through the whole Year; They
will have Four Themes or Scheams to be erected for each month; one at the
moment of the New Mood; one at that of the Full-moon; and one apeece at each of
the Quarters: and then collecting what Planet is Lord of a Quater of a month,
they Prognosticate the Temper of the Air as well for that whole Quarter of the
Month, as for each Day therein; according as the Dominion decays, or
continues strong, respectively to that dominion which is to succeed at the
next Quarter, or as that is of a contrary, or the same, or of a middle nature.

But because the Predictions taken from these predominions, are for the most
part fallacious; therefore they call in other things also, which may impede the
Effects otherwise to succeed, and produce some contrary to them. For that I may
not insist upon the notable variety of Effects, which they will have to arise
not only from several Stars of the Zodiac, according as they call some
Saturnal, some Jovial, some Martial, etc. But also from the Twelve Houses, and
the several parts of them, whereof they make some to be of their own nature
Exciters of Thunder, some Causers of Rain, some of Hail, some of Snow, some of
North, some of South Winds, etc. And thus you may observe, how they derive the
chiefest variety from the Aspects of the Planets, and those places in which
they are the while.

Now among these Aspects, the most powerful for change of weather, they make
that called a Conjunction; the next an Opposition; the next a Quartile; then a
Trine, and last (or least) of all, a Sextile. For they will have the forces of
every Planet to be corroborated by the additional forces not only of such other
Planets as are of like virtues, but also of indifferent ones; as on the other
side, they will have the influence of each to be abated or mitigated by the
influences of Contrary Planets, according to their mutual Aspects: and in the
General, that clear and wholesome Weather is signified by a Trine or Sextile;
soul and unwholesome, by a Quartile; indifferent, by a Conjunction, rather the
one than the other, according to the condition of the Ruling Planet. As for
their Apertiones Portrarum, or Catarracts, i. e. of great turbulency in the
Air, by high winds, great Rains, Thunder, showers, Hail storms, etc. these
they will have to be caused, not only when the Planets whose natures, and
houses are opposite, or respect each other in an opposite, or Quartile aspect;
but also, and chiefly, when the Moon leaving one Planet, or its aspect, is
carried to another Planet, or its aspect, which is opposite thereto. For thus,
when the Moon (for Example) is carried from Saturn to the Sun, or contrariwise
from the Sun to Saturn; They will have dark Weather, Foggs, Mifts, abundance
of showers and extreme Colds to be engendered and portended. When the Moon
marches from Jupiter to Mercury, or from Mercury to Jupiter; then we must have
high Winds, and especially from the North and East, as also Lightning, Thunder,
and the like tempestuous Weather, etc.

In respect of the Places likewise, They make no small difference. For if the
Planets be Oriental and Direct, and about the Apogeum; then must they signify
Dry weather: if Occidental, Retrograde, and about the Perigeum; wett weather,
Mars only excepted, who at such times increases Heat and Dryness. But our
chiefest care must be to regard the Signs, in respect of the Triplicities, or
Trigons, in which the Planets are configurated among themselves. For from
thence, respective to the aspects of the Planets made in them, there ensue
Fiery, Watery, etc. effects. But above all they cry up a Conjuuction; and so
much the more, if it chance to be of those Planets which they call the Great,
or Greatest. For if such a Conjunction happen in Fiery Signs, then it portends
great and dangerous Conflagrations: if in Watery then great Inundations: if in
Earthy, then huge Earthquakes: in Fiery, then fatal Plagues and Pestilences.
And wheresoever it happens, if Saturn be predominant, it produces great
sicknesses, and contagions; if Jupiter be predominant, either no diseases at
all, or very gentle ones: if Mars rule, acute diseases. The like affections of
the Air, They praesage from the Conjuctions of the inferior or lesser Planets,
and chiefly if they are all conjoined. For if they meet in Watery Signs, then
we must certainly expect deluges. And to prevent your wonder at this, though
they derive fair Weather from the Sun, and three superior Planets; they decree
Clouds from the three Inferior; and add, that Mars sometimes of the superior,
does cause rains, and Mercury of the Inferior, serenity. For they take Mercury
for Eolus, who does sometimes raise high Winds and storms, and sometimes blow
them away again, and sweep the welkin, as with a broom. If he be conjoined with
Saturn; then doubtless we shall be troubled with dark, rainy; and blustering
winds: if with Jupiter; we have gentle and refreshing gusts: if with Mars,
partching and burning blasts: if with the Sun hott and unwholesome gales.
Iomitt, how they attribute Hail to some Aspects, Thunder to others, snow to
others, and the like: and how the Planets, as they pass near the Fixed Stars, do
mightily increase their virtues; (for when Mars passes by the Pleiades, he
does so heighten their watery forces, that woe be to us, for deluges) and how
they admit the same effects, concerning the Rising and Setting of the Fixed
Stars respective to the Sun, all which are contained in the Tables and
Kalandars of the Ancients, as we have formerly observed; with an infinite
number of the like Extravagances, whereof their Books are full.

After this short account of the Grounds and Manner of their erecting
Praedictions of changes of weather, we might well spare any further discussion
of them, their Vanity being obvious to every man's consideration. For how
frivolously do they elect the Lord of the Year, of each Quarter of the Year, of
each Quarter of the Moon? that designation of a number of Testimonies of
Fortitude and Debility being merely Chimerical, and yet made the Signs by
which they are guided in their Election. If there must be a Lord paramont among
the Planets, one would think the sovereignty should belong to the Sun; and in
the next place to the Moon; not that it should be taken away from them, and
conferred upon Mars, Mercury, or any other, so as that in respect of it, the
power of the Sun and Moon must be wholly diminished and obscured. But how can
that very moment, wherein a Planet passes by the Center of the Sun, or
Equator, or either of the Tropicks conduce to the election of it for Lord? Are
not those Circles in the Heavens merely imaginary, distitute of all virtue; or
if there be any virtue adscriptive to them, ought it not to be derived wholly
from the Sun? And does not the Sun in its approach to, and recess from them,
proceed on in one equal tenor, nor so vary his influx in them, as that it is
not the same both before and after he has passed them? Or, if he does vary his
influx, is not the tenor of his variation the same both before and after: so
that from one punctual moment nothing of change can be inferred more from one
particular moment, than from any other precedent or consequent? The same
likewise may be said of those moments, in which the Moon is in the points of
Conjunction, or Opposition; or those that are immediately precedent, or
subsequent to them. But what if no man can be certain of that precise moment,
in which the Sun is in a Cardinal point of Heaven? Sure I am, there are no
Tables or Ephemerides so exact, as to teach that time within 6 hours, or the
4th part of a Day. For though those composed by Tycho come the nearest to
truth, yet they are somewhat short of it, and we are confirmed that hitherto
none have ever been free from some exorbitancy or other, more or less: so that
yet there never was a Celestial Scheam erected, at the precise moment of the
Suns being in either of the Cardinal points, and so no experiment could be made
of this so magnified Dominion. For suppose the Calculators mistake no more than
only two hours in the time; then what is ascribed to the First House, does
really belong to the Twelfth, or to the second, betwixt which and the First,
how great difference they make, every man perceives. The same in proportion
may be said of the uncertainty of the moment, when the Moon is in Conjunction
with, or Opposition to the Sun; forasmuch as even the Eclipses observed do
assure us, that that moment is always different from that which not only the
Ancients, but also the moderns Ephemerides prescribe.

And what if the true places of the Planets were never yet exactly known, as we
shall declare hereafter? So that a Planet does not deserve that Dominion, which
is given to it, in respect of the Testimonies of Fortitude, that do not belong
to it, when it is absent from that place, upon the supposition of which it had
them assigned. Again, what if those things we have discovered of the Planets,
and their motions, be such as require a new Theory and new precepts concerning
them and their periods, different, if not contrary to those that have hitherto
been excogitated and delivered? For if the Moon, according as she is increased
or diminished in light, acquireth various degrees of Fortitude and Debility,
and causes various effects: must we not allow the same also to Venus, which
likewise has the same Variety of Phases, as the Moon? If the Earth suffer so
much of alteration from the various aspects of the Moon; it is fit that Jupiter
should suffer some alteration from the aspects of his proper Moons, which as
they are more in number, so are they swifter in their motions, and oftener
changed in their configurations? And according to this alteration, is it not
reasonable to conceive, that Jupiter becomes stronger or weaker, as to his
activity upon inferior bodies? May not the same be said of Saturn, in respect
of his Ansulae? And are not those his Ansulae, and also the Jovial Moons to be
numbered among the Planets, which in respect of the Earth display their
particular virtues, and so may have their various Testimonies of Fortitude and
Debility, and thereby stand Candidates for the honor of the supreme Dominion,
when it comes to their turn, as well as any of the rest? But why do I dwell thus
long upon this subject, when common Experience convinces the Dominions
supposed, to be mere Dreams? As also are all the mighty Attributes not only of
the Dodecatemoria, or twelve Divisions of the First Moveable Heaven, (than
which Vanity it self is not more Vain) but also of the Asterismes, and Stars
themselves, which they will have to act, according as each does resemble such
or such a Planet in color. For who could ever experimentally tell, that the
Heart of Scorpio does heat and dry; since no Star is in color more like Mars?
And why should the Ey of Taurus, which is one of the Hyades, and the chiefest
among them, cool and moysten; since that also comes as near the redness of
Mars, as the Heart of Scorpio? Why was not the Dog Star, conceived to be the
cause of the greatest heats in Summer, rather accounted Martial?

Of their Aspects I add nothing; because look how much authority and faith our
Astrologers conferr upon them, so much does daily Experience detract from them.
For in vain do they recurr to the signs and Triplicities; in vain do they
allege their Conjunctions, when the Events nevertheless deceive them. It is
memorable, what we read in Histories, and indeed almost in all Books of the
former Age; that when Astrologers, in respect of great Conjunctions, and some
mean ones to happen in the watery signs, had Praedicted a General Deluge
(forsooth) and so great calamities of men and beasts by water, as was never
before heard of, and this to fall out in the month of February, in the year
1524. so that many, being terrified with this Prognostication, in Spain,
France, Italy, Germany, and other Parts of Europe, provided themselves of
shipping, boats, Victuals and other necessaries for a long Voyage, and betook
themselves to the topps of the highest mountains, in expectation of the Deluge
foretold: It fell out, that all that month of February was fair and clear,
and more temperate than ordinary; as if Providence had ordained that exceeding
serenity at that time, on purpose to refute and deride the vain Predictions of
our Star-prophets (for it is rare to see February, pass away without leaving
raines and cold behind it) which even Cardan and Origanus themselves could not
dissemble their sorrow for, complaining that that judgment of a Deluge then to
come, was given by Stofler, not without the irreparable disgrace of Astrology.
Just such another Prognostication was that, which Scaltger reports, in
(Praefation. in Manil) out of Rigordus, who wrote that the Astrologers had
foretold so general a destrnction, by the violence of winds and tempest,
because of a Conjunction of as well the inferior as superior Planets, in
September MCLXXXVI. there being an Eclips of the Sun on the 11 of the kalends
of May immediately foregoing; as that many expected the Universal Dissolution
of Nature then to come: and yet when all came to all, there was not so much as
a storm ensued at the time Predicted: and the contrary event derided the skill
of the Astrologers, and foolish credulity of those that believed them. There
was no cause why I should infer these rare instances; considering that every
days experience does sufficiently demonstrate the like fallacy; at least to
such, as give themselves the fatisfaction of observing the times, in which the
Conventions of the Planets are set down in the Ephemerides. For, how many
Apertiones Portrarum are there, not only in every year, and month, but also in
every week, nay day; and yet nevertheless are there not whole weeks, months,
nay sometimes years too, in which no extraordinary changes of weather can be
observed, but what are agreeable to the Season? And let them add as much as
they please, the variety of situation in respect of the Sun, of the Eccentrick
of the Epicycle; still there is nothing which they can prove by experience; or
which may not be disproved by contrary experience: so that their rules become
plainly arbitrary, and the matter comes to pass alike, whether you predict fair
weather or rain, or winds, or calmes, unless it be that in winter commonly
there is most wett, and in Summer most heat. But the Plowman may as easily
divine of the weather, as our learned Astrologer with all his Books, Tables,
and Celestial Figures or Scheams about him. Schonerus once observed, that as
Mars was passing near the Pleiades, there fell down abundant rain: but how
often have we our selves observed that Planet travailing the same way, and yet
not so much as a cloud to be seen in the sky for many days together both before
and after? Ought he therefore instantly to set it down for a rule, that we
should always expect great rains when ever Mars was approaching the Pleiades?
Or may not we, with more reason, institute the quite contrary? Besides, it is
no unreasonable question, to demand of Astrologers, why Mars should not rather
repress and abate, than extimulate and heighten the watery influence of the
Pleiades? And why should not the Moon, and Venus, and Mercury, rather excite
and increase it? When yet we so frequently observe these Planets ariving at the
Pleiades, when the Air is most serene, and no showers succeed?

I add nothing likewise of the Rising and Setting of the Fixed Stars, of which I
have already said enough; only I advertise, that since the Telescope has
discovered innumerable Stars in the Firmament, besides those formerly beheld by
the naked ey: if there be any virtues to be ascribed to the Stars, certainly it
is requisite we should compose new Rules and precepts, according to which the
newly discovered Stars may challenge to themselves those Effects, that are
fully attributed to others. Nor can it be Objected, that these Newfound Stars
are too small; because, since their multitude is incredible, and chiefly in all
the Galaxy, or Via Lactea: it seems reasonable, that their vast excess in
number should compensate their defect in bigness: and though each one singly
cannot have much of energy, yet all of them together may do well. Where we
cannot but wonder, that the Galaxy, being so spacious and considerable a part
in the Heavens, had never any particular Effects attributed to it; especially
when to the two small Stars of Cancer, to the Manger, and other cloudy Stars
(which yet are nothing but very small assemblies of most minute Stars) great
Effects have been imputed: and the Via Lactea conteins myriads of the like
heaps of minute Stars, in all parts of it, and through the whole Zodiac.

CHAP. XIII.
The Astrologers Plea, and the Answer thereto.

HEre let us a while attend to the Plea of Astrologers, and hear what they can
allege in their Defense. Their principal Allegations are, that the Rules and
Placits of their Art, according to which they institute their Predictions of
weather, were grounded upon long Observations: that the same are still
confirmed by many experiments: that among many predictions of the Ancients,
that of Thales is very memorable, when foreknowing that there would be great
Plenty of Olives the next year, he went and farmed all the Olive yards in
Miletum, and Chio, before hand, and so the Event answering his expectation, he
thereby very much enriched himself: that if the Effects do not always follow
according to their divination, the fault is not to be imputed to the Art it
self, but to the unskilfullness or negligence of the Artist: that since they
subject the Stars, not to Fate, but to God, who can at pleasure change and
avert Effects that would otherwise come to pass; when things do not succeed
according to their presignifications, the blame does not belong to Astrology:
that all the objections made against them prove no more than this, that
Astrology is only a Conjectural Art, as Physic, Rhetoric, and the Art of
Navigation; not that it is no Art at all, or a mere Hariolation: that to
contradict their Art, is injurious not only to the Heavenly bodies themselves,
as if they were made in vain; but even to the Divine wisdom, as if either that
had not made the Stars for the use of Man, or it had not endowed man with such
sagacity as might serve to make him foresee what good was to be hoped for, and
what evil to be shunned: and finally, that it is downright madness to referr
these Effects either to Chance, or to any other Cause, but the Heavens;
especially since though there may be inferior Causes admitted to conduce to the
production of those Effects, yet those are only the instruments of the Heaven,
which gives them their activity, and uses them as subordinate Agents, Now
judge you, whether these be not weighty Considerations.

I Return, that they never have proved, nor ever will be able to prove, that
the Rules or Institutes of their Predictions were founded upon long
Observations: as well because those Times, from which both the Chaldeans, and
Egyptians boast to have had their Observations, are altogether fabulous; as
because the Ancient Astronomers were studious to know only the motions and
courses of the Sun and Moon, in order to the prediction of Eclipses; but not at
all of any other of the Planets as may be evinced from hence, that Hipparchus
knew nothing of them sufficient to enable him to reduce their motions into
Tables: and Ptolomy was the first, who from Hipparchus and his own Observations
composed Tables of their several motions. Again, because the Places of the
Planets in the Zodiac being then unknown; no man could observe what would be
the Effect of each Planet being in the various places of the Zodiac; which
their Placits suppose most falsely. Further because the Chaldeans manner of
Observing, mentioned by Empiricus, does sufficiently declare what kind of gross
and imperfect Observations they made. Moreover, because the Fixed Stars
constantly from their Creation moved from the West toward the East; but the
Chaldeans were utterly ignorant of any such motion, and so could not observe
and design the places of either the Fixed, or Erratique Stars: because since
all the more Antique Astronomers held all the Celestial motions to be
Concentrical, and Ptolomy first observed them to be Eccentrical: it is
manifest, how much knowledge they wanted, in order to their being able to
observe, and desine which were the true places of the Planets. And because
as well in respect of the special motion of the Fixed Stars to the East, as of
the special and manifold wanderings of the Planets; the same Face or
Constitution of the Heavens cannot again ever return: and therefore this or
that change of weather once observed to happen in such or such a position of
the Heavens can never be again observed in the like position, so as to make it
but probable, that the Placits of Astrologers were grounded upon repeated
Observations. What they say, might indeed suffice, in case the position of
some, and those the principal Stars, were the same: but only, when they are
asked, why some mutation of weather does not respond to a prediction, made
from some certain position of the Heavens? They instantly recurr to the
situation of some Stars, which is not the same it was with other Stars
constituted in the same position. And certainly, since not only the Stars
returning to the same situation of their operations; but others also that are
in another situation; it is requisite that the action of those should be
disturbed, and diversified, by the different action of these. Hence whereas
they affirm, that their Rules are confirmed by frequent Experiments; that is,
manifestly vain and false, even from this, that they are contradicted by as
many, and more Experiments. We could attest, that the same has often happened
to us, that happened to Joh. Picus, who Observing the mutations of the Air for
a whole Winter together, scarce found six or seven of an hundred and thirty
days, that agreed with the Predictions of Astrologers. And I pray, if any
should cast Dice, and according to the chances set down; that such and such
days we should have fair weather, and such and such foul; would not his
predictions fall out to be verified upon 6 or 7. days in an hundred and
thirty? So that as for Experiments, our Astrologers can never secure their
Placits, by alleging the certainty of them.

As for that famous Prediction of Thales; it is a wonder they do not take the
same course to enrich themselves, by the presages of plentiful years; if they
believe their Astrology to be no whit inferior to that, which they think Thales
made use of. But, in troth, from all their frippery of rules they shall never
be able to discribe a Position of the Heavens, that can inform them of the
future fruitfulness of any sort of Trees, so as to encourage them to farm all
the Orchards in the Country, for that year; or to lay a good wager that their
Prediction shall be fulfilled, especially with a good Husbandman or Gardener,
who understands the nature of Fruit Trees much better than they. But is it not
said, that Thales drew this Conjecture from Astrology? It is so indeed; but yet
it is worthy our notice, what Aristotle tells us; that he had that
foreknowledge of an extraordinary plenty of Olives [(...)] Before winter was
quite ended. For he being addicted to the study of Nature, and maintaining
Water to be the Material Principle of all things, had often observed what kinds
of fruit grew most plentifully from much Water; and what from little: And there
being Commonly much rain either in the beginning, or middle, or end of Winter;
He might as easily foreknow at the end of that Winter, that there would ensue
the next Summer an abundance of Olives, as I have seen some Husbandmen, who
have foretold the like plenty of the same fruit, not only from the Winter, or
Autumn, but also from the Summer preceding, and this from the great raines
that fell in that Summer. This likewise is worthy consideration, that when
Thales would purge that part of Philosophy, which some had upbraided him
withal, as useless, and nothing conducing to redress his poverty: he wisely
contrived to referr this experiment of his wisdom to that very part in Chief.
Just as many in our days, who seeing that the Common people think the
contemplation of Celestial matters to be unprofitable and Idle, as no thing
availing to the Commodities of life; to confute this Vulgar error, and
Vindicate themselves from contempt, they cherish the common persuasion, that
Astronomy conduces to the prediction of Future Events. And thus did that brave
Man, Keppler, who said, that a Foolish Daughter was not to be despised, if by
her gains she maintained her wise Mother: intimating that Astrology, though
degenerous, was not to be turned out of Doors, because without her the Mother,
Astronomy, would have fewer Favorers and supporters, It is well known, that
Thales was scoff't at for his study of Astronomy, not only by diverse others,
but even by his own maid; and so that his study was not in revolving Tables, or
consulting Ephemerides, but only in beholding the Stars, and Observing their
motions: but our Astrologers, when they make their predictions, have no regard
at all to the Stars (of which the greatest part of them are wholly ignorant)
but consult only Ephemerides, and the rules set down in their Books. And
whereas we read, that he predicted an Eclipse, it must be that he had by him
the Observations of other Eclipses made by others, and especially the
Egyptians, with whom he had some Conversation: but this argues no more than
that the buisiness of the Ancients was chiefly to understand the motions of the
Sun and Moon, in order to their Prognostication of Eclipses; and that they had
investigated the motions of the other Planets, there remains no memorial at
all, I add, that what Aristotle says of the imputation of this Prediction to
Thales, in respect of his great sagacity and wisdom; ought so to be
understood, as though the narration it self were utterly false, yet such was
the same of the man's wisdom, that he deserved to have it believed of him. I my
self have known a man, upon whom many notable predictions were fathered, of
which indeed he never so much as dreamed; and this only because of the great
skill he was thought to have in Astronomy, and that men would not admit him to
lie poring all the Year long upon the Stars, to no purpose. And though He did
solemnly disavow that he had ever predicted any such thing, yet that did the
more confirm and increase the common report of his supposed Divinations, as if
he declined the matter only to avoid envy; so greedy of rumors and novelties
are the Vulgar, and so industrious in forging and believing fopperies. But of
Thales I have said enough.

As for their Plea, that when Events disprove their predictions, the fault is
not of the Art it self, but of the Artists: this is a subterfuge, and so poor a
one, as that it betrayeth the vanity and imposture of the very Art. For they
have patched up an Art of so many, and so various things, as that whatsoever
the 'Event be, they have still some rule or other to show, according to which
the Event observed may be thought to have come to pass. And grant that the
contrary had happned; then they have another rule in readiness, according to
which that sell out. And hereupon (forsooth) they become admirable, when after
a thing is come to pass, they tell you how it came so to pass; but before the
Event, nothing is safe, nor can they more certainly divine that a thing will
come to pass, than that the quite contrary will come to pass. And O wonderful!
If when they have divined positively, the thing predicted does not ensue
accordingly; they excuse themselves, and say that they mistook in their
Calculations, and had a respect to one thing, when they ought to have had
regard to another. And do not you think they would have run to the same excuse,
in case they had predicted the quite contrary, and that nevertheless had fallen
out otherwise than they had predicted? Wherefore, to speak the truth, the
Artists deserve to be condemned for their easy credulity, and implicit
embracing the dictates of their Art, as if they were sacred and oraculous: and
Art it self to be exploded, in that it is composed of such ambiguous and
uncertain Placits, as seem rather to have been chosen by a Lottery, or casting
of Dice, than by judgment and Observation.

But nevertheless, it was discreetly done of some of them (for I do not find
them All to have so much piety in them) to exempt the Stars from the
jurisdiction of Fate, and to suppose them under the government only of God, who
made them: and yet when they pretend this for an excuse and support of a most
vain and indeed profane Art; I dare not say, they have done either discreetly
or piously. For they make as if they were certain, that such an Effect would
inevitably ensue, as they have foretold; unless God by some special resolve of
his providence is pleased to avert it: as if it were better, that God should be
supposed to pervert the General order of Causes and Effects, that his infinite
wisdom ordained and instituted from all Eternity; than that their foolish
Aphorisms should be suspected of uncertainty and deceit: and as if it were
more reasonable to recurr to a miracle, than to confess the fallability of
their rules. And certainly, if any man can think this refuge of theirs to be
considerable; we not despair to persuade him, that there can be no dream so
wild and absurd, that is not capable of defense from the same allegation.

Again, I cannot but allow them to be somewhat Modest, when they confess their
Art to be only Conjectural: and yet they may be accused of great Arrogance,
when they boast it to be of equal certainty with the Arts of Physic,
Rhetoric, and Navigation. For in these, Human prudence and industry so act
their parts, as that the proposed and desired End does for the most part follow
thereupon; and when it does so follow, the Cause is not immanifest: But in
Astrology mere Chance plays the whole game; and the Event foretold does seldom
or never follow; and when it does follow, the Cause is not altogether obscure
and uncertain, and every man may give as good a Cause among sublunaries for
that Effect, as Astrologers do from the Stars; and so Astrology is not so much
a true Art, as a mere Lottery, or Guessing at random. Nor am I in saying this,
injurious to those noble Creatures, the Stars, whose true and genuine virtues
whatsoever they be, I most wilingly allow them; but it is injurious to them,
to dishonor them with the imputation of such power and efficacy, as is
incompetent to them, and to make them many times the instruments not only to
Men's ruin, but even to all their vicious inclinations, and delestable
villainies. Nor is it Derogatory to the Divine wisdom, which makes nothing in
vain, and may be conceived to have had some respect unto Man, when it made the
host of Heaven: but it is derogatory thereto, to imagine God to have an ey to
those ridiculous purposes and ends, that men many times foolishly propose to
themselves, and so to presume of the certain knowledge of Human Events, as if
they had pried into the secret Counsels of Providence Divine. We deny not, but
God has endowed the Stars, as all the rest of his Creatures, with some certain
Virtues; but we question, whether Astrologers know what those Virtues are; and
whether the Faculties, which they ascribe to the Stars, be the same that God
gave them, or others merely imaginary. Nor do we deny, that God gave Man
Sagacity or wisdom of Mind, in order to his conjecture, what may be
beneficial, and what hurtful to him in the Future; but we deny, that this
Sagacity is any other but the chiefest part of Moral prudence, or that we ought
to conceive it to consist only in the skill of Astrology, as they will have it.
As if when Men stood in doubt, what would be the Event of such or such an
affair, they ought not to consider the Causes, Instruments, Circumstances, and
probabilities of what they design, and so to proceed to action, or desist
accordingly: but only to have recourse to the papers of Astrologers, and there
to enquire, whether or no, and how their enterprise should succeed. Or as if
Astrologers, being to Sow their fields with this or that sort of grain, would
not rather take advice for the most opportune season, from the experienced
Plowman, than from their Almansors; and prefer the honest Sagacity of the
clouted shoe, to that of their uncertain Astrology.

But they tell us, that it is madness to referr to mere Chance, fair Weather,
Rain, Plenty, Scarcity, and the like Effects; as if they had not their proper
Causes in Nature, or happened not by the disposition of Providence Divine. This
you will say, is much; and yet to say, that those things happen by Chance, in
respect of Man's ignorance, and of the prevision of Astrologers, I hope is no
madness at all; since it amounts to no more than this, that Man does not
understand their particular Causes, nor their Connection with the Effects; and
therefore that it cannot be foreknown, from whence or when they will evene, and
that it is by chance that Men foretell that they will, and when they will
evene, since the truth is concealed no less from him, who does adventure to
predict them, than from him who does not; not after those Events have, or have
not happned, at the time prefixed, can he who predicted them glory that he did
it upon any certain science, or he who did not predict them say that he forbore
upon the score of his skill in Divination. And hence is it, that he whose
prediction comes to be fulfilled by the Event, may (indeed) be accounted the
Happier, or more Lucky-man in his conjecture; but not a jot the more skillful
or Knowing, for it. This I speak only of Astrologers; because Mariners,
Plow-men, and Shepherds, and others may, from the paleness, or redness of the
Moon, from Halo's, Paraselen's, Rain-bowes, and the like Meteorological Signs,
probably conjecture what weather there will be either the same day, or the next
following, by reason of the familiar connection of such Events to such Causes:
but our Astrologers, who glory that they are able to predict all sorts of
weather on each Day of the Year; and that not only many hours, but many Days,
Weeks, Months, Years, and Ages before hand, can predict no such thing, because
there is not the like familiar and manifest connection betwixt the Causes and
Events. Nor can they object, that their Calculations are very laborious and
difficult; for this when all is done, is nothing but with great labor and
pains to make a Calculation from some intricate game on the Dice. For allow
that fair weather shall succeed upon such or such particular chance of the
Dice; and foul weather upon another; and wind upon another: and then make your
predictions of each according to the chances, and you shall find the buisiness
succeed with as much certainty, as if you raised your predictions from the
Aphorisines and Calculations of Astrologers. Nor is this a wonder, since I have
heard of some Almanak-makers, who were famous for their Weather-wisedome, and
yet they never used other art to make them by, than the Chances of a Die.

But they confidently demand, whether there be in nature any Cause, to which
the changes of Weather ought in probability to be referred, except only the
Heavens? Whereas it is easily Answered, that the Heavens indeed (or rather the
Stars, and chiefly the Sun) are the General Causes of most of the mutations in
the Air; and yet besides them, there are other special and principal Causes
among inferior bodies, to which it is to be referred, that those mutations
happen in this or that place, in this or that time, and in this or that manner,
rather then otherwise; and not to the Heavens, which without them could not
Cause any Effect or change at all: and that by the nature and activity of these
inferior Causes it is that the Stars do attemper their influence, and
accommodate their action. This considered, They do ill to affirm, that all
sublunary Agents are no more but merely the instruments of Superlunary; for in
truth they have special Virtues of their own, such as are incompetent to mere
Instruments; and it is they, that rather make use of the virtues of the Stars,
as their instruments. Again, there are some certain Effects, to which no man
can say the Heavens do much conduce; such as the sudden eruptions of Flames
and Fire, and Vapors caused by them from subterraneous Waters; yea Metals
themselves, which though some have supposed to be generated in the bowels of
the Earth, by the special energy of the Sun; yet none have ever given an
account of the true reason, or manner of that Generation; nor is it indeed
conceivable how. True it is indeed, that the warmth of the Sun does cherish the
body of the Earth, and so promote the fertility of the seeds therein contained;
but yet an External cherishing Cause does not exclude internal and more proper
Causes from executing their particular faculties. As for the Moon and the other
Planets; if they may be admitted to act any thing upon the Earth, by the same
reason the Earth may be conceived to re-act upon them: nor can the Earth be
more their Instrument, then they the Earths. The parts of the World mutually
contribute their operations and assistance each to other; forasmuch as every
part has its peculiar virtues, and in a special manner displayeth the same by
its actions. I add, that it has been granted, that the Sun and Moon have their
operations upon inferior bodies; and that they produce such Effects, as may be
fore-known, and foretold: but not that the prenotion and prediction of those
Effects do belong more to Astrologers, than to the common People; since no man
is ignorant, that the Sun (for instance) does produce heat and serenity, more
frequently than foul weather, in the Summer. It has been granted likewise,
that other sydereal bodies, and chiefly the Planets have some influence and
activity upon the Earth, in proportion to their flender light; but what the
special activity of each Planet or Star in particular is, Astrologers are as
much ignorant of, as the most illiterate Clown in the World. For as when a room
is enlightened by a Flame, from which many small sparks issue forth, no man can
discern the particular light, which arises from each particular spark, the Air
being promiscuously illumined by them all: so the Sun, Moon, and Stars acting
promiscuously upon the Earth, by their several influences blended or confused
together; it is impossible for any man to distinguish their several activities.
But you will say, are the virtues of the Stars to be measured by the Greatness or
smalness of their particular Lights? And why not I pray? Will you have it to be
measured by that of their Diametres, or of their Discuses? If so, though we
should allow that each of the Fixed Stars is not less potent in it self, then
either the Sun, or Moon, or any other of the Planets; must you not yet confess,
that the Distance which does diminish the light, and discuss as well of the
Fixed, as of the Erratique Stars, must in the same proportion diminish also
their activity; so that the virtue of each Fixed Star, compared to the virtue of
the Sun, and that of each Planet compared to that of the Moon, can be no more
than the light of the one is to the light of the other, or the Discuss of one
to the Discuss of the other. And this seems much more reasonable, than what
Astrologers suppose, viz. that the virtues ascribed to the Planets are equal,
if not superior to those of the Sun and Moon. But (say they again) whence
come's that great variety of sublunary Effects, if not from the various
positions, and various influences of the Stars? Why, I have already declared,
that the variety of Effects among sublunaries arises from the variety of
Causes among sublunaries, as they are variously compared either among
themselves, or with others. To Day there arise vapors from this part of the
Earth, which elevated into the Air become condensed into Clouds, and so fall
down again in showers. In the mean time the matter of them is exhausted, or the
heat by which they were evaporated grows less at the same part of the Earth.
And albeit by the continual action of some parts of the Earth upon others, the
like matter be to be congested upon the same place, and new heat to succeed;
yet that will not happen precisely on the same day the next Year, but sooner or
later; and therefore it is no wonder, if it does not prove wet weather the next
Year, upon the same days, that it is wet weather this Year. And what I say of
wet and dry Weather, may be applied also to all other changes of the Air; since
by the same reason the matter of Winds Hot or Cold, as also of Thunder, Hail,
Snow, and the like, is not prepared in a readiness in the same parts or places
of the Earth, at the same times one Year, that they were another. Which one
would think to be a more probable Cause of the variety of weather, both as to
times and places, than that imaginary variety of Astral influences, which
Astrologers so much cry up.

If this be so (say Astrologers) then these Mutations cannot be prenoted or
predicted, by any rules of Art, I confess they cannot, especially long before;
for otherwise there are those Signs, by which I allow that we may foresee and
foretell great changes of weather, when they are near at hand. What then, Must
Astrology, noble and divine Astrology be vain and useless, and be able to make
no probable Conjectures at all concerning the precise times of these Changes?
Yea truly, I think so; nor need I say more to justify that my opinion, than
what I have said already in this Chapter. But, Were those Laws made in vain,
which allow of and tolerate the profession of Astrology in those matters, that
concern Agriculture, Medicine, and Navigation? For those Laws, I conceive they
are to be looked upon, as many others, which provide for the tolleration of
lesser Evils, in order to the prevention of Greater: For because the Mind of
Man, being always greedy of knowing things to come, is easily carried away
with those splendid persuasions, that Astrologers have contrived to allure and
inveigle it to a belief of their Art; therefore that they might a vert men's
minds from a too curious and sollicitous investigation of future Contingents,
such as the Arbitrary actions of men, fortuitous Events, dangers, calamities,
the day and manner of death, and the like; from the prediction of which men's
private lives, and the public peace are commonly disturbed; therefore (I say)
was it, that the wise Lawmakers, prohibiting this Fortune-telling part of
Astrology, permitted the use of the other concerning Weather-conjectures, as
that which might set bounds to, and in some sort humor man's Curiosity, and
occasion less of disturbance both in private, and public. And this License
might in the mean time seem to the people to be the more reasonable and
beneficial, while it carried the pretext of some true observations of the
Rising and Setting of the Stars, in causing Winds or Rains; of the Moon in the
full, or wane, increasing, or decreasing her light; for the most advantageous
sowing of Seeds, Setting, Grassing, removing of Plants and Trees, letting of
Blood, Purging, Venery, Baths, and the like; of Tides of the Sea; of the pale
Moon commonly preceding Rain, the red winds, the white fair weather, and the
like Signs: which though they do not belong to Judicial Astrology, are yet
commonly referred to it, partly through the ignorance of the Multitude, but
mostly through the cunning and arrogance of Astrologers, that so they might
acquire the greater credit to their profession. And hereupon we may see some
Phisicians, who pretending to have more profound knowledge in Celestial
matters, than is usually expected from others of the same profession; think to
acquire the reputation of Transcendent Artists, by giving out, that they will
not undertake the cure of any sick person, especially of great quality or
Condition, unless they have first made solemn inspection into his
Nativity-scheam, and erected another Scheam for the Year past, another for the
very instant of his falling ill, and others for the times wherein each Symptom
first invaded him: when yet (in troth) either they do no such thing at all, or
if they do, it is to no more purpose, than if Themselves should dream that he
would live or die; and all this is but a knavish trick, to make men believe they
are much wiser, than really they are; and the while they underhand consider the
same prescrips and Aphorisms of Principal Physicians that the more modest, more
honest, and more learned Practitioners of that Art, inform and guide their
judgments by. Again what wonder is it, if the Authors of those Laws made in
favor of Astrologers, being wholly taken up with matters of more importance to
the state, and perhaps somewhat touched with the infection of these cunning
Impostors, as well as the rest of the people; would not wholly interdict the
profession of that pretended skill, to which as men, they did not deny their
assent, at least in part? Nevertheless, it was contrary to the intention of
those Law makers, that Astrologers should (as they do) wrest that Tolleration
of only a part, to the justification of the whole of Astrology. For by what
reason can they come to know the individual Complexion of a sick man, by
looking upon the Stars or Ephemerides; how can they know the time, vehemence,
duration, period of his sickness; or that the same will be short, or long,
mortal or not mortal, and all other things, that are expressly forbidden by
those Laws? In a word, if it be fit for any man to conclude the verity of
Astrology, from this Tolleration of it: certainly, it is much more fit for us
to conclude the Falsity and Imposture of it, from the frequent renewing of
those Laws made against it.

And thus much in Confutation of that part of Astrology, which concerns the
Prediction of Changes of Weather.

CHAP. XIV.
The Genethlical part of Astrology examined, and exploded.

IT remains, that we now survey that other part of Astrology, called the
Genethliacal, or which, from the inspection of the Genitures, or Nativity
Themes, or (as they are Vulgarly called) Scheams of men, does institute
Predictions of all the remarkable Events that befall them, in their whole
lives. For though the most part of what has been delivered by us in the
precedent Chapters, does in some sort relate as well to this Latter, as to the
Former part, and so may easily be accommodated unto it; yet there are some
things peculiar hereto, which require a peculiar consideration.

In the First place, we are to remark, that that man does make but ill
provision for the peace and quiet of his thoughts, who does but lend an ear to
Astrological predictions, though he fix not his mind upon them. For though they
are but vain, and a man does strive to confirm himself in the opinion, that
they are mere fopperies; yet in respect of the common persuasion, that there is
something in them, he shall find himself very prone to give some credit to them,
and so give some occasion of disquiet or other evil to himself. For if the
Astrologer shall have predicted his death, instantly the thought thereof enters
his mind, causes a troublesome apprehension therein, and makes him
discontented: and if any light disease chance to intervene, the same is
augmented by the melancholy resentment and disquiet of mind within him, and so
puts him really in danger of death, which otherwise he had no reason to fear,
from the nature of his disease. If any great mishap, or infortune before-told
him; that prediction also vexes his mind, and is often the cause, that he
flies to such precautions to secure him for the infortune threatened, as really
prove the means to bring the same, or as bad upon him; which otherwise would
not have befallen him. If he has been promised either long Life, or felicity
of fortune; then either he rashly exposes himself to such dangers, as shorten
his Life; or neglects that industry and prudence, which might have made his
fortune prosperous indeed, but being omitted, prove the occasion of his
infelicity, and misery in the end. For the proof of this, we have many stories
both Ancient and recent that testify, that those men have generally been most
unhappy, who confided in the Astrologers promising them very great happiness:
and of these we shall mention some hereafter. In the mean time, accept this
admonition; that nothing is safer, then strictly to follow the dictates and
rules of Prudence; and to live, in respect of ones self, honestly; in respect
of others, justly: and for the rest, to committ all to Providence Divine, and
to be prepared for all encounters of Fortune. The advice of Horace, in this
case, is oraculous. Tu ne quaesieris, scire nefas, quem mihi, quem tibi 1.
Ca^min. Ode 11

Finem Dij dederint, Leuconoe i nec Babylonios
Tentaris numeros, ut melius quicquid erit pati,
Seu plureis hyemeis, seu tribuit Jupiter ultiman. etc.
Enquire not thou, Leuconoe, what End
The Gods at length to me, or thee intend:
Consult not vain Astrology, to prepare
For future Evils, whatsoever they are.
Whether more Years, or not, remain behind;
Be wise in present, to thy self be Kind.


By this means, if Good fortune comes, you relish it the more sweetly; if bad,
you bear it more easily; and this benefit we are sure of, that if we must be
miserable, yet we shall not be so before our time. For (they are the words of
Cicero, in 2. de Divination.) How unhappy a life had Priamus lived, if he had
fore-known in his youth, what tragical Events were to befall him in his old
age? And that we may leave Fables, do you think it could have been beneficial
to Marcus Crassus, when he flourished in wealth, and all kinds of prosperity, to
have fore known, that his beloved son Pompey should be slain, his Army
destroyed, and himself perish in ignominy, disgrace and want, on the other side
of Euphrares? Do you think, that Pompey could have taken joy in his three
Consulships, in his three Magnificent tryumphs, in his glory of high
Achievements and admirable felicities; if he had fore-known, that after all he
should be killed in exile and obscurity in Egypt, after the less of his
numerous Army; and after his death suffer such horrid things, which I cannot
speak of without tears? etc.

Nor can Astrologers excuse themselves by saying, that such unhappy misfortunes
Presignified by the stars; and being fore-known, may be avoided. For, it is
plain, that if they be avoided, they were not presignified: but rather the
avoidance of them, which was really to ensue, ought rather to have been
presignified. And, if we saw, that Astrologers themselves did once avoid those
diseases, and other evil accidents, which they pretend are presignified to them
in particular: then perchance they might challenge some belief at our hands:
but, since they cannot secure themselves with all their caution, as being
ignorant of those presignifications made to them: why, should they think to
provide for the safety of others, when reason requires they should be more
skillful and fore-sighted in their own Cases, than in those of others? But, we
must reserve the full refutation of this false pretense till a better
oppertunity; being obliged first to demonstrate the vanity of the Art, from the
examination of its very Principles.

They affirm, First, that all the Good or evil Accidents of a man's life, do
depend upon that very moment of time, in which he issues from his Mothers
womb. For, they will have, that the sideral bodies, and principally the seven
Planets, in what part soever of the Heavens they are at that instant, when an
Infant is born, do so act and club their rays together upon him, as that they
impress upon him a necessity (nor more nor less) of living in such a condition;
of dying at such a time, and in such a manner; of marrying such a person, at
such a time; of suffering Shipwreck upon such a day; of receiving a wound in
such a place of his body, on such a day; of being imprisoned, such a day; of
being overthrown at Law, such a day; of falling sick, such a day: and so of all
other Accidents in his whole life. As if any man of sound judgment could regard
the Heavens, and behold those seven wandering Starts; and yet conceive in his
mind, that they should make any impression so manyfold, so particular,
inevitable and certain. Indeed, if the Planets applied themselves to conspire
the fortune of only one infant, at a time; then the buisiness would be less
admirable, less incredible: but since at one and the same instant of time,
millions of Infants enter upon the stage of life, in several places of the
Earth; can any man understand that the same seven Planets can so act upon every
one of them, as to prescribe with equal distinction preciseness, and certitude,
all that shall befall them from the moment of their births, to that of their
deaths? especially since those Accidents are innumerable, and incomprehensibly
various? Ought they not to cause the same Effects in all and every of them that
are born of all kinds, and Species of Animals; for which though there be no
particular Astrology composed, yet that hinders not, but they should have their
fates consigned to them by the Heavens, as well as the rest? Go on therefore,
and conceive, if you can, how it should come about, that seven Planets, which
immit but seven sorts of rays or influences, should be able so to complicate
and temper their rays, as to make them suffice, to so great and
incomprehensible a variety of Births, of Accidents. Again, if they allowed the
Planets a longer time, a whole day, nay but an hour, for their fatal
operations; the wonder would be somewhat diminished: but, that they should
conspire destine, and effect their impressions, and conclude all effects, in
only one short moment; this certainly is above human capacity. Who likewise can
conceive, that the Planets are of power to destine so many things in that one
moment, and yet have no power to destine any one thing, in so many Myriads of
moments following? Further, did they hold it necessary for the Planets, at the
moment of the Infants Nativity, to be all above the Horizon; then also the
supposition might seem more tolerable: but to make their virtues and efficacy
all one, whether they be above or under the the Earth; this is most
intolerable* For, since in the night time we feel no virtue of the Sun, but
what remains diffused through the Air, the day before; because his beams cannot
pierce through the body of the Earth: is there any reason we should believe
that either the Sun, or any other of the Planets, when they are depressed under
the Earth, can so transmit their virtues upon an Insant entering the World, as
to destine all things belonging to him as effectually as if they were above the
Earth, and in a posture convenient for the direct transmission of their rays
upon the subject on which they are to operate? The same also may be said of the
virtue of those Planets which at that time are covered by the Sun or Moon.
Lastly, If they would allow that the rays of the Planets should be so received
by the tender Infant, as to operate according to his constitution derived from
his Parents, and so to be varied to the production of various and sometimes
contrary effects; then they might more justly expect our assent: but to make
the Planets to do all things, to subject both a sickly and un-sound Infant, and
a lusty and strong one, if born at the same instant, and in the same City, to
one and the same influence, and the same effects; Is this to be endured by
reason? Nor can you think that they are able to allow any thing of this kind by
distinguishing; for if they should but say, that the influence of the Planets
were only general; or that the least power of Concurrence or opposition were to
be ascribed to the Complexion of the Infant: then Farewell their whole Art.
For, the persumed Certainty thereof does so depend upon the Stars; as that it
must be wholly destroyed, in case any respect be had of the individual
Constitution of the Patient, as a special and determining Cause, which for the
most part is not understood, and which is subject to infinite variety. And you
well preceive, that Astrologers require only two things, viz. The time of the
Nativity, and the Altitude of the Pole, or Latitude of the Place: and from
these two alone, they undertake to predict the Infants Fate most certainly,
most punctually. And perhaps it might be granted, that at the time when one is
born, the same does befall him, that does when he issues forth from the place,
in which he was cherished by a special heat, into the cold Air, or the Air
affected with any other degree of warmth; as we see does happen to a Red-hot
Iron, when it is taken out of the Fire, and Plunged into cold water: but when
it shall be also granted, that the external Air, affected with the Rays of the
Stars, is available to the changing of his temperament, and to cause that his
life should be longer, or shorter; yet nothing can be more like a dream, yea
more vain then a dream, then that therefore it is determinable, how long
precisely to an hour that Infant shall live, since according to the care that
is afterward taken of the Child, his life shall be longer or shorter, and more
or less subject to infirmities; or what advencures of prosperous of adverse
fortune shall thenceforth befall him; since those depend upon such future
occasions, as have no relation at all with the condition of his Birth. Let a
man but seriously consider with himfelfe, how many there are, and have been in
the world, with whom he has had to do in some affair or other, either
directly or indirectly, from his Childhood to this present day, in order to his
dispatch of several buisines: that he might take this or that Journey: acquire
this or that Honor or Dignity; heap up this or that mass of wealth; sustain
this or that dishonor, or loss; and so run over the most considerable
Encounters of his life: then let him consider, whether those so many men of
different Ages, Complexions, Humors, Conditions, Nations, Countries, (without
all which living at such times and in such places, and meeting with him upon
such occasions, he could not have effected such designs, or met with such
Events) had any relation at all to his Nativity. Let him, I say, consider that,
when they could not but live at such a time, in such a place, meet him, and be
willing to do these or these things for, or against him; unless because others
lived before them, are dead, and did this or that for them, and so of the rest,
since the Fates of those men also depended upon others that went before them
from Age to Age upwards, to the beginning of the World; so that from thence
forward all the successions of men, and all the series of affairs to this
present day are to be unravelled; for if all things had not been so as they
were, neither had those men lived, with whom he has had to do, nor those
Events been, which have besallen him. Nor can our Astrologers evade this
necessity, by saying, that the Planets do not design particularly, and
singularly, what Good or Evil, and from whom, and when, and where a Man shall
receive it: for since the rays are singular, by which the Planets design any
one accident, it is necessary that the definition be of a singular Event; nor
can the Event be singular, unless from the singular circumstances of Person,
Place, Time, and manner. And manifest it is, that other Events, then what are
really to come, cannot be defined; nor can there be otherwise terms of singular
actions: that I may not take notice, how Astrologers boast the certainty of
their Predictions chiefly in respect of circumstance of Time, which is most
singularly, and in respect of which such an Event cannot happen to such a
Person, unless that Person be at that time, in such a place in such company,
upon such an occasion. That I may likewise omit, that Astrology must be
confessed most vain and useless, unless it be able to premonish men of singular
Events, together with the Persons, occasions, and other circumstances of them:
for otherwise no man can know when, how, or from whom to expect benefit, or
detriment; or what he must do, to meet his good, promised; or decline his Evil
threatened.

CHAP. XV.
The Moment of an Infants Nativity, uncertain.

TO pursue the Doctrine of Astrologers, touching this Omnipotent Moment of an
Infants Nativity; let us observe how strict and punctual they are in the
investigation of it; and this to the end, that they may exactly know, what
point of the Ecliptic ascended at that time above the Finitor, and that being
found out, to erect a Scheam of the position of the Heavens at the same: and
this done, according to the Planets being in such or such Houses they proceed
to give judgment of the future accidents of the Infant. And indeed, it is not
without good cause, that they thus require so exact a knowledge of that
punctilio of time; for since they direct the same to the determination of the
time of life, (as we shall see more fully anon) if they miss of it but one half
hour, they must miss at least seven or eight Years in their definition of the
time of life.

Here I might object, how difficult it is to design the very moment of a
Child's Nativity: since no Child enters into the World in one and the same
moment, but usually stays many moments in the Birth: and if they take the
last moment, or that wherein the Child's Feet come away from the Mother, then
must the Head have received its fate before the Feet; if the first moment, or
that in which the Head begins to come forth, then the Heart, Liver, Kidneys,
and all the rest of the body remaining yet in the Mothers Womb, cannot obtain
the same destiny with the Head: and if the middle moment, or that in which the
trunck or middle of the Body comes forth of the Womb, then one extreme of the
Body has already received its fatal influence, and the other not. If you say,
that the influence is immitted at that instant, in which the infant first moves
his Lungs, or Breathes (as Cardan will have it, in lib. 3. quadrip. cap 2.)
then you beg the question, and we may as justly fix upon the moment of the
separation of the Infant from the Afterbirth, or the cutting of his Navel
string. Again, you will not be able to tell us, what a mouthfull of air drawn
into the Lungs can do, as to the disposing the whole body to receive the
impression of the whole Series of Fates, that is then contexed. Besides, what
would Cardan say, if he heard Physicians prove by invincible reasons, and
frequent Experiments, that the Infant does respire in the Mothers Womb, some
months before its Birth?

I might again object, that it seems incredible, that when Twins are born (and
they are usually born immediately one after the other) the influence of the
Stars should be so suddenly changed, as that the Destiny of one should be not
only different, but perhaps quite contrary to that of the other. If it be
answered, that in respect of the great swiftness of the Heavens motion, the
position of them must be very much changed in two or three moments, and
consequently the influence as much varied: which Nigidui was wont to explain by
the turning round of a Potters wheel: then St. Augustine (Reply 5. de Civitat.
Dei. cap. 3.) that this Fiction will be more fragite; then the earthen Vessels
made by the turnning of that Wheel, will serve our turn. As if Astrologers
could ever observe all the differences of the positions of the Heavens; and so
all the variety of impressions or effects happening betwixt two moments, so
nearly succeeding each other; when the Celestial motion, though extremly rapid
in it self, must yet be very slow, in respect of man's observation of it; nor
does it vary the position of the Heavens, but in some sensible space of time,
as performing one complete round only in 24. hours, otherwise than a Potters
Wheel, which is turned round in an imperceptible space of time: so that there
can be no proportion betwixt the arch of the Heavens, in which the positions of
two immediately successive moments differ, and the arch of a Wheel, in which
two continent impulses differ each from other, if either of the Arches be
compared to a convenient Circle.

But waving these difficulties, I come to demand, How Astrologers can attain to
any certainty not only of the almost insensible intervalls of time, but even of
half an hour over or under the true moment of an Infants Nativity? For
sometimes they cannot bring their Conjectures near the true time, by a whole
day; some times by half a day, either the nightly half, or the daily, either
aforenoon, or afternoon; and sometimes they pitch upon the most likely hour. I
speak of them who account by common Clocks; and to trust to them for
preciseness, is most uncertain, as the Common Proverb teaches us; since of
twenty of them in one Town scarce two agree together, and not one usually goes
right. It would be insufferably tedious to reckon up all the various causes of
Error of our Clocks, and Watches; and as for Sun dyals and Hour-glasses, of
either Sand or Water, they are disliked by even Ptolomie himself, who concluded
it impossible to attain the exactness of time otherwise than by the Astrolabe.
Now for that, pray of a thousand Nativities cast by Astrologers, can you
instance any one, at the very moment whereof He that took it, stood ready with
an Astrolabe in his hand to compute the hour exactly? And if he did stand
ready, what if the weather were then dark and cloudy, so that neither Sun,
Moon, nor Stars were to be seen? What if the true motion of the Sun were not
yet known, nor the true places of the Planets, as it is now manifest they were
not known before this our Age? And yet there remains somewhat to be amended
therein. What if the true Altitude of the Pole be not yet found out, as it is
not, but in very few places? What if men are not certain of the Longitude of
the Place, or difference of Meridians; as there is reason to doubt they are
not? What if there be not sufficient care had of the Refractions; and it is
well known, that before Tycho no Man considered them? What if the Astrolabe be
too small, or not exactly framed, and Figured; or not made use of with care and
preciseness, than which nothing is more ordinary? What if there be an Error in
any of those many punctilio's requisite to an exact Observation; as a thousand
to one but there will be some? What can be said of the rudeness of the Old
Chaldean Observations, upon which as upon the Principles and Fundamentals the
whole Art is founded; for (as Sextus Empiricus, lib. advers. Astrologos, tells
us When they were to observe the time of an Infants Nativity, one Chaldean sat
watching in the top of an hill, or other eminent place, not far from the
groaning Chamber, and attended to the Stars; and another remained below with
the Woman in travail to give the sign, by ringing a Kettle or Pan, at the
instant of her delivery; which the other taking, observed the Sign of the
Zodiac then Rising above the Horizon; and accordingly they gave judgment of
the Infants Fortune: and this if the birth happened in the Night; but if in the
Day, then he that sat upon the high place, observed only the motion of the
Sun. Now I pray, what a gross and imperfect way of taking the moment of the
Nativity was this? For to omit other considerations, what if the Infant was
born in a great City, or other place far from a Hill? What if the Air were
Cloudy and Dark? What if no Star of those in the Signifer, or space of the
Zodiac (as there are more Star-less, than Starry places therein) did arise at
the time of the Sign given? What if the brightness of Morning, or Twilight
obscured the Stars? Besides, it is well known, that They regarded not the
degrees, or minutes of the Signs; but thought it sufficient to mark the Sign
it self then Rising. And can you then think their Observations to have been
exact? Sure I am, they were so rude and uncertain, as that they never could by
them attain to the prediction of any one Eclipse of the Sun, so as to
predetermine the time of it; as Diodorus (lib. 2.) reports. This considered,
we may apply that of Manilius (lib. 3.) to them; Nec me Vulgatae rationis
preterit ordo,
Quae binas tribuit signis surgentibas horas,


For, these were the men, who thought that the right and Oblique Ascendent
Signs of the Zodiac did arise in equal portions of the Equinoctial; and so
that it was lawful to progress, or regress to the point rising, from the hour
of the Nativity given; and supposed place of the Sun, allowing to each sign
two hours; though some will have more, some less. These also were they, who of
all the Aspects admitted none to be effectual at a Nativity, but only the
Diametral, Trine, and Quartile; and never so much as named the Sextile, or any
of the Rest; ascribing moreover to the Diametral, or two opposite signs, this
propriety, that all such as were born in such an Aspect, should have opposite
Fates Decreed for them; as Geminus (Cap. 1.) remembers. Now, Consider with
yourself, how solid and congruous principles, or fundamental rules these
Chaldeans laid down, for succeeding Astrologers to build upon: and how certain
an Art that must be, which has no other foundation, no other support, but
those.

To prevent these our Objections, They Answer; that when the Artist is not
fully certain of the time of the Nativity to a moment, he may investigate it
either of these three ways.

The First they call Trutina Hermetis, the Scales of Hermes; because supposed
to have been derived from that thrice Great Man: which Ptolomie (in
Centeloquio) affirms in these words; In quo signo luna fuerit tempore
conceptus; ipsum, aut ejus oppositum fac Horoscopum in Partu; therefore
examining the time, in which the Infant ought, according to Nature, to remain
in the womb; from the time of his Conception, they compute and conclude upon
the moment, wherein he ought to have been born. But, I beseech you, do they not
in this seek an obscure thing by a more obscure? For, though they are wholly
ignorant of the moment of the Conception, yet they institute their divination
of the moment of the Nativity from thence. But, they collect the one from the
other; as if there were any more pleasant begging of a Principle to be thought
upon; or as if there could be a greater certainty of the Consequent, than there
is of the Antecedent? And they multiply their rules; but observe, that no man
has hitherto punctually defined, how much time ought to intercede betwixt the
Conception, and Birth of a Child. Besides, Ptolomie does not say, that the
degree, or minute, but the sign in which the moon is at the time of the
Conception, should be the Horoscope of the Birth; that so the exquisite
preciseness may be reduced to the latitude of two hours. And does not this
agree with the old method of the Chaldeans, newly mentioned? But, we may as
easily refute, as smite at these incongruities; since manifest Experience is
repugnant to that Rule of Ptolomie, or the Trutina of Hermes.

The Second, they call Animodar, or Almuseli; which is Ptolomies own. For, He
injoyns his Disciples, to look back upon the New, or full-Moon, immediately
preceding the Nativity; and to observe what Planet obtains the supreme
authority in that place, wherein the Conjunction, or Opposition happened; then to
note what degree of the sign such a Planet was in, at the estimated time of
the Birth; and erecting a Scheam at that time, to compare the number of that
degree, with the number of the degree then Rising and of the middle Heaven; and
to which of the two it shall be nearest, as to the number of degrees, and equal
number is to be constituted in that Cardo. But it has been by many
demonstrated, that Experience does destroy this way also; and nothing is more
manifest than that the whole Method is Arbitrary, and a mere Fiction, or Dream;
and that the time estimated may be so varied, as that the Cardines may be
wholly changed; and finally every man may know, that the Horoscope is diverse,
in diverse Climates, when yet according to the Placits of Ptolomie, the same
ought to be taken, if two Infants be supposed born at the same time in diverse
Climates. We might add the uncertainty of that moment, when the New, or Full
Moon has happened; as may be inferred from what we have formerly said.

The Last, they call Accidentia Nati, Accidents after the Nativity. This is the
Newest of the Three, and seems grounded upon what Cardan (in 6. Aphorism. 158.)
says, Sapientis esse non solum ex Genitura eventum, sed etiam ex eventu
Genituram judicare. For, as from the Genital Scheam, by directions, by
Transitions, by annual profections, they collect at what time, or times, any
remarkable Accidents, befall a Man after his Nativity; so on the reverse, do
they pretend to collect the precise time of the Nativity, from the times of
those Accidents. But, this we shall by and by explode more opportunely. In the
mean time, observe, that Astrologers cannot make use of this Method, until a
good while after the Nativity, when some eminent Accidents have befallen the
person proposed. Observe also the Error of the Consequence, in that they
suppose the matter in dispute, viz. that from the Nativity we may collect the
times of the chiefest Accidents to ensue in the whole life. I pass over other
Methods, as that of Messahala, and others long since exploded.

CHAP. XVI.
Their Method of investigating the times of Personal Accidents: and the
Fallacies thereof.

HAving fixed upon the Moment of Nativity, drawn the Scheam, and distributed
the Planets into their several Quarters, together with the Part of Fortune, and
sometimes also with one or two of the most eminent Fixed Stars; (Besides the Head
and Tail of the Dragon:) They teach us a Method of investigating at what times
all considerable Accidents are to befall the Person. And this Method is
manifold, but chiefly Fourfold; Direction, Revolution, Profection Annual, and
Transition.

The First, viz. Direction is versed betwixt the two points in the Zodiac,
taken in the Nativity Scheam, of which one is called the Significator, the
other the Promiser; whether they be Planets, or the Rays of Planets, or
Aspects, or Cusp's of Houses. For they will have, that the Significator, as if
moveable, does slowly progress to the Promiser unmoved; (some term that the
Promissor, which I here call the Significator; and others quite contrary: but
that is not material:) so that when the Significator shall come and shake hands
with the Promistor, then Oh then! shall be the performance of that Effect,
which was so long before signified by the one, and promised by the other. But
because they are wont to number the Advance or Progress, not in the Zodiac,
but in the Equator, to which those places are referred by Circles of
Declinations; hence is it, that to Direct, is nothing but to enquire the Arch
of the Equator, which is interjacent betwixt the Significator and Promissor.
And because they will have the Progression to amount to one Degree in a Year;
five minutes in a Month; ten Seconds, in a Day, constantly: therefore that
Arch does easily point out, at what time, from the Nativity, the Effect sought
for, will happen. But several things are Directed, respective to the variety of
Effects; as the Sun, for the state of Life, and dignities; the Moon for the
affections and passions of the Mind; the Horoscope (or first Rising point of
the First House; which is also called the Horoscope,) for health and
peregrinations; the Middle Heaven, for Friends; the Part of Fortune, for
increase or decrease of Wealth; and for the duration, or period of Life, the
special Director is the Prorogator, Dominus vitae, (...); the Emissor, (...)
(in Arabic, Hylech, and sometimes Alcochoden* And for this, they elect either
that Planet, which has more Dignities, and fewer Debilities, in the places
called Hylegialia, i e. the First Tenth, Eleventh, Seventh, or Ninth Houses;
and especially the Sun, in a Diurnal Geniture; the Moon, in a Nocturnal: or if
there be no Planets in those places, then principally the Horoscope it self.
But the Emissor is Directed [(...)] to the Interfector, or Killer, as to the
body of Saturn, or Mars, or to the Malefical beams of each, or to the
disposition of the Eighth House, etc. For those are the Destinies, from which
they give judgment of the time of Death; allowing so many Years of Life, as
they have numbered degrees of the Equator from the Emissor to the Interfector,
and so many months as there are five minutes over and above, and so many
days, as there tens of seconds, and so many hours, as there are twenty and
five thirds, as may be collected from what we said even now. I omit, that the
Direction is either Direct, i. e. to the Consequent Signs; as for the Emissor,
the Horoscope, the Middle Heaven; or Converse, i e* to the Antecedent Signs,
as for the Part of Fortune, or Planet Retrograde.

The Revolution, is nothing else, but a new erection or constitution of the
Celestial Scheam to that moment, in which the Sun after the space of one or
more Years, is revolved to the same point of the Zodiac, in which it was at
the moment of the Nativity. For they will have it, that from the comparison of
this Celestial Theme, or Position, with the root, or Natalitious Scheam of the
Geniture, is signified what is to happen to the Person in that Year, which is
begun. In particular, if the Horoscope of the Revolution does respect the
Horoscope of the Root, in a benign aspect; then health and strength of body is
signified, for that Year: if in a malign, then sickness. If the Planets, in
the Revolution, be disposed in a contrary manner, to what they were, in the
Geniture; then some notable danger is portended; and the like. Among the rest,
this is worthy our remembrance; that in the Revolution, if the Moon come to
that place where Saturn was in the Root; then the Person shall Marry an old
Withered Crone, and (in all likelihood,) despise and cuckold her, etc.

The Annual Profection is only a certain equal progress, in which both the
Cusps of the Houses, and of the Planets, and other places of the Geniture are
conceived to go forward under the Zodiac, by the space of 30 degrees every
year; so that in the space of 12 years complete, the whole Zodiac is run
through, and the same Progress again begun. For they regard those places, to
which the progress is made, according to this Annual Profection, in the Theme
of the Root; and according as they observe the Aspects betwixt them, and the
place of the Root to be good, or bad, they give judgment of Felicity, or
Infelicity, to happen at that time. And they design both the months and days;
because, the year of Profection being given, they easily compute the time, in
which within the compass of that year, the Aspects fall out. Moreover, they
generally teach, what year shall be happy, what unhappy to the Native; as for
example; the Fourth year of life must be unhappy, because then the Horoscope
comes to the fourth House, which respects the Horoscope in a Quartile, and
the middle Heaven in an opposite. And hence is it, that they dispute mainly
concerning Climacterical years, and show which are Lords of the seventh years,
called by the Grecians (...), by the Arabians Alfridary: determining the
dominion of the first seven years upon the Moon, the second upon Mercury, the
third upon Venus, and so consequently, the Moon, beginning her sovereignty
again at the eighth septennarie, and that year being always dangerous, in
which the dominion of each Alfridarius, or Lord, is changed or devolved upon
his immediate successor. And this is all the great mystery of Climacterical
years, so much talked of, so much feared.

The Transition is when a Planet passes by the places of the Geniture; so as
the Moon (for example) sometimes passes by the same place, in which she was at
the time of the Nativity, sometimes the place in which Saturn was sometimes that
of the Horoscope, sometimes the place which was Quartile to Mars, Trine to
Jupiter, etc. For they will have, that some eminent Changes are made in these
Transitions; and therefore they introduce them, that so they may the more
precisely define the times of Accidents, For thinking themselves sure only of
the Year, or Month, wherein any Effect, good or bad, is promised, by the
Direction; they consider the days, in which the good or bad Transitions
happen, and cast the Events to come, upon the most potent of them.

And now you have heard all these big words, and brave suppositions; pray, what
is your opinion of them? If you will give me leave to guess, I should think you
hold the whole Art to be a Mysterious Nothing, a Fiction more vain than vanity
it self.

For, as for their Direction; how could it be, that they should institute their
numeration in the Equator, leave the Ecliptic, and the rounds of the Planets,
in which they are moved? It is not, because the Equator is the measure of Time,
as one whole revolution thereof makes a Day? But that Direction, which they
call Direct, is computed contrary to the motion of the Equator: and as for
their assumption, that one degree is respondent to one Year, what grounds have
they for it? From Nature they could not assume it; and the year is made by
Nature: but their distinction of the Circle into 360. parts, rather than into
more, or less; as also their subdivision of each single degree, into 60.
minutes, and of every single minute, again into 60. seconds, is merely
Arbitrary, and a mere Artifice. But what proportion is there in this, that one
degree shall serve for one Year; five minutes, for thirty days; ten seconds,
for one whole day? How can the single Years, inscribed upon the single degrees,
or the months upon so many minutes, or the days upon so many seconds, be
correspondent? To speak only of the Degrees; truly if the term of man's life,
at the longest, did extend to 360. Years: then perchance they might, with
correspondence to their supposition, determine how much shorter every man dying
sooner, does come of that precise number of Years: but since the number of
degrees is 360. and od, and yet each degree must answer to one whole Year of a
man's life, which does seldom amount to above David's account, viz. threescore
and ten; what becomes of the overplus of degrees? Can any who gives his
imagination the liberty of the greatest extravagancy in Bethlem, Phansy a more
incongruous thing than this? Again, how is it possible, that that place in
which a Planet, or Aspect was, at the time of the Nativity, should so long
retain an impression then made? Why should it not effuse health, or harm,
sooner or later? Why should not this impression, which is only accidentary, be
expunged by other, and perhaps different impressions, there succeeding so many
other Aspects, so many other transitions, almost every Day? And as for the
Place it self; what is it but a mere Dimension, something simply respective, and
wholly incapable of Action? For whereas they refer the Energy to the Zodiac,
or the places therein possessed by the Planets; it is manifest that though the
Planets cover some places of the Zodiac from our sight, and may therefore be
said to be in them: yet really the Planets are not in the Zodiac, nor can they
impress upon it, in respect of the immense distance betwixt the Zodiac and
them, any such virtue, as should be afterward retorted upon us; and if the
Zodiac could reflect any such virtue upon us, is there any reason why it
should not do it at all times, as well as some, except only while those
particular places of it are covered by the bodies of the Planets.

And as for their Revolution, the same may be said of that, as of the
Direction; the condition of the one being as bad, if not worse than that of the
other. For what community can there be betwixt that point of the Heavens which
arose in the Nativity, and that which arises in the time of the Revolution, so
as to cause that the Fates of that Year should depend upon the aspect of one to
the other? What an exquisite sense here is, that the Latter point, which was of
no concernment at the time of the Nativity, should at the instant of the
Revolution become sensible thereof, and infuse upon the Former, I know not what
virtue, which should afterward affect an Infant born, and no longer remaining
in the same place? I say, why should it be sensible of that point, which is
mane, or inanimate, and in which there were no remains of an impression left?
And the Theme is wont to be constituted only in the Revolutions of the Sun; but
why not as well in all those of the Moon, of Mercury, or of the other Planets?
At least, why not in the Revolutions of both the Fortunes, and Misfortunes, to
which they ascrible more power, than to the Sun it self?

Likewise, for their Annual Profection; can there be any reason given, why
Thirty degrees precisely should respond to each year? How can that consist with
the Direction, which (as we have seen) does allow no more than one degree to
one year? And why is there not here also a reduction of the Zodiac to the
Equator? Is not the Question here as well concerning the Time? I speak nothing
of the Sense of the Heavens, which must of necessity be stupefied at all other
times, and be excited only every twelfth year, in the Natalitious places. I
observe only, how pleasant a thing their distribution of the Alfridarij, or
Annual Lords, is, so that the Planets imitate great men, ambitious of the
Magistracy, and must raise sedition in Heaven, unless they be admitted to rule
by turns. As if the Sun deserved not, or were not able to hold the Scepter
longer than Mars? As if after each seventh year, the Moon were to be brought
down almost from Heaven, the Virtue of Mercury prevails; and then not only the
Moon herself, but the Sun also, and the rest of the Planets, do homage at the
throne of Mercury, and adore him as their Superior? Besides, though this be now
the Vulgar Policy of the Alfridarij; yet Ptolomie had another, Firmicus
another, and others another kind of Political successive Monarchy among the
Planets. For Ptolomie (lib 4. cap. 9.) does not consigne seven years government
to each Planet; but four years to the Moon; ten to Mercury; eight to Venus;
fiveteen to Mars; twelve to Jupiter; and what remains of life, until the hour
of death, to Saturn. Firmicus consignes the first ten years and nine months,
to the Sun, in a diurnal nativity; and to the Moon, in a nocturnal; and other
terms of sovereignty to the others, according to the order, in which they
follow the Sun, or Moon, in the Zodiac. And now, I pray take notice, with what
constancy these famous Artists deliver their very Fundamentals: nor can you
demand, upon what grounds either of them builds his Theory; for in truth, their
Answers would be most childish, most ridiculous.

Lastly, for their Transitions; all I say of them, is only this, that each of
the Planets ought to be most exact in their notice of all the places of the
other Planets, when any one is born, that they may know them again, when they
come to them, and distinguish the impressions left on them. For if a Planet
should perform its course with one and the same equal tenor, and not make
interpunctions in its way, as it passes along, and reflect upon those marks or
memorials: what reason can there be, why it should as it passes that way
again, do such a thing, and no other, at that point. But in case any thing were
begun at the Nativity; why should it continue so long, and not rather be nulled
and obliterated in all that intermediate time; so many Planets passing by the
same Places, and leaving various impressions behind them? But why do I trifle
away my time upon these Absurdities, these Extravagances, whose Inventors
(doubtless) laughed at those, that did not laugh at them?

CHAP. XVII.
Their Questions, impertinent; and Elections of Times for sundry affairs,
ridiculous.

HEre I should proceed to the Examination of those Questions, and Elections,
which Astrologers profess they are able to judge of: but who does not already
laugh at their confident pretenses, to determine and resolve a vast multitude
of Questions and very uncertain ones too, concerning even the least thing in
human affairs; and this from Principles so vain? For that we may touch only
upon the matter of Marriage, because Venus and the Moon (forsooth) are Feminine
Planets; because the Significator of the Seventh House, and the Planet dwelling
therein, are supposed to decree somewhat or other always belonging to the
familiarity of Women: from these, and from their various mixture of Aspects, in
those or those Signs, decads of degrees, etc. our Astrologers undertake to
determine all Queries touching matrimony and single life. As (for instance)
whether the Native shall be Married or not? Whether he shall obtain his
Mistress with ease, or difficulty? In what year of his age he shall enter into
Wedlock? Whether he shall have only one Wife, or more, and how many? Whether
his wife shall be of the same Country or an Alian? Whether she shall be
Fruitful, or Barren? Fair, or Deformed? Chaste, or Gamesome? Complaisant, or
Contentious? Prodigal, or Frugal? And a hundred other the like petite
propositions. Hither may we refer that whole Book of Firmicus, wherein is
Answered and explained, what kind of Geniture theirs ought to be, who are
abandoned to Fortune, or carefully suckled and educated by their Mothers; who
are born Twins, who Servants, who Lords, who well featured and shaped, who
Monsters and unhansome, who of dogged and churlish dispositions, who Homicides,
who illiterate, who Lawyers, who Physicians, etc. with a thousand other the
like particulars, whose fundaments to commemorate, would be an endless trouble.
I shall select only this, If Venus (says he) be found in the House, or
territories of Mars, and Mars in the House or territories of Venus; and the
Moon posited in her Signs or Houses, and in the Full, shall behold them in a
Diametral aspect: then the Natives, being Husbands, shall murder their Wives
with their own hands. But why so? Is it not because Venus designe's Marriage,
Mars is the Killing Planet, and the Moon, which is taken for the Mother of the
Family, is looked upon Malignantly by Mars? O admirable Demonstration!

Again, they determine their Elections, for the opportune enterprising and
dispatch of all buisiness. For abusing that Experience, by which we are taught,
that according to the Times or Phases of the Moon, there is a convenient time
for the doing of some operations in Physic, Surgery, Navigation,
Agriculture, Gardening, etc. They have heightened the matter, so as to subject
all other affairs of life to certain opportunities dependent on such or such
positions of the Heavens. For even concerning those Arts, they affirm, that a
Purge is not to be given to a patient, while the Moon is in Aries, Taurus,
Capricorn; because those being Signs that Chew the Cud, the patient will
nauseate and Vomit up the Purge again. That a Ship is not to put to Sea when
Mars is in the Middle Heaven; because Mars being the Patron of Pirates, he
threatens the taking and Robbing of the Ship by them. That a Tree is not to be
Planted, unless some Fixed Sign, as Taurus, Leo, or Aquarius, be ascending:
least it be soon plucked up again, or destroyed. And as concerning other
affairs; if you would have (say they) an Infant nursed up tenderly and
delicately, then put him to suck first, when some Human Sign ascends; if you
would have him love Flesh well, and be strong, then let Leo be ascendent; if
Fish, and fit to make a Cappuchine, or Carthusian, then let Cancer, Pisces, or
the tail of Capricorn be ascendent; if Fruits, and Herbs, and so fit to make a
Pythagorean, then let the head Capricorn, Aries, or Taurus, be ascendent. When
you would put your son to School; be sure that Mercury behold the increasing
Moon with a benign aspect, When you would make an address to a Prince, be
careful that the Moon be consociated with the Sun, or Lord of the Tenth House,
in a Sextile, or Trine aspect. When you would go a Hunting choose a Moveable
Sign for the Ascendent, and let no Planet be Retrograde either in that Sign,
or in any other Angle. When you put on new Clothes, let a Moveable Sign
ascend, and let not the Moon be in a Fixed; least your Clothes last longer than
stands with the growth of your body, or the dignity of your state. With a
thousand the like trivial Niceties, which I am ashamed to repeat. But I cannot
conceal, with what prodigious Vanity they prescribe the opportunity of laying
the foundations of Cities, For, from the moment, wherein the First stone is
laid, they foretell the Fates not only of the City it self, but also of the
Inhabitants; as that Tarrulius Firmanus, who (as Cicero relates, in 2. de
Divination.) derived the Birth day of Rome from those Palilia (Shepherds Feast
instituted in honor of the Goddess Palis, supposed to preserve their Flocks
from Wolves) in which the foundation of it was first laid by Romulus: and said
that the City was born, when the Moon was in Taurus, and he doubted not to
predict the Fate thereof. Solinus (cap. 2.) adds the rest of the face of
Heaven, or disposition of the Planets; though how skilfully, you may guess from
hence, that he places the Sun in Taurus, and Mercury in Scorpio, when the Sun
and Mercury can never be a whole Sign distant each from other. But O foolish
Thou. if thou demand what point of the Heavens ascending thou may make the
Horoscope! For what moment can you suppose to be the First of a growing City?
That wherein the Timber is felld, and the Stones taken out of the Quarrie? That
wherein the trench for the Walls is first described with a line? That wherein
the ground is first broken up? Or that, in which the first Stone is laid?
Besides how comes it, that the Destinies of the Nation, or Colony should be so
connected to these things and actions, as that the Astrologer should be able to
foreknow them. I say nothing of that Election of times, which they prescribe
to be observed in the making of Seals, Images, Figures, Gamatives, and the like
representations, which they call Talismans: because it is obvious, that no
distracted Phansy could ever have imagined any thing more vain, more foolish;
and it is irksome to me to insist long upon such Chimera's, which only to know,
is to refute.

CHAP. XVIII.
Their Plea of Antiquity, Authority, Reason, and Experience, or Observation.

HAving now examined most of Astrologers Fundamentals in particular; let us
hear their Plea for their Art in General.

In the First place, They Urge the Antiquity of it, and deduce it from very
Ancient Authors. They cite in their defense the old Babylonians and Chaldeans,
among whom Berosus was one, to whom the Athenians, in respect of his many
predictions, erected a Statue with a Golden Tongue, in their public Schools,
as Pliny (lib. 7. cap. 37.) relates: as also the Ethiopians, and Egyptians,
among whom were Petosyris, Necepsos, Hermes, and that great man Ptolomie, who
after his prodigious labors in the instauration of Astronomy, cultivated
Astrology also, in a particular Book, which they call his Quadripartite Work.

In the Second, they allege Reason; and particularly that that admirable
magnitude, multitude, pulchritude, and variety of Heavenly bodies cannot serve
to no other end or purpose at all, but to be gazed upon. That the Connection of
the inferior World to the superior, so as that it deriveth its virtues and
force of activity from thence, is sensibly manifest. That the Efficacy of the
Sun and Moon upon all sublunaries, is generally confessed: and that other Stars
both Erratique and Fixed ought likewise to be allowed to have their peculiar
Faculties, such as cause more admirable Effects, than can be referred to them
merely as Luminaries. That from the various positions of the Moon with the Sun,
the temper and constitution of sublunary things is daily changed; and
therefore, from the various configurations of the other Planets and Stars,
there must arise a great variety of vitues and effects, which being
acknowledged by Shepherds, Plowmen, and Mariners, cannot but be better known
to Astrologers, who search more profoundly into their natures. That the
Heavens, as all men allow, are the Cause of Heats, Colds, and all Changes
happening in the Air; and therefore, they must cause likewise Barrenness,
Fruitfullness, diseases and all affections not only of men's bodies, but also of
their Minds, which follow the temper of their bodies; and so be the Causers of
their Loves. Marriages and Children; of their Animosities Quarrels, Wars,
Slaughters, etc. Again, that the wonderful variety of ingenies, Studies,
Habits, manners, among several nations, and several persons of the same nation;
can have no other origin, or disposition, but what proceeds from a superior
Cause, i. e. the Heavenly influences. Lastly that the Fates of men, being so
diverse, so unexpected, and many Times so undeserved; cannot be referred to any
but a Celestial Cause; as Firmicus confirms by a long series of Examples, and
Manilius sings in these and other verses, Fata quoque, and vitas hominum
suspendit ab Astris,
Quae Summas operum parteis, quae lucis honorem,
Quae famam assererent, etc.


In the Third, they take sanctuary in Observation and Experience. For, (say
they) though we be ignorant of, and cannot investigate the true cause of some
Effects; yet we are not therefore to conclude, that either those Effects do
not happen, or that from the exact observation of many of them an Art may not
be framed. Otherwise, it might be said, that the Loadstone has not that Virtue
of attracting iron, and directing to the Poles, which our senses assure us it
has; or that the Art of Navigation cannot consist of the observation of
magneticall effects: because no man can give a good cause or reason for the
demonstration of those admirable Proprieties of the Loadstone. By equal reason,
though we cannot demonstrate, why such or such effects should ensue upon such
or such positions of the Heavens, which we are able to predict; yet it is
sufficient, that many the like observations have been made of the like effects
following upon the like positions, so that an Art may be thereupon erected,
according to which it may be predicted, that when such positions happen again,
the like effects will follow upon them. They proved, and affirm, that this Art
is confirmed by so many and certain Experiments, as that it can be no longer
indubitated. And here might be cited many Famous Predictions made by Chaldeans
to Alexander, Antigonus, and other Ancients; but that those which were
delivered concerning Augustus, and other Roman Emperors, sound more loud in
the mouth of Fame.

For of Augustus it is reported by Suetonius, that P. Nigidius, having found
the hour of his Nativity, affirmed that he was born to be Lord of the whole
Earth: and that Theogenes, enquiring into the Position of the Heavens at his
Birth, leaped for joy, and adored him, as one that should be a mighty Prince.

Of ^rius it is well known, that Scribonius Promised glorious things, while he
was yet in his Cradle, and that the time would come when he should obtain the
Sovereignty of the World.

Of Caligula, that Sulla the Mathematician, being demanded what his fortune
should be, according to his Geniture, answered him, that his death was near at
hand, and inevitable

Of Nero, it was foretold that he should be first Emperor, and then a
Matricide. But above all, the story of Domitian, is most memorable. For says
Suctonius, he was never so much moved with any accident, as with the answer and
misfortune of Ascletarion the Mathematician. For being brought before Domitian,
and confidently avowing the Predictions, that he disfused, as deduced from the
mysteries of his Art; Domitian asked him, what should be his own end? To which
he returned, that he was certain he should be ere long torn in pieces by Dogs.
Domitian, to refute this prediction, commanded him to be instantly slain, and
buried: whereupon he was accordingly killed upon the place, and carried to be
burned. But, as the fire was kindling, under, the Rogues, there suddenly fell
so Prodigious a shower of rain, as extinguished the fire, and drove away all
that assisted at the funeral: and instantly there came thither a multitude of
Dogs, and plucked down the dead Body from the pile of wood, tore it in pieces.

To recite more examples in Ancient times, is superfluous; for even in our
days, every man hears of some eminent Adventure or other, that fell out,
according as it was predicted by Astrologers. But we cannot omit what they
have observed to befall some notable opposers and contemners of their Art. For,
of Plotinus, it is recorded by Firmicus (lib 1. cap. 3.) that he, who laughed
at the rules and predictions of Astrologers, perished by a most lamentable
death: adding these words; And so he felt the power of Fate, and suffered that
end, which the fiery judgments of the stars had decreed for him: and being
destroyed by the bitterness, of that sickness, he taught all men, by his own
sad example, not by liberty of speech, that the force and power of the fates
can by no means be contemned. And Gauricus speaking of Joh. Picus Mirandula,
who in twelve Books invaded and derided Astrologers; says, that he died
immaturely in the 32. year of his age, from the Direction of his Horoscope to
the body of Mars, as had been precisely foretold him by some very learned
Astrologers: adding withal, that he wrote against Astrology, in a passion of
anger, because three Genethliacks had predicted, that he should die before the
six and thirtieth year of his life. And this is the sum of their main Plea.

CHAP. XIX.
Their Pretense of Antiquity and Ancient Authors, confuted.

NOw, as for the great Antiquity they boast of; we downright deny it, both in
respect of what we have already said, touching the Antiquity of Celestial
Observations; and of the memorials of Simplicius, who writes that Callisthenes,
enquiring of the Chaldeans concerning the Antiquity of their Nation they could
not produce any records of more than a thousand nine hundred and three years,
from then original, down to the taking of Babylon by Alexander the Great; as
also the testimony Phavorinus (in Agellius, lib. 14. cap. 1.) Disciplinam istam
Chaldaeorunt tan^ae vetustatis non esse, quantae videri volunt; neque eos
Principes ejus. Auctoresque esse quos ipsi ferunt. But should we grant
Astrology to be as Ancient as they would have it; it could not be denied, that
among poor Mortals no Evil has been more ancient, than Vanity, Foolishness
Credulity. In all Ages from the beginning of the World, men have been greedy of
knowing things to come; in all Ages there have been Impostors, who complying
with that humor of Curiosity, have pretended to the knowledge of Future
successes, that so they might acquire the reputation of singular wisdom, and
procure gain to themselves by the Credulity of others. And this even Ptolomie
himself (lib. 1. cap. 2.) insinuates; and Phavorinus openly contends, that
Astrology was invented upon no other occasion, or grounds. His Words are to
this purpose. That a sordid and beggarly sort of fellows, seeking to relieve
their wants by lies, and cuning impostures, invented those Cheats and specious
knacks of Astrology; and that the same persons. Observing that some sublunary
bodies were moved by the influx of some Celestiaiones, as the Sea, which
attends the Moon in her increase and decrease of light, and has its lowest
ebs, when the Moon is least illuminate; took advantage from thence to persuade
men, that all occurences here below, from the least to the most considerable,
were ordained and governed by the Stars. And what wonder, if those who first
proposed to enrich themselves by Divination, fathered their Art upon the
Heavens; considering that no Cloak could better disguise their fallacy, than
that splendid one especially among people ignorant of Celestial matters; as may
be inferred from what we touched upon before? I will not here repeat those sundry
Arguments, I have formerly alleged, to evince that the Astral observations
made by the Chaldeans could not be exact; and that the whole Hodg-podge of
their Placits and Rules and Aphorisms were most unjustly referred to the
Stars, when indeed they properly belong to Brainsick Coxcombs. Only I observe
this, that from the Time Astrology came to be known among the Grecians, though
it found many Admirers among the Common People (who were then, as now, hott in
the pursuit of Novelties, and specious vanities) yet among Judicious Men and
Philosophers it met with nothing but Contempt and Derision? Unless you please
to except the Stoscks who held even Dreams to be true. And that they may no
longer glory in that common objection that Astrology was never derided but by
unskilful and illiterate persons; I shall allege this text of Cicero (2. de.
Divinatione) Eudoxus, an Auditor of Plato, and according to the judgment of
the most learned men, the Prince of Astronomers, has left his opinion in
writing, That no credit is to be given to Chaldeans in their predictions of
men's fortunes from the time of their Nativity. Panaetius names also Archelaus,
and Cassander, the most eminent Astrologers of his age, who though they
excelled in all other parts of the Celestial Science, yet never descended so
much below the dignity either of their Art, or their judgment, as to use the
Genethliacal part of it. And Scylax Haticarnasseus a familiar friend to
Panetius, excellent in Astrology, and a most prudent Governor of his City,
repudiated this whole Chaldaical Knack of predicting men's Future Fates. And
thus Cicero; who you see, cites no man unskilful in Astrology. Nor indeed can
any men so well reject this Art, as the most knowing in Celestial matters:
because what others admire as great, and sacred mysteries, these discover to be
only Childish delusions, and absurd Fictions. And therefore it is no wonder, if
every genuine son of Urania, who speculates the Heavens themselves, and does
not acquiesse in the Ephemerides of Astrologers, cannot but look upon this
Genethliacal Art, as Vain and contemptible.

But what shall we say to their allegation of the Authority of that great Man
Ptolomie? Why truly this; that no man can be ignorant, that that Opus
Quadripartitum, of which they so much boast, is subdilitious; as long after his
death fathered upon him, in respect of his admirable skill in Astronomy. For
every judicious man that reads both works, may soon perceive another Genius in
the Opus Quadripartitum, than what is in his Almagest, or Great Composition.
For since in his Preface to his Almagest, he professes, that he undertook the
explication of the Mathematiques, because in them there is contained certain
and undoubted science; and neglected both Theological, and Philosophical
Speculations, because both of them are rather Conjectural, than Demonstrative;
the Former in respect of the incomprehensible nature of Divine things, the
Latter, in respect of the instability of the subject, and variety of Men's
opinions concerning it: having made this profession, I say, is it probable that
He should afterward so much dishonor himself, as to embrace, assert, and
patronize an Art, which is far more uncertain and conjectural, than either
Theology, or Philosophy can be thought to be? In the Quadripartite work there
is indeed a notable Proemical discourse; but such as dwindles away into nothing
in the end, like that picture of a Man's Head set on a Horses neck, or a Woman
with a fair face, and Fishes tail. Again, supposing Ptolomie to have been the
true Author of that Quadripartite work, containing the Institutions, or rather
the whole of Astrology; nay more, that he wrote it seriously, and upon good
considerations, and not only to exercise his wit, in reducing to order and
method the scattered notions and Placits of others; which certainly is as much
as our Astrologers can desire us to grant: yet nevertheless, it does not follow
that the Authority of any one single person is sufficient to justify an
Unreasonable Art. I say, an Unreasonable Art; because either there is no Reason
at all given of any of its Aphorisms and Positions; or if there be (as
sometimes there is) it is such as cannot deserve to be called reason; such as
that (for instance) which the Author of that work gives (lib. 1. cap. 13.) for
the distinction of the Signs into Masculine and Feminine. Further, if he had
professed that he had proved and allowed of all that he there delivers; then
perhaps the gravity of so great a man might have inclined us to yield our
assent the more readily: but the truth is, he only congested together what he
had received, partly in writing, partly by tradition, from the Ancient
Chaldeans, and Egyptians; admitting many things, and rejecting as many (as
touching the matter of the Celestial Fines, or Bounds, lib 1. cap. 21.) which
he does nor fortify with either reason or experience. This considered, it is no
wonder, if the Astrologers succeeding him, did not approve his Doctrine in all
things: because where his positions wanted reason to support them, every man
thought himself to have as much right to reject, or introduce whatsoever
pleased him, as he had; which was the cause of so many and so great innovations
in the Art. And therefore the witty Cardan, that he might vindicate the
Astrology of Ptolomie, condemns (they are his own words) that innumerable
multitude of Knaves, who corrupted and defiled the Art; so as that not so much
as any tract or sign of it remained undefaced. For so many Albumazars,
Abenragels, Altabitzij, Abubaters, Zaheles, Messahalacusses, Bethenes,
Firmicuses, Bonatuses, Boni Genij, have since sophisticated the Ancient Theory,
that what can remain entire after so many Impostors, so many Trifles? I say
Cardan the Witty; for I cannot say the Judicious, as to his supposition of the
Arts being pure and reasonable in the days of Ptolomie: as if the Astrology of
Ptolomie had not bin taken out of other former Authors of the same rank: as if
Cardan himself, who foisted in so many things of his own head, did not deserve
the same Character, he gives of the other Innovators: as if we might not, to
his list of Knaves and Impostors, add also so many Cardans, Schoneruses,
Gauricuses, Junctinuses, Leovitiuses, Ranzoviuses, Pezcliuses, Origanuses, and
others of the same Tribe: as if that Artist, who calls his fellow professors,
Impostors were not an Impostor himself: as if all of them put together were not
Impostors; or that I may sweeten the matter, all of them did not write
Impostures. For thus I think fit to sweeten the phrase for their sakes, who
were of too candid minds, to write with purpose to delude others; though of so
simple and good minds, as not to suspect that others wrote on purpose to delude
them.

CHAP. XX.
Their pretense to Reason, excluded.

HOw little of Reason can be urged in defense of Astrology, may well appear
from those many and considerable reasons, that I have brought against it,
several of the precedent discourses. And therefore I conceive my self obliged,
in a voydance of tedious repetitions, in this place to examine only that
Consequence, or Clue, but which They boast themselves able to presage the
particular Events of things. For if all their Assumptions, were granted as
fully and amply as they can desire; yet it would be worthily questionable by
what right of Consequence they come to infer what they so confidently conclude
upon?

For First, those many great and lumiuous bodies in the Firmament, or Etherial
spaces, are not useless and idle; forasmuch as they afford us their light,
comfort and cherish us by their warmth, and may serve among themselves to that
further end, which the infinite wisdom intended at their Creation: but because
they have some Activity, is there a necessity that activity must be such as
Astrologers presume, and their Effects such, as They pretend to foreknow and
foretell? Whatsoever the Action of the Stars be, it must be, as we said before,
only General; nor can any singular Effect be produced thereby, unless as it
concurreth with the action of some singular Cause. And therefore, that it may
be known, what any singular Effect will be; it is to no purpose to know what
that General action of the Stars is, unless that singular action, and
particular disposition, which determines the Effect to be so, or so, or
causes it to obtain such a condition of singularity, be equally known.
Wherefore it is not to be inquired of the Stars, why an Infant is born strong,
or weak, of a sweet and mild disposition, or of a choleric and harsh; but
collected from the Complexion of his Parents, from the good or evil condition
of their seed, from their diet, course of life, and the like. Nor are we to
say, that such an Infant was born infected with a foul and contagious disease,
because the Sixth House was his Horoscope; but because his Mothers Lower House
was impure and infectious. Nor that such a man was killed by a Canon shot,
because his Horoscope was direct to a Quartile of Saturn; but because the
Gunner had levelled and discharged his pieece directly against him. Nor when a
man is slain with a Sword, is Mars, or any secret Malignity of the Stars ruling
at his Nativity, to be accused of his death; but the Thief, Soldier, or other
person, who is the true [(...)] Homicide: and so of other Accidents.

Secondly, we deny not but there is a certain Connection of this our inferior
World with the superior; and that some evolument does rebound to us from
thence: but it does not follow, that therefore the inferior World has all its
Effects from the superior; that it has no virtues, no power of acting of its
own; that here below is no Primary, true and genuine Agent, but all
Instrumentary; that whatsoever is done by sublunary Actives and Passives, is
the sole and immediate effect of the Heavens, as a Cause that does command,
execute, and restrain all other Causes only to such or such an efficacy
inevitable.

Thirdly, we deny not, but the Sun and Moon have strong operations, and do many
things by the virtue of their Rays: but it does not follow, that therefore the
Planets and Fixed Stars must be their Competitors at least, if not their
superiors, in the honor of this energy. How can it be proved that as the Heat
of the year is to be referred to the Sun, the Fullness of Shel-fish to the moon;
so some special effect ought to be referred to Jupiter, or rather to him, than
to Mars, or Venus, yea than to the Sun, or Moon? Observation teaches, that
when the Moon is in Conjunction with the Sun, the marrow in the bones of
Animals is diminished: but, does Observation teach, that any such effect
follows when Mars, Venus, or other Planet is in Conjunction with the Sun, or
Moon, or other Planet?

Fourthly, Astrologers boast, that they have more Knowledge of Celestial
Operations, than Plow-men, shepherds, Mariners, or the like Illiterate Persons
can have: when yet it is well known they do not observe the Stars motions, as
those Plain and honest men do, in the open Air, but being shutt up in their
closets, make their Calculations out of Ephemerides, or Almanacks, by the light
of a small Candle, and unless it be the Sun and Moon, know neither Planet nor
Fixed Stars in the whole Heavens. But, when they turn over their Ephemerides,
can they have a more exact knowledge of Celestial matters, than those who look
only upon the Stars and Planets themselves? If so, how have they remarked what
Saturn does, when Progressing beyond the Sun he is covered by the body thereof?
How his beams have passed through the whole great body of the Sun, that so they
might arive in full virtue at the Earth, and affect the body of an infant
entering into the world? By what note of distinction have they known that
Saturns and no other Cause, introduced such or such an impression.

Again, it is confessed, that Heat does arise from the Celestial rays of
light; but it is no good consequence, that therefore there is no Heat in the
Earth, but that which comes from those rays. Cold also arises from the
absence of the Sun; but it follows not that therefore there is no cause of
Cold inherent in the Earth, which may diffuse it self through the Air, and
overpower the weaker heat of the Sun.

Barrenness also, and Epidemical Diseases arem any times induced by two much
Cold, or Heat, or other affections of the Air; but the Cause of those
Affections arise from the very Earth; and if they were not known, nor the
seasons of the year when they usually take their turns of Predominion in the
Air, could we divine, by any Celestial inspection, or how, or when they would
mis-affect us. The Affections of the Air, we confess, work something not only
upon the temper of the body, but also upon the mind it self, by the
intercession of the temperament: but the main buisiness is to be able to
foreknow, when the Air will be so or so qualified; of what particular temper a
man must be, in order to his being moved and altered by such an affection; upon
what occasion he shall be at that time in such or such a place, where the Air
is so mis-affected; neither of which, I am sure, can be learned from the Rules
of Astrology.

Furthermore, we deny not but a man may be, according to his individual
temperament, more disposed to Love, marriage, and procreation of Children than
to Continence, Single life, or barrenness. but the Difficulty is, how to
foretell what his individual temperament will be, and what occasions he shall
meet with to induce him to love this or that Woman, rather than any other, in
this or that year of his life, rather than sooner or later; and what
inducements that Woman shall meet with either to accept, or refuse him for her
Husband; and whether they shall have issue, or not, etc, Likewise, a man's
complexion may be such, as to dispose him to Anger, Quarrels, and a Soldiers
life: but who can fore tell what occasions of Anger, Quarreling, or Fighting he
shall meet with, at such or such times of his life; whether he shall hearken to
the dictates of his own, or friends prudence, and decline the danger, or not;
whether he shall be victor, or not; whether sickness, imprisonment, or other
accidents shall hinder him from going to the Wars, or not; whether his wounds
shall be in such a place, or mortal or not?

Lastly, we deny not, but the Studies, Successes, Fates of Men, are Various;
but the Riddle is, how we should know that God has suspended their Studies,
Successes, and Fates upon the Stars, and not rather upon other Causes, which
for the most part are easily known, and as easily pointed out: though we never
know them till after the Events, and so, in respect of our ignorance, may be
said to work by chance or accident. But in the Heavens we can find no such
probable Causes for such Events; and indeed it seems mere foolishness, and
unjustifiable rashness, to suppose these petty affairs to be so important and
considerable, as that God should impose the care of them upon the Stars, or
that their Successes should depend upon none but such great and noble Causes.
Phavorinus (apud Gellium) judges it to be mere madness for us to imagine, that
because the Tides of the Sea agree with the course of the Moon, therefore the
trivial contention of a Man with his Neighbor, about some small Water-courss,
or some Bank lying in common betwixt them, should be judged for or against him,
according to the state of the Moon when his suit was commenced; as if that
matter were predeter mined in Heaven, and of absolute necessity so or so to
succeed. And thus we see, how little reason They have to pretend Reason for
their defense.

CHAP. XXI.
Their Pretense to Experience, Unjust.

WE are now at length come to their Last and strongest Hold, Observation, or
Experience, which they so frequently boast of, and against which, far be it
from me to make any opposition, if there be the least of truth in what they
allege: since against genuine and certain Experience no Reason can prevail.
But it was well said of that brave Prince of Physicians, Hippocrates (1.
Aphorism.) that Experience is Fallacious; since so many things inter vene, that
may occasion mistake, and make men run into a Paralogisme, or accepting that
for a Cause, which really is none: and since those Experiments are very rare,
which convince such an effect to arise from such a particular Cause, and no
other. And therefore no man has ever denied, but Experience is to be weighed
in the balance of Reason, least there should be some fallacy concealed, that
might prejudice our assent, and so, that strict examination ought to be made of
all particulars and circumstances: since nothing is more common in matters of
Experiment, than for unskilful to be deceived themselves, and for dishonest
men to deceive others: nor are we without great circumspection to yield our
assent to all experiments, especial such as we rather hear of from others,
than see with our own eyes.

And as for the matter in hand, how many things are there that oblige us to
question the truth of those Experiments, which Astrologers obtrude upon the
World, as testimonies of the Certainty of their Art?

In the First place, we have already seen, that the Chaldeans performed nothing
in this kind; nor Hipparchus from either them or the Egyptians; nor Ptolomie
from all of them, as to the point of observations relating to the true motions
or true places of the Five Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury.
Wherefore the Chaldeans were very far from eithet establishing the Fundamental
statutes of the Art by their own Observations, or proving that they made those
statutes upon any considerable grounds at all.

Again, whereas each single precept, or Rule ought to have been constituted
upon many experiments had of the certain variety thereof: we have plainly seen,
that it was not possible for them ever to make the same experiment so much as
only twice; because the same position of the Heavens cannot return again, not
only after many hundreds, but also many millions of years.

Further, the Ancients were ignorant of all those notable discoveries, that
have been lately made as well of the Fixed, as Erratique Stars; which would have
required them to alter their Astrological decrees; and chiefly those, which
concern the spots in the Sun, which being frequently both more in number, and
greater in bulk than Mercury, or Venus ever appeared: ought to be presumed to
have stronger operations upon the Earth, than either of them, being interposed
betwixt the Sun and us, or (as they phrase it) in the Heart of the Sun.

Besides, should it be granted, that the decrees of the Chaldeans were grounded
upon, and confirmed by Observations; and that the discoveries lately made to us
by the Telescope and otherwise, were not necessary to be known to them, as to
the certainty of their Rules: yet we have made it manifest, that the most they
could do, was to make decrees and Observations useful for themselves, or their
own Country; but not for their Antaeci, or Antipodes, to whom their
Observations and Decrees are not only incompetent, but perfectly contrary; nor
for those who live under the Equator, who ought to have decrees composed of the
two contraries reconciled in a mean; nor for those, who live in a greater or
lesser recess from the Equator, for whom the same rules ought to be varied by
degrees, until at length they become quite contrary to what they were at
first, or to be totally nulled: so that it is well worthy our wonder, that our
Astrologers are so inconsiderate, as to give their judgments from the rules of
the Chaldeans, who lived in a Climate so vastly distant from ours; and to
conceive, that we should have the same Observations here, that they had there.

To these exceptions you may please to add the Variety of the Soyls, or
Countries, in which men are born, and educated. For since men are otherwise
affected in Mediterranean; or inland Countries, than in Maritime, or places
bordering upon the Sea; since in some Maritime places, men live generally
longer and healthier, than in others, according to the wholesome, or unwholesome
Genius of the Soil: what reason is there, why the Observations of one place
should serve for a rule, whereby to give judgment of the disposition and
influence of another? Because with us Men very rarely live to an hundred Years;
is it reasonable thereupon to predict, that among the Tovopinambaltij (who
commonly attain to twice that Age) no Man shall exceed an hundred? And when (as
Historians tell us, in their Indian relations) the Women of that Country
usually bear Children after the ninetieth year of their Lives; shall we give
the same judgment of our Country Women, who cease to bear Children before they
are fifty? Supposing the Nativity of an European to be the same in all points
with that of a Brasilian; must their Constitutions, Lives, Fortunes, Deaths be
therefore the same?

Add also the Variety of Education and Manners. Here we might reap a plentiful
harvest of matter from Bardesanes, in Eusebius (6. Prepar. 47.) from Caesarius,
and others; but to omit the rest, it is well known, that all those many Rules
delivered by Astrologers concerning the signification of Riches, and of
Marriages, are of no use among those Nations, who hold all things in Common,
who neither value, nor collect wealth, and who know no such thing as Adultery,
Incest, Rape, or Polygamy, but have all Women in Common. And this Ptolomy was
sensible of; when he gives a caution to his Disciples, not to predict the
Marriage of ones own Sister, in Italy; but in Egypt, where such Marriages were
Lawful: nor to foretell to an Egyptian, that he should lie with his own
Mother; but to a Persian, because such prodigious Copulations were tolerated
among the Persians, but detested by the Egyptians. So that (as He adds) there
ought a consideration to be had chiefly of the Laws, Customs, and Manners of
several Nations and Countries. And this Caution, indeed is good; but yet of no
advantage toward the reputation of the Art: forasmuch as it plainly imports,
that the same, and its principal Observations ought to be proper to each
particular Nation: now several Nations being most inconstant to their Laws,
Customs, and Manners; the Observations drawn from them cannot choose but
reader the Art most uncertain, most fallacious.

To these Varieties let us subjoyn also, those of different Seasons of the
Year, Hot or Cold, Dry or Wet; of a sound, or sickly Constitution, upon
occasion whereof Astrologers would have been far from predicting, that Old
Parr, the long lived Welsh-man, should after the hundredth and fiftieth year of
his age, be brought from an obscure hungry Village, on the North side of a
barren Mountain in Wales, into the Court of the King, and there destroyed with
delicacy) of a high or mean Fortune; of an illustrious, or obscure Family; of
strict, or careless Education; of honest, or debauch Conversation; of the
Course of Life, either imposed by Parents, chosen by the inclination of ones
own Genius, or fallen upon by chance; of the Condition of the Times, whether
warlike, or Peaceful, Learned or Barbarous; with a thousand other the like
Circumstances, which necessarily vary-the Events of Men's lives, and divert them
from what they would otherwise have been. Unless you can think it reasonable,
that because such or such Men, are destined by the Stars to fall by the edge of
the Sword, in War; therefore that War must be raised in that Commonwealth, in
order to the fulfilling of their particular Destinies: when a sober Man would
rather think that the Geniture of private persons should be accommodated to the
Fates of their Times and Countries, than the Contrary, For to say, that such a
Man should not have been born, unless it had been Decreed, that there should be
War in that Nation, at that time, when he was grown up to be a Soldier; is most
insufferable.

In the Last place, let us reflect upon the Variety of the Art it self; it
being no secret, that the Artificers are at irreconcilable variance among
themselves; and even about their Fundamentals. And hence comes it, that they
differ in their doctrine in many things, and among the rest, in the Manner of
Erecting Scheams; for few of them now a days retain either the Old Chaldean
way of casting Nativities, or the Placits relating to them. You will say
perhaps, that the Chaldeans were not in the right; but since you have both the
composure and certainty of the Art only from them, handed down from Age to Age
to the present; if they were in the wrong, how came you to be in the right?
You Will say, Tou are guided by Experience; but will you dare to prefer the
Experience of a few Years to that of many Ages: and if their long Experience
were not sufficient to constitute a firm and durable Art, will your short
Observation suffice, when you want the advantages wherewith the serenity of the
Air, and the constancy of their studies furnished them; and opportunities to
compare their Experiments with your own? You will say, that the Difference of
Times and Climates does require some innovations; but why then do as many
Astrologers yet adhere to their doctrine, as recede from it? Why is the same
Method for the most part embraced in diverse Countries? Why is the Method many
times varied in the same Country? And thus much of their Experience in General.

To examine their Experiments more Particularly; I plainly affirm in the First
place, that Astrologers neither have, nor can presage those Events, which
concern any Man's Life, or Death. As for Ancient times, we have sufficient
testimony from Cicero (2. de Divinat.) in these words; How many things do I
remember were by Chaldeans predicted to Pompy to Crassus, to Caesar himself, and
that each of them should not die, but in full old Age, but in their own Houses,
but in peace, and undiminished honor? And yet how their Fates were violent,
immature, and Tragical. So that I cannot but very much wonder, how any man
living can give credit to their divinations; when he cannot but observe that
their predictions are falsisied by contrary Events. For Modern, Sextus ab
Heminga has sufficiently cleared the matter to our hands; for having proposed
thirty eminent Nativities, and reduced them to strict examination according to
the best rules of Art; he declared, that the Experiments did in no wise agree
with the rules; sad Events befalling such as were born under the most happy and
promising positions of the Heavens; and good befalling such as the Heavens
frowned upon, and threatened all the mischief and ruin unto, that can be
imagined. And thereupon concluded, that Astrologers, when they give judgment
of a Nativity, are generally the whole Heavens wide of the truth; portending
things that never come to pass, and pretermitting such as do come to pass. Let
us be contented with one eminent Example. All Histories assure us, that Henry
the third of France died in the fortieth year of his age complete, of an
unfortunate wound in his Ey, received in Tilting: and yet see the prophesy of
Gauricus concerning Him, in his Prognostication of the Year MDLVI, Because in
the Scheam of his almost Divine Nativity, He had the Sun almost partilely
conjoined to Venus, under the degrees of his altitude; and also the Moon and
Venus advancing through his Horoscope, under the Constellation of Aries:
therefore He shall live most happy and glorious, till the seventieth year of
his age, deducting only two months; and if by the favor of God, He escape the
dangerous Tears, Sixty three, and Sixty four, then Semper vivet in terris
pientissimus, it will be very long before there be an end of his renowned Life.
Now you will say this came very near the truth: and yet I could fit you with other
Examples of the same Gauricus's predictions, that came as near, as Sextus ab
Heminga has exactly noted. See likewise the Prediction of Cardan, when
speaking of the same King Henry; He shall be (faith he) in his old age so much
the more happy, by how many more difficulties he has passed through before.
And how acutely, I pray do these famous Prophets foresee those things, which
are proved by the Event? Most admirable indeed they are, when they demonstrate,
that those Events ought to have befallen men, in respect of their Genitures,
which have already befallen them: but when they predict that those Events are
to come Can any thing be more foolish, or indeed more grossly Knavish? Observe I
beseech you, how rightly Cardan predicted the lamentable misfortunes of men
that were his dear Friends, Cheek of England, and Raconet of France, and sundry
others, all whose Nativity Scheams he erected will all possible exactness, and
afterward printed them? I cannot hold from noting that John Rudolphus
Camerarius, when writing against the foresaid Sextus ab Heminga, he had, to
declare the certainty of Astrologers, collected an hundred several Genitures,
and among them put those of our late King of France, Henry the III. and Henry
the IV; conjoyning also the judgment of Fredericus Rutelius: as to Henry the
III. the buisiness succeeded accordingly, sed Fatum post Fata canebat, He
foretold his disaster after it had befaln him. But as to Henry the IV. who was
then living, when his Century was published in the year MDCVII. nothing was
less foretold by him, than the time of his Death. For though that best of Kings
was murdered by a Sacrilegious hand, in the year MDCX. and that in the month
of May: our famous Prophet never suspected the least danger to him, in that
Year or Month; but cast his Death upon the year MDCXIII. and the month of
October; as threatening some eminent danger to his Life in the nine and fiftieth
year of his Age nine month s and one and twenty days, he being born on the
24th of December, at two a clock after Midnight, in the year MDLIII. and that
because the Sun would then come by direction to the body of Saturn; the
Horoscope to a Quartile of the same; and the Middle Heaven to a Quartile of the
Sun. But truly as the Fate of that Prince was deplorable; so was the
Hariolation ridiculous.

It will not be amiss for us, here to reflect upon somewhat of Michael
Nostradamus, my own Comprovincial, that relates to our present argument; for of
those so famous Centuries of Tetrastichs composed by him, I have another
opportunity to speak. I shall give you only a taste of the Astrology he made use
of; and if according to that he failed most shamfully in his predictions, I
hope we may well believe, that he was not inspired by any divine spirit, or
Genius, such as might suggest falsehoods to him, or put lies in his mouth.

Being some years since at Salona, in company with the worthy person,
Franciscus Bochartius Campinius, President of the high Court of Justice in
Province, and that truly noble Man, John Baptista Suffredus, Judge of that
City; I remember Suffredus showed us the Nativity Scheam of Antonius Suffredus,
his Father, with the judgments thereupon given, under Nostradamus his own
handwriting. We were much pleased to enquire of him, concerning his Father,
whom he knew well, as not dying till his son was almost arrived at Man's estate.
The Father, according to that Scheam, was born in the Year MDXLIII. on the 13th
of January, 22. minutes after high Noon, the Altitude of the Pole being
supposed to be 44. degrees; which is more by the third part of a degree, than
ought, but that is no matter. There were no degrees of the Signs inscribed on
the Scheam; but the bare Signs divided into Houses, after the old Chaldean
way, beginning at Aries pertaining to his Horoscope; nor was there any mention
of the Five wandering Stars, but only of the Sun referred to the second degree
of Aquarius, and 36. minutes, and of the Moon related to the sixth degree of
Taurus, without any minutes at all. Now the Son John Suffredus being not able
to give us any account of those Accidents, which Nostradamus had foretold
should befall the Father in his Youth; as that in the 16th year of his age, he
should fall into a dangerous Dysentery or Bloody Flux; that he should be
invaded with an acute and violent Fever, in the 17th year of his Life, and in
the 20th fall in Love, and relinguish his studies, etc. I shall relate only
such, as he could more certainly inform us of. Among other of the Prophets
judgments there are most remarkable. That he should wear his Beard long, and
crisped (but he always shaved his Chin bare) that in the middle of his age,
his Teeth should be rotten (but he had very white and firm Teeth to his dying
day) that in his old age he should go almost crooked and double (but he went to
the last upright and straight, as any young man whoever) that in the 19th year
of his life, he should become exceeding rich, by inheriting a strangers estate
(but besides what his Father left him, he never had any wealth or estate) that
he should suffer by the treachery of his Brethren, and again, in the 37th year,
be wounded by his own Mothers Son (but he never had any Brother, nor had his
Father more than one Wife) that he should marry a Forreigner, (but he married a
French Woman of Salona) that in the 27th year, he should be charged with a
Eastard Son (but no Man ever heard of that) that in the 25th he should be
overwhelmed with the Theological Doctrine of some of his Tutors; and that he
should be so addicted to Natural Philosophy, and the secrets of Magic, as no
man more; as also to Geometry, and Arithmetic, in an extraordinary manner
(when yet it is well known, he never had any particular affection to, or care
of any of those Studies, but entirely devoted himself to the knowledge of the
Laws, of which Nostradamus never dreamt, nor of the Dignity of a Senator, which
in that respect was worthily conferred upon him, at Aix, in the 25th of his
age) that in his old age, he should apply himself to Navigation, and Music
(but he never delighted much in Music, nor was ever at Sea in his whole Life)
that he should not pass the 75th year (but he passed not the 54th; of which
Nostradamus said not a word.) And these things I am the more particular in, to
the end that Men may judge, what credit is to be given to such predictions.

We must allow, that some one thing of those many, that Astrologers presage may
perchance come to pass, now and then; and yet for all that, it is free for us
to continue our opinion, that those Events have other Causes to depend upon,
than such as justify Astrology.

One is Fortune, or mere Chance. For when they tumble out so many judgments
concerning Future Events; no wonder if one, or two of them hit right. No Man,
as the old Proverb is, who shoots all day but he may sometimes come near the
mark, Gamesters playing at Dice, usually in a few throws, cast In and In. Why,
therefore may not our Gamesters playing with the Stars, among a thousand
predictions light upon one true one? Old Women, Children, and Fools sometimes
foretell truth, and why should not Astrologers have the same luck? But you will
say, that others make their predictions hap at a venture; but Astrologers from
the Rules of Art. We grant it; but yet those Rules were made by mere Chance, at
random, without convincing reasons; and change them how you please, still they
shall pretend to premonstrate the same Events. Will you have an illustrious
Example hereof? Cardan in his Geniture had Saturn in the 21. degree of Gemini,
which yet, according to the Rudolphine Tables, was in the 18th degree; Mercury
in 23. of Libra, which was in the 26th and so of the Moon, and the other
Planets. Now if Events ought to be predicted from the true places of the
Planets; and yet those predicted from the false places come to pass as
certainly: you may plainly perceive, that it matters not in what places soever
the Planets be, whatsoever be predicted. Again, Cardan sometimes mistakes the
places of the Planets, not only by a few degrees, but even by whole Signs. For
Example, in the Geniture of his dear Friend, John Cheek, He mistook the true
place of Mars by more than one whole Sign. Will you have something yet more
worthy the wonder? Tycho Brahe (lib. de nov. Stella. p. 777.) tell'us that both
Cardan and Gauricus enquired into the Fortune and Manners of Martin Luther, by
calculating his Nativity, which both of them fixed upon the 22. of October; but
differed about the year, Cardan taking the year M C C C C L X X X I I I. and
Gauricus the next year following: Cardan took also the hour of Ten at Night,
and Gauricus the hour of one afternoon, when the true hour was Eleven. And
that you may not think they were in the right as to the day of the Month; I
assure you, they both missed it by 19. days: for He was born upon the tenth of
November (being the Eve to St Martins day, from whom he took his name) as Tycho
sets it down out of Eberus, Now I beseech you, how great variety was there of
the Heavens, in so different Scheams, and neither of them near the truth: and
yet the Accommodation of the Events (forsooth) must be convenient? Can you
choose but think this whole Artifice to be a mere Delusion; a Toy more vain
than the Canting of common Rogues and Gypsies, as they call them? Doubtless, if
mere Chance did not bear all the sway in these matters, Astrologers could not
either so frequently, or so duly be deceived in their Divinations. Of Forty
things (says Cardan lib. de judic. cap. 6.) Scarce ten happen right, as they
are predicted: so that you have the Confession of a most Learned Astrologer,
which the force of truth extorted from him in spite of his confidence. And
indeed had not too much doting upon the Art bewitched the Man he might more
truly have said, that of four hundred Predictions scarce one is verified. But
supposing his supposition to be true, that of Forty scarce Ten succeed; and it
will follow of necessity, that Chance has a main hand in Astrological
predictions, when the Truth of them is four times less then their falsehood. I
must not omit to advertise you, that Cardan himself (lib. de Genit.) much
commends that saying of Marlianus; Si vis divinare, contrarium ad unguem dicito
ejus quod Astrologi aut pollicentur, aut minitantur: if you have an itch to be
divining, be sure you foretell the quite contrary to what Astrologers either
promise, or threaten. For however Cardan would have this to be understood only
of unskilful and ignorant Astrologers: yet you may perceive, what truth is to
be expected from the most learned and diligent of them all, among whom he
challenges the Chair to himself: nor do the multitude deny him that honor.
And yet you may find him glorying, that he spent a hundred hours about the
Geniture of King Edward the Sixth of England, which he made the first of twelve
eminent Nativities: and notwithstanding all that pains and care, he predicted
nothing less than the Events that befell that worthy Prince. For (to omit
other things) the Records of England assure us, that King Edward died in the
sixteenth year of his life; when he had predicted, that he should be very
sickly in the 23, 24, and 25th years. After which time (says He) he shall be
afflicted with sundry diseases, and (Mars being then his Anereta, or Regicide)
he shall dye of a Bloody Flux, and a violent Fever, Now does Industry gain the
better of Chance or not? O if Cardan had the luck to have foretold, that this
King should fall into some dangerous Disease, in that year, wherein he died:
what Joy, what Triumph, what Quacking would there have been among Astrologers?
and how would the Diviner have magnified himself, and his Art?

Another Cause is the Cunning and underhand Fraud of Astrologers, in making
their Praedictions. For when a Geniture is given them to Divine upon, in the
first place they take special care to learn out, of what Sex, what Family, what
Quality, what Country, what Course of Life, etc. the Person is; for as Cardan
instructs them, without the knowledge of all these particulars, no judgment
is to be given. And what great wonder is it, if from the consideration of all
these things they chance now and then to foretell some Events, which may well
be suspected, not from the precepts of Astrology, but from a natural Sagacity
or Conjecture according to probabilities? Hither-to you may referr the
prediction of Ollerius Barcinonensis concerning that Heroical Prince, Henry the
4th of France, not long before his inhuman assassination by that Monster a
^oviliack; For it is likely enough that Ollerius might have some secret
intimation of that bloody design, which both the Kings Orators suspected, and
some certain Grande'es of Spain insinuated; and which a common rumor, diffused
through Spain, for above two months together, seemed to premonish; as I have
more largely declared in the Life of Peireskius. Again, they give their
predictions always in the General-indefinitely, and (like the Devil of
Delphos) in Amphiboligies: and this piece of subtlety they have learned of
Ptolomie, out of these words (in Centiloq. Sent. 1.) It cannot be that an
understanding Artist should predict the particular forms, or manners of
Accidents; as the sense does not receive the particular, but a certain General
form of a sensible object, and he that deals in matters of Divination, ought to
use the skill of Conjecturing by probabilities: and only those who are inspired
by the Divine Spirit, can predict Particulars. And why should not they be
believed to come near the mark, when they presage some Danger, or Death, or
Favor, or Calamity, or the like common Accidents, from which no man is
exempted? For who is there, to whom some such Accidents do not at some time or
other happen; Providence having so generally mixed evil and good* together in
this Life? And as for their Amphibologies, or ambiguous Answers, they contrive
them so cunningly, as that be the Event what it will, still the words shall be
capable of intimating it: or if they deliver any judgment in plain terms
(which they seldom do) they annex some certain Condition; that so if the Event
foretold do not succeed accordingly, then they may lay the blame upon the
failing of the Condition: but if it does succeed, then without regarding the
correspondence or disagreement of the Condition, they magnify themselves for
infallible Prophets. Hereupon, though when their Divination does fail, they
presently allege that either the Providence of God, or the study of
Philosophy, or the very premonition it self put an hinderance to the Event
designed: yet when it succeeds, they mention nothing but their own admirable
skill. They are wont also to excuse themselves with being afraid of the Anger
of Princes, if they should plainly and in simple terms, predict the Events
attending them: and yet if there chance to be but the least shadow of the
Events predicted, then whole Troy is conquered, and they boast themselves
acquainted with the secrets of Fate. And this again is the Cause, why they so
complicate their Aphorisms, as that unless the thing presaged fall out exactly
so, they lay the fault upon their own incircumspection, in omitting the
consideration of something or other, that ought to have been considered in their
Calculation of the Nativity proposed; that so the Art may still be thought
sufficient to make predictions to an hairs breadth. Lastly, in case any thing
succeed, which was foretold; that must be done by the exact observation of the
rules of Art: but if nothing succeed, then (forsooth) they exclame that the
buisiness was not done with due exactness, that the Scheam ought to be
corrected, and the Horoscope so removed forward, or backward, so as that the
Effect may be brought at length to quadrate or correspond with their direction.
And because for the most part one direction being accommodate to the Effect,
the rest are incongruous; therefore their Cunning is such, as that they say,
that the Effect is sometimes either Anticipated, or Prorogated by one Year at
least wide of the direction. But why should I run over all their Frauds and
starting holes? One remedy will serve against them all; and that is, to propose
a Nativity to one or two of the best of them, and when they have studied it as
much as they please, require them to predict any one particular Event to come,
in plain terms, together with the certain day, manner of the accident, and
other Circumstances: and when they have done that, see if they will lay a
considerable wager that that Event shall succeed accordingly. If they accept
the condition, pray let me go your half: if they refuse it, you may understand
how little confidence they have in their own Art, which yet they would impose
upon others, as divine and infallible.

The Last Cause is the Ignorance and Stupidity of such as come to consult them
about their Fortunes. For First, there are very few, who sufficiently
understand (what we have more than once inculcated) that the iflux of the
Heavens is only General, and that all particular Effects belong to particular
Causes. Men generally do not consider, that Brute Animals, which have their
Births Synchronical to those of Infants, have yet different fates from those of
Men, when yet the Stars looked upon both indifferently. And so well conceipted
are we of our selves, that we suffer our selves to be persuaded, that what ever
befalls us, certainly the Heavens took care for it: and being deluded by this
proud credulity, we instantly believe what ever is told us from the Heavens, as
something ordained and inevitable; contributing to our own delusions, as if it
were not sufficient for us to be subject to the delusions of others.

Men therefore being commonly possessed with Hope, Fear, Love, Hatred, or some
other passion, interpret all things in favor of that passion, and expect that
even the Stars should be as much concerned therein, as themselves: and thus
they swell themselves with the Air of Phansy, that they may be much greater
than indeed they are, and of Gnats be taken for Elephants. And whether it be
good or evil that the Astrologers have predicted to them; they scorn to think
themselves liable to so low a thing as Fortune but derive the least grace, or
injury done them, from those sublime and glorious bodies, the Stars. There is a
Tale (and it is a true one) of Francis the Monk, a famous Astrologer in the
last Age; how he predicted that some friend should shortly give him a new pair
of Shoes, from the coming of the middle Heaven to the Benefical rays of I know
not what propitious Planet. What would this Man have done think you, in case he
had had great wealth accumulated upon him, or if he had bin advanced to some
dignity in his Order? But alas, Human infirmity being once out of the tuition
of right reason, is never wanting to assist toward its own delusions. Secondly,
it is to be considered, that though the greatest part of those things which are
foretold by Astrologers, never come to pass; yet the Common People foolishly
take no notice of those many failings: but if one among a thousand predictions
chance to be verified, presently, as if it had been delivered by Jupiter
Hammons Oracle, the Art is thought Divine, and the lucky success of that one
divination makes them forget the falsity of all the rest. And this condition of
Vulgar heads cannot be unknown to any man, who has at any time observed their
weakness in this kind. Nor do I mean only the meanest sort of Men, but place in
the number of the Vulgar even Men of high condition, and such whose dignities
render their follies the less remarkable; these also being as much overrun
with the itch of Astrological Curiosity, as the others; unless it be some few,
whom natural Sagacity, or good education, or experience has made more
competent judges of those fooleries and frauds. Otherwise being possessed with
ambition, and the immoderate desire of Life, there is no cheating trick of
Astrologers, which will not easily ensnare their belief. And this truly is the
reason, why we observe Great Persons generally much to favor Diviners, and to
embrace with all greediness the very dreams of such, as seem to promise them a
continuance, or increase of their Grandeur: though Histories ly open to attest,
that no Princes have been so unhappy, as those who most confided in the
predictions of Astrologers, that promised them rare and singular felicities. We
shall spare some of fresher memory and yet not go far off for Examples of this
kind. How tragical were the Fates of Emmanuel of Portugal; of Peter, of
Arragon; Simon the Bulgarian, Lodowick Sforxa Duke of Millain; who confided in
Astrologers that flattered them with the hopes of mountains of Happiness equal
to that of the Gods, and yet came to be the most miserable Princes in all
story. For Peter was murdered by his Bastard Brother; Lodovick despoyled of
his Dukedom, and perished most miserably in Fetters; and the others suffered
most grievious calamities.

Again, the wonder is always much heightened by the greatness of the Person;
For if any thing predicted befall an eminent Man, or Prince; then the Art is
extolled to the Heavens. And this (forsooth) because Great men are conceived to
be more favored and respected by the Stars, then Plebeans; and so what ever
befalls them, is believed to be decreed more especially by the Heavens: and if
any thing predicted by Astrologers befalls them, the predictions being
commonly known to all, all men fall into admiration of their skill. And this
for the most part relates to the Death, Disposition, and Calamities of
Princes. As if the same Sun did not with indifferent beams shine upon the
Cottages of Peasants, and Palaces of Kings and as if it were not all one to
the Stars, whether a Rich Man, or a Beggar, were born in the loins of Old
Inachus, or from those of one sleeping on a Dunghill? As if those Fifty
thousand Men, who fell in the Battle of Canna, had all their Fates inseparably
connexed, by the Heavens to the rashness of their General, who unadvisedly
engaged them to fight upon disadvantage? When they were born in so many several
places, at so many several times; can you think it easy to an Astrologer, from
an inspection into all their Genitures before, to have found directions for
them, such as might enable him to predict that they would all fall upon the
same day? Lastly, it sometimes happens that when an Astrologer has promised
some great honor, or advancement to a young sprightly Courtier, who has
already a good share in his Princes favor: the confidence of this promise does
so elevate his spirit, quicken his industry, and engage all the nerves of his
mind to endeavor the accomplishment of his ends; as that he at length come's
to attain some fruit of his services and hopes, and then who so much admired,
so much cried up, as Mr Astrologer, who foretold his preferment? When indeed,
he ought rather to sacrifice to his own wit and Confidence (both which
conjoined, do great matters in the World. especially in Courts) or to the
Bounty of his Prince, than to the indulgence of the Stars, which are as
unconcerned in him, and his affairs, as in the Life, or Death of a Fly. On the
other side, Predictions of Evil accidents, make men dejected in their Spirits,
slack in their industry, and sometimes desperate: and then it is no wonder, if
they prosper not in their designs (diligence being the life of buisiness) but
meet with such disasters, as were threatened them by Astrologers. And I could
make you a true relation of some, who having been told by Astrologers, that
they should die by a rope, have, to prevent the shame of the common Gallows,
hanged themselves when they had no other occasion of discontent. And these
Events, we poor miserable Mortals account the undoubted Experiments of
Astrology. As if many others had not lost their labors, and been defeated of
all their hopes, whom the like glorious promises invited to make themselves
Courtiers and Favorites? As if many had not died in peace and prosperity in
their beds, to whom Astrologers had threatened violent and untimely deaths by
the hand of an executioner? As if the good Fortune of successful Courtiers
were not to be ascribed to their own industry: or the miserable death of such
as lay violent hands upon themselves, were not to be ascribed to their own
madness and impiety, rather than to any decrees of the Stars?

It remain's only now, that we expede our selves from those particular
Experiments of the verity of Astrological Predictions, that are related of
Alexander of Macedon and other Ancients formerly mentioned; the fame of these
having given more reputation to the Art, than any thing else they pretend to,
except the Credulity of Men.

To these, therefore I Answer; First, that all those relations may be False:
and that the Faithfullness of Historiographers in such things may be
questioned. Not that I think they deserve to be accounted Liars, when they
record such Accidents, as they have either seen themselves, or heard from other
credible Persons, though those accidents seem strange and supernatural; but
that they may be justly suspected of affecting Rarities, when they studiously
scrape together and set down all kinds of common Rumors dispersed among the
common People, concerning the Nativity, or Death of some great Prince, whose
Life and adventures they write of; and by this means often impose upon the easy
belief of their Readers. For it is well known, that most Historians do sometimes
invent many wonderful passages and encounters to make the person of whom they
write, the more illustrious; and sometimes jestingly, or inconsiderately vent
such Romantic relations, which have no ground in truth, but being once
admitted into the ears of the People, instantly gain credit, and become the
more authentical, by how much the more they are dispersed; especially if the
Prince perished by some tragical disaste. For then the accident grows
predigious and every Man dream's and talks of nothing but Night Ravens,
Screetch Owls, Evil Genius's Bells ringing themselves, Furies in the Air
holding Ensigns, and flaming Torches, the sound of men walking invisibly, the
impressions of feet going backward, Armies fighting in the Clouds, and a
thousand such ridiculous Bugg-bears: so that the wonder is the less, if among
all these Portents, they omit not to add also the Prophesies of Chaldeans. And
Historians, understanding that such relations will highly please the People,
and be read with delight and greediness; will therefore by no means leave them
out of their Papers and it is to be wished, they would not now and then amplify
them, on purpose to engratiate their story. For my part, truly, I am sure I
have read in the History of a great Princes Life and Death, such things as
never befell him, nor any like them, so as to give occasion to those relations.
You will take it ill, perhaps, that I give this digressive touch upon the
infidelity of Historians; but if you please to hear Seneca's censure of them
(lib. 7. quaest. natural. cap. 16.) upon occasion of Comets, you will find mine
much the milder and more favorable of the two There needs not much ado (says
He) to derogate from the Authority of Ephorus; he is an Historian Some hunt
after praise by the relation of incredible things, and by telling wonders stir
up the Reader, who otherwise would lay aside their books, and betake himself to
other employment, in case none but ordinary accidents were related. Some are
Credulous, some Negligent: some are surprised with a Lie, others pleased. Those
do not avoid it. These affect it. And this is common to all the tribe of them,
that none thinks his works will be liked and become popular, unless he here and
there lard them with Fictions. And Ephorus, being a Man of no very precise
faith, is often deceived himself, and does as often deceive others, in his
reports. And thus Seneca.

Secondly, it is possible some other bold pretender to Divinations might say to
Alexander; Thou shall loose thy Life at Babylon: but no man could say this, as
a thing foreseen by the Stars, but that he might as well die there, as any where
else, either by Surfets and Drunkenness (to which he more and more devoted
himself) or by throwing himself into the thickest of the Enemies forces (which
was his custom, out of an excess of Courage, or rather rashness) or by
Treachery of his powerful Captains (who were then perpetually plotting his
Death) or by some other Accident. Again, being they accounted Alexander a
Tyrant, the Chaldeans might well conjecture, that a Conspiracy against his life
might be more easily plotted, and effected, in a spacious and populous City,
then in the midst of his Army. Besides, being interrogated strictly concerning
the fate of that great Conqueror, least they should betray their own ignorance
by saying nothing: they might deliver that prediction, which if it succeeded,
would commend their Art; and if not, would easily be forgotten: Men's minds
being taken up with new successes, and new designs. And that you may be
satisfied, that the Chaldeans did deliver this and the like prophefies, either
by Conjecture, or mere Chance: be pleased to consider what is reported of
Morius and Octavius. Both of them confided in the Chaldeans, that promised them
wonders: but one met with what he expected, and the other the quite contrary.
Now, is this a sign of the Constancy of the Art? Certainly no, the matter is
wholly obscure and those prophesies are to be referred to mere Fortune not to
any Certainty in the Art. For Augustus likewise; though I should grant those
predictions of his future greatness to have been realy delivered; yet it is not
impossible but that they might be delivered out of Flattery: and since we are
not to doubt, but many the like predictions have been given of sundry other
young Men of great hopes; no wonder, if those proved false in others, that this
proyed true in him. Further, since Augustus could not acquire the Empire,
unless Pompey, Caesar and some other great Romans were first removed out of his
way by Death; and the Chaldeans had positively fore told that Pompey and Caesar
should neither of them dye, but in extreme Old Age, but in their own homes, but
in full splendour and renown (as we formerly observed out of Cicero*) you may
easily perceive with what certainty they were able to prophesy his ascending to
the Emperial dignity. I omit how dangerous and treasonable a thing it would
have been in Theagenes, to have predicted a Monarchy in Rome, in those ticklish
days* when the names of Monarchy and Slavery were both a like odious to the
high spirited People of Rome. I omit how Scaliger has plainly demonstrated,
that at the time of Augustus Birth, Capricorn did not Horoscopize* but rather
the Sign quite opposite.

I omit also, that many of my acquaintance have been born under Capricorn
possessing the Horoscope (yea and the very middle of it too) who were never so
vain for all that, as to dream of being made Emperors. And though many have
boasted, that the Geniture of Cosmi Medices was very like that of Augustus: yet
Cardan (lib. cent. Genitur genit. 49) observes therein the Signs, not of
Empire, but Prudence. The same may be said of the other Emperors; and we need
only oppose to them what Seneca has of Claudius, who was no sooner made
Prince, but Astrologers predicted his advancement almost every Year, and Month.

As to that notable story of Ascletarions prediction of his Death by Dogs, to
the enraged Domitian; truly it seems to have be a tale invented and bruited
abroad after the death of Domitian, to cast the greater odium upon his memory.
For Ascletarion might indeed conjecture the disaster of that Prince only from
hence, that few Tyrants die bloodless Deaths. He might also foresee his own
violent Death, from the anger and cruelty of the Emperor, who using to spill
innocent blood upon less occasions, was not likely to let him escape, who told
him of so sad a Fate attending him: but that himself should be torn in pieces
by Dogs, either he predicted no such thing at all, but the people (who never
diminish rarities) took occasion to forge that part of the adventure; or if he
predicted it, he did it upon guess, that the angry Tyrant would set the Dogs
upon him. Again, supposing he did really predict that accident, yet can he not
be said to have predicted the true manner of his Death, because he was not torn
by Dogs till after his Death, and Astrologers never extend their predictions
beyond Death; but he intended that he should be torn alive, The same may be
said of that Astrologer, who in the presence of G^leatius Duke of Millain
predicted his own Death by the fall of a Beam upon him; for to omit other
objections, it is manifest there is no Aphorism, or Rule in Astrology so
precise, as to determine the instrument of Death, or define it to be rather a
Beam. than a Tile, or Stone, etc. But the Common people are wont to note all
circumstances with overmuch curiosity; and to let no passage escape without
referring it to portentous Causes. Historians, likewise are wont to take* less
care in relating only what is true, than in Setting down Vulgar reports of
extraordinary occurrences. Will you have a pregnant Example of this? A certain
Astrologer having predicted, that Henry the Seventh of England (a wise,
Valiant, and Fortunate King, should die in such a year; the King sent for him,
and asked him, if he could tell in what place himself should be at the next
Christmas (then near at hand:) The Prophet being surprised with this unexpected
question, stood mute a good while, and at length confessed he could not tell.
Thereupon the King smiling, said, then my friend I am more skillful in
Divination, than you are; for I can foretell that you shall keep your
Christmas in the Tower of London; and accordingly commanded him to be sent
prisoner thither. Nor did the King either die in the Year predicted, or set the
Astrologer at liberty again, until a good while after, when the heat of his
Divining humor had been abated by the Waters of affliction; and that was an
act of more Clemency in the King, than Princes usually show to such impudent
fellows. For to pass by other Examples of Astrologers, who have drawn sudden
Death upon themselves, by adventuring to vent Prophesies concerning the Deaths
of others; we have a memorable one, out of the Anthologia, of Diophantus the
great Astrologer. Hermogenem Medicum monet Astrologus Diophantus,
Vix illum menseis uivere posse novem.
Qui videns, vide, ait, quid nobis astra minentur;
Imminet at, moneo, mors inopina tibi.
Dixit, and extendens dextram admovet, and Diophantus
Desperare alium dum jubet, ipse perit.
Hermogenes, by Diophantus told.
He should not live nine Months more; said, my Friend,
In telling me my Destiny, you are bold;
But (trust me) your life instantly will end:
And then he struck him; so the Prophet fell,
While he, from Stars, another Fate did tell.


If this seem too Ancient, we can furnish you with another of fresher date,
concerning Lucas Gauricus, whom we have so often mentioned. Could He, think
you, who had sung the fatal Dirge of Johannes Bentivolio, Prince of Bononia,
many years before hand; could he I say, foresee and avoid his own untimely and
miserable end? Historians tell us No; but Cardans testimony will do best in
this case. Gauricus (says he, lib. de Genit.) Was put upon the Rack, by the
Bentivoglios; which was more then he ever foresaw. by the Stars: though he
might portend the ruin of the Family, more from a wise Conjecture of affairs,
than from Astrology; for he was an egregious Sycophant.

What say you to Cardan himself, who though he died at the time, when he had
predicted he should die, (starving himself on purpose, to verify his
prediction, as was noted by Scaliger, and Thuanus) yet as to the time, and
manner of his eldest Son, John Baptista's death, he was grossly mistaken? Every
Learned man, who has perused his preface to Manilius, well knows, that he
delivered sundry prophesies of his Sons Fate; but he never premonished, that
that beloved Son of his should, in the 24th year of his Age, loose his head by
the stroke of the Hangman for Poisoning his Wife. Concerning this sad and
infamous Accident, Sextus ab Heminga says most excellently; What will the
World think, when this tragical event shall be told to posterity, and all
Nations? The most prudent, most sage, and most Learned Hieronymus Cardanus, a
Physician, and Philosopher, and Astrologer, the most incomparable of the Age he
lived in, and without doubt the most to be honored; who took care for the
education of his Children in Learning and piety, and omitted nothing that might
conduce to their erudition in knowledge and virtue, studying their good as much
as was possible. For he most exactly described their Fates, in those his
voluminous Commentaries upon the Quadripartite Work of Ptolomie; and expressed
all particulars thereof, that he might appear to have bin wanting in nothing
for them, whereunto his utmost providence could extend. But unhappy man that he
was, he all this while never suspected, from the Rules of his great Art, that
his dearest Son should be condemned, and have his head struck off upon a
Scaffold by an Executioner of Justice, for destroying his own Wife by Poison,
in the Flower of his Youth; nor did he ever predict, or mention any the least
particular of all that Tragedy. And thus Sextus ab Heminga.

Finally, as to what Firmicus exaggerateth concerning the death of Plotinus;
all I shall say of it, is that it is a mere vain Rhetorical aggravation. For
Porphyrius, the disciple of Plotinus, does particularly describe both the
nature of his sickness and his constant deportment at his death ensuing
thereupon: and He was more a Philosopher, than to charge his disease and death
upon any fiery decrees of the Stars, and their fatal influences, as Firmicus
did afterward. Again, what did befall Plotinus; which is not common and
ordinary to all us Mortals; and which may not as well be objected against the
memory of many thousand other good and pious men, who never wrote against
Astrology, nor ever thought of it? He died of a Consumption; and that is
caused, not by any vindictive judgment of the Stars, but by weakness of
Constitution derived from ones Parents, by ill Air, unwholesome nourishment,
contagion, and diverse other Causes, well known to Physicians. That good Man,
therefore, suffered not any punishment for his judicious Book against
Astrologers; but as he was subject to the common Condition of Man's Nature, so
did he patiently undergo it. Unless you please to allow, that the Stars were
more to blame, for exciting so learned a Person to write against their supposed
power; or that they altered their former decrees concerning him, and contrived
a new Fate for him, as soon as they sure he durst inveigh against the fooleries
and impostures of Astromancers. But to add more, were a shame. Concerning Picus
Mirandulanus, we may say the very same. For it was the tenderness and delicacy
of his Constitution, his uncessant Studies, and exhaustion of his vital vigor
by continual writing, which took away that illustrious Person out of the World
so immaturely; and not any malignant influence of incensed Mars. Gauricus,
indeed much insults over him, because of his derision of Astrology: but may not
wise men much more justly inveigh against Gauricus, who by reason of his
foolish confidence in Astrology, brought himself to the torture of the Rack;
and so was the Cause of his own most miserable Death: when Picus Mirandula did
nothing but what was honorable and pious, nor ever ran into such
extravagancie, as might occasion his untimely Death? But Astrologers foretold
his Death precisely, as to the time? That I deny; for (observe) Picus fulfilled
not more than 31. Years of Life: and yet Gauricus reports, that Three eminent
Genethliacks had punctually predicted his death before the 36th. There is only
Bellantius, who wrote against him, and glories that he foretold he should die
in the 33d year from his Birth. But if Bellantius came so near the matter (and
yet he missed it a whole year and more) he might conjecture Picus could not be
a long lived man, from his weakly constitution, continual labors of the mind,
and other Signs; there being nothing more familiar, than for men who are no
Astrologers, to guess that a young Man, of a fiery active Genius, a pregnant
and capacious Soul, an overlively wit, and a soon-ripe judgment will not live
long; and to say of such a one Ostendent terris hunc tantum Fata nec ultra Esse
sinent.



Though all this while, I see no reason why I should more believe Bellantius,
in this point, than the rest of that arrogant tribe; since they all cry up
themselves, and boast that they have predicted such and such Events long before
they happened; when in truth, no Man ever heard of those predictions, till
after the Events. But what I have said against Astrologers, is enough;
especially since that Divine wit, Picus, has said much more: to whose
incomparable writings I remit my Reader, while I go Study some other Argument
of more use to the Commonweal of Learning, than Astrology has ever been. And
so adieu to both Astrologers, and their Art.

FINIS.

