THE Last will and Testament OF THOMAS GATAKER.

( B. D. Author of the Annotations of Jeremy 10. ver. 2. and the Vindications
of them, as also of the new-come out discourse APOLOGETICAL.)

WHERE IN Is showed the manner and order of the disposing of his Estate, with
the certain Legacies given to Friends; together with the manner of Burial of
his aged corpse, without superstitious Rites or Ceremonies.

Printed in the year 1654.

blazon or coat of arms

Mr. Thomas Gatakers last will and Testament.
IN the name of the Flock-paced Synod, and Synagogue of Presbyters, Amen. I
Thomas Gataker, Parson, Rector (or rather receiver of the Tithes) of Reddriffe,
near London, being aged 79. years, and by the course of nature am now in (
vespera vitae) the evening of my life, do here ordain this to be my last will
and Testament (being in perfect remembrance, that no contention or strife may
arise after my decease, concerning my ill-gotten estate) in manner and form
following

Imprimis.
I Bequeath my soul (brim-full of corruption) into the merciless clutches of
Old-Nick, the Bellows mender, and his well-beloved son Dr. Holms, (that man of
sin and shame) by whose only merits in railing against Astrology, belching out
sedition and Heresy amongst the people, and sowing cushions under the elbowes
of iniquity, my hope is to be saved from the sad fate of the Scotch colors,
and to be shortly wrapped up into Jenkins his third heaven, prepared him of old,
for his constant perseverance in the Doctrine and Faith of Mr. Love, there for
to sing Geneva Jiggs, to the delicate tune of O Priests, monstrous Priests,
what do you mean to do!

And for my body, in regard it has patiently sustained, and run through the
fiery trial of a Bawdy House, and been but lately parboyl'd in Cornelius his
Tub, it is my desire that Alexander Kinsey (dwelling at the Woolsack in
Ivy-lane) may have the burial thereof in his Petits, my ears only excepted, and
hereafter otherwise disposed; and that the Silkmen and Mercers Apprentices (and
others my well-disposed Proselites) in Paternoster Row, will accompany it to
the grave, and there to see it decently interred, without any Popish Rites,
superstitious prayers, or ceremonies, other then what the Directory of their
Morning and Evening stomachs shall admit of, by which means, my intent is, that
Alexander may save some moneys (toward the payment of his Daughters portion,
who is now upon the prick of preferment) which would otherwise be laid out on
Hogs Grease, and cleansing scraps, usually (by him) bought at Pye-corner, and
this out of the mere good will I bear him, for that he formerly went out (as if
he would have fought the battles of the Lord against the Mighty) under the
conduct of Sir William Waller ( alias William the Conqueror) howbeit he never
durst fight, as being not persuaded of the lawfulness of fighting with any body
but his wife, yet (to give the Devil his due) continues a fiery hot, and so
zealous a Presbyterian, that (for some months last past) he has never been
without a Priapisme, and the complexion of a pickled Oyster, notwithstanding
some of the ungodly scandalize, and call him the nineteenth part of no Religion.

Having thus disposed of my soul and body, which I fear will cause old tugging
on some sides when I am dead; but that all things may be carried fairly without
fraud and deceit, (and that the Devil may have his due) I have began thus, and
shall persist in the setting my house in order, and then come what will come,
Dives torments, or the joys of Lazarus, which later, that little conscience I
have, tells me I have not been worthy of.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Nicolas Bourn (a trundle-tail'd Stationer near
the Exchange) my books, or bundle of impertinencies, lies, forgeries, and
nonsense, commonly known by the name of Tho. Gataker B. D. his Vindications of
his Annotations etc. upon condition, that where my envy, hatred, malice, and
uncharitableness (against the society of Christian Astrology, and its harmless
Professors) has been too weak, he shall make good, and where the sparks of my
rage are dying, I enjoin him (as having the only Bellows of Presbyterian zeal)
to re-inkindle it against such a Cerberian crew, who have (I may well say) by
their dismal writings, drove me out from among them, wretched man that I was to
meddle with them. One thing more I desire of my friend Bourn, that he take the
pains to view all and every my works since 1651. (at which time I began to
defame the Science of Astrology) and blot, or cause to be blotted out, every
English word therein concerning that subject, lest after-Generations begin to
espy the opened vein that let in death, and write it in an Hebrew character (in
which language I have good skill) and then get tooting Mun. Calamy to warrant
it Authentic.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Joseph Blaiklock (a broken Presbyterian Book
binder) the remains of my chopped Logic, and entreat M. Rowland to make him
amends for the over-worn Pamphlets he paraphrased on, and caused him to print
in one volum against Astrology, which has almost cract the Stationer, and
ruined the Binder, that being the causa sine qua non of his present testiness,
to make him amends (I say) by attending him once a day at his house, (because
he dares not walk abroad so far as a Hen, for fear of Gods judgments, nam inter
malleum and incudem versatur) and after a use or two of consolation, to
instruct him so far therein, as may enable him to prove black to be white, or
(which is all one) his wife an honest woman: But now I remember, I heard the
Sheriff had returned a non est inventus for Mr. Rowland, and therefore I shall
desire Mr. Gaul will supply the place, perhaps he may jumble a syllogism or
two more then ordinary out of Mrs. Blaiklock, who being singularly free
natured, (especially when she whitens her linen at the bank side) is more then
shrewdly suspected to ramble in the praedicament of a bad quality.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Edmund Calamy the hooping Preacher of
Alderma^bury, my exquisite art of lying, wherein, as it is not denied, but I
have excelled all that ever wore a Whetstone, so I hope he will in short time
make a great improvement thereof, and bring the art to absolute perfection (if
Mrs. L. say but amen to it) and I desire, that in lieu thereof, he will
perpetuate my Name in an Hebrew Annagram, [which language I have been honored
for in Essex] to be fixed upon the Gravestone of his affection, and to preach
my Funeral Sermon, upon the text in Eccl. 22. 12. Seven days do men mourn for
him that is dead, but the lamentation for the fool and ungodly should exdure
all the days of their life.

Item, I give unto Leonard Cook [the Proverbial] Pulpiteer of Istington, all
and singular my spiritual impostures, and tricks of Leigerdemain, together with
the G^llimawfry of my extempory long-winded prayers, beseeching [in the bowels
of a Holland Smock] he will decently dress, and set out the same in a large
charger of hypocrisy fit for a deluded Auditories appetite, and so present
them to the poor hungry people, on the slick table of his deceitful tongue, and
bid them all welcome to be cheered.

Item I give unto Mr. Kelly [a Scotch Presbyter] now, or lately Reader of
Cripplegate my Lottry, [for which very thing could I have wished my self hung
up to the ears in a Scotch Ordinary when I was writing it] and part of my
Vindications of my Annotations, which I bequeathed to Bourn, wherein I have
comprised two irrefragable reasons, plainly proving Presbytery, Tithes,
Railing, and Nonsense, to be all alike, Jure Divine.

Item, I Bequeath the whole stock of my Impudence unto Ralph Farmer (the
Lay-Levite of Bristoll, which together with his own) will surely enable him (
Proteus-like) to assume all shapes, and to run through as many professions, as
the wandering Jew is said to have done Countries, here to play the Scribe, there
the Chimist, in a third place the Priest, to be Aliquis in omnibus, nullus in
singulis, A Saint in one place, a Devil in another, a Cheat every where,
always, Impudeus innocuum quotidie persequitur, yet glory himself in the title
of a godly Minister, a painful Pastor, a powerful teacher, notwithstanding he
never saved the soul of a louse, and deserved the tithe of a Nit for his
Quacking.

Item, I bequeath my matchless gift of Poetry, unto Justice George Wither, as
the only man I know that has dabled his dirty Genius (not in Helicon, for
that is heathenish) but in the Ducking-Pond of fancy, and who alone is capable
of my Soule-saving strains, provided that he return unto the faith from whence
he is fallen, and resolve hereafter to burn, rather then turn any more with the
times, and shall not hackney out his broken-winded Muse, to be any more drained
of Hymns, or Ballads, for victories obtained against the godly, but that the
offal of his invention may for the future, be set and sung to the melodious
Bag-pipes of Presbitery, in their Galloping Gamboll of a Scotch list, the
better to awaken the Bell-weathers of the faction, and to quicken the dull
spirits of their drooping Proselites, now in these better times of persecution.

Item, To the intent the world may take notice, I was never so great an Enemy
to the persons, as I was to the function of Bishops, because not capable of
being one my self, I give unto Dr. Usher (late Primate of Armagh) all my
private Notes, and Collections, the heavy fruits of my forty two years drowsy
Contemplation, against that devilish black-Art, (which neither he nor I
understand) to wit, Astrology; together with all the Ribbaldry, Drollery,
Billingatism, Hopkinism, Ands, Ekes, So still, Most ills, Viles and Guiles,
Hells and Fells, Bases and Disgraces; of which see more in my new come out
Apology.

Item, My Learning (such as it is) together with my malice, vainglory, Pride
and Hypocrisy, I give unto the late Synod of Divines, and the rest of the
Mountebank Ministers of London, the better to uphold them in their learned
Barracadoes, against the gathered Independent Churches, reserving only for
Vavasor Powell, and Mr. Simpson, so much of my pride and malice, as may
strengthen them in these times of persecution (the one being an exile, and the
other a close prisoner to Windsor for Treason) that now having time to
contemplate, when they come to their thrones, they may suppress that Monstrous,
Art of Astrology, and doom those Heathen English using of it to perpetual
silence, with three pounds in money, the which I desire may be speedily laid
out upon an Umbrella, whereunder to hide and preserve these dow-bak'd Levites,
in their Assemblies from the direful influence of the Suns Eclipse in August
next, least when they seem to laugh in their sleeves, they sorrow in their
hearts, for the mischiefs then impending, by the means of those Sorcerers and
Wizzards, who we know, do oftimes speak truth by the help of the Devil (the
Father of lies) although (we confess) it stands not with our interrest to
acknowledge so much.

And now whilst I am a giving, let me not be unmindfull of my people of
Reddriff, whom I so basely went to Law with, while Prelacie was high, and by
eager pursuing and unjust bribing, and many other (Jesuitical) underhand
tricks, I overthrew, and by the aforesaid devilish means, got all gleabes,
and tithes, to the value of 200. l. per annum; though in my brass-faced, late
come out Apology, I have utterly denied it; because I would not give those
cursed Astrologers (who have brought me even to death) any color of ground
against me. But now to make all amends, I desire all people of my Congregation
of Reddriff, to take notice of this my real intention to them, and that this my
will should not be taken in Sermo pedestris, in foot-language, I thus proclaim
my desire in choice and unctious words in form following.

Item, I bequeath to my Reddriff Congregation my Executors year of Tithes, to
buy them all Gloves and Ribbands to mourn for me their painful Pastor, who have
so immensly (blessed be the Lawyers) taught them to part with the Ministers
due, truly, and without trouble, for which I question not but my Successors
will sing Hallelujahs to my name, and manners, saying, Blessed be Tho. Gataker,
who has committed iniquity with greediness, even to the great advantage of the
Ministry, but the total and absolute undoing of the people.

And lastly, my fortitude, long-suffering, and patience ( gaudet patientia
duris) I bequeath to Mr. Jenkins, Case, Jagg^r, etc. because I fear they shall
have most need thereof; the remainder of my good qualities, especially my wit
and honesty, (my debts being first paid by the late Act for Release of poor
Prisoners, etc. and my Funeral expenses defraid by my Parish) I freely give to
my kind friends R. Ibbi^son, Printer to the Queen of Sheba, and J. Hunscot,
Basket-Beadle to the Society of Stationers, whom I make the formidable
Executors of this my last will and Testament: And moreover, I do aptly appoint
and constitute in cheveral* conscienced friends J. Rothwell the pygmy
Stationer, and S. Theu^brand the Supravisors thereof, on whom I bestow a silver
pair of Tooth-picks, and Claspers, (being all the Plate that escaped the jaws
of Guild Hall) which I desire them to accept of in remembrance of me, and my
sufferings for the cause; and I do hereby revoke and renounce all former wills
by me heretofore made, as being but the effects of a religious lunacy, in
witness whereof I have hereunto set my ( per Antiphrasin) innocent hand and
seal, the twelfth day of the first month, in the sixth year of the
Presbyterian justly deserved slavery. Anno 1654.

Thomas Gataker.

I shall desire also at the hands of my Executors, that they cause to be
engraven on my Tombstone this following Epitaph.

An Epitaph.
OLd Gataker is gone, Jove speed him well,
And safely, whether unto heaven or hell:
But into heaven the Varlet goes not sure,
For there be stars, and stars he will not endure:
Or if to hell, thrice wretched is his fate,
For even the devil himself does calculate
And read the stars, has clearer eyes then we,
Far more experience in Astrology.
Perhaps, as when alive, so when he is dead,
Heo'l be with stars and Planets tortured;
Only the difference is, here could he rail,
In hell the fashion is to weep and wail,
And gnash the teeth; but charity I have,
To wish his hell may only prove his grave:
Or if it be in Limbo, it is fit (...) stay
There, till his filth be thoroughly purged away.
And may all others of his dirty Faction
Have like success, whilst they have such like action.
FINIS.

