MYSTERIOUS CLOUDS AND MISTES, Shunning the Clear Light, a little further
disclosed, in a short Answer to Mr. JOHN SIMPSONS long Appendix, Entitled,
Truth breaking forth through a Cloud and Mist of Slanders: Wherein the Charge
of Slander, so far as it concerns, both himself and some others, is taken of
and removed

By THO. GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin, and are to be sold by Fulke Clifton, on
Fish-street Hill, under Saint Margarets-Church. 1648.

To Mr. JOHN SIMPSON.
SIR,
I Intend not to be overlong with you. My purpose is not to enter into
dispute, about what you now profess to hold, or not hold; or to examine how
far forth your at present professed tenants are agreeable to truth: (I have
work of more weight to take up my time, that, in regard of my present
infirmity, hangs heavy on my hand) but to clear my self only, from such
imputations as you have been pleased, in your late Appendix, to cast upon me;
as having raised page 1.
a mist, and cloud of slanders, committed page 60.
great and horrid sin, and used page 62.
reproachful, and railing speeches, against you.

For answer whereunto, when I shall have but simply and plainly related what
concerning you, I have delivered, and on what ground; I suppose the
heinousness, and horridness of this hideous charge, will with any indifferent
Reader be much allayed; yea, I hope, your charge it self, will appear to be
groundless, and unjust.

I shall rank the heads of it, in that order, wherein your self have laid them
down.

The first error, you say, that is charged upon you, is, that the moral Law is
of no use at all to a believer; no rule for him to walk, nor to examine his
life, by; and that Christians are free from the mandatory power of it.

Concerning this I say only, that Preface to Gods ey on his Israel. p. 17.18.
it was at a public hearing before a Committee of the house of Commons, in the
Star Chamber, by sufficient witnesses, proved to have been delivered by some of
the three, that were there convented, and in particular, by Mr. Randall, and
Mr. Simson. nor did I publish this, until I had procured a view of the Papers
of the worthy Chaire-man of that Honorable Committee, out of which, word for
word, I transcribed the same. And if it be a wrong to divulge, what, in open
Court, in a judiciary hearing, has publicly past, I must then confess that
herein I have wronged Mr. S. otherwise not: for that is all, that herein I
report Nor does Mr. S. himself deny what I herein assert.

Only two evasions he has, not to refell my report; but to wipe that of from
himself, which he is, it may well be, now in part ashamed of.

The former is, that page 1.
some did either through ignorance, misapprehend, or through malice misreport,
what he had delivered; and that to clear himself concerning the first branch of
it, he had in a Sermon at Algate, taught the contrary* as for p. 3.
the other three, he can either affirm, or deny them all.

And indeed it has been wel-observed formerly concerning diverse, who have
taught about this City, wherein people, Athenian-like, too much affect
novelties, that endeavoring to draw Disciples after them, by broaching of
newfangled fancies, they have been wont to deliver their tenants in such
ambiguous terms, that albeit their followers acquainted with their canting
language, understood what they intended in them; yet they might, by some
colorable glosses, and nice distinctions newly-minted, make them seem to be no
other, then what the sound, and Orthodox held.

But suppose Mr. S. have in part since preached the contrary, to what he was
then charged with; and that the rest of it, he can either say, or unsay, as he
pleases; yet what is all this to that, which was then charged upon him, or by
witness proved against him? which is all that I relate: and if it be well
weighed, may come nearer home to what he now says then himself takes notice
of. howsoever, it is no other to a tittle, then mine original exhibiteth.

And if Mr. S. can, as he says he can, aver the three latter; I see not, why
he should stick much at the first: since that it can hardly be conceived, what
special use, the Law moral should have in regard of a believer, that may not
be referred unto, and comprised under, one of those three.

But this latter evasion it may be, will stand him in better stead: and it is
indeed of larger extent then the former, either charge or defense: for therein,
he charge not me alone now, but the Honorable Committee, who had the whole
managing of the business, and his brethren, (as he is pleased yet to term
them) that by Order attended the Committee there. For he tells his Reader, p.
52.
that if this liberty had been granted unto him, that his tenants might have
been received from himself, before he were censured for them, it might have
prevented many reproaches, which he has lain under, and many sins in those,
who have rashly censured him^ But withal insinuates that he was there, and
then dealt with, as was John Husse, at the Council of Constance, by the
outragiousnesse of that Council; p. 53.
so many interrupting him at every word, and some mocking, and making mouths
at him, that it was impossible for him, to make a perfect answer to any thing:
and in like manner, that when he endeavored to acquaint the Committee fully
concerning his mind, he was so interrupted, (and why added he not mocked, and
mouthed, to?) that it was impossible for any man to know his mind, and
judgment: and that it was frequently added by the brethren, (as if they had
the managing of the business, and not the Committee) that, that day was a day,
wherein he was to hear the charge against him, and that there would be a day
appointed, wherein he should have liberty to bring in his answer to the
Committee; but that such a day is not yet to be found, nor, as he further
intimates, is like to be, until Astraea (an heathen Goddess) come down from
heaven (where, but by poetical fiction, she never was) to do justice to the
oppressed.

Concerning which, I shall take a little more pains, then I desired to do, for
the clearing of the Committee, as well, as my self. Mr. S. therefore here so
tells his own tale, that those, who were not acquainted with the proceedings
of the Committee, might conceive the carriage of the business to have been
such, as that he, and his accomplices there, had but one day of appearance, and
on that day, they had their charge only given them, unto which, they were not
suffered to return answer, to any purpose: for that if they spoke ought to that
purpose, they were interrupted, if not far worse dealt with; and told that
they should have another day for answer. Whereas indeed it is well known, that
they had not, one, or two alone; but many days of hearing. Yea, that at their
first appearing, before any charge formally entered, or proceeding to
examination of witnesses, they were by the Committee entreated to deliver their
minds in writing, for the better clearing of themselves, concerning such
points, as were suggested, to have been either taught or maintained by some of
them, or to go for current among their followers; that so the business might
be, in a fair, and friendly way (if it were possible) composed, without
proceeding in any such judiciary course. But this they utterly at first,
refused to do; nor without much urging, and pressing by the Committee, could
be induced, at length, to condescend unto. And when they had, by such
importunity, been drawn to undertake it; and a day assigned them, to bring in
their answer; how willing, or desirous they were, to clear what they had
taught, or to make manifest, what their mind, and judgment was, may appear, by
their answers returned to some of the Questions, in writing delivered unto
them; which out of the Copies remaining in the worthy Chairmans hands, I shall
here word for word, insert.

Question. 1. Whether the moral Law did oblige a believing Jew to obedience?

Answer. That the believing Jew, before Christ, (if any such one was meant) was
kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith, that should after be revealed. Gal.
3.23.

Quest. 2. Whether the moral Law does now, as strongly oblige a believing
Christian to obedience?

Answ. That the believing Christian, after Christ's death (if any such one be
meant) is not under the Law, but under grace. To. 6.14.

Quest. 3. Whether a believer be bound to conform his life to the moral Law;
because God in that Law requires it?

Answ. That the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the flesh; but after the spirit. Romans 8.4. I through the Law, am dead to
the Law, that I may live unto God. Gal. 2.19.

Quest. 4. Whether he that makes the Law his Rule; be a Papist in heart,
whatever he be in practice?

Answ. That though the Law be an eternal Rule of righteousness; yet he that
puts himself under it contrary to Paul, is so far a Papist.

Quest. 5. Whether the Law be a Rule, by which unbeleevers shall be condemned,
and not a Rule, by which they ought to walk?

Answ. The Law abstracted from Christ, is no Rule, for unbeleevers to walk by,
for life.

Quest. 6. Whether a believer may make threatenings a motive to deter him from
sin; and the promises a motive to encourage him to duty?

Ans. That to serve God for the hope of a legal reward, and for fear of legal
punishment, is no Christian service: or, in Mr. Tindalls words, That to serve
God, for fear of hell; or the joys of heaven, are but shadows of good works.

Quest. 7. Whether Peter's person sinned in denying Christ; or his flesh only?

Ans. That as it was in Paul; so in Peter: No longer I, but sin, that dwells
in me. Romans 7.17.

Quest. 8. Whether a believer in sinning, breaks any moral Law?

Ans. Sin is the transgression of the Law. 1 John 3.4.

Quest. 9. Whether when Peter wept bitterly for denying Christ, he did it out
of weakness of faith, or duty to God?

Answ. Peter's weeping might be from weak faith, and so from fear; or, from
strong faith, and so from love: but whether, we know not, only we hope it was
an Evangelicall duty^

Quest. 10. Whether a believer be as well pleasing to God, in the act of
adultery, or murder, as before?

Quest. 11. Whether a believer in the act of adultery, or murder, may see the
discharge of that sin in Christ, and his part in Christ, before his repentance,
and humiliation for it, as well as after all the humiliation in the world?

Ans. 1. They are framed in very odious, and ambiguous terms. 2. That a true
believer seldom, or never falls into such wilful, scandalous wickedness;
because the love of Christ constrains him far above all legal motives. 3. That
if perhaps a believer should fall so; yet ought he not to add infidelity to
this other sin.

Quest. 12. Whether a believer in the act of adultery, or murder, may enjoy as
sweet communion with God, as in the performance of any holy duty?

Ans. That the repetition of it, is unfit for any Christian mouth, and ear.

Quest. 13. Whether God does chasten a believer for sin?

Ans. That the chastisement of our peace was upon him, that is, Christ; and
that by his stripes we are healed. Esaias. 53.5.

Quest. 14. Whether a believer falling into sin, ought not to pray for the
actual pardon of it, in the sight of God, or only for the manifestation of it,
to his own conscience, and the continuation of it?

Ans. That when it shall be explained to us out of the Scripture, what is meant
by actual pardon; and what by the sight of God, then shall we be better able
to answer to this proposition.

Quest. 15. Whether there ought to be days of fasting and humiliation
appointed under the Gospel?

Ans. We know nothing to the contrary.

Quest. 16. Whether a Christian ought to afflict his soul, with sorrow for sin,
in a day of humiliation, and whether it be sin to sorrow for sin?

Ans. That all humiliation, and sorrow for sin, which is not of faith, is sin.

Quest. 17. Whether a believer humbling himself for sin, in these sad days,
seeking Gods face, and returning unto him, may not expect a blessing from God,
and the Nation for Christ's sake in so doing, and whether the doing of these
duties for this end, be the cause why our fasting, and Prayer prevails no more
with God, for the healing of the land?

Ans. That although a man pretend to humble himself; yet if he make his
humiliation, repentance, and reformation, a fortress, and tower of defense,
the munition, armor, and wall of brass, to defend the Kingdom, and Nation;
if he makes his repentance of such omnipotent efficacy, that there is no
thunderbolt so great; no wrath so furious in God; but it will abolish it,
without so much, as mentioning the Lord Jesus, who only delivers us, from the
wrath to come, who if he had not delivered us from the desert of the
sinfulness of our humiliation, repentance, and reformation, the just wages
thereof would have been everlasting fire: we believe such humiliation, is
nearer the pride of Lucifer, then true Christian humiliation. 2. That among the
great sins of the Kingdom, we believe, that the great esteem, dignifying,
and exalting of our own works, doings, and duties, to make our peace with God,
is a dethroning our great, and only peacemaker, and thereby a most dangerous
enemy to the peace of this Kingdom.

Now, besides that from some of these Questions, it may be observed, what
wholesome and savoury documents their followers (at least) deduce from the
tenants by these men maintained; to let (I say) that pass; let any
intelligent, and indifferent reader judge by most of their Answers, whether
these men desired to have men know their mind and judgment; as this man
pretends, that his desire, and endeavor was to have done, but that he was so
interrupted, that it was not possible for him so to do. Sure in writing there
was no body to interrupt him, or them: and Mr. S. himself, being the principal
spokesman among them, was by some of the brethren in an orderly manner disputed
with, without any such interruption, as he here complains of; and was often
also afterward heard at large. Nor was there proceeding to any hearing of
witnesses, until they had refused to give more clear, and satisfactory answer,
unto these, and some other of the Questions, delivered unto them: for unto many
of them, they returned no answer at all. And if this man's mind therefore were
not then fully made known (as he pretends) concerning those points: himself was
in fault; in whose power, and at whose choice it was, to have fully in writing
expressed the same, had he been minded so to do: mean while, that he had so
taught, as in the charge is related, was then, and there averred; nor any
exceptions taken unto those, that witnessed the same.

These things then, so transacted at a public hearing, and such points charged
upon, and testified against, Mr. S. to have been delivered by him, which
himself cannot gainsay: I suppose it to have been no p. 17.
breach of charity (as he charge it) to deem, that Preface to Gods ey, etc.
p. 17.
from thence, those exclamations of his might well proceed; away with the Law,
away with the Law: as also that horrid speech, (so I term it again, and still
shall do, whatsoever colors Mr. S. shall please to varnish it over with,
thereby to smooth, or smoother the horridness of it) The Law cutteth of a man's
legs, and then bids him walk: which whether it be fitly paralleled p. 28.30.
with those passages of the Apostle; Romans 7.5.
The motions of sin, which were by the Law; and 2 Cor. 3.6.
The letter kills: or, whether it do not justly deserve such an Epithet, I
shall leave to any pious, and impartial Christian to determine: for the
speeches themselves are not denied. And as for some p. 18.
harsh expressions of Luther concerning the Law; as the like also concerning
Christ; which in overmuch heat of passion, seem to have fallen from him; and I
would rather men should read in the writings of Mr. S. and others of his way
and strain, then hear from me; I suppose men moderately minded will hardly
justify them; muchlesse take liberty to themselves therein to imitate him, and
yet further muchlesse to forge others thereby far harsher then those of his.

The next matte of charge against Mr. S. was, that he should teach, Preface to
Gods ey, etc. ^. 18.
That God does not chastise any of his children for sin, nor is it for the
sins of Gods people that the Land is punished.

Whereunto might further have been added, that presumptuous speech of his in
open Court, then confidently uttred; whereof my self was an ear-witnesse. That
he did not believe, that any sin of his own, or of any believer, had any hand
in the procuring of the judgments of God, then upon the Land.

As also what in a paper was given in by him, under his own hand, containing
the heads of a Sermon Preached at Algate, at the giving, and taking of the
Covenant (occasioned it seems by that Question among others propounded; whether
a believer may lawfully take the Covenant, as it reqireth his confessing his
sins, deserving the calamities, and judgments, that now ly upon the Nation?)
in these words.

I did profess, that J thought what I had taught was a truth, That national
punishments do not come upon a Land, or Nation, for those sins, for which Gods
justice is satisfied in Christ.

Now concerning this, which he cannot deny, and yet would fain salv; he makes
answer, that p. 34.
some few weeks, for want of experimental knowledge, he was a little clouded
in his spirit, concerning the doctrine of affliction; but that his mistake was
never charged upon him, by his accusers: (which riddle of his, what it means, I
cannot arread) and that Ibid.
yet in his darkest, and most cloudy discourses, he held forth enough to
charitable and loving hearers, to free him from this charge.

He might better have said, that by these, and the like assertions, he staved
people of, and kept them aloof, such especially as were forward to rank
themselves, among the number of believers, from deeming their sins to have any
hand in the procurement of Gods judgments upon the state, and from being
humbled in that regard, in the sight of God for the same.

Sure when he appeared in the Star Chamber, he was far enough from holding out
that, that might free him, from the charge: belike his appearance there, was
within the compass of those few weeks, during which his spirit was under the
cloud, he speaks of. And yet by From p. 36. to p. 43.
a long lacinious discourse, to show either the subtilty, or sublimity of his
wit, in being able to argu either way, he would make men beleev, that he taught
nothing then, but what he holds now, though he professes now to have attained
p. 34.
a more clear and truly spiritual knowledge of the point.

And herein he seems to resemble H. Cl.
one, that living sometime in the City, did preach publicly, that the plague
was not infectious; who being convented before authority, and qestioned for such
his doctrine, his answer was, that he denied not, but that the plague-sores, or
blains might be infectious; but his meaning was, that the stroke of Gods Angel
was not infectious. But as his doctrine, so delivered, whatsoever his reserved
meaning was, did encourage people to repair over-boldly to those that were
visited, and that, as was then deemed, to the damage, yea, and death, of not a
few: So it may justly be feared, that these cloudy, or rather peremptory
assertions of Mr. S. have endamaged, and endangered souls, not a few, in
withholding them from serious humiliation for their sins, under the hand of
God, as well upon themselves in particular, as upon the land in general;
notwithstanding these his distinctions, which he comes out with now; but not
heard of then, when this charge, was given in against him: at which time, it
seemed to be grounded upon Gods not sight of sin in any Believer, the
principal subject of Mr Eatons book, then justified among them; else what
reason should there be of Gods not inflicting evils national, more then
personal upon any, in regard of sins satisfied for by Christ, in both which p.
42.
himself makes the case to be all one.

Mean while, what has bin affirmed, is not here removed, that this position,
in both branches of it, was by witnesses produced, proved to have bin delivered
by Mr S. which is as much as I avert.

The like may be said of the next Point; to wit,

Preface to Gods eye, etc. p 18.
That if a man by the Spirit, known himself to be in the state of grace, though
he be drunk, or commit murder, God sees no sin in him

To this Mr S, says nothing, but that p. 43.
if he should name the party, that gave this in against him, it would be enough
to acq^t him, in the judgment of those, that know him. But that p. 44.
for the substance of it (setting aside some words put in to bring an odium
upon it,) to wit, that God sees no sin in his justified children, it is Gods
truth, which he hops to maintain unto death. And I hope then it was no fault,
either for that party, whoever he was, to charge it upon him; though those
terms (which whether Mr S. instanced in, or no, is not much material) might,
if he did not, have bin spared: nor for me to relate what was then alleged.

Mean while, he that now acknowledges it, to be p. 50.
a gr^ss error, and destructive to the power of godliness, to maintain, that God
in no sense, may be said to see sin in his people; having yet in those terms,
(which he now here acknowledges,) taught it; knowing it to be so in Mr Eatons
book maintained, and yet joining with those, that had bin publishers, and were
then defenders of it, and the subject matter therein contained; nor at all,
manifesting his dissent therein from them, which by writing he might have done,
had he bin so minded; he has no cause to complain, if it were so charged upon
him, as it was then taught, and had bin delivered by him: these instances
inserted, not at all altering, or concerning the state of the Question: and
that the rather; for that some of his followers (whom, why I so term, I shall
hereafter show) have in that manner, which he now would seem to condemn,
maintained it. And let Mr S seriously consider with himself, whether his
delivering his tenent in such terms, having bin by his Auditors so apprehended,
have not given diverse of them occasion to take the more liberty to sin, upon
that conceit, that though they do commit sins never so heinous, or horrid, God
does not at all see it; not is at all offended, or displeased with them, for
the same.

The nex^ charge is with much vehemence prosecu^ed, to wi^, where I say, that
Gods eye on his Israel. p. 25.
those grossly abuse the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 40.12. who taking their
rise from Luthers application of them, with some harsh expressions unto Christ,
strain them so far, as to dissuade Christian people from troubling of
themselves about confession of their sins, as being enough, for them to beleev,
that Christ have has confessed them for them already, against the latter
clause whereof, to wit, enough for them to beleev that Christ has here
confessed them for them already, in my margent, I name Mr S. preaching on that
Text.

From which aspersion to clear himself, he affirms,

1. p. 57.
That he took not his rise for the exposition of the place from Luther, whose
exposition thereof, be had not then seen.

2. p. 57.58.
That the Apostle expounds that Psalm of Christ; and other Autors of good
note expound that passage of sins imputed unto Christ.

3. That p. 58.
I would make my Reader beleev, that upon this account, he would wholly take
away confession, which he denies; and p. 56.
is able, he says, to prove the contrary, by the testimony of many godly, who
then heard him, and would be deposed thereupon; and p. 58.59.
that the maine use of his sermon was to teach believers, how they should in an
evangelicall way confess sin, ever the head of the Scapegoat, Lev. 16.21. in
faith, beholding them laid, and charged upon Jesus Christ; in which we do
confess, and acknowledge to the glory of Gods grace, and Christ's goodness,
that our sins are laid upon Jesus Christ.

4. That p. 59.
about the same time, be preached in diverse places, on 1 John 1.9. which
Sermons might show, that he is not against confession of sin.

To all which I answer,

1. That I charge not him in particular, with taking the rise of his doctrine,
therein, from Luthers harsh expressions. There are others, that so do, whom in
those words I intended.

2. Nor do I control those, that understand either the Psalm of Christ, or that
passage, of our sins impured unto Christ; tho I rather approve of another
interpretation; which I there propound.

3. Nor do I charge him, that he would wholly take away confession of sin, which
Mr Eaton himself does not: but that herein he concurreth with him, and some
others, in affirming that Christ there confesses our sins for us: and
thereupon taking away all necessity of confessing our sins, in such manner, as
the faithful Saints and servants of God, in Scripture ordinarily do, as
incensing Gods wrath against us, under which we do lie, as Psa. 32.3, 4, 5.
David (though a believer, and a person justified in Gods sight) did, until we
do make sincere, and serious acknowledgment of them.

4. And this being still constantly avowed by persons religious, and judicious,
who then heard him, is no way removed, or contradicted by that which be here
relates to have bin the main use of his Sermon: and all which I doubt not, but
that, Mr Eaton himself, were he yet surviving, would readily subscribe unto.

Nor do I make any question but that those two parties, who pronounce, the one
of them I. Saltmarsh of Free Grace. p. 271.
such beleivers, to be but poor melancholy creatures, as are much troubled
for new sins, supposing God to be angry with them for the same; the other, that
it is Earburie. See Oxford Account p. 36.
a sign of the spirit of Antichrist in persons, to be afraid of this sin, and
of that sin; and consequently of any sin; yet would either of them own the
confession that Mr S. here speaks of, and p. 59.
tells us, is the best confession: to wit, whereby we confess that our sins
are laid upon Christ. Neither is this that confession that Psalm. 32.5, and
51.3, 4.
David, and other Ezr. 9.6.15. and 10.1.10.11. Nehem. 9. Dan. 9.
men of God, made of their sins, recorded in the word; nor that which the word
of God under that term and title of confession Prove. 28.13. Jer. 3 13. 1 John.
1.9^
requires of us; but an acknowledgement of them, as offenses committed by us
against God, and our sincere and serious sorrow for the same. Neither would the
confessi^n Levit. 16.216 p. 59.
made over the head of the Scapegoat, ever have availed any, unles it were
accompanied, with inward remorse and contrition of spirit, as Psalm. 51.3, 17.
David's and that of those other servants of God was. And all this therefore is
but the crying up one necessary duty, for the crying down and suppressing of
an other.

But the p. 60.
great and horrid sin, that he would not have me forget to confess, is the
charging of him, for exhorting people to sin, as fast as they will, (because
there is a fountain for them to wash in.) Whereunto he adds, that he does
think that if ibid
the Devil himself should get up into a pulpit to preach, (who does often
preach by his Vicars and Curates) (he might have added, no less often by
Schismatics and Sectaries,) that he would not make use of any such exhortation.

The words, upon occasion whereof, this hideous tragedy is raised, are these;
subjoyned to a relation of six several tenants charged upon, and proved
against those three, that appeared in Star Chamber before the Committee
forementioned, whereof Mr S. was one; and particularly that out of Mr Eaton
then objected to them, and defended, that when Abraham denied his wife, and in
outward appearance seemed to lie in his distrust, lying, dissembling, and
equivocating, that his wife was his sister, even then truly all his thoughts,
words, and deeds were perfectly holy, and righteous from all spot of sin, in
the fight of God freely.

Preface to Gods eye, etc. p. 18.
To which may be added that wholesome exhortation, then also averred, to have
been delivered by one of them likewise in the Pulpit, which might posse for an
use of the point, Let beleivers sin as fast as they will, there is a fountain
open for them to wash in.

Concerning which he grants, that p. 61.
this was brought in against him, that he should in a Sermon deliver those
words just in the same terms, as I have related them, not as he now cutteth
them asunder in relating of my relation; nor does he deny the uttering of them.

Only he adds that ibid.
the party that gave it in, being by some (I know not who, nor when) demanded,
whether he did deliver it, by way of exhortation, was so ingenuous as to
acknowledge, that it was not delivered as an exhortation.

Then to justify the matter,

1. p. 61.
He paralleleth it, with those passages, Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him
be unjust still, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still.

2. He tells me, that p. 62.
my learning might have taught me, that the word Let, is not always used by
way of exhortation; but sometime by way of supposition, and frequently
signifies as much as though, and ibid.
so taken, it is as seasonable a truth as he can in desire of my good, leave
upon my spirit; who though professing my self a beleiver, have sinned, as fast
as I can, in his apprehension, against the laws of love, and the commandments
of the Lord Jesus; yet there is a fountain opened, in which if God give faith,
I may wash my self from these sins.

To all which sore charge, and slight apology, I answer,

1. That the speech it self, whether delivered in way of exhortation, or
inference, (and one of the two it must needs be) does savor too strongly of an
incitation, and encouragement to sin, and that wilfully; which was all that in
the term to exhortation, I intended.

2. That if the thing it self be so hideous, that if the Devil himself should
preach, he would not make use of such an exhortation; and yet by his own grant,
the words may be so taken; then those surely have just cause to ^ake shame to
themselves, who use expressions in the Pulpit, trenching so near upon that,
which is so hideous, that even the Devil himself would not so use; that they
cannot without some subtle nicety be distinguished the one from the other.

3. That to draw Scriptures thus in, as here, and before, to parallel, and bear
out such speeches, as both that before, and th^s here, are, is to play, and
dally with Gods word, and to be boulder with it, then Christian piety will well
permit.

4. That it is a poor shift to help out such a loose speech, to tell us, that
let is not always a note of exhortation, when as the matter of the
proposition, and manner of the conceiving it in those terms, sin as fast as
they will, sound overmuch, and over loud, in any ordinary construction, to an
incitement to wilful sin, for which, the though substitute in the room of
let, is but a very sorry salv.

As for this application of it to my self, that I have sinned, as fast, as I
can, in his appr^hension, and yet if God give me faith, I may wash my self from
these sins. I take the former branch as a fruit of his own selfish fancy, and
the latter, as a frothy flout, and so leav them to him; and this whole apology
for my self, to the cen^ure of those that are of understanding, and abili^y, to
discry, and discover the slights of imposters, through such colors, as they
are wont to glase over their unsound tenants withal; and their shifts, in
varying from point to point, as they find the bl^st of popular appl^use to blow.

And now Sir, I address my self again unto you, who that you may seem, not
without cause to have laid such a load of sin upon me, that I could not
possibly, in your apprehension sin faster then I have done, against the Laws of
love, and the commandments ^f Christ; in the close of this your discourse, tell
your Reader, p. 62.
it might be exp^ted, you should speak somewhat to my reproaches, and railing
speeches against you; but we know, you say, who has said, men have learned to
reproach me, and speak evil of me, and I to suffer.

Sir, what reproachful and railing speeches, other have suffered, not some
one, or two; but the maine body of Gods faithful Ministers, and Messengers
among us, from the mouths, and pens of those of that faction, which you have
formerly adheared to, and complied with, is too well known; and I have at large
Preface to Gods eye, etc. p. 10.13.
else where, discovered But Sir, where are those reproachful, and railing
speeches, that you here charge me to have used against you? or why do you not
produce them; or point, at least, to the places, where they are to be found?
you have raked, and scraped together all to a tittle, for ought I know, or can
call to mind, that I have any where written of you; what railings appear
there, in any part of it? or who is able to say, that I ever railed upon you,
either in public, or in private? Sir, it is none of my usage: what yours is,
I wot not. This charge of yours therefore, I am well assured, you are less
able to make good, then I am all, that has bin by me charged upon you.

For such erroneous points, as have bin broached by you, and others, if I have
maintained the truth of God against you, or them, and discovered the evil
consequents of them, I have therein done no more, then what my duty to God, and
his people, has in my place required of me: and that the rather, for that I
perceived diverse of my people to be too much taken with them. For your self,
the time was, when having heard you, once, or twice in my place, and upon
invitation of you home, had some conference with you; I took so good liking of
you, that not long after motion being made for a weekly lecture in my
congregation, I recommended you, to some of my people, that were most active in
the business, who upon enquiry informed me, that y^u were like to settle,
either at Dunstans, or Butolphs, whether of the two, I now remember not: and so
that business was at an end. Some good space of time after, I heard, by
reports of many, some of mine own people, among others, who used to hear you;
that you were fallen into diverse strange points, tending to Antinomianism; and
that some of my Congregation, women especially, were, by hearing of you,
therewith infected: that which afterward appeared to be no false report, or
groundless surmise, but a truth. For there repared to me one day, two women of
your Auditors, living under my charge, who were earnest with me, to have use of
my Church, for a day of solemn humiliation; affirming that they would bring
none, but Ministers to perform the duties of the day. Demand being made, who
the Ministers were; the answer was, Mr: Simson, and Mr. Randal. why those?
because I had received some aspersions against Mr. Simson, (I give you their
words,) which he would take off. What aspersions? I had confuted some of his
points, what points, or point? I had taught that sanctification was an evidence
of justification. and did he hold, and teach the contrary? yea, and that which
he had taught therein, was the truth, to wit, that sanctification was no sure
evidence of justification; that which according to their weak ability, they
endeavored stiffly to maintain. In conclusion, I answered them, that if it were
so, you should not, with my consent, come into my Pulpit, by the leavening of
my people, to make me work, for the unleavening of them again. They told me
plainly, if they could not have you in public, they would have you in
private; and so I was after told they had. Now true it is, that I had handled
that point a little before purposely, upon occasion of another, that had nearer
at hand, fallen upon that argument, and used some reproachful terms,
concerning that evidence, nothing minding Mr S. But Sir hence it appears, what
by your hearers acknowledgement, you then taught; and that by your such
teaching, whatsoever you now hold, or pretend to hold, people were then
tainted, and some of mine own, among others; (for I presume they were not here
in alone,) who continue still stif both in this erroneous conceit, and in that
other, which you now so deeply brand, concerning Gods not seeing sin at all in
his Saints, which is not unlikely they sucked then together with the former,
from Mr Randall, and your self, whom they constantly followed.

But Sir, if I had so exceedingly wronged you, as you here pretend; and used
such reproachful, and railing language, as you here intimate, against you; I
marvel much, what the reason should be, that I never heard ought of it, all
this while before, from you: which had bin no difficult matter, for you, to
have done, either by word of mouth, or by a few lines in writing; you being not
ignorant of the place of my constant abode, whereunto by a continued state of
infirmity, I have bin confined, now almost these three years. That which yet I
should not have mentioned, save in regard of some reports that have bin cast
abroad, whether coming from your self, or no, I know not. It is not long since,
I suppose, about a twelv-moneth past, that one of my people repairing to me,
as* from your self, acquainted me with your willingness, to bestow your pains,
some Lords day, with me, if I would give way to it. I told him, I thought it,
not so safe for me so to do; in regard of those erroneous opinions that you
had bin charged with, and had not cleared your self of. He replied, that you
now acknowledged your judgment in those points to be altered. I told him
again, that if your judgment were altered, from what formerly you had hold;
you might do well to make it publicly known, thereby to undeceiv those, who
had formerly bin misled by you: but that you should so prefesse, did to me seem
very strange: for that within some few days before, I had bin informed by a
Gentlewoman of good credit, that it was reported by a Minister, then about the
City, (one in whose Lecture, at great All-halows, if I mistake not, you
succeeded,) as from your self, that you had bin with me, and made it appear
unto me, that I had wronged you, in charging you with what you had not held.
Now Sir, whether both these* or either of them, came from yourself, or no, (the
latter whereof, for the subject matter of it, I am sure, is untru) your self
best know. I relate them both as they came to me; wishing that the former of
them, may be true, and that God will be pleased to give you a right
understanding in all things.

Thus, Sir, I have done with you, and your charge against me, not intending to
waste further time about this business, which (in regard of other more important
employment, formerly hinted) both is, and will be very precious with me: but to
leav and refer what I have here said, to the consideration, and construction
of others, thereof to deem, and upon advised perusal to determine, whether I
have attracted such heinous, and horrid guilt, or no, as you herein charge upon
me, by ought that concerning you, and your teaching, I have any where published.

And if it be demanded, why this Apology came no sooner abroad, since, that
being so short, it might suddenly have bin dispatched; the reason is, because
by occasion of mine other hard task, (the one half whereof, I had not as yet
overcome, by reason of a long continued, and late renewed infirmity, being
therein much retarded, and was loath therefore to filch time from for any other,
not very necessary, by-busines, before I saw so much at least of it
accomplished) I had not leisure, so much, as to survey your charge against me;
nor was afterward able to return so full answer thereunto, until I had a view
of some papers, concerning that business of public hearing; whereof, by reason
of disability to stir far abroad, I could not procure either fight, or
transcript, but by others.

To conclude all, Sir, I shall beseech you, in the fear of God, advisedly to
consider with your self, what multitudes of people, have of late bin drawn
aaside, into gross, and pernicious errors, by those, whom you have sometime
consorted, and complied with; and by your self, in likelihood, not a few (as
some of them profess it) among the rest: that you may be seriously humbled in
the sight of God, for what of this kind, you have formerly failed, and faulted
in; sincerely to his glory acknowledge your former oversights therein;
discreetly, and prudently, for time to come, forbear such expressions, as may
in ordinary apprehension, tend to the fomenting of liberty to sin, and loosnes
of life; and piously prosecute the pressing upon all sorts, the practice of
repentance, which God by his judgments present upon us, does so incestantly,
and so instantly call upon us for; and that duty, which God in his Law reqireth
of them, and whereunto in regard of Creation, as well, as of redemption, they
ought to hold themselves still obliged: that so you may, if it be possible,
(which with some peradventure yet, is never like to be;) but that you may at
least, do what in you lies, to reduce those, whom you have formerly turned out
of the way, and caused to stumble at Gods Law. By so doing, you will gain more
sound peace, and solid comfort in the end, then by complying with the humors of
people, unstable, and unsettled, (of whose mutability, and inconstancy I doubt
not, but that you have had, or seen some experience your self) you shall be
ever able to attain. The Lord be with you, and vouchsafe unto you, and us all,
spiritual wisdom to carry our selves aright, and uprightly in all things, to
the honor of his grace in us, and truth professed by us; the preserving, and
building up of his people, in either; the faithful discharge of our duty here,
and eternal welfare, for, and with our blessed Savior hereafter. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

James Cranford.
July. 22. 1648.

