English Exercises FOR SCHOOLBOYS TO Translate into Latin.

Comprising all the RULES of GRAMMAR.

And other Necessary Observations; Ascending gradually from the Meanest to
higher Capacities.

By J. Garretson, Schoolmaster.

The Third Edition; with Large Additions; By an Eminent Schoolmaster in London.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultry, over
against the Stocks-Market. MDCXCI.

To the Practitioner; From a Schoolmaster in London.
IN this Edition, there are added not only very many Words left out in the
former; but for the better Understanding of young Beginners, (for whom things
cannot be made too Plain and Easy) the Gender of every Noun, and Termination of
the Genitive Case is affixed; as also, the Conjugation, and Preterperfect Tense
of the Verbs, with a Catalogue of several Nouns, Verbs, Participles, etc.
showing what Case they will govern, with a hint of the Rules to which they
belong.

LICENSED,

Sept. 7. 1686. Rob. Midgley.

An Advertisement.
THE Author being deceased, and the Book to be reprinted, a Friend of his, at
the request of several Schoolmasters, has made the following Alterations and
Additions:

First, Before Examples be given to all the Rules, as they stand in order in
Lilly's Grammar, there are in a preliminary way a competent number of Examples
fitted to the more easy and fundamental Rules, for the initiating and
grounding of young Beginners. These Rules are concerning,

1. The Nominative Case and Verb.

2. The Substantive and Adjective.

3. The Accusative Case following the Verb.

4. Conjunctions Copulative and Disjunctive, that couple like Moods and Tenses.

5. The Nominative Case following the Verb Sum.

6. The latter of two Verbs being the Infinitive Mood.

7. The Genitive Case latter of two Substantives.

8. To or For (the use of any) Signs of the Dative Case.

9. With or By (being an Instrument) Signs of the Ablative Case.

10. The Use and Government of Praepositions.

And (which has been thought wanting in Books of this nature) more than
ordinary care has been taken, That in the Examples to every following Rule,
Children might be reminded of, and exercised in all those that went before.

Also toward the end, many new Exercises are added to those that were in the
former Edition.

And the whole (especially with respect to the explication of Lilly's Rules)
has been Revised.

TO THE READER.
THE Necessity and Usefulness of Schools, is too universally acknowledged to
need the pains of an Argument for its Demonstration; nor do Schoolmasters want
the Assistance of Eloquent Encomiums to vindicate the honor of their
Employment. To find out Methods whereby that Province may be managed more
successfully, most to the through and speedy accomplishment of Youth, committed
to their charge hic labor, hoc opus est. And that pains has been found to be
nowhere more requisite than in Translating English into Latin; that necessary
part of School-business, in which after considerable Practice, with the help of
the most Faithful and Laborious Teacher, Boys still remain lamentably
imperfect, and defective. To the redressing of that Grievance therefore, if
this Work may in some (though but small) measure be conducible to the ease of
the Master, and promotion of the Scholar, the Author presumes to hope it may
not be altogether exploded.

It is most readily granted, that diverse learned and able Schoolmasters, have
already done worthily toward the design of facilitating Boys making Latin; and
several of them have compiled useful Englishes for Translation, as Mr. Wase,
Mr. Walker; and since them, the worthy Gentleman, Master of Bury-School, in his
English Examples, which has met with general acceptance. But though the World
be much indebted to them for their useful Labors; it is yet to be hoped, that
some Addition of further discoveries toward some things, which seem still
wanting, may be promised without seeming to design derogation from their
esteem, or being guilty of vanity; Especially prefixing before the following
Work these modest Acknowledgments.

First, That had it pleased any other to have undertaken the Design herein
managed, it had been far better accomplished, and would have merited greatest
thanks, as well from the Author as others.

Secondly, That this Work does not arrogate to it self so great a sufficiency,
as that Boys in their Exercises, or any Translation, shall never need any
information besides what is here before them. Datur plus ultra. Much less does
it presume to work Miracles, viz. To teach those that are sottish and
unteachable; Ex quovis ligno non sit Mercurius.

Thirdly, It pretends not to be without mistakes, but craves a favorable and
candid censure. After which humble Concessions, some account of the nature and
method of the ensuing Treatise may not be unacceptable.

And First, I have therein given Examples in Sentences to all the necessary
Rules of Sintaxis; tho some less, or not at all important, be neglected, I hope
without loss.

Secondly, Whereas in the English Examples, before the Examples to each Rule,
were set two or three words of the Rule it self; finding by Experience that
Boys would not reflect upon the Rule, or if they did, they understood it not:
To remedy that inconvenience, I have prefixed the whole Rule in English as
plain as was possible; with any amendments which might be collected out of
other Grammarians besides Lilly, our usual Oracle; so that this Work may serve
for an Explanation of our common Syntaxis.

Thirdly, In all, or most of these Rules, where Boys are allowed by our common
Grammar, to use either of two Cases; I have confined them to one, and not left
it indifferent, except the nature of the word governing be absolutely
indifferent, which is but seldom; Because in many Rules, where the Latin Rule
leaves it indifferent, one is less elegant than the other, and therefore rarely
to be admitted. It is certainly more useful for Boys to be accustomed to the
more proper Case; they will find out that which comes in with [interdum] or
[rarius] soon enough of themselves; which yet they are minded of after the Rule.

Fourthly, Because Boys are apt to forget what is past; I have so ordered the
Examples to each Rule, that they contain all of them remembrances of the
former; lest while they be employed about a new Rule, the old ones be
forgotten, which is the great impediment of a progress in making Latin. And
that may answer an Objection, which may possibly be made, That the Examples,
especially in some places, are too few, in the Rules of the Relative and
others. For exemplifying every Rule over and over, under those which follow,
makes a competent amends for that paucity.

Fifthly, Because Boys are not very likely to render an Example of any Rule
before they are come to it, nor can it be expected at the Example, to the First
or Second Concord, they should make time or place, (unless we should suppose
them, before they begin to make Exercise, to have a perfect Grammar in their
memories.) I have therefore anticipated no Rules, but sometimes forced the
sense, or made it less Emphatical and Accurate, than it might otherwise have
been, rather than put them upon the Practice of a Rule they have not yet
arrived at.

Sixthly, I have given Examples to the most useful and frequently occurring of
Mr. Walker's Particles; because there is scarce any English totally without
them; and to them I have added many useful Grammatical Observations both from
mine own Experience and others. And if there be occasion for any Particle which
is not here exemplified, Mr. Walker's own Book may be consulted, or a short and
cheap Compendium thereof in a late Practical Gramma^, compiled by an Elaborate
Schoolmaster.

Seventhly, Because when Boys make a considerable progress, they begin to be
above short Sentences, and their skill is not so much tried in them, as in
continued Discourses. I have added some Dialogues and Epistles, wherein they
are reminded of the former Instructions.

Eighthly, In all the Examples, I have endeavored to intermix some useful
Admonitions relating to the duty of Children toward God, or Man, or
themselves, because they can never have principles of Virtue or Prudence
suggested to them too soon; considering the natural forwardness of young ones
to Vice, and the many evil Examples which tempt them thereto.

Ninthly, For a good part of the Book, I have caused the force of the Rule to
be printed in different Letter, for the Direction of Boys at the beginning; but
not in all the Examples, to try their own Discretion; nor quite through the
Book, because they may be supposed to be able themselves to distinguish, (when
they have been a while experienced) where the force of the Rules lies.

Lastly, Because at the first beginning to Translate, or make Exercises, they
either have not, or cannot well use a Dictionary, I have compiled an Index of
all the words in the Sententious Examples to the Grammar-Rules, unless a few by
chance escaped inspection. But not farther, because when Boys come to some
perfection, they cannot be without Dictionaries for other uses, as well as
Exercises. And it is meet they be practiced in the use of them.

A Work of this Nature and Model, sparing the Master's labor in writing
Englishes, and guiding the Scholar by easy and successive steps, I hope may
facilitate both the Master and Scholar's work, and competently prepare them for
making Epistles, Themes, or any other Exercises of their own proper Study, that
shall be expected. Which if it be found to do, by those that shall not disdain
to make experiment, the success will sufficiently requite the Labor of him who
unfeignedly desires the advancement of Learning; the flourishing of Schools,
and the Temporal and Eternal good of Children.

J. G.

Praeliminary Exercises on the Fundamental Rules.
Rule 1. Concord 1.
IN a Sentence, the Verb must be put in the same Number and Person that the
Nominative Case is of.

Note, All Nouns and Pronouns are of the third Person, except Ego, Tu, Nos, and
Vos, and the Vocative Case.

I sup. I mistake. I blow. I halt. I wink. I grieve. I increase. I run. I fail.
I agree. I strive. I learn.

Thou love. Thou washest. Thou call. Thou weepest. Thou spinnest. Thou
sillest.

Thou do refute. Thou do drive. Thou do creep. Thou do stuff. Thou
do patch. Thou do prop.

He does rub. He does forbid. He does cut. He does grow. He does bind. He does
tarry.

Note, That A, An, and The, are signs of Nounsubstantives Common. All names of
Men, Women, and Places, that have not these signs before them, are Names Proper.

A Dog barketh. The Sheep bleateth. The Fire burns. The Grass withers. The
Ox belloweth. The Goose cackleth. The River overflows. The Wind blows. The Cock
crows. The Bell rings. The Bird sings. The Grass springs.

A Man does go. A Bird flies. A Fish swims. A Worm does creep. A Wolf howleth.
An Hog grunts.

We fight. We laugh. We eat. We hear. We drink. We lament. Ye carry. Ye tarry.
Ye marry. Ye patch. Ye catch. Ye snatch. They keep. They weep. They sleep. They
fear. They bear. They hear.

Parrets speak. Bulls bellow. Magpies do chatter. Asses bray. Horses neigh.
Lovers do flatter.

I did rub. Thou did scratch. He did tear. We did run Ye did go. They did
creep.

I stood, They moved. We persuaded. Ye asked. Thou playedst. They slew.

They have blamed. Women have spun. Ye have climbed. We have despised. He has
hedged. Thou have vomited. I have said.

I had drawn. Thou had sawn. They shall take. Ye will pull. God will rule.
Sinners shall quake.

Hear thou. Thou shall attend. Let them speak. Swear ye. Let us pray. Let the
Devil rage.

I may hide. We can slide. Thou may moan. Ye can buy. He may die. They can
groan.

We might roll. He should foul. Ye would wonder Thou could pay. I might play.
The Heavens would thunder.

Thou might have ruled. I should have obeyed. Ye could have commanded. We
could have served. He would have profited. They could have hurt.

When I shall have supped. When thou shall have written. When ye shall have
sleeped. When ye shall have risen. When we shall have sat. When they shall have
walked.

The Man feels. Cloth is felt. The Eyes see. Pictures are seen. I know. I am
known. We hear. We are heard. Thou teach. Thou art taught. Ye shave. Ye are
shaven.

I was propt. Thou wast bought. He has been sold. We were driven. Ye have been
forced. They have been persuaded.

Thou have been urged. He has been overcome. I had been led. We shall be
thrust. Ye had been beaten. The doors shall be shut.

Thou had been loosed. Thou shall be bound. Let them be pricked. We had been
touched. Ye will be drawn. Let us be deceived.

Be thou broken. Thou will be bended. Let him be moved. We could be tamed. Be
ye pressed. They might be subdued.

Thou would be established. I might have been despised. He could have been
kicked. They might have been taught. Ye might have been torn. They might have
been caught.

When thou shall have been left. When thou will have been sent. When he shall
have been called. When we shall have been burned. When ye shall have been
turned. When they shall have been required.

Rule 2. Concord 2.
EVery Adjective must be of the same Case, Gender and Number, that the
Substantive is of, to which it belongs.

A white Horse trots. A beautiful Woman pleases. A sweet Apple does delight. A
great loss grieves. A sharp Spur pricks. A crooked Horn does sound.

An heavy Weight tires. An hard Lesson vexes. A weary Traveller sits. A black
Bean feeds. A thick Book teaches. The broad Sea appears.

The filthy Swine wallow. Perverse Infants cry. A whorish Woman paints. A mad
Drunkard reels. Filthy Harlots entice. Swelling Rivers overflow.

The fair Rose withers. The lovely Face fades. The white Snow falls. A fair
Cheek grows pale. A long Life ends. Strong Men die.

Black-Berries are gathered. White Mushrooms are trod upon. Filthy gain is
esteemed. Famous Virtue is despised. A naughty Girl is beaten. Good Boys are
loved.

The hot Summer burns. The cold Winter freezes. Precious time is neglected.
Winged hours slide away. Rolling years fly away. Sorrowful days are seen.

Nimble Stags will run. Fearful Hares had started. Wild Bulls shall be tamed. A
mad Dog has bitten. Swelling Toads had been killed. Poisonous Serpents did
sting. Unwary Fools have been stung. The Golden Age did exist. True Honesty was
prized. Cursed Riches were neglected. The Iron Age reigns. All villainies are
practiced. Every impiety is loved.

If good Lawyers may plead. If skilful Statesmen do contrive. If useful
Physicians can prescribe. If Orthodox Preachers might Preach. If wise
Philosophers might have reasoned. If just Judges might have judged. If merciful
Kings would have Governed. If good Subjects will obey. If loving Husbands would
have cherished. A diligent Boy may be praised. A Virtuous Woman might be loved.
If tender Girls have been instructed. If ugly Vice be shun. When bright Piety
had been sought. When painful Masters do instruct. When honest Merchants did
traffic. When rich Citizens have gained. If the fruitful Fields shall have
been Plowed. When the laborious Plowman shall Sow. When all nature shall
rejoice.

Rule 3d.
A Noun following the Verb is the Accusative Case.

A Man teaches Boys. A Master hears Lessons. A Scholar teareth Books. A
Fuller washes Cloth. A Dyer dies Garments. A Carpenter builds Houses.

Love thou God. Embrace ye Christ. Let us fear our Maker. Let them follow
Virtue. Do ye abominate Vice.

Fowlers take Nets. Huntsmen take Hunting-poles. A Fisherman takes a
Fishing-Cane. An Husbandman takes the Plow. Reapers take Reaping-hooks. Diggers
take Spades.

True Honor ennobles a Man. Humble modesty graces a Woman. Willing Obedience
adorns a Child. Busy Birds build Nests. A nimble Squirrel breaks Nuts. The
filthy Sow devours Acorns.

Good Examples instruct docile Minds. Great Afflictions teach humble Patience.
Cruel War destroys flourishing Kingdoms. Joyful Peace makes men happy.

A fierce Dog tears the harmless Sheep. An horrid Bear eats bloody Entrails.

Good Divines will study Divinity. Painful Preachers have preached excellent
Sermons. Thou have handled vain trifles. An hungry Dog will eat dirty Flesh.
Thou had read learned Authors. The swelling Seas did drown great Ships. Thou
shall see happy Peace. The cruel Sword has destroyed many Bodies. Thou did
refuse great Gifts. He did wear gay Garments. I shall hear pleasant Stories. Ye
will buy good Horses. I had finished a troublesome business. Wise men have
understood deep Mysteries. I have conquered strong Giants. We do shun fierce
Tigers. He drives fat Cattle. Grassie Meadows fatten lean Sheep.

When terrible Death invades impious Sinners.

If we see armed Justice.

When an angry Deity did drown the whole World.

When sulphurious Flames had burned a sinful City.

If men have felt Divine Judgments.

If ye will follow wholesome Counsel.

Thou shall learn better manners.

When thou had warned foolish Transgressors.

When thou abhorrest filthy Vice.

He did preach Learned Sermons.

When the Divine Spirit has enlightened blind minds.

Rule 4.
Conjunction Copulatives, and Disjunctive.

English, And, Or, Nor, etc.

Latin, Ac, Atque, Nec, Neque, etc. join like Moods and Tenses, and sometimes
like in Verbs. Moods, but different Tenses in Verbs. Like Cases and Gender and
Number in Nouns.
A General marches and fights.

A careful General will march and fight.

A General provides Swords and Bucklers.

A General chooses plain and open Fields.

A Carpenter loves a smooth and straight Tree.

A Painter procures Colors and Pencils.

A Scholar will learn and study.

Faithful Schoolmasters do instruct and correct.

Diligent and ingenuous Boys read their Books, and write their Copies.

A painful Husbandman Sows or Reaps.

Idle Blockheads love neither their Books, nor their Money.

Treacherous Servants will loiter and steal.

Faithful Friends have cheated and betrayed their faithful Friends.

Good and pious Women love and esteem Virtue, and Goodness, and Piety.

Rule 5.
THE Verb Substantive Sum has a Nominative to come after it, and not an
Accusative.

I am a Boy. Thou art a Girl. He is a Man. We are Schoolmasters. Ye are
Lawyers. They are Divines.

Covetousness is a vice. Prodigality is a sin. Generosity is a virtue.
Thriftiness is a virtue. Abundance is a vexation. Contentment is happiness.

They are Botchers. We are Tailors. Thou art a Shoemaker. He is a Cobbler. Ye
are Footmen. I am an Horseman.

God is a Spirit. Christ is God and Man. Devils were Angels. Troy is now a
Field. Troy has been a City. Vice is an Evil. Virtue is a Good.

We have been Madmen. We are Fools. Ye will be wise Men. Ye had been Servants.
Thou art a Master. Ye will be Captains.

Cruel War is a misery, and a dreadful ruin. Blessed Peace is a felicity, and
a sweet rest. The pale Moon is a Planet. The moist Water is an Element.
Precious Diamonds are Stones. Yellow Gold is a Metal.

Splendid Garments are proud Ornaments. Many Books are great impediments.
Effectual Grace is an heavenly Gift. True Virtue is the only Nobility. Learned
Books are Scholastic Weapons. A diligent Boy is a rare spectacle.

Honey is sweet. Gall is bitter. Vinegar is sour. Horses are generous. Tigers
are furious. Foxes are cunning.

Marble is smooth. I am hard. Jet is black. They are white. Stones are hard.
Thou art soft. A Stag is swift. He is slow. An Elephant is docile. Ye are
stupid. An Ant is provident. We are sluggish.

The pleasant Spring is delightful. An hot Summer is troublesome. The sickly
Autumn is hurtful. The Icy Winter is unpleasant. Dog Days are torrid and
sickly. Sweet fruits are unwholsom and pernicious.

If I had been a skilful Scholar and a good man.

If we shall be happy Lovers.

The black Crow was white.

Be ye faithful and diligent Servants.

If I was a potent General.

If I can be a rich Tradesman.

Great Oaks have been Acorns.

Great Giants were little Infants.

Those Whelps will be huge Mastiffs.

A wild Colt may be a good Horse.

A rash Youth may be a discreet Man.

Diligent Servants will be careful Masters.

Rule 6.
THE latter of two Verbs, if the sign (to) comes before it, or may be put
before it, is the Infinitive Mood. [To be] is a sign of the Infinitive Mood
Passive.

Fishes love to swim. A Dog loves to run. Worms love to creep. A Bird loves to
fly. Horses love to trot or gallop. Asses love to go or lie down.

A Boy desires to play. Ye intend to work.

A Glutton rejoices to feed. I choose to fast.

A Drunkard covets to drink. They seek to abstain.

A Blockhead hates to learn. Ye cease to study.

A Soldier prepares to sight. We thought to have stood.

A Coward attempts to run and hide himself.

Ye attempted to have slain Men and buried them.

Little Boys learn to swim. Unskilful Tailors did learn to sow. Skilful
Carpenters know how to build and pull down. Ignorant Weavers will learn to know
how to weave. My cockered Brothers had desired to go. Cunning Knaves endeavor
to deceive and betray.

If tender Parents desire to see their dear Children.

A foolish Botcher knows not how to make handsome Clothes.

A little Dog can hold a great Boar.

Black Ravens will attempt to devour a stinking Carcass.

When furious Dogs attempt to tear harmless Sheep and Lambs.

Furious Persecutors have sought to root out blessed Piety.

Opportunity ought to be improved.

Boys love to be commended and rewarded.

Boasters thought to have been extolled.

Misery ought to be avoided.

Gay Virgins thought to have been courted and married.

Old Dogs teach little Whelps to lick up fat Porrage and sweet Milk.

Old Thieves teach young Thieves to rob rich Houses.

Great Hens teach little Chickens to scrape every Dunghill.

Ugly Witches are said to become Black Cats.

The common People believe ugly Witches to become Black Cats.

Rule 7.
WHen two Substantives come together, with (of) between them, the latter shall
be the Genitive Case.

The sight of a fair Picture delights.

The smell of a stinking Dunghill offends.

The Pledge of Dear Love pleases.

The face of things is changed.

The color of green Fields will delight and please.

The labor of the industious Be ought to be praised.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom and happiness.

The loquacity of Fools is the abomination of the prudent.

The modesty of a fair Maid is the true Ornament of her mind.

The love of excellent Learning is the Ornament of a pretty Boy.

The loss of great Treasures may be repaired.

The loss of precious time cannot be redeemed.

The Cares of this World have blinded the minds of Men.

The deceitfulness of Riches did ensnare the thoughts of Sinners.

The Soul of a pious Man will abhor the base love of cursed Pleasures and Lusts.

If the just Judgments of God would always seize on wretched Sinners, men would
not dare commit so great Villainies.

The rashness of Drunkards has betrayed the secrets of the mind.

When the Vices of a depraved Age shall have drawn down the just Judgments of a
Righteous Deity.

The report of the great Portion of an unmarried Virgin, is oftentimes the
sound of a great lie.

Base Sloth is the Parent of Contempt and Poverty.

Sometimes (of) is left out, and the latter Substantive is put former, ending
in (s).

The Nation's peace, or the peace of the Nation.

The Church's power, or the power of the Church.

A Lord's dignity, or the dignity of a Lord.

A Woman's modesty, or the modesty of a Woman.

A Man's wisdom, or the wisdom of a man.

A professed Friend may be a Man's Enemy.

The Father's prodigality will be the Son's shame and beggary.

Fly great Ladies sinful Embraces.

The World's contempt is the Mind's content.

The stout Soldier's Sword has been the proud Enemy's ruin.

The Soul's loss is the loss of losses.

The Fool's tongue may be his neck's Halter.

The Walls of the City are the defense of the Inhabitants; and increase the
courage of its Defenders: And the Defenders courage is another wall of the City.

Death is the common fate of all men, and young and old shall feel the
sharpness of his Darts.

The rich Favorite of Fortune shall have many Companions, and is the subject
of Flatterers praises: But every one will despise the poor man, when every
Blockhead shall call the golden Ass wise and learned.

Rule 8.
TO and for (signifying the use of any one) are signs that the Noun next
following them must be the Dative Case.

Corn grows for Man. Grass grows for Cattle.

Hay is mowed for Horses. A Goose is carved for the Guests.

Sense abounds to thee. A Shoe is fitted to the foot.

Magistrates provide Prisons for obstinate Malefactors.

A Rod is prepared for the back of a Fool.

Scriveners buy Lands for wealthy Citizens.

An Hat is fitted to a Man's Head.

Filthy Gluttons prepare delicate Dainties for their ungodly Bellies.

A Glove is fitted to a Boy's Hand. Men do accommodate God's Commands to their
Lusts.

The Fire separates Oil for Chemists.

An Hair-lace is platted for a Girl's Head.

Virtue affords true Comfort to her Votaries. Base Vice offers happiness to
Fools.

Humane blood is sacrificed to Hellish malice.

Some Verbs govern a Dative Case of the word next following without the Sign
(to) and then the word following that must be the Accusative. Of which, such as
are of more common use are these that follow. To promise. To pay. To give. To
tell. To send. To offer. To bring. To buy. To procure, provide, etc.

My Father promised me great Rewards. Or my Father promised great Rewards to me.

The Debtor pays the Creditor great sums of Money.

Or the Debtor pays great sums of Money to the Creditor.

The Stranger told me great wonders. Or the Stranger told great wonders to me.

The King promised my Brother his pardon. My Mother sent me great Tokens of her
love and care.

My Father's Man brought me Bread and Cheese.

My good Uncle will give me many good Books and learned Manuscripts.

My dear Cousin offered me a kiss.

My little Brother sent me his Gloves and Handkerchief.

My Master forgave me my faults.

My Father provided me a good School.

Thy Friend procured thee a good Horse.

My Uncle has promised my Brother all his Farms.

God forgives penitent Sinners their great Offenses.

If ye will lend my Father's Servant your Boots and Spurs.

When they had offered Caesar a Crown and Scepter, he refused them.

When we shall have bought Clothes for the Governor of the City.

If ye have given the Treasurer your Money, ye have done well.

If the steadfast hope of Eternal life can bring comfort to dejected minds.

Our Man brought my Uncle's Horses Hay and Straw, for they were almost starved.

My dear eldest Brother bought my Sister new Gloves.

Pay my Master Forty pounds.

If thou will send me a Penknife, I will give thee thanks.

When ye shall have given my Brother the Grammars, I will send you the new
Bibles.

The blessed Redeemer has prevailed to procure pardon for miserable sinners.

The justice of God does delight to prepare the fire of Hell for impenitent
sinners.

God's love does delight to prepare Heavens happiness for true Believers.

Thy Lands are preserved for thine Heir.

Thou have told thy Father many Lies.

I can tell you, that my Father will give me money, when he shall see me to
bring him comfort, to apply my will to learning, and to prepare my mind for the
paths of Virtue. And the paths of Virtue are at first rugged, afterward
pleasant.

Rule Ninth.
WIth] or [By] (signifying an instrument) are signs that the Noun following
must be the Ablative Case.

The mind is distracted with cares and fears.

The Stomach is fed with meats.

The Body is broken with labors.

Men overcome difficulty with pains.

Soldiers overcome dangers with daring and Fortitude.

Citizens overcome poverty with riches.

Lions tear Beasts by strength.

Foxes seize Geese by cunning.

Men conquer Armies by Courage.

Nature is polished by Art.

Art is consummated by practice.

Practice is facilitated by diligence.

I struck my Brother with my fist and a stone.

Thou kick'st thy Sister with thy foot.

The Master smote the Servant with his stick.

Alexander cut the Gourdian knot with his Sword.

The Boy cut the stick with a blunt Knife.

Thou shavest thy Father's beard with a sharp Razor.

If the virtue of Mankind had known how to overco^^ afflictions with patience.

When the Man's throat was cut with a sharp Razor.

T. Victory was adjudged to the Foes by the Sword.

The fate of Nations is known to be governed by Divine Providence.

Reapers reap Corn for the careful Farmers with sharp Sicles.

Mowers mow the Hay for the laborious Husbandman with crooked Sythes.

The Mason's Servants build the Walls of an House for a rich Nobleman with Lyme
and Stones.

If thou will send me my Paper, I will bring thee thy Book; and I will trim thy
Book with my Penknife.

If you will buy me four good Houses, I will lend you a sum of money, and will
give you a Saddle and Bridle, and will furnish you with new Boots.

We have commanded thee to build our Uncle's Ships with the strongest boards.

You plowed your ground with my Fathers Plows, and you promised him a great
Sheep, but you paid him a little Lamb.

When we feel our flesh to be burned with scorching fire, we shall not stand.

I will tell my Mother this great rumor, that her Lover has offered my Sister
an hundred pieces of Gold, and has promised her to adorn her with precious
Jewels.

If you shall have heard a famous City to be taken by the valor of the
Soldiers, and the industry and conduct of their General.

My Brother's man began to pluck Roses for my Sister with his dirty hands. He
is a Sloven.

My Mothers Maid was seen to carve the Goose for the Servants with my Father's
knife, for she is a bold Girl.

The General of the Army took care to provide Clothes for his Soldiers with
great industry, and that is a careful General.

Cruel Tyrants will rejoice to prepare punishments for innocent Subjects, by
force or by fraud; for cruel Tyrants are devouring wolves.

Rule 10.
THESE following Prepositions govern an Accusative Case.

Ad to. Aversus-sum against. Ante before. Apud at. Circa about. Circiter about.
Circum about. Cis, Citra on this side. Contra against. Erga toward. Extra
without. Infra beneath. Inter between. Intra within. Juxta nigh to. Ob for.
Penes in the power. Per by. Pone behind. Post after. Preter besides. Prope
nigh. Propter for. Secundum according to. Supra above.

Trans beyond. Versus cowards. Ultra beyond.

Though (to) be generally the sign of the Dative; yet after Verbs of motion, of
exhorting, provoking, calling, inclining, etc. it is made by (Ad) with an
Accusative Case.

I have walked to the City. I will run to the Market. Let us go to the Banks of
the River. We will exhort thee to virtue. He inclines his mind to his study.

Thou shall invite thy Master to Supper. Call ye your School-fellows to play.
Kingdoms provoke Kingdoms to War.

A Scholar strives against a Scholar. An Orator strives against an Orator. A
Poet strives against a Poet. A Piper strives against a Piper.

The Captain goes before his Soldiers.

Boys abide at the School. I met my Brother at the Market. The Sergeants go
before the Mayor. The Passenger is at the Ship. The Heifer wanders about the
Fields. Soldiers encamp about the City.

Note. Circiter about, always refers to time, and never to place.

Darkness arose about the sixth Hour. My Father died about the first day of the
week. He lived with my Uncle about six weeks.

The Cattle are on this side of the River. Thou shall not swim against the
Stream. Charity is exercised toward our Neighbors. The Mare feeds on this
side of the Brook. Let us not fight against two Soldiers. Piety is exercised
toward God.

My Friend lives without the old City. The Woman's crooked Nose appears beneath
her rugged Forehead.

The pretty Boy sits between the pretty Girls.

The Diggers sleep without the broad Ditch.

The Belly hangs beneath the Breast. He played between both Houses.

Note, Inter frequently signifies among.

Thy Sister is fair among Women.

The Bagle is King among Birds. The Whale is King among Fishes. The Lion is
King among Beast

The Mountain is within the hundredth Stone.

I observed my Sister to play nigh to the yellow Bank.

Rewards are assigned by the Master to the Scholas for diligence.

The Prey is within my Nets. They have pitched their Tents nigh the City-walls.
My Brother was punished by my Father for his sawciness and pride.

My Friend is in the power of his Adversary.

He came to us by the Marketplace.

The Dog comes behind his Master.

Thou art in the power of the King.

The Stag did run through the Valleys.

The Servants walk to Church behind their Master and Mistress.

After the setting of the Sun, the Stars arise.

The Boy had Quills besides an Inkhorn. We will sit hard by the River. The Sun
appears after Storms.

When the Knight kept Hawks besides Dogs.

Let us play hard by the Dunghill.

Children eat Lice for the Jaundice. Kings are honored according to their
dignity. The Birds fly above the Clouds. Physicians do order men to drink Milk
and Brimstone for the Itch. The matter happened according to our wish.

The Prodigies appear above the City.

The Master ows the Servant Money for service.

Our Enemies fled beyond the Seas. We walked beyond the Mountains.

The Cattle run beyond the River.

The Birds fled beyond the Fields.

Note, Versus is put after the word it governs.

Clients go toward their Patron.

The Dogs run toward the Hills.

The men hasten toward the City.

These following Prepositions, govern an Ablative.

A, before a word beginning with a Consonant from.

Ab, before a word beginning with a Vowel. from.

Absqu; without. Coram before, or in presence. Cum with. De of, or concerning.
E, ex, of, or out of. Prae before in Comparison. Pro for, or instead of. Sine
without. Tenus up to.

Drunkards go from an Alehouse to an Alehouse.

A Maid without Modesty, is as a furious Mare without a Bridle.

Guests proceed from an Egg to an Apple.

We see a Boy without Government to be a mad Mastiff without a Chain.

My Friend pleaded my cause before that Judge.

(With) when it notes company, or signifies (together with), is made by cum,
otherwise it is an ablative.

I went with my Brother to the Green Fields, and there I beat him with a Rod.

That nimble Woman was seen to dance before the King.

I fought with mine Enemies with great stones, and then rejoiced with my
Companions.

That wanton Boy has discovered his impudence before me, and I will prepare
Rods for his back.

The Water rushes through the Street, with much Mud.

I heard good news of (or concerning) my Brother.

The Cook-Maid snatched the Cheese with her hand out of the Jaws of the great
Dog.

The Seaman does discourse of the Sea.

I heard that rumor of you.

That Boy brings thee shame, and is praised before thee.

Men did admire my Father before my Uncle; for my Father provided meat for the
poor.

Thou shall be condemned out of thine own mouth.

I will grind for thee. A Purse without Money, is a miserable Companion.

Christ was the Savior of men, and died for wretched sinners.

A Scabbard without a Sword is the Instrument of a Coward.

Note, That Tenus is put after the word it governs, and puts the word, if
plural, in the Genitive Case.

The Waters covered him up to the eyes.

The Brook was up to his knees.

The River was up to his ears.

Praepositions governing two Cases, are these that follow.
1. IN and sub, after Verbs of Motion, govern an Accusative (and then in
signifies into,) otherwise they govern an Ablative.

2. Subter, under, indifferently, either Accusative or Ablative.

3. Super upon, Accusative or Ablative; super about, Ablative only.

4. Glam unknown to, now generally an Ablative, formerly an Accusative, as also
Clanculum.

The Boy jumped under the Waters, to gather pebble-stones for his play-fellows.
He cast his Book into the fire.

The Girl gathered Herbs under the Hedge, and brought her Mother those Herbs
and fine Flowers.

The man in that House offered me Pears and Plumbs.

My Uncle brought my Brother Money, and he ran away into the Woods.

I slept under a form in the School, and my Mother sent me there my dinner.

If I had staid under the Shades, I would have slept, and sleep would have
given me rest.

My Father lent my Uncle a great sum of money in the White-Parlour.

My Brother came to me in the Fields, and struck me with his fist.

The Dog is under the Table. The Hare is under the Bush. The Horse treads upon
the Grass with his Feet. The Father asks concerning his Son. My Mother procured
money for me unknown to my Father.

The Water lies upon the Earth, and the Air lies upon the Water.

The Wives of the Soldiers ask concerning their Husbands.

My Cousin is a naughty Boy, for he ran away from School unknown to my Father
and his Master; and he was seen to strike the Servant-Maid with a great stone;
and to buy keys for a Thief; and to take money out of my Father's pocket.

Some Recapitulatory Exercises.
1. A Brave Soldier is a Kingdom's Glory, and resolves to purchase Honor to
himself by his Sword through bloody Rivers.

2. A Skilful Shoemaker knows how to fit a Shoe to a Ladies Foot with his Hand
and Glove, without other Instruments: And a Skilful Shoemaker is a great Artist.

3. The Grace of God is a man's happiness, and abides without riches after
losses, in great dangers, and is believed to afford true comfort to God's
worshippers by its excellent virtue.

4. Every sort of happiness abounds to the diligent man; and men have been
observed to conquer difficult labors by diligence, and to be praised for their
industry. Industry is a great virtue.

5. If you will send me your Verses, I will lend you my Themes; and will
endeavor to provide a Dictionary for you, and procure you other Books.
Learning is the Ornament of a man's Life, and is acquired by labor and study.

6. The Spring is a pleasant time; for then we see Nature to be renewed by the
cherishing beams of the Sun; and then we see the Trees to sprout, and the
Gardens to bring forth Flowers for the laborious Be.

7. I struck my Sister with a Stick, and was forced to fly into the Woods,
where I observed Corn to grow for the Husbandman, and green Grass for the
Cattle. The Fruits of the Field are God's gifts: But when I had tarried there a
while, I returned to my Parents, and submitted my self to their mercy, and they
forgave me my offense.

8. When my dear Mother, unknown to my Father, shall send me money, I will pay
my Creditors their Debts, and will provide a Supper for my Friends in my
Chamber, without the consent of my Brother, or my Master's leave; and will give
my Friends gifts with my own hands.

9. A valiant General is a strong Rock, without fear or baseness, and resolves
to fight against his enemies, and procure a firm and stable Peace for his King
and Country by his victorious Sword; and always is known to grant his
suppliant enemies their life, and never to offer his Friend any unkindness.

10. A Merchant-man sails to the remote parts of the World, by the help of the
Winds, through Waves and Dangers, in great Storms, besides Rocks and
Quicksands, among the Barbarians, far from his Children, and sends his Wife
gifts with his Friends in his Ship: When he has obtained good success
according to his wish, he rejoices to prepare rewards for the laborious Seamen.

11. Courage and Conduct bring men Victory. Victory gladdens the minds of the
Soldiers. Stout Soldiers rejoice to subdue Nations by Arms; and War oftentimes
is a necessary evil: And when men conquer, they reap the fruits of their pains.
Crowns are formed for a conquering General's head.

12. Careful Parents lie in Bed without sleep or rest, and study to provide
Arts for their Sons, and Portions for their Daughters. They give them learning
and manners, and buy them necessary Books, and when their Children offend, they
correct them with stripes. The care of Parents is the happiness of Children.

Exercises fitted to Lilly's Concords, and Rules, together with Observations
upon them.
1. Concord.
VErbum Personale cohaeret cum Nominativo Numero and persona.

The Verb Personal agrees with his Nominative Case-in Number and Person.

We mourn. I live. Thou love. He does learn. Ye had found. They will fall.
The Clock strikes.
The Master reads; Boys should attend; ye play.

The Preacher preaches, ye do not hear.

Parents love. Children fear.

Scholars obey. Masters teach.

Truants are despised. Diligence is praised.

A man fights. Men conquer.

A fool laughed. The fool was laughed at.

Nominativus primae vel secundae Personae rarissime exprimitur nisi causa
discretionis, etc.

In Verbis quorum significatio ad homines tantum pertinet, etc.

Note, 1. Ego, tu, ille, nos, vos, illi, when the Engl^^^ of any of these is
the Nomin^tive Case to a Verb* Latin must not be expressed but understood, unless
there be an emphasis or distinction in the word, e. g

I love not thee because thou beatest me.

I will punish him because he played.

Thou art foolish, he is wise.

Note, 2. Sometimes there be two or more Nominative Cases before one Verb,
which have the word [and] between them (sometimes understood) and all belong to
one Verb; and in such Case the Verb following must be of the Plural Number; and
of such Persons, as the more worthy Nominative Case. Now the Pronoun of the
first Person is more worthy than the second or third; and the second more
worthy than the third, (of which third Person are all Nominative Cases, except
ego, nos, tu, vos.)

My Brother and I will play.

Thou and I did learn.

The Cloak, the Paper, and the Knife, were found.

Thou and thy Father are observed.

Non semper vox Casualis est Verbo Nominationae, etc.

Note, 3. Though a Substantive Noun or Pronoun be usually the Nomnative Case to a
Verb, yet not always, but sometimes a Verb of the Infinitive Mood, and then the
Adjective (if there be any) after the Verb, must be the Neuter Gender; if it
have no Substantive to agree with.

To lie is not lawful. To cheat is not safe. To play is not profitable. To
neglect hurts. To rest strengthens. To jeer fretteth.
Aliquando Oration, etc. and sometimes a whole sentence, (which has always an
Infinitive Mood in it) e. g.

To sleep long is not wholesome.

To despise Admonitions destroys Boys.

To be vexed because of losses consumes.

To teach others, teaches the Teachers.

2. Concord.
ADjectivum cum Substantivo genere numero and causa Concordat.

Every Adjective must be of the same Case, Gender, and Number with the
Substantive to which it belongs, which answers to who? or what?

A Diltgent Master instructs attentive Scholars.

A godly Son rejoices an happy Father.

A needy man finds few Friends.

A small Family requires little preparation.

A good Exercise deserves great praise.

Rash Counsel hinders great gain.

Ad eundem modum Participia, etc.

A Pronoun or Participle must agree with the Substantive, as if it were an
Adjective, e. g.

My good Master corrects his own Son.

Thy torn Book has not my Lesson.

Our Form fighting, lost the promised reward.

Your Manservant running, threw down my Brother standing.

A fighting Cock fears not his crowing Enemy.

A neighing Horse despises the Darts flying.

A raging multitude breaks settled peace.

Note, 2. Sometimes in a sentence there is an Adjective, which has no
Substantive to agree with, and which has this sign [the] before it, as if it
self were a Substantive. In such Case that Adjective must be always the
Masculine Gender, (because the word man or men is always understood) if it
stand before a Veb, it must be the Nominative Case; if after a Verb, the
Accusative; and for its Number, it is for the most part such as the Verb, which
it either comes before or after, e. g.

The Industrious are praised, but the slothsul are punished.

The righteous finds peace, but the wicked shall seel torment.

The covetous despises the poor, but the liberal cherishes him.

The wise seeks greater wisdom, but the fool despises understanding.

The merciful and kind shall find mercy, but the cruel shall be recompensed.

Note, 3. Sometimes the word [thing] or [things] comes after an Adjective, and
is the Substantive to it; but in such Cases you must rather omit making any
Latin for thing, and only put the Adjectives into the Neuter Gender, and make
it such Case and Number, as res should have been if it had been expressed, e. g.

It is a pleasant thing to see the Sun.

It is a more pleasant thing to see God.

It is a most cruel thing to kill Infants.

To Exercise Clemency is a most generous thing.

To play little, to sleep little, to learn much, to rise early, are very
excellent things.

To despise the wicked, and to love the good, are things commendable.

Note, 4. Sometimes two or three Substantives with [and] between them, have but
one Adjective, which has relation to them all; in such Case the Adjective must
be the Plural Number, and in Gender must agree with that which is of the most
worthy; the Masculine is more worthy than the Feminine or Neuter, and the
Feminine more worthy than the Neuter; Except in things which have no life, and
there the Neuter is most worthy, e.g.

My Father and Mother are pious.

My Brother and Sister are idle.

Thy Paper and thy Penknife are bad.

My Exercise and my Lesson are profitable.

Our Manservant, and Maidservant, and I, are good, and shall have rewards.

Thou, thy Master, and thy Mistress, have been kind, and merit my greatest
thanks.

3. Concord.
RElativum cum Anticedente Concordat Genere Numero and Persona.

The Relative [Qui] agrees with his Antecedent in Gender, Number and Person,
e. g.

1. The good Boy, which.

2. The honest Nurse, which.

Quoties nullus Nominativus inerseritur inter Relativum and Verbum, etc.

1. The Relative must not agree with the Antecedent in Case, but must be the
Nominative Case to a Verb, if it stand immediately before a Verb, and no other
Noun or Pronoun between it and the Verb, be the Nominative Case to it, e. g.

That Woman is loved, which [Woman] has a fair face.

That Girl is lovely, which [Girl] bought me my Knife.

That Servant is trusty, which [Servant] brought me my Breakfast.

That Hat begins to be torn, which [Hat] covers my Brother's Head.

That man is a Butcher, which [Man] struck my Father with a Stone.

That Preacher is honored, which [Preacher] knows how to prepare Divine
Comforts for the Soul.

I love that School-fellow, which [School-fellow] lent me Books.

I who found your Book.

The Master is honored which takes pains.

Thou art condemned, who despisest thy Mother.

He had greatest praise that said the longest part.

The godly Father, that instructs his wicked Son, delivers himself.

The Rebellious Scholar, that despises his Master, vexes his Master, but he
destroys himself.

The wicked that fear not God, will blame their own folly hereafter.

The rewards which are promised, shall be given, if the works, that are
required, be done.

At si Nominativus Relativo and Verbo interponatur, etc.

2. But if between the Relative and the Verb there stand a Noun or Pronoun
Substantive, which answers to the Question who or what, made by the Verb, then
the Relative must be either,

1. Such Case as the Verb requires after him, which is in the same Sentence
with the Relative, (which Sentence ought, in writing proper English, to be
distinguished by a Comma before and after it) if it will answer the Question
whom or what? made by the Verb, e. g.

1. The Boy will die, that thou have beaten.

2. The Horse was very good that my Father sold.

3. The Comedy which we acted, was pleasant.

4. The Boy whom learning delights, will win love, and shall be honored.

5. The diligent Master, whom the Boys observe, makes his Scholars learned:
but he, whom his own Scholars despise, labors in vain.

6. That foul Vice, which men embrace most greedily, is most hurtful.

2. Or if any other word stand between it and the Verb, besides the Nominative
Case to the Verb; or stand before it and the Verb which requires a Case, then
the Relative does not follow the Verb, but is to be put in such Case as that
other word governs, e. g.

1. The House, whose Foundation is not strong, will fall when the wind blows.

2. The praise, for which thon strivest, shall not be given, because thou do
not exercise thy utmost strength.

If [whose] be the English of the Relative, the Relative must be the Genitive
Case, e. g.

1. The man, whose fame is lost, is miserable.

2. The Boys, whose Lesson is hardest, apply the greater industry.

If a Preposition come before the Relative, the Relative is governed of that,
e. g.

The mark, to which the Horse runs, ends the Horses labor.

In other Cases, it has commonly some signs before it, as [of] [to] [than]
etc. and must be rendered according to other Rules.

Note, Two or three Antecedents Singular, will have a Relative Plural, which
agrees with the more worthy Person and Gender.

1. My Brother and I, who came, were admitted.

2. The Master and Mistress, which take care of the Servants, are honored.

3. I have found the Paper, the Penknife, and the Rule, which had been lost.

4. He and I, which are good Boys.

5. My Father, my Sister, and you, and I, which are ready, will go.

6. Thou and thy Father, who study temperance, will live long.

7. The wicked man, and the bloody woman which wounded my Mother, fled; but my
Uncle and Aunt, that loved her very well, will revenge her death, though my
Father is dead.

8. Thou and I, who have spoiled the Paper and Ink, that we bought, have
provoked our Master, who loves thrifty Boys that keep all things carefully,
and spoil nothing.

9. Thou and he neglected those precepts, and admonitions, which have been
repeated so often.

3. Interdum etiam Oration ponitur per Antecedente. Sometimes one or two
Sentences going before, answer the Question who or what, and then the Relative
following them must always be of the Neuter Gender^; and if there be one
Sentence for an antecedent, the Singular Number, if two or more, the Plural,
and always in either Case the third Person, e. g.

1. Thou Truantest much, and art very idle, which are most pernicious things.

2. I have made my Exercise, and construed every Sentence afterward, which will
please.

3. I have vexed my Father, I have provoked my Master, which trouble me very
much.

4. I write, thou make thy Exercise, which are different works.

Note, Sometimes a Pronoun primitive, not expressed, but understood in a
Possessive, going before the Relative, is the antecedent to the Relative; and
may (if there be occasion) have an Adjective to agree with it, as if it were
expressed, e. g.

1. I hate thy manners, who do not reverence Superiors.

2. I found thy Book, who art a careless Boy.

3. I had thy honor, who neglectest thy Exercise.

4. God abhors thy hypocrisy, who hear Sermons, but do not regard them.

5. I excused thy fault whom thy Play-fellow accused.

6. Thou and I will visit our Countrey-house, who live pleasantly, near a River.

5. Note, The antecedent is sometimes, in good Authors, repeated after the
Relative; as Diem scito esse nullum, quo die non dico pro reo. Cicero. There is
no day, in which day I plead not for some Guilty Person.

Interrogatives and Indefinites follow the Rule of the Relative, that is, If a
Nominative Case come between them and the Verb, they must be the Accusative
Case; if there be no Nominative between, they must be the Nominative Case to
the Verb, e. g.

1. What troubles thy mind? My Friend! What grief have thou felt? what have
thou done?

2. Whether of the two I shall cut, I know not.

Constructions of Nouns Substantives.
Reg. 1. QUum duo Substant. diversae significationis, etc.

If two Substantives stand together in English, with the Particle [of] betwixt
them, the latter of the two must be the Genitive Case, e, g.

1. The valiant Son of Philip coveted the Dominion of the whole world.

2. The fear of God, contempt of the World, and steadfast hope of Eternal Life,
make quietness of mind, which is the great happiness of man; which wise men
greatly desire.

3. The sound of the Clock calls Boys to School.

4. The noise of the Trumpet stirs up the warlike and generous Horse, which
knows the sign of the battle.

Proinde hic Genesis in Adject. Possess. etc.

The former Substantive sometimes is rendered by an Adjective Possessive derived
from it, and must then agree with the latter, in Case, Gender and Number.

You discourse of Sea-affairs.

We gathered Mountain-fruits.

I boiled Garden-herbs.

I flung away the Dunghill-weeds.

My Brother's House. My Father's Garden.

3. Note, When two Substantives in English come together without so much as
[the] between them, only the sign [the] before the first of them, the latter
must always be made the Genitive Case. e. g.

The Ditcher cleansed the Town-ditch.

The Boy fell into the Tower-ditch.

The Slave leapt over the City-walls and escaped.

That Carpenter built my Garison-walls.

This Cannon broke down the Castle-walls.

The Boys love the School-Chimney when their limbs are Cold; but in Summertime
they choose the Fields.

Let somebody go up, and open the Chamber Door.

Reg. 2. Laus and Vituperium rei, etc.

[Of] between two Substantives (and after the Verb Sum) whereof the latter
betokens the quality or property of the former, to it is praise or dispraise,
shows that the latter Substantive before which it stands, must be put into the
Ablative Case, e. g.

I love a Boy of an excellent wit.

The Servant of a stubborn spirit, that will not observe his Master's Command,
is beaten.

Our Nation is happy, that has a Prince of great Clemency.

The Master has easy work that teaceth Boys of flexible minds, and ingenious
dispositions.

The Scholar that refuses to regard the Master's words, is of perverse mind.

6. The Boy, that plays when others learn; and learns when others play, is of a
base disposition.

7. The deceitful man, that privily upbraideth his Friends, is of dishonest
manners.

Reg. Opus and usus Ablativum exigunt.

[Of] after need, is a sign of the Ablative Case.

1. Although I have twice learned the whole Grammar, yet I have need of daily
reading.

2. Thou art ignorant, and have need of instruction; but thou do not regard,
therefore also thou have need of the Rod.

3. The limb which refuses the benefit of softer ointments, has need of
sharper remedies.

4. He that teaches Boys, has need of Patience and Diligence, for all Boys
are not of docible wits.

Reg. 4. Est ubi in Dativum vertitur.

Sometimes the sign [to] stands between two Substantives, and then the Latter
may be rendered by the Dative Case: or [to] may be changed into [of] and the
latter made by the Genitive, e. g.

1. A good Prince is a Father to his Country.

2. Loyal Subjects are the strongest wall to Royalty.

3. God is a friend to those that love him; he is a Father to the righteous,
that fear him.

Reg. 5. Excipiuntur quae in eodem causa, etc.

Two Substantives coming together without [of] between them, are put both in
the same case, by apposition.

1. Rashness, the Picture of a fool, betrays a womanish mind.

2. Sloth, the Enemy of men, usually brings forth theft.

3. Envy, the wrack of the Soul, brings forth murder, the destruction of the
Body.

4. Paleness of the face, the token of bitterest anger, shows thirst of
revenge; pale rage is most dreadful.

Note. From Substantives Masculine in [tor] come Feminines in [trix] (or may
for the most part be made from thence;) from those which end in [us] come
Feminines in [a] which Feminines must be used, and not the Masculines, when
there went before a Substantive of the Feminine Gender, to which the latter
has relation, or with which the latter is the same; and usually the Verb [is]
commonly stands between such Substantives, e. g.

1. Death, the Enemy of Nature, is a Friend to good men, whom it leads into
Eternal Glory.

2. Courage for-the-most-part is a Conqueror.

3. Rest is the repairer of strength, a refresher of the vital Spirits.

4. Unwearied diligence oftentimes is an helper of a weak wit; Art and Study
mend Natures defects.

Reg. 6. Adjectivum in Neutro genere, etc.

When Boys meet with a Substantive, having before it immediately an Adjective
(which intimates the quality of the Substantive) as much, little, more, less,
so much, how much, and such like, such a Substantive must be the Genitive Case;
and the Adjective put in the Neuter Gender, and taken for a Substantive.

1. Much labor brings more gains.

2. How much sweat, so much sweetness.

3. He that has a good Stomach, does not desire much Sauce; a man of a weak
Stomach eats little meat.

4. A small Shop sometimes brings much profit.

^. Note, Adjectives when their signification belongt to men, are often used in
the Masculine Gender, without the word man or men, expressed in the Latin; and
such Adjectives may have another Adjective to agree with them.

1. Honest men do not violate their promises.

2. A good man, that imitateth the example of Christ, loves those that hate
him.

3. Bloody and deceitful men, dig their own Graves.

4. A wise man hates him, that admireth his own folly which others laugh at.

Note, Sometimes two Adjectives of contrary signification one to another,
belong both to one Substantive, but the Substantive is not twice repeated in
the English; nor must be expressed in Latin, but understood, and the latter
Adjective must agree with the Substantive as the former does.

1. Bigger Boys strive to keep under the less, i. e. the less Boys.

2. A smaller Army often conquereth a greater.

Note. And sometimes [one] supplieth the place of the Substantive after the
latter adjective, which [one] must have no Latin for it; only do with the
adjective as if it were alone, e. g.

1. A clean Book excels a dirty one.

2. A small Horse excels sometimes a bigger one.

Construction of Adjectives.
Adjectives Govern a Genitive.
Reg. 1. A Djectiva quae desiderium, notitiam, etc. The sign [of] after
adjectives, betokening desire, knowledge, remembrance, ignorance, forgetting,
care, fear, guilt, or any passion of the mind, requires the Surstantive (Noun
or Pronoun) following, to be put in the Genitive Case, e. g.

1. Those that are desirous of honor, are studious of learning, and of good
manners.

2. He that is mindful of the Master's commands, is not fearful of punishment.

3. I will be mindful of thee, till I be forgetful of my self.

4. Thou and I are guilty of the same Crime, but we have a mild Master, that
often forgiveth.

5. The richest man, careless of his affairs, is reduced to poverty.

6. I am clear from the crime that thou mentionedst.

Reg. 2. Adjectiva Verbalia in ax, etc.

Adjectives ending in [ax] derived of Verbs, and having [of] or [in] after
them, requires the Noun following to be put in the Genitive Case.

1. He that is bold of heart frighteth his Enemy, and escapes danger; but the
cowardly man is slain.

2. Most men are sagacious in their own profit; but who endeavors his
neighbor's good?

3. Fools are tenacious of their own intentions, they hear not the reason of
the wise; they are not capable of admonition.

Reg. 3. Nomina, Partitiva aut Party posita. Interrogativa quaedam and certa
numeralia, etc.

Reg. 4. Quibus addi possunt Comparativa and Superlativa, etc.

The Particles [of] or [among] after adjectives, which are called Partitives,
betokening part or some one of more, after Interrogatives; such as ask a
Question [as which,] [whether.] After Nouns of Number (one, two, three; first,
second, third) after adjectives of the Comparative or Superlative degree, after
all these [of] or [among] require the Substantive next following them; to be
put in the Genitive Case: with which Genitive Case such adjectives governing,
must agree in Gender, e. g.

1. Thou have chosen two companions, one of which is a fool; the other of them
is idle, and they will make thee incapable of study, if thou imitate them.

2. It is a difficult thing, Whether of the two parts shall I take?

3. He who is the most diligent among the Scholars, shall be the most excellent
of them all.

4. Both thy Brother and thou art valiant; but thou art the more courageous of
the two.

5. None of the Heathenish Gods delivered his worshippers.

6. Pylades and Oretes cherished a mutual love: none knows whether was the more
faithful of the two. Thou art my Pylades, the most trusty of all my friends.

Exc. 1. In alio tamen sensu Ablat. exigunt cum Prepositione. In alio vero
sensu Dat.

If a Noun of Number (an ordinal, first, second, third, or adverbs derived of
them) have the sign [to] after it, the Noun following that sign must be the
Dative Case, if the Particle [after] it must be the ablative, with a or ab.

1. Thou who art second to none in learning, yet sit forth after my
Brother: Which I greatly wonder-at. I am first after thee.

2. I love my Master best, next after God, who requires my whole heart.

Exc. 2. Usurpantur autem and cum, etc.

Sometimes [of] or among, after Nouns Partitives, etc is rendered by e ex with
an ablative, inter ante with an accusative.

Reg. 5. Interrogativum and ejus Redditivum, etc.

The Question and the Answer must be made by the same Case of a Noun, Pronoun,
or Participle, and the same Tense of a Verb that the Question is asked by, e. g.

1. Q. Who was it that went out?

A. My Sister.

2. Q. Whose Book have thou?

A. My Cousin 's.

3. Q. What have you lost?

A. My Inkhorn.

4. Q. What are Covetous men desirous of?

A. Money.

5. Q. Of whom am I mindful?

A. Your self.

6. What did you in the School?

A. Learn my Lesson, heard my Masters instructions.

7. Q. What will thou do in this matter?

A. Vindicate my Father's honor.

Exc. 1. Fallit haec Regula, etc.

Sometimes the word [whose] may be rendered in Latin by cujus ja jum, and in
such Case that Adjective must agree with the Substantive that stands with it in
the Question: and the Substantive which is the Answer to it, must be the
Gentive Case, e. g.

Q. Whose Garment is this?

A. My Father's.

Exc. 2. Aut per dictionem variae, etc.

When a Question is asked by a word which has diverse constructions, h. e. when
the Verb in the Question requires one Case of the Noun that stands with it in
the Question, and another of that which is in the answer, then the Substantives
must be each of them such as the Verb requires; not both the same Case.

Q. What fault does my Brother accuse me of?

Cujus criminis accusat me Frater?

A. Of most abominable things.

De turpissimis.

Exc. 3. Fallit denique cum per possessiva, etc.

When the Answer to a Question is the English of a Pronoun Possessive, meus,
tuus, suus, etc. it must not be made by the same Case with the Interrogative
word in the Question, but the same with a Noun Substantive therein, whatsoever
it be, agreeing with it in Case, Gender and Number, e. g.

1. Q. Whose Inkhorn have thou?

A. My own.

2. Q. Whose Key is that?

A. Thine.

3. Whose Paper do you take?

A. Our own.

In Interrogative Sentences, the accusative Case which must follow the Verb, or
any other Case that must be governed of it, usually stands before both the Verb
and its Nominative Case; the remembrance of which will be helpful in rendering
any of the former examples.

Note, 2. In Sentences where a Question is asked, if it be asked by a Verb
only, and no Pronoun interrogative in the Sentence, the Interrogative
Conjunction [ne] must be added to the Verb: but if there be a Pronoun
Interrogative, then [ne] must not be joined to the Verb; e. g.

1 Q. What have you done?

A. Made our Exercise.

2 Q. Have thou lost thine honor?

A. I have lost it, but I will regain it.

But if there be in the sentence [non], [nunquam], or almost any other Adverb;
or if there be not an Adverb, any other Pronoun beside an Interrogative, [ne]
must not be joined to the Verb, but to the Adverb or Pronoun, e g.

1. Did not Alexander behave himself valiantly, who alone leaped into a City
amongst his Enemies, when his own Soldiers were not with him?

2 Q. Will thou never cease to thirst after revenge, which dishonors a
Christian?

A. Christ commands to love our Enemies; and shall I, his Servant, despise my
Master's Laws? I will hereafter obey.

3. Shall this Drunkard bewitch thee? shall that Gamester entice thee?

And when [ne] is to be joined to the Verb, the Nominative Case must always be
after the Verb; e. g.

1 Q. Was Cicero the most eloquent of Orators?

2 Q. Did Virgil excel the other Latin Poets?

Adjectives governing a Dative Case.
Reg. 1. ADjectiva quibus commodum aut incommodum, etc.

Adjectives betokening profit or disprofit, meetness or unmeetness, pleasure or
displeasure, submitting, relation, due, friendship, hatred, resistance,
difficulty, likeness or unlikeness, and nearness; if a Noun come after them,
require it to be put in the Dative Case; e.g.

1. He that is guilty of theft, and yet denies his fault, is a liar, and is too
like the Devil.

2. Virtue is pleasant to the righteous, it is profitable to all that love it:
How foolish are they that will not traverse pleasant paths?

3. Reverence is due to God, the King of all the world: Honor is due to Kings,
because God has commanded that we be obedient to them.

4. He is near death, that is very sick, yet thinks himself well.

5. A loud noise is inconvenient for learners, it is prejudicial to study; it
is hard for one Boy to learn, whiles another that sits next him bawls. A silent
School is very helpful for learning.

Ex. quaedam ex his quae similitudinem significant, etc.

Par and similis have sometimes a Genitive Case of the Substantive coming after
them; which yet is not to be imitated, as equally regular with the Dative.

Natus, commodus, incommodus, etc.

Adjectives betokening profit, fitness, as aptus commodus; also natus, habilis,
promptus, opportunus, proclivis, assuetus, expositus, when any of these have a
Noun after them, which signifies the purpose, end, or thing [to] or [for]
which; they will rather have such a Noun to be put in the Accusative Case with
[ad] tho the same Adjective. If a Noun or Pronoun follow, betokening a person,
require a Dative.

1. I desire not to be near him, that is near to the top of wickedness.

2. That servant is not fit for me, that is unfit for labor; he is convenient
for me, that has strength and understanding convenient for work

3. He that is forward to vice, is exposed to the Devil's temptation: for that
enemy of mankind is ready to mischief, and rejoiceth when he finds a mind
moveable to wickedness. It is a lamentable thing that men of excellent wits are
most prone to wickedness.

Reg. 2. Huc referuntur Nomina ex Con, etc.

2. Nouns derived of others, and beginning with [con] require a Dative Case of
the Noun following them.

Many were Fellow Soldiers with Jason, when he fetched the Golden Fleece; many
were Companions with him, but he bore away the Glory of the Enterprise.

Note, Communis has usually after it a Dative, rarely a Genitive; and when two
persons or things follow it, with [and] between them, that [and] must not be
made by [et] but by cum with an Ablative.

Death is common to me and thee, to men and women, to young and old. The Grave
is an House common to all Creatures.

Note, 4. Alienus, immunis, proprius and superstes, require a Dative Case after
them, sometimes (but seldom) a Genitive: and sometimes alienus and immunis an
Ablative, with a Preposition [a] or [ab] Boys may indifferently make the Dative
or Ablative.

1. A Conscience free from Guilt laughs at false accusers; fear is proper to
offenders.

2. Glory surviveth good men: Death takes not their Crown away. Let us not
therefore practice wickedness, as if we were desirous after ignominy and
disgrace, the offspring of sin. We were born to greater things; we have Souls
capable of happiness: let us embrace Virtue, which will make happy whiles we
live, and for ever: but some men will always be far from noble desires; let
them have their sought ruin.

Adjectives governing an Accusative Case.
Reg. 1. MAgnitudinis mensura subjicitur, etc.

The Substantive betokening measure, and which usually in English comes before
(seldom after) these Adjectives, long, hard, thick, high, deep, big; such
Substantive must be put in the Accusative Case, to be governed of the
Adjective.

1. A Well fifty foot deep gives not good water, if it have bad Springs.

2. The walls of Babylon, a City of Chaldea, were two hundred foot high, some
write that they were three hundred foot, and seventy-five foot thick.

3. A Walk an hundred yards long, and five yards broad, which has Trees
planted on each side, is pleasant for those that would recreate themselves.

Exc. 1. Interdum and in Ablativo, etc.

The word of measure or quantity is sometimes put in the Ablative Case, seldom
in the Genitive.

Adjectives governing an Ablative Case.
Reg. 1. ADjectiva, quae ad Copiam, egestatemve pertinet, etc.

Adjectives that betoken plenty or wanting, as poor, destitute, empty, full,
rich, void, and suchlike (which have after them the signs [of] or [in] require
the Noun following such signs to be put into the Ablative Case.

1. He whose Bags are empty of money, has an House empty of friends, and a
Coat full of Rents.

2. The Court, which is full of flatterers, is pernicious to a Prince; tho he
be rich in substance, abundant in honors.

3. A journey an hundred miles long, wearieth an Horse that has not his belly
moderately full of provender: for while he is desirous of meat, he goes
slowly; but if a strong and well-fed horse refuse to put forth his strength, a
whip and spur make him mindful of his work and duty. Laziness has need of
spurs.

Exc. Interdum and Genitivo, etc.

The Genitive Case is many times read after such Adjectives, and Boys may do
the like; but they are rather in prose to be accustomed to the confinement of
the Ablative.

Reg. 2. Nomina diversitatis ablativum, etc.

The English word [diverse] or [different] rendered in Latin by alter, alius, or
diversus, requires the Substantive following, whether Noun or Pronoun, to be
put in the Ablative Case, with the Preposition [a] or [ab].

1. My Brother is of a very bad nature, and far different from my father, who
is of a good disposition, and rich in good endowments of mind, tho poor in
estate.

2. Children are not always like their parents; they are sometimes quite
different from them.

Reg. 2. Nonnunquam etiam Dativum, etc.

Rule 2. Diversus for different, has sometimes a Dative. A woman contrary to
this.

Reg. 3. Adjectiva regunt Ablativum, etc.

Rule 3. Adjectives govern an Ablative Case of the word, that signifies the
instrument [wherewith], the cause [why] or the manner [how] a thing is done.

1. My Master's face was greatly changed, when he found his only-beloved Son
guilty of a lie; it was sometimes pale with anger, afterward it was red with
heat of fury: and in the mean time his Son was trembling for fear of punishment.

2. He that is only a Christian in pretense, who in the mean while is an
hypocrite in heart, is an enemy to his own soul: for tho he be subtle at
dissimulation amongst men, he shall not deceive the Almighty.

Reg. 4. Forma vel modus rei, etc.

Rule 1. Substantives also have sometimes after them an Ablative of another
Substantive, which betokens the manner how, or the reason why the former is, or
is called such.

My Master has been a father for wholesome counsel; he that is my parent by
nature, and whose son I am by birth, took not more care of me. But I have been
a Servant in name, but a Rebel in deed.

Reg. 5. Dignus, indignus praeditus, etc.

Rule 5. Adjectives which have usually after them the sign [of] or [with] or
[upon] require the Substantive following them to be the Ablative Case.

1. Those are unworthy of the Glory of Heaven, that do not think Virtue worthy
of love; who are not content with the pleasures that Virtue gives.

2. I relying upon thy honesty, neglected mine own safety; for thou void of
that, deceivedst me.

3. A Son endowed with excellent wit, rejoiceth his Father, whose good example
he imitateth, whose commands he observes; he is never trembling for fear, for
he provokes not his father's anger; he is always mindful of his duty; he is
like a staff to his fathers old age.

Nota, Horum Nonnulla Genitivum, etc.

Note, In Authors dignus and indignus are sometimes read with a Genitive Case
after them; but that is not for the Boy's imitation, (only they may need to
understand it) therefore we give no examples of that Government.

Reg. 6. Comparativa cum exponuntur, etc.

Rule 6. Adjectives of the comparative degree, they have [in] [by] or [than]
after them; if the Latin word [quam] for [than] be left out, require the
Substantive following to be put in the Ablative Case; e. g.

1. Thy lesser brother is more learned than thou by far, he is wiser than his
teachers by many degrees.

2. My book is cleaner than thine by much, and yet thine is newer than mine.

Note, 1. If [quam] be expressed in the Latin for the English word [than], then
the word following [than] must be of such Case as the Substantive which went
before the Comparative Adjective.

1. Thy Father is richer than mine, and thou will have a greater Portion than
I; nevertheless I am content with mine own condition, I am not desirous of thy
wealth, because I desire Virtue, which (I think) is better than riches.

2. He that has a good conscience, is more safe than a City encompassed with
Walls; for a calm mind will bear more tempests than the strongest bulwark.

Note, 2. [Than] must sometimes be made only by [quam], ( not by the Ablative,
and [quam] left out); viz. when the Substantive which follows [than] is not
compared with that which went next before the Comparative Adjective, or with
which the Comparative Adjective agrees, but with something at a farther
distance from it; e. g.

1. My father has an handsomer Horse than your father: he bought him yesterday.

2. My Brother is like my Uncle in the shape of his face, and in the color of
his hair; but he is very unlike in his manners: he is the most wicked of all
our family; he is prone to all vices, accustomed to all evils, unworthy of my
father's love; relying upon my mother's over love and bounty, he spends money
lavishly; he acts as if he were void of reason; he understands nothing beside
hypocrisy: for whilst he is so bad indeed, he is a Saint in appearance; no man
is of a baser disposition than he; none commits greater faults than he.

Reg. 6. Adjectiva pretii regunt Ablat.

Rule 6. Adjectives, whose signification betokens buying or selling, such as
dear, cheap, etc. ( whose English has after it [at], [of], or [for],) require
an Ablative Case after them.

1. A poor Cottage, dear of Twenty shillings, many times contains a man of
great virtue; and a man of small estate has often a contented mind.

2. A Garment cheap at an hundred pounds, sometimes covers a man whose wit were
dear at a Groat. Virtue and Wisdom are better Ornaments than gay Clothes.

Reg. 7. Adject. proprietatem, vel passionem corporis and animi denotantia,
reg. Abl.

Rule 7. Adjectives signifying some property or passion of body or mind,
require the Substantive following next them, to be put in the Ablative Case; e.
g.

1. A valiant Soldier, that exposes his life for the sake of his Sovereign,
bears the strokes of his enemies; he is sometimes wounded in his head and
limbs; he is sometimes sick of a Fever, but he is never feeble in mind, tho he
be weak in body; courage remains, when strength is lost.

A good man is unquiet in his mind, whilst he taketh-notice-of other men's sins;
he desires the happiness of those that neglect their own; they are slow of
heart, and see not; they are void of understanding; they desire none of God's
Commandments; they pray not; but God sometimes hears the Prayers of the
righteous for them.

Construction of Pronouns.
Reg. 1. HEC Possession. meus, tuus, suus, etc.

Rule 1. The English words [my] or [mine], [thy] or [thine], [our], [your],
when they note Possession, must be rendered by the Possessive Pronouns, meus,
tuus, noster, vester: but when they may with as good sense be turned into [of
me], [of thee], etc. and it is indifferent in the English, which you use; yet
it is not alike in Latin, but must be rendered by the Genitive Case of the
Primitive; e. g.

1. My Picture is not like me.

2. That is indeed thine Image, because thou boughtest it; but it is not the
Image of thee, it is more beautiful than thy face by many degrees.

3. Thy desire of me is stronger than my desire of thee; thou love me,
because I am profitable to thee; but thou art unworthy of my love, because thou
art void of all Virtue.

Reg. 2. Nostrum and Vestrum, etc.

Rule 2. Nostrum and vestrum, not nostri and vestri, are used in the Genitive
Case Plural, after Adjectives which govern a Genitive Case, especially
Partitives, Comparatives, and Superlatives; e. g.

1. The younger of us is more learned than the elder of you, who are never
mindful of your duty.

2. Every one of you will be punished, but each of us shall be praised: you all
despise the School-laws, but we observe them.

Reg. 3. Sui and suus reciproca, etc.

Rule 3. The several Cases of the Pronoun Primitive [sui] are used for the
English word [him] or [them], when the Particle [self] or [selves], is either
joined to [him] or [them], or is understood, and may be expressed; and the
Possessive suus for [his or [their] when [own] is or may be with it; e. g.

1. Every man loves those that are like himself, and despises those that are
hurtful to him: Nature teaches to love our Friends, but Religion teaches to
love our Enemies.

2. My Father sold his own Horse, and neglected his journey which he designed,
because my mother is sick of a Fever, and we fear her Death; my Father
testifies greatest love; he is always near her, and bewaileth waileth her
sickness so greatly, that we fear my father's death also. Sorrow is an heavy
burden, which sometimes kills him that suffers it.

Note, When the Particles [self], [selves], or [own], neither are, nor may be
added, then [his] is made by [ejus], [their] by [eorum], the Genitive Cases
[eum], [eos], for [him] or [them]; e. g.

1. All men hate his manners, who speaks that which he does not think.

2. Some are more prone to Vice than others, and some strive more to conceal
those Vices that they commit, than others; hypocrites sin secretly, men see not
their wickedness; but God sees their hypocrisy, the most private of all sins,
and will punish them.

3. God blasteth his estate that despises his parents; Providence does not
prosper their labors, that neglect their best friends.

Rule 4. [Ipse] and [idem] are of all persons, according to the person of the
Noun or Pronoun to which they belong.

Reg. 5. Ille tum usurpatur, etc.

Rule 5. [Ille] is used for he or that, when we speak of any person or thing
with respect; [Iste] when we speak of him or that which we despise; e. g.

1. I scorn him that behaveth himself proudly; but I admire him, who tho he be
great and rich, yet is of humble behavior.

2. Who does not laugh at that man's folly, that despises that honor which
great actions procure, which the praise of wise men gives, and only desires
to obtain the shouts of the unconstant common people, whose words are more vain
than the wind, who quickly hate the same man that before they loved?

Reg. 6. Hic and ille cum ad duo Anteposita, etc.

Rule 6. When in a former sentence, we have occasion to mention two
Substantives, (either persons or things), and afterward would speak something
concerning them by these expressions, [this], [that], [the one], [the other],
[the former], [the latter]; in such sentences, [this], the one, the latter,
must be rendered by hic, to have respect to the latter Substantive mentioned,
[that]; the other, the former, by ille, to refer to the first mentioned, and to
agree with them in Gender accordingly; e. g.

1. Virtue and Vice divide the whole World between them; this has a greater
part, but that is the more desirable; the one deceives, the other makes
happy; the former gives true pleasure, the latter brings assured misery.

2. Will thou choose Wisdom rather than Folly? the one will make thee
honorable, the other procures contempt: hard study and industry procure
wisdom; labor thou therefore, otherwise after many years instruction, thou
shall be a fool.

Construction of Verbs.
Verbs requiring a Neminative Case
Reg. 1. VErba Substantiva, sum, forem, fio, etc.

Rule 1. Verbs Substantive, sum, forem, sio, existo, Verbs Passive of calling,
as nominor, appellor, dicor, vocor, nuncupor, scribor, salutor, habeor,
existimor, putor, videor, nascor, require a Nominative Case of the Noun
following them.

1. Our Master is diligent, but I have been hitherto an idle Boy; I have
imitated the Example of Drones; I have lost my Parents love, who always
provided all things necessary for me; I have been unworthy of their care: but I
will deserve to be called the most diligent of all the Scholars for the-time-to
come.

2. The Lion is accounted the most generous of Beasts, because he is more
placable than others; Men fear his roaring, but he seems merciful, for he
hurts not his Enemy submitting. The bloody minds of many men are more
barbarous than wild Beasts.

3. Man is a Creature of upright body; He walks upright whilst he is in his
journey; when night comes, he lies flat, and sleeps; when old age
diminishes his strength, his body bends downward toward the earth; at
length he leaves his earthly part in the Grave, and his Soul ascends to
Heaven, where he dwells for ever.

Reg. 2. Infinitum quoque utrinque eosdem casus, etc.

Rule 2. Any of those Verbs, if they be put into the Infinitive Mood, require
the same Case after, which they had next before them; tho it be a Dative,
Accusative, or Ablative; e. g.

Silence makes a man to be esteemed wise; Talkativeness causes a pratler to be
thought foolish.

Reg. 3. Denique omnia fere verba, etc.

Rule 3. Any Verb must have a Nominative Case after it, if an Adjective come
next to it, which agrees with the Nominative Case to the Verb; e g.

1. I came first, and therefore I was praised, and shall be well rewarded;
thou, who always come last, losest thine honor, and art reckoned a sluggard.

2. Hypocrites pray loud; but the silent requests of the righteous are heard;
their desires shall be satisfied, whiles hypocrites with all their pretended
Piety shall perish.

Note, An Adverb (ending in [ly] coming after a Verb) may sometimes elegantly
be rendered by an Adjective of the Nominative Case; e g.

1. He that learneth diligently, shall soon excel his idle Companions, that
play always.

2. A good man dies willingly, because he has lived pioussy. An honest life
causes a quiet death: but he that is mindful of past wickedness, fears
eternity.

The pleasures of sin then yield no refreshment; the expectation of future
torment is dreadful to a guilty soul, which despised Heaven before, and shall
lose it irreparably.

Verbs Personals governing a Genitive.
Reg. 1. SUm genitivum postulat, etc.

The Verb Sum, when it betokens the part, duty, property or possession,
requires the Noun following to be put in the Genitive Case.

1. The Earth is the Lord's.

2. It Is the duty of children to observe instruction.

3. It Is the part of fools to laugh always.

4. It Is the wise-man's property to hold-his-peace.

5. It Is the part of Kings to defend their Subjects; it is the duty of Subjects
to be obedient to Kings: The world would perish without Government and Order.

Exc. 1. Excipiuntur hi Nominativi meum, etc.

1. If the English of any of the Pronoun possessives come after Sum, without a
Substantive coming after them, such Pronoun must not be the Genitive Case, but
must agree in Case, Gender and Number with the Nominative Case to the Verb.

1. That Paper was mine, but now it is my brother's.

2. The Kingdom of Heaven is theirs that are poor in spirit; it shall be ours,
if we observe God's holy Commandments: let us be mindful of our duty, ready to
every good work; let us live soberly, righteously, and godly.

Exc. 2. At hic subintelligi videtur officium, etc.

2. If with the English of the Pronoun possessive be joined the word duty,
part, or property, the Pronoun must be the Nominative Case, and always the
Neuter Gender.

1. It is thy duty to do whatsoever thy Father commands.

2. It is every-ones part to look to himself. The world is full of Enemies, and
all men have need of caution. It is our part to exercise the greatest prudence.

Other Pronouns, as Relatives, Interrogatives, compound Pronouns, etc. have the
Construction of Nouns, i. e. are put in the Genitive Case.

1. Let us love God, whose we are.

2. It is not any ones place to reprove others, but theirs that are unblameable.

Note, Sometimes the English of a Substantive which ought to be the Genitive
Case governed of Sum, may be turned into an Adjective derived of the
Substantive; e. g. It is the part of a Woman, muliebre est, or mulieris. It is
the part of a man, virile est, or viri.

Reg. 2. Verba aestimandi Genitivo gaudet.

2. Verbs of valuing, estceming, or making account of, require a Genitive Case
of that word which betokens the price or value of the thing, and which tells us
at what rate, or how much.

1. Those value the honor of God at nothing, that call themselves Christians,
and defire to be accounted Saints, but in-the-mean-while are like Beasts, and
are given to all vices.

2. Riches are esteemed little, when men see better things. The light of the
Sun dimmeth the lesser shining of a Candle.

3. I value not him a rush, that is a Friend to every body.

Exc. Aestimo vel Genitivum, etc.

2. But the Verb Aestimo it self will have either a Genitive or an Ablative of
the value.

1. I have a Horse that I value at forty pound.

2. I esteem a faithful Friend at a great price.

Reg. 3. Verba accusandi damnandi, etc.

3. Verbs of accasing, condemning, blaming, admsnishing, acquitting, or
clearing, will have a Genitive of the crime or thing, which crime has commonly
of, for, er from before it, in the English.

1. One Boy accuses another of idleness; the Master hears their tales; but
punishes only those, whom he thinks guilty, and worthy of punishment.

2. The Master's praise makes some Boys diligent, it moves them greatly,
sometimes when he passes by faults, his clemency persuades them to love him,
and to observe his laws, which are good for them. Kindly to warn ingenious
minds of their faults, frequently reduces them to obedience without severity.

3. When a murderer obtains a pardon, he escapes the Gallows, but he is not
cleared from guilt: but Saints receiving remission of sins, become guiltless in
the sight of God, as if they had not sinned. The blood of Christ washes
defiled Souls.

Exc. 1. Vertitur hic Genitivus, etc.

Sometimes the Crime is put in the ablative Case, sometimes with, but usually
without a Preposition.

Exc. 2. Uterque, Nullus, Alter, Neuter, etc.

If the English of any of these words, viz. Uterque, nullus, alter, neuter,
alius, ambo, or of an adjective of the Superlative degree which has no
Substantive with it, come after Verbs of accusing, etc. the Latin of those
words must never be in any other but the ablative Case.

1. Our Manservant was accused of theft and of drunkenness, but he denied;
whiles in the mean time he was guilty of both; and his lying cleared him of
neither.

2. A guilty conscience has no need of Witnesses: it accuses it self of most
heinous things; the man is miserable, whom Conscience condemns.

3. Q. Of what crime art thou convicted?

A. Of none.

4. Q. Of what duty did our Master admonish our Form when I was absent? Did he
admonish of diligence about our Studies, or of Godliness?

A. Of both.

Reg. 4. Satago, misereor, miseresco, etc.

And Verbs of remembering and forgetting, require the Noun following to be the
Genitive Case of the person or thing pitied, remembered, or forgotten.

1. I pity my Brother, I pity his folly; for he has wasted all the Portion
which my Father left; and now he begs from door to door.

2. I remember the report that I heard, but I do not regard it; he that fears
misery before that it come, forgets his own manhood, and becomes like a
Child.

3. A Judge, whose Sentence accuses him of injustice, is unprofitable to his
Country. A just Judge remembers mercy and justice together, he never
sorgetteth right and law; but never condemns the innocent.

Note. 1. Reminiscor, obliviscor, Nemini, etc. are read also with an accusative
after them.

Note, 2. Nemini sometimes signifies to make mention of, and has then an
Ablative after it, with the Preposion de.

Reg. 5. Potior aut Genitivo aut Ablativo, etc.

5. Potior to obtain or get Possession of, governs either an Ablative or a
Genitive.

1. A Scholar that obtains his Master's favor, is more happy than he that is
idle, who loses his honor, wastes his time, and continues a blockhead, tho
play be pleasant to him a little while.

2. He that remembers instructions, gets profit; he that forgets them,
obtains no advantage. It is the duty of Boys to attend whilst Masters teach;
labor spent in vain wearieth the most industrious and strongest workman; but
work succeeding according to expectation, delights.

Verbs Personals governing a Dative Case.
Reg. 1. OMnia Verba acquisitive posita, etc.

All Verbs govern a Dative Case after them, of the Noun which has to or for
before it, e. g.

1. He is of a low and ignoble spirit, that only lives for himself, and not for
his friends; we were born for the public good, generous men are forward to all
works profitable for the Commonwealth, they neglect themselves in comparison of
the Country.

2. The wicked lays a snare for the man that is more righteous than him; but
God cares for his Servants, and preserves to them their lives; he lays up
everlasting happiness for them.

Exc. 1. Verbs betokening motion or readiness with [to] after them, require an
Accusative always with the Preposition [ad.]

1. He that plays, when he ought to go to School, endures severest
punishments, and besides finds his labor more wearisome, when he returns
to his Study, because of his past idleness.

1. Man hastneth to his end; whiles he is strong of body, and sprightly in
mind, he is many times near his Death; innumerable dangers encompass him, one
of which brings him to the Grave; the longest life is short.

Exc. 2. Verbs of exhorting, provoking, inclining, calling, belonging, and
loquor, have also an Accusative after them with ad, never a Dative.

1. God inviteth sinners to Eternal Happiness, he calls them to repentance:
he speaks most graciously unto them: he has prepared for Penitent Sinners
all things that belong to blessedness, all things that they can desire: but
their hearts are hard; all arguments move not till God's appointed time.

2. Remember, Oh foolish Boys, your Master's words, he exhorts you to
industry, which is beneficial to your selves, your pains shall produce great
gains: he spends his own strength for your benefit; be not your own enemies.

Reg. 2. Imprimis Verba significantia, etc.

2. Verbs of profiting, helping, pleasing, and the contrary to them, require a
Dative Case after them.

1. He that only pleases himself, does not profit himself, but prejudiceth his
own honor and happiness, because he displeases God his Greator, who calls
his Servants to abstinence, and denial of themselves.

2. A Blockhead answers not the care of his Master, who wastes his strength
in vain, whilst he teaches a Boy, whose understanding is incapable of
learning; Parents accuse the Teacher of neglect, because they see no
proficiency; but tho fools by Nature sometimes become wise by Art and
Education, yet every Mind is not brought to Wisdom.

Exc. Laedo, offendo, to hurt, and delecto, to delight, will have always an
accusative Case after them, and also the Englist Verbs, tend, avail, conduce,
make to or for an Accusative with the Preposition ad.

1. The School delights diligent Boys, for in it they have a good Master that
teaches them; they have good Books, which they read; they have beloved
School-fellows, whose mutual Societies helps their Studies; they are free
from dangers, to which Boys playing are exposed; they are not near those evil
Examples that entice idle Boys; they get Virtue and Wisdom, which they esteem
more excellent than play.

2. Temperance conduces to length of Life, it makes for the preservation of
health; luxury pleases the palate, but it offends the stomach, which when
laden with various meats, turns not them all into nourishment, but into matter
of Diseases: from intemperance proceed headaches, Fevers, Apoplexies,
Consumptions, and almost all kinds of Diseases; a Glutton hastes more swiftly
than others to his Grave.

Reg. 3. Verba comparandi, etc.

3. Verbs of comparing or equlling, require (besides an Accusative of the thing
or person compared) a Dative of the Noun next following them, which has [to]
or [with] before it.

1. If the longest life be compared to Eternity, it is very short; if the
happiest condition be compared with Heaven, it is miserable, and not worthy of
our desires; Earthly Happiness sometimes does harm; but Heaven is altogether
desirable.

2. If we compare the number of good men to the multitude of the wicked, it is
small; tho they shall be increased, they shall never be made equal with them;
the Enemies of God will be more numerous than his Servants.

Note, Sometimes the Ablative Case with cum, sometimes the Accusative with ad,
is found after Verbs of comparing.

Reg. 4. Verba dandi and reddendi, etc.

4. Verbs betokening to give, restore, and return, (when it is a Verb active)
require an accusative Case of the thing given, and a Dative of the person [to
whom], e.g.

Give-ye those things to Caesar, which are Caesar's, unto God the things which
be God's; God will give those men a reward that please him, and those whom he
has set-up Governors of the World. He, that rebelleth against Princes,
displeases God.

2. I returned my Master the Book which I borrowed. He lent it me, and it was
my duty to read it, not to keep it; tho Books delight me very much, I ought to
restore them to the owners; the Fables pleased my fancy, the Phrases conduced
to my advantage; he willingly gives me any thing that makes for my good; what
friend shall I compare with him, who is always ready to mine assistance.

Reg. 5. Haec variam habent, etc.

5. Some Verbs govern after them different Cases, as dono, a Dative of the
Person, and Accusative of the thing; or an Accusative of the Person, and
Ablative of the thing; insterno the same Tempore moderor, a Dative or an
Accusative, scribo, mitto a Dative or Accusative with ad; Consulo to give
Counsel, a Dative; to ask Counsel, an accusative; and many others, some in the
same signification, some in a different sense, which may be learned more fully
by experience.

Reg. 6. Verba promittendi, solvendi, sidendi, etc.

6. Verbs betokening to owe, promise or pay, and Verbs of believing, crediting,
committing, govern a Dative Case after them, of the person to whom, with an
accusative of the thing.

1. I owe him money, because I promised to pay to him another man's debt, but
at present I my self have need of money, that I may pay my own Creditors, whom
I will pay first.

2. Thou have often promised, but I will never believe thee; it is a dangerous
thing for any to break his promise; for no body will believe him afterward;
his words are unworthy of credit that once deceives.

3. Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ paid the debt which we had contracted; it
is a most righteous thing that we please him, who has redeemed us; let us
return him the greatest praises, let his precepts delight us, let his blameless
life be our Example.

4. Thy mind is like a Sieve; I will not commit secrets to thy trust, thou have
promised secrecy, but thou forgettest thy promise. I pity thine imprudence;
thou will never obtain the love of thy Friends, if thou be guilty of that
folly. He that betrayeth his own secrets, is a fool; but he that reveals his
Friends counsels, is treacherous, most worthy of hatred.

Reg. 7. Verba imperandi and nunciandi, etc.

7. Verbs of commanding ( except jubeo) Verbs of telling or speaking to (
except loquor) must have after them a Dative Case of the person, and an
accusative of the thing.

1. God commanded Abraham the Father of the Faithful, to sacrifice Isaac his
only Son; he willingly returned the promised seed to him that gave it; But the
Angel of God suffered not him to slay the Child, but told him how acceptable
his designed obedience was to God.

2. God speaks to sinners sometimes most gently, that he may draw them to
obedience; he tells them of that blessed life, which he has prepared for his
servants: sometimes he speaks more terrible things, and tells them of the
abyss which shall be the reward of sin, yet his promises and threatenings move
not stubborn minds.

Reg. 8. Verba Obsequendi, Repugnandi, etc.

8. Verbs of obeying, meeting, helping, ( except juvo) resisting, submitting,
require the Substantive following, (whether a person or a thing) to be put in
the Dative Case.

1. He that resists his own evil inclination, obeys God: the Captain that
conquereth a stubborn enemy, is worthy of Laurel; but he that subdueth himself,
is worthy of greater praise; for man's heart is more obstinate than the
proudest foe.

2. They that disagree with their Neighbors, procure to themselves much
hatred; quarrels profit no body, they hurt all men: peace is the most desirable
of blessings: a man of a good spirit meets his enemy without hatred, and
returns him kindness instead of revenge.

Note. Repugno to resist, governs a Dative Case. Oppugno of the same
signification, an accusative.

Reg. 9. Verba minandi and irascendi, etc.

9. [Irascor] to be angry with, governs a Dative Case, [Minor to threaten], a
Dative of the Person, and an accusative of the judgment or punishment threatened
with.

1. God is angry with the wicked, and threatens them with most dreadful
torments; it is not an unjust thing that those who offend an infinite God of
infinite goodness, suffer endless misery; those sinners are happy whom God
meets, and stops in the way of wickedness.

2. I am angry at thy sloth, beware lest thou feel the punishment which I
threatened thee with; offenders are most worthy of recompense.

Reg. 10. [Ignosco], [pareo], [indulgeo], govern always a Dative, and no other
Case; [remitto] signifying to pardon, or forgive, has always relation to a
fault or offense mentioned after it, and requires that word of the offense to
be made always in the accusative Case; and if besides that, a person be
expressed, the person must be the Dative.

1. A merciful Prince pardons disobedient Subjects; but if they pay him not
due thanks, and resist his will afterward, they are called ungrateful; and
though he forgave the former offense, yet he will not pardon them their
ingratitude, for they are unworthy of his Clemency. The gracious Prince, whose
heart is full of mercy, yet sometimes punishes, lest his patience encourage
offenders to greater attempts.

2. A Master passeth-by the Scholar's neglect; but if he always forgive him, at
length he becomes bold, and incapable of amendment; the best amongst Boys
transgresses; but crimes often repeated, are signs of a stubborn mind.

Reg. 11. Sum cum compositis, etc.

11. Sum requires a Dative Case after it, of the Noun following it, which has
to or for before it, and sometimes when such sign is not expressed; so that the
Noun following it, seems to be the Nominative, that Nominative may be turned
into a Dative.

1. Virtue is for an ornament; no part of beauty is wanting to him that is
endowed with it.

2. A Wall is a defense, but the courage of the Inhabitants is the strongest
Bulwark.

Reg. 12. Dativum postulant Verba, etc.

12. Verbs compounded with the Adverbs satis, been, male, and the Preposition,
prae, ad, con, sub, ante, post, ob, in, inter, super, require a Dative Case
after them.

1. I prefer Virtue before Gold, because it is better by much; money cannot
satisfy the mind of men, but virtue is a portion to it self.

2. Cruel Lords lay heavy burdens upon their slaves, and never pity their
weakness.

3. He that puts a feeble horse under an heavy load, is an enemy to himself,
for his horse will be wearied, and the burden will be left in the road.

4. Vice creeps upon us under the name of virtue; prodigality takes to it
self the name of bounty; covetousness desires to be called thriftiness,
cruelty exercises its bitterness under the show of magnanimity, revenge seems
like greatness of spirit; pride calls it self neatness; all vices sometimes
bear the show of virtue.

The Sun shines without difference upon the just and unjust; but the just have
the light of God's countenance, which yields them greater comfort than the
enlightner of the day.

Exc. 1. Sed praeeo, praevinco, praecedo, etc.

1. Praeeo, praevinco, praecedo, praecurro praeverto, will have an accusative,
Allatro, antesto, attendo, condono, illudo, insulto, praestolor, a Dative or an
Accusative.

1. That Scholar that excels his companion, shall stand before him.

2. God preventeth the designs of men, many times they act things quite
contrary to that which they purposed.

3. Envious Zoilus barketh at famous men, that merit praise, and excel him; but
the losty spirit mocks at envy.

Exc. 2. Confero, conduco, accedo, applico, converto, govern rather an
accusative with ad, than a Dative, e. g.

1. He that comes near-to God, receives the good things which he asks.

2. He that turns his affections from the folly of sin, to the wisdom of
righteousness, is wise.

3. A Physician applies different remedies to different bodies; the same
medicine that eases one man, prejudiceth another, though both be sick of the
same disease.

Exc. 3. Aspicio, invenio, admiror, alloquor, adjuvo, invado, obeo, subeo,
occido, adjuro, impedio, require only an accusative Case after them, e. g.

1. He that finds wisdom, is richer than the greatest Prince.

2. Princes greedy of glory, invade foreign Countries; but those that are
content with their own Kingdoms, live most quietly.

3. Some men not only despise the Law of God, but hinder others, that seem
forward to virtue; they are of devilish wickedness, that not only destroy
themselves, but are like the Devil, because they tempt others, and invite them
to eternal misery.

Exc. 4. Interdico [to forbid], governs a Dative of the person, and ablative of
the thing. Supersedeo only ablative.

Reg. 12. Est pro habeo Dativum, etc.

Rule 12. When you find the English word have, which seems as if it ought to be
made by habeo, you may make use of the Verb sum, es fui, instead of habeo: and
then the word that seems to be the Nominative Case to habeo, must be the
Dative, governed of sum; and the word which should have been the accusative,
(if it had been made by habeo) must be the Nominative, e. g.

1. The Smith has a black face, but his gain recompenceth his dirtiness; he
has white money. Men are willing to any labors, which produce profit; he that
will give men money, may persuade men to all undertakings.

2. Those men that have most money, obtain the greatest reverence amongst men:
Virtue is most worthy of honor, but riches are preferred-before Honesty. Few
understand the excellency of Virtue; but wise men esteem him whose mind is
adorned with the best wisdom, more than him whose storehouses are full of all
sorts of Treasures.

Note, Suppetit has the very same construction, and is used likewise for habeo.

Reg. 13. Sum cum multis aliis, etc.

Rule 13. Sum, do, duco, verto, tribuo, habeor, may have after them two Dative
Cases, one of which is of that Noun which should be the Nominative or
Accusative to follow the Verb, the other of a Noun which has to or for before
it, e. g.

1. A faithful Subject is a defense to the Prince, he resists him not, but
prefers his Prince's safety before his own life; he oeyeth his commands.

2. A broad Trench is a security to the Army; but neither valor nor walls are
able to preserve those, whose lives have come to their appointed measure.

3. Pleasure is accounted an happiness to him, whose mind unworthy things
satisfy; but the Soul of the wise is not content with earthly things.

Verbs governing an Accusative Case.
Reg. 1. VErba Transitiva, etc.

Rule. 1. Verbs Transitives, (and such are all those by which the Question
whom? or what? may be asked) whether Active, Deponent, or Common, require the
word answering to the Question whom or what, to be of the accusative Case, e. g.

1. Shake-off sloth, which is the worst enemy to Boys, and Men; leave-off
vanity and play, which only please the fancy, they profit not the mind; apply
thy self to thy Studies, which will give thee a Crown of honor; let not idle
Boys Examples hinder thy diligence; obey thy Master, and thou shall be free
from fear.

2. Speak few words: it is not meet for Boys to talk; silence becomes youth;
hearken to all things which the Master speaks; remember his words, and forget
not his Admonitions, which are profitable for thee.

Reg. 2. Quinetiam Verba quamlibet, etc.

Rule 2. Verbs Neuter may have an accusative Case after them, when the
Substantive, which comes after them, is of a like signification with the Verb,
e. g.

1. He that serves the Devil, serves an hard service; the pleasures of sin
are full of bitterness: but he that pleases God, is his own Friend; the
Service of God is the most perfect liberty.

2. Scholars live a wearisome life (as they think), but idleness is the cause,
why study is irksome to them; the pathe of Learning are smooth; but slothful
Drones think-them rough and unpassable.

Reg. 3. Sunt quae figurate, etc.

Rule 3. Verbs betokening an Exercise of some sense, as oleo, spiro, sono,
govern an accusative Case after them, though they be Neuters, and never any
other Case.

1. The Drunkard smells of wine, the proud man smells of perfumes.

2. The angry man breaths revenge against his Enemies; he thirsteth-after the
destruction of those that oppose him, and injure him.

Reg. 4. Verba rogandi docendi, etc.

Rule 4. Verbs of entreating, teaching, admonishing, and induo, and celo,
require two accusative Cases after them, one of a person, another of a thing.

1. Ask pardon of God, who forgiveth penitent sinners; there is no one that
sins not, the best of men sin frequently, and have need of pardon.

2. A Saint relying upon the merits of Christ; is thousand times more happy
than the man whose mind is full of vain hopes, while he trusts to his own
righteousness; Christ teaches Christians faith, besides obedience.

3. He that concealeth his faults from men, and puts over his crimes a
covering of lies, displeases God, and adds a greater fault to his other
impieties.

Rogandi Verba, etc.

After Verbs of asking, the accusative Case of the person, may be turned into
an ablative, with a or ab.

1. Ask not a kindness of thine Enemy, lest he injure thee, when thou expectest
benefit; he is a fool, that trusts his Enemy, though he smile upon him, the
gift of Enemies are deceitful; it is a dangerous thing to trust every Friend.

2. A Beggar beggeth a farthing of a covetous man, but he has greater need
than the poorest Servant; he is not content with his present abundance, ^^t is
greedy after greater riches; the largest treasures, which satisfy not the
desire, do not keep-off poverty: he is poor that coveteth more; he that is
covetous, is poorer than a Beggar.

Rule 5. Those Verbs Passives will have an accusative Case after them, whose
adjectives would have two accusatives.

Thou shall be taught better manners, for thou art of saucy behavior, which
will not be concealed from the Master, who will be very angry with thee.

Verbs governing an ablative Case.
Reg. 1. QUodvis Verbum admittit Ablativum, etc.

Rule. 1. All manner of Verbs require the ablative Case of a Noun following
them, which betokens the instrument wherewith a thing is to be done, without a
Preposition, which Noun has commonly the sign with or by before it in the
English.

1. He that corrects a Child with the Rod, does him good; but he that spares
him always, is guilty of all the Crimes which the foolish youth commits
afterward: They are Enemies to Children, that suffer them to do evil
unpunished; It is a more desirable thing to recall Children to obedience by
severity, than to let loose the reins upon their necks.

2. Learning is attained by Study, not by sloth and sleep, which blunt the edg
of the wit; intermission helps the mind, but idleness hurts it; he that
studieth with his utmost endeavor, comes to wisdom.

Note, If to the English Particle [with] together may be joined with safety to
the Sense, then [with] signifies company, and must be rendered in Latin by
[cum], with an ablative case after it.

1. He that walks friendly with his Friend, and yet suddenly stabs him with a
Dagger, is like the Syrenes, which with their sweet Music allure men to
destruction.

2. With flattering words a wicked Woman enticeth a silly youth, who relying
upon hopes of pleasure, goes with her, but at-length his flesh and his liver
are consumed with an hidden fire; he perishes together with her whom he loved,
and shall after this life be tormented with her with most sharp tortures; the
just rewards of his forbidden actions.

Rule 2. Verbs require after them an ablative Case, of the Noun which betokens
the cause, or reason, or motive; which has at or for before it.

1. The Master that beats a Boy, his Scholar, for the sake of his own Son,
before he have examined the matter, is unjust; whilst he waxed pale with rage
against him whom he punishes, he becomes guilty of rashness: A prudent Master
hears before-that he judges, he is impartial.

2. The man that is contemptible for the shape of his Body, is oftentimes
honorable for the endowments of his mind.

3. A man of true valor is not moved at the report of war, he undertaketh it
upon just reasons, and prefers his honor before his life.

Rule 5. Verbs have after them an ablative case of the Noun Substantive, which
betokens the manner how, and has the sign with before it.

1. A small spark raises a great fire with strange increase, it pierces
between the parts of matter with wonderful subtilty.

2. The Doctrine of the Gospel, after the death of Christ, the Author of it,
overspread the World with wonderful speed; it conquered the hearts of men with
invincible force: with great success it opposed the Heathenish Idols. The
Devils were angry at the overthrow of their Kingdom, but their lying Oracles
yielded to the power of God, who began to fulfill to Christ the promise, which
he had given him; and now Paganism is almost extinguished.

Ablativo causae and modi, etc.

Sometimes the Noun betokening the cause, is put into the ablative Case with
prae.

He that languisheth for thirst, gives a man greater thanks, that offers him
water, than if a Prince gave him a Crown; those things are most acceptable,
which answer the present necessity.

Rule 4. After any Verbs, the ablative case is to be used of a Noun, which
betokens the Original, Descent, Country, or part affected, either Body or Mind.

1. A Boy of an ingenious temper is troubled in mind, when he has provoked his
Parents to anger, and desires nothing more than the recovering of their favor;
but a Boy accustomed to the practice of disobedience, laugheth-at reproof.

2. That Child is happy, that by descent proceeds from good and pious
Parents; but he is more happy, that also imitateth the good Example of his
Ancestors.

Reg. 5. Quibuslibet Verbis subjicitur, etc.

Rule 5. The English words buy, sell, cost, is worth, and such like, when they
are rendered into Latin by their preper Verbs, require the Substantive
betokening the price, rate or value, to be put into the ablative case, and
after Verbs of buying, the person of whom must be the ablative case, with a or
ab after sell and cost, the Dative.

1. Is not he an excellent Merchant, that buyeth wares for an hundred pound,
and sells them for an hundred pence? He is not a friend to himself.

2. This Book is worth five groats, but the Bookseller sold it me for thirteen
pence, and told me that it cost him twelve pence.

Vili, paulo, minimo, magno, etc.

Note 1. Vili, paulo, minimo, magno, nimio, plurimo, dimidio, duplo, are
ablative adjectives of price or value, and are used after such Verbs, without
Substantives.

1. He sells his eternal happiness for a very-little, that prefers dunghill
pleasures before it; Heaven is worth the whole World, it will cost a man labor
and denial of himself; pleasures worldly and heavenly, seldom succeed each
other.

2. Men desire to buy glory cheap, which cost our Savior dear, who purchased
it for us; they value the World at too great a rate.

Reg. 7. Excipiuntur hi Genitivi, tanti, quanti, etc.

Rule 7. These English words, viz. So much, how much, thus much, more, less, as
much as, how much soever, must be rendered by adjectives, (tanti, quanti,
pluris, minoris, etc.) without Substantives in the Genitive Case; but if the
English be such, that with them a Substantive must be joined, the ablative must
be used according to rule.

1. A good name is a jewel, which is worth so much, that at what rate soever
thou purchasest it, thou do not buy it dear.

2. A man given to vice, contracteth to himself many diseases, the cure costs
him more than his pleasure recompenceth; health is easily lost, but the
recovery of it is bought of Physicians at a great rate.

Note, Valeo, (to be worth) is sometimes read with an accusative.

Reg. 6. Verba abundandi, implendi, etc.

Rule 6. Verbs of filling, emptying, wanting, abounding, loading, easing,
require the Noun following, (which has with or of before it) to be put into
the ablative case, besides an accusatsve of the thing or person filled,
emptied, etc.

1. He, that wants money, is accounted a fool, though he be wise; he is reviled
by the tongues of those that tread upon all, that are not like them, with great
pride; an Ass laden with Gold, is preferred before the most useful beasts.

2. He that eases the miserable of their burden, shall hear many blessing
him; we may admire some men's cruelty, that never pity others, never do them
good; such men are of sordid mind, and when they want help, none will succor
them: fill the poor with food, and thou shall never want treasure; God tells
us, That if we give to the poor, we lend to him, and has promised us, that he
will repay us.

3. A thief robs a traveller of his money, but at length he depriveth
himself of life, for his villainy brings him to ruin and death.

Note 1. Participo (Active, to make partaker) has the same construction, viz.
an accusative of the person, and an ablative of the thing.

Note 2. Verbs af filling and emptying, are sometimes found to have a Genitive
case after them, of the Substantive which has of or with before it.

Reg. 7. Frungor, fruor, utor, and similia, etc.

Rule 7. Frungor, fruor, utor, nitor, laetor, vescor, glorior, supersedeo,
require an ablative case after them of the thing, muto an ablative of the Noun
which has [into] before it, and besides that an accusative; Dignor, communico,
and prosequor an accusative of the person, and ablative of the thing.

1. That Boy, that often seeks to enjoy the company of evil Boys, never
performs his duty; he prefers the love of a tempting Boy before his
Master's favor; he quickly lays aside his care, leaves off his diligence,
changes smiles of his Master into frowns; he becomes like his Companion, who
will rejoice at his ruin. Idleness is the nourisher of all vices, and vice
for-the-most-part foregoeth destruction. Be thou therefore mindful of thy duty.

2. Use thy Friend with greatest caution; trust him not before thou know him
well; there is not one among twenty friends that is faithful; they seem loving,
but they use flattery; a mask which hides their hearts from other men. Friends
destroy more than Enemies.

3. Leave-off Childish vanities, when thou come to ripeness of age; trifles
are a dishonor to years; use not Childish Exercises, nor let the delights of
Children please thee after that the ripeness of thine understanding has
rendered thee fit for greater employments.

4. Boast not of thy health and strength too much; only whilst thou enjoyest
them, give praise to him that bestows all good things upon all men; use them
well, lest he deprive thee of them. God does good to thee, return him not evil.

Reg. 8. Merior cum Adverbiis been male, etc.

Rule 8. Of after Mereor is made by the Preposition de, (which will have an
ablative case after it), if after the English word deserve, come an adverb.

A faithful Schoolmaster deserves well of his Country, he teaches his
Scholars to obey their King, he educateth not Rebels: and though many become
wicked and pernicious, that have had good Education, yet his honesty satisfies
his own mind, for he knows, that he taught them nothing, except that which
tended to faithfulness to his Prince, and the public Peace; he desires that
every-one that he instructs, may become a Common good, and may deserve
as-well-as-may-be of mankind.

Note, If no adverb come after mereor, but some other word with of, of must be
made by a or ab.

Over-fond Parents many-times destroy their Children; and though reverence and
obedience is due to Parents, yet their foolish indulgence deserves very ill of
the Children, who afterward feel its evil event, when it has brought them to
misery; so that they deserve not at-all thanks of them.

Rule 9. Of after a Verb, must be made by the ablative case always, except the
Verb belong to that Rule, viz. Verba accusandi, damnandi, monendi, etc. and
sometimes even after those must be rendered in Latin by de, ex, a, or ab.

1. A wise man scorneth not to take advice of those, than whom he is wiser by
many degrees; for fools sometimes speak wisely; he obeys not all Counselors;
but he hears all things patiently, and practices that which he thinks most
profitable to his business.

2. A good man learneth good of all men; of the wicked he learneth the
odiousness of sin, for he observes how greatly it deformeth them; he learneth
to avoid the vices which they practice, for he sees the misery which vice
creates to them; and foreseeth the eternal sorrow which will succeed it: of
good men he learneth virtue, for he striveth to imitate them; he endavoureth to
be like those that learn of Christ, who always pleased his heavenly Father.

Note, Of is sometimes the same with concerning, and must then be rendered only
by de.

1. A wise man hears many things of other men, but he believes not report,
which is a liar; he thinks worst of himself, best of his neighbor.

2. He that hears of a great treasure, soon striveth to obtain it; but when
the Ambassadors of God, speak of eternal riches, men regard not the message, as
if they were worth nothing.

Note, Of between two Noun Substantives is sometimes the same with concerning,
and must not be rendered by the Genitive Case of the Noun, but by de.

Among Children sometimes we see the hottest contention about the smallest
trifles; and among fools we find many times a long discourse of the most
ridiculous matters, a long talk of nothing is acceptable to a silly mind; but
for the most part a wise man's words are of weighty affairs.

Reg. 10. Verbis quae vim comparationis obtinet, etc.

Rule 10. Verbs of comparing and exceeding, require after them an ablative case
of the Noun, which signifies the measure, by how much, or the thing wherein,
e.g.

1. Labor is many degrees wholsomer than sloth; the one enfeebleth the
strength of the body, and the perception of the mind; the other is wholesome both
for mind and body.

2. He is honestly ambitious that labors to excel all his equals in wisdom
and virtue; no other contention is good.

Reg. 11. Quibuslibet verbis additur Ablativus, etc.

Rule 11. A Noun or Pronoun Substantive, joined with a Participle (or with
another Substantive, before which being is expressed or understood) and having
none other word, whereof it can be governed, shall be put in the ablative case
absolute, i. e. not depending upon any word but it self.

1. Death approaching the Soul which never before believed God's word,
concerning Eternity, sees future things with greatest clearness, and conscience
accusing, the man condemns himself, and (commonly too late) blames his own
folly; then he sees the hell that God threatened him with, and which he shall
quickly feel.

2. God being teacher, men shall learn; for nothing can resist the Divine
power, which effects whatsoever it designeth. They are happy that learn of so
wise an instructor.

Note, When you have the English of any of these words, viz. Dum, quum, quando,
si, quanquam, the Substantive next following, which seems to be the Nominative
Case to a Verb, may more elegantly be put in the ablative Case, and the
Participle used to agree with it, instead of the Verb.

1. When God punishes, the World trembles, and wicked men are sometimes
taught the fear of God by his voice from heaven; but some men are of so
obstinate minds, that nothing can move them; tho God bestow all mercies on
them, goodness does not persuade them; and though they feel his anger, they will
not obey him. The hardest rock is softer than the hearts of men.

2. When God calls, men answer him not, and therefore he threatens them with
a refusal, when they cry unto him: But he fills with blessings those that ask
his mercy with all their hearts unfeignedly.

Reg. 12. Passivis additur, etc.

Rule 12. Verbs passive have after them an ablative case (of the Noun which
betokens the doer); with a or ab, which Prepositions answer to the English
signs of or by.

1. He is beloved of all, that is of courteous behavior; but he is more
hateful than the Pestilence, that when he speaks smooth words, thinks evil,
whose heart disagreeth with his tongue.

2. The hearts of men are full of deceit: the most wise man knows not himself
sufficiently: the thoughts of men are thoroughly known only by God, who made the
heart, and sees all its secrets; and will call men to Judgment; the most
hidden things shall hereafter be laid open by him, that sees all things.

Exc. quorum Participia sequentius, etc.

The Participles of Verbs Passive require after them rather a Dative of the
doer, than an Ablative; e. g.

The news of his own Son's death being heard by the Philosopher, when his
sudden lamentation was expected by his Friends, he only said, I knew that I
begat him mortal; he did not become pale or languid with sorrow; he did not
faint in his mind; he was not presently sick of grief; he seemed a man of an
unshaken mind.

As for other words after a Passive, (sc. all besides such as betoken a doer or
sufferer), they must be the same case, which the Verb Active requires.

Rule 13. Vapulo, veneo, liceo, exulo, fio, are called Neuter Passives, and
have the same Case after them that Passives have; sc. an Ablative of the doer
or sufferer with a or ab.

1. Cicero, the famous Roman Orator, a man of greatest eloquence, was banished
by Clodius; but the image and memory of his excellent virtues remained among
the Citizens, who valued so great a man at a great rate: He was recalled from
his Exile, he was called the Father of his Country, which title properly
belongs only to Kings. His Works are prized by all learned men highly.

2. The Boy is deservedly beaten by his Master, that whilst he reads many
Authors, of whom he may learn Eloquence, Elegancy, and Moral Precepts, which
conduce to his profit, beside the mere Latin words; yet only reads, and
remembers nothing.

Of the Construction of the English Infinitive Mood.
Reg. 1. QUibusdam tum Verbis tum Adjectivis, etc. The English Infinitive Mood
has next before it the sign to: Or such English Verbs as have the sign to
before them, must be rendered into Latin by the Infinitive Mood; e. g.

1. He that desires to learn, and to be-wise, is not content with one reading,
he readeth-over-again. Some have need of many readings, whose memories are not
tenacious of instructions: the memories of some Boys are like the water, which
retains not an impression; Children of less wit conquer a difficulty by
frequency, which the hasty labor and industry of greater wits cannot conquer.
Use patience, thereby thou shall attain to whatsoever thou desire to
understand.

2. The Boy that never doubts, learneth nothing; he is rash, and ignorant how
much labor exact learning will cost a Boy: he forgets consideration, which
is most necessary for all that learn: he thinks himself wise, therefore he is
justly thought a fool by all others: he that goes most slowly, is wiser than
his companion, who runs headlong. Drones are not worthy of commendation, but
the overhasty are worse than they; extremes are dangerous in all things. Go
the middle way, if thou desire to attain thine end.

Rule 2. When two Verbs come together without a Nominative Case between them,
tho the latter have not the sign to before it, it is the English Infinitive
Mood, and must be put into the Infinitive Mood Latin.

1. A godly Son dares not disobey his Parents, tho they be fond of him, he
abuses not their love: they indulge him, yet he pleases them; for if he
resist his Parents will, he displeases God: he will not hearken to the evil
counsel of wicked Boys, that are void of the fear of God: he had-rather be
despised, and lose their company, because of his honesty. The love of the
wicked is more dangerous than their hatred.

2. Who can compare any other treasure with Learning? It excels Riches and
Honors; for all Substance being taken away, Learning abides inviolable:
violence cannot spoil a man of it; it continues untouched in the midst of all
losses.

Rule 3. When two Verbs come together in English, with nothing but a Nominative
Case between them, that Nominative Case may be turned into the Accusative, and
the Verb which seemed to be the Indicative Mood, be made by the Latin
Infinitive.

1. When Alexander the Great called to mind, himself had killed his dearest
Friend, he intended to have stabbed himself; but some of his Soldiers knew he
intended evil to himself, and hindered him. Self-murder had not well revenged
Manslaughter: the Death of so great an Emperor had not repaired, but had
doubled the loss.

2. Titus Vespasian, the Eleventh Roman Caesar, after that he had conquered and
taken Jerusalem, when he entered into the City and the Temple, lamented the
divided Inhabitants had destroyed so glorious a City by their cruelty and
obstinacy; he the Conqueror pitied the Conquered; he bewailed their folly: He
was called The delight of mankind; no Prince was ever of a sweeter temper.

3. Historians say, Aristides left not (when he died) money sufficient for the
charges of his Funeral; they tell us, the public Treasure supplied the greater
part.

But if, for the Counjunction understood, quod be expressed in the Latin, the
Nominative Case, and the Indicative or Subjunctive Mood must remain (as they
seem in the English) to come after quod.

N.B. 2. When the Conjunction that is expressed in the English, and it seems as
if quod must be made for it in Latin, quod may more elegantly be left out, and
the word which seems to be the Nominative Case translated by the Accusative,
and Verb by the Infinitive Mood; e. g.

1. He that believes the report that he hears from a liar, is a fool; a wise
man never trusts him that once deceived him; he that is deceived once by a
Knave, blames the deceiver's deceit; but he that is twice cheated by the same
man, betrayeth the greatest imprudence: he that knows that his companion is
deceitful, and yet trusts him, tells all the world that himself has lost his
reason.

2. That is a Boy of a generous spirit, that when he heard that his Master
praised him, used his utmost diligence that he might not seem unworthy of the
praise which his Master gave him; that is persuaded by arguments more strongly
than by stripes.

3. When a wise man hears that himself is blamed, he enquireth who blames
him; if he understand that good men accuse him, he accuses himself by their
Testimony, and cease to commit those things, which seem evil to others; if he
hear that wicked men blame him, if for a just cause, he bewareth
for-the-future; but if they accuse him because his exact virtue displeases
them, he rejoiceth in their accusations.

Reg. 4. Prius supinum Active, etc.

4. The English of the Infinitive Mood active, after another Verb betokening
motion, as going, coming, etc. must not be made by the Latin Infinitive, but by
the first Supine of the Latin verb; e. g.

1. A man that spends many years, and lays out all his time upon trifles,
is like a Merchant that went a long Voyage to fetch ashes from Mount Aetna,
which being exposed to the winds, he lost them all in his return.

2. Ovid says, The younger women go to the Theater to see the young men, to
show their gay clothes, to procure themselves wooers; they go not only to see
and to hear.

3. Boys go to the Church to hear Sermons, but they do not attend to the
Preacher; they hear of serious things, but their minds are busied about vanity;
they forget the pious instructions, they are unmindful of their ownadvantage;
they sit talking of play, and of things which do not belong to their welfare;
they go away void of all piety: They are most worthy of punishment that abuse
Sabbaths: Boys are sent to Church to get increase of spiritual knowledge.

Rule 5. The English of the Infinitive Mood Passive [to be] coming next after a
Verb betokening motion, must not be rendered by the Latin Infinitive, but by the
Subjunctive with the Conjunction [ut.]

1. Boys come to School to be instructed, but they are enemies to themselves,
they do not use their time rightly; the Master endeavors to teach them, but
they do not answer his care; they are a grief to the Master, who pitieth their
ignorance.

2. He that is worse than his Ancestors, and more ignoble, is of a base spirit:
but whosoever endeavors to advance the honor of his Family by greater
virtue, is truly worthy of a great Name among men. He that hastes to be
honored deservedly, is wise: but he that runs with all speed in the paths
of vice, hasteneth to destroy himself and his honor, and is deservedly called
a fool.

Rule 6. The English of the Infinitive Mood active, coming after the English of
any Tense of the Verb [Sum] must not be rendered by the Latin Infinitive, but by
a Participle of the Future in [rus.]

1. When thou art to choose Companions for thy self, find-out those that are
better and wiser than thy self, of whom thou may learn something: he that
learneth of all with whom he converseth, is like a Be, that, when it is to
perform its wonted task, gathers honey everywhere; but he that chooses only
useful Companions, is like the Ermin, which, when it is to move from its former
place, treads only in the cleanest paths.

2. Converse with those that are more honorable than thy self, so shall thou
be honored of all that observe thy choice; but avoid those that are too much
greater than thy self; they will be Lords, not Friends; they will scorn thee
when thou art to undergo misfortunes.

Rule 7. The English of the Infinitive Mood Passive, after any Tense of [Sum]
must be rendered by the Participle of the Future in [dus]; never by the
Infinitive Latin.

1. The goodness of God is to be praised, who bestows even upon his enemies
innumerable kindnesses, who gives rain and other necessaries to those that
serve him not. It becomes us to imitate his blessed example; let us do good to
our enemies: that piety is to be admired, which is extended to so great a
degree.

2. He is to be blamed, that is over-prodigal; they are to be despised that are
covetous: withold not thy money when there is need of it, nor waste it when
there is no need. Riches are treasures lent to men by God, which they must use
as he pleases; they are not to be laid out without his leave, nor to be
detained when he demands them.

Rule 8. The English of the Infinitive Mood signifying to the end for, or that
he might, is made by the Gerund in [dum], or the Subjunctive Mood with [ut], or
with a Relative.

1. The Prince that hireth Soldiers to fight his Battles, buyeth enemies to
destroy himself; they that for desire of reward will revenge any quarrel, are
dangerous to those to whom they seem Friends, and whose cause they defend; for
more money will buy their force against their former Masters: the richer Prince
shall always have their help; they serve Money, not the Prince.

2. He that buyeth Books only to lay up in his Closet, who never reads them,
is like a man that is desirous of fine Clothes, but lays them up in his
Chest, and does not put them on.

3. He that only lives to gratify his sensitive appetite, is not a man, but a
beast; he lives a bestial life: he is the most base of all slaves, that serves
himself: that man is to be honored, that prefers his noblest reason before his
senses.

Reg. 9. Gerundia in di pendenta quibusdam, etc.

9. When the English of the Infinitive Mood active comes next after any of
these Substantives, viz. studium, causa, tempus, gratia, spes, opportunitas,
modus, ratio, potestas, licenta, consuetudo, consilium, vis, norma, amor,
cupido, locus; or after an Adjective which would govern a Genitive Case of a
Noun, such English Infinitive Mood must be rendered by the Latin Gerund in [di].

1. Foolish sinners neglect Exhortation, till time is past; and when their
wishes are vain, Death approaching, they then desire opportunity to amend their
lives: when they have abused Divine Patience, they afterward beg space to
return. Late repentance is seldom true.

2. He that has steadfast hope to live for ever, is not angry with Divine
Providence when it bids him go hence: he is sure to see Cod, and what earthly
felicity is to be compared with that vision?

3. A desire to die is culpable, when it proceeds only from impatience by
reason of trouble. But he that is desirous to live, when death would be more
honorable to God and Religion, wants Christian courage, is of a feeble mind.

4. He that is greedy to heap up riches to himself, nor cares by what arts or
means he obtains them, lays up for himself repentance. Unjust gain pleases
the covetous, but displeases God; and the remembrance of it will become
bitterness at last.

5. The Devil uses many stratagems; he has many ways to deceive; he is
skilful to destroy: time and experience have increased his cunning; but he
flies from those that resolvedly resist him, the strength of God assisting.

Reg. 10. Posterius supinum passive, etc.

Rule 10. The English Infinitive Mood passive, coming after a Noun adjective,
must be rendered by the latter Supine of the Verb active.

1. A man is hard to be found that prefers the advantage of his Friend
before his own; that not only pitieth his Friend's calamities, but also helps
him with all his might. Adversity is the fittest time to try the sincerity of
Friendship. The Bonds of Friendship are to be observed as sacred.

2. Parents are worthy to be reproved, that indulge their children too much. He
that cares not for his Family, is worse than an heathen, he is worse than a
brute. But those Parents that give children leave to live and act according to
their own will, are unfaithful to them.

3. The conditions of parents is to be bewailed, that are deprived of their
children; but the hard lot of children is more worthy to be lamented, that are
destitute of Parents, for they are exposed to unknown events.

4. A child that fears God, is afraid to speak those things which others act;
he is afraid to repeat words which other Boys spoke. His pious parents tell
him, That all wickedness is not only sinful to be committed, but is also
sometimes dangerous, always unhandsom to be expressed. But children too often
speak of the evil words and works of their companions with delight, at best
without hatred.

N. B. The English Infinitive Mood after Adjectives, may elegantly be also
rendered by the Subjunctive Mood of the Verb, with the Relative [qui]. For
Exercise of which Boys may be accustomed to render that clause of the former
Example, wherein the force of the Rule lies, both ways in the same Exercise,
viz. both by the latter Supine, and by the Subjunctive.

Reg. 11. The English Infinitive Mood Active after any Tense of [Sum]; when the
Infinitive Mood notes property, duty, or place, must be rendered by the Latin
Infinitive as it seems to be; but the word that seems to be the Nominative
case to [Sum], must then be turned into the Genitive, governed of [Sum], or it
may be rendered by opportet, etc.

1. The Master is to take care that the Scholar neglect not his Study, while he
is in School; but Parents are to look-to-it, that Children obey them, when they
are dismissed from School. It is not meet to trouble the Master with Domestic
faults.

2. Children and men are to avoid rash speaking. All must use consideration. He
that speaks without care, often remembers some words which fill him with
sorrow afterward. An hasty Tongue is full of folly and vanity, and most
frequently guilty of lies. Those that expect peace and safety, are to restrain
their Tongues with a bridle.

Reg. 12. The English Infinitive Mood Active, coming after Adjectives,
betokening worthiness, fitness, or something like to them, must be rendered in
Latin by the Subjunctive Mood, with the Relative qui.

1. He is unworthy to live, that lives only for himself. A wise man is a
common good, who consulteth for the benefit of others, who endeavors to do
good to all. But yet he is not to be commended, that, as a busie-body,
searches out those things which do not belong to him. The middle way is most
safe. He is truly wise, that neither neglects his duty toward his Neighbor,
nor medleth with other men's private affairs. Those men are unfit to have the
name of Friends, that search out the conditions other men, not that they may
help them, but that they may know and divulge them.

2. He is unfit to enjoy riches, who does not use them. God gives men riches,
that they may serve him with them; but they abuse the greatest plenty. Their
unsatiable desires provoke them to unjust methods to increase their substance.
He is more happy, that (whilst poverty lesseneth his power to do good) striveth
to serve God with his utmost ability; than him, that whilst he has
opportunity to do much good, does nothing; he is worthy to lose that, which he
uses not.

Reg. 13. When the English Infinitive Mood Active comes after a Noun
Adjective, which Adjective governs an Accusative case, with the Preposition ad,
such Infinitive Mood must be rendered in Latin, by the Gerund in dum, with ad.

1. Reveal not thy miseries to any, except to those that can help thee. Many
are ready to ask, How do thou do? that are not forward to help on thy
welfare. Believe not all that say, they pity thee. Trust a true friend (if thou
be sure to find such a one) that will pity thee, and will be forward to use his
greatest endeavors to free thee of thy trouble.

2. Advise thy friend most warily, lest thou injure him, and he accuse thee of
enmity. Rash counsel is unprofitable to him that gives, and to him that
receives it. Be ready to hear, careful to contrive, but slow to speak.

3. It is hard to move him that is accustomed to do evil. Custom is equal to
Nature for strength and persuasion. Admonitions, instructions, threatenings,
promises, fears, are ineffectual, to banish vice from a mind, in which it has
a long time dwelt.

4. It is strange to be observed, how earnestly boys endeavor to cheat
themselves, whilst they think they only cheat their Master. They are sent to
School to get learning, but they invent arts to escape saying their Lessons,
whereby they continue Blockheads, and never come to learning. They go to School
to be instructed, but they are glad if the Master forget to call them, though
he very seldom please them so. When they are to give an account of their
Authors, they have brains ready to invent little tricks to supply their
neglect; whereby they strive to impose upon the Master, who yet is faithful,
and finds out their craft. When they have committed a fault, and are to be
punished, they endeavor to excuse themselves with lies, or to appease the
Master's anger by promises, which they never perform. Parents buy them Books to
read in, and they are capable to understand them, but they read idle trifles
when they should study. They desire nothing more than to stay away from School;
they shun their own benefit, and covet their own loss; but when they come to
man's-estate, they see they were their own Enemies.

The Construction of the Participle.
Reg. 1. PArticipia regunt casus verborum, etc.

Latin Participles govern such cases as the Verbs of which they come: except
Participles in dus, which govern a Dative case after them, though the Verb
which they come of, govern an ablative.

1. Virtue to be preferred before the purest Gold, is valued at a low rate; and
virtuous men are despised of many; but they enjoying inward peace and
tranquillity, pity the greatest men, who are laden with wealth, and yet are
miserable, because they want the chief happiness of man.

2. How many men are like the brutish Swine, that prefer dirt and mire before
the cleanest Palace; they despise Jewels, and gather up Pebbles: they are
content with sordid Earth, despising Heavenly things, wanting wisdom to
distinguish.

Exc. 1. Participiorum voces cum fiunt, etc.

When the English of a Participle, may form all the degrees of Comparison, the
Latin Participle then becomes of the nature of a Noun Adjective, and requires
the Substantive following it, to be put in the Genitive case, whatsoever case
the Verb governed.

1. That Master is most loving to his Scholars, that will not suffer them to
loiter, nor will give them too much time to play; that restrains them from
evil by the severest Laws, that gives them rewards when they are worthy of
them; but yet punishes their wilful idleness, when nothing else will amend
them.

2. A Friend, that reproves of errors, is preferred before him that flattereth
with his lips; the wounds of a Friend are more healing to a man, than the
smooth words of a flattering Enemy.

Exc. 2. Exosus, perosus, pertaesus, etc.

2. [Pertaesus] weary, a Participle requires an accusative case after it. So
also [exosus] and [perosus], when they signify hating, but when they signify
hated by, or hateful to, they require a Dative case.

1. Judges hating bribes and covetousness, are hated by those, whose guilt
prompts them to avoid the stroke of Justice: but they are chosen by wise
Princes. For unspotted Justice is the best Friend to Royal Power.

2. He is hated of all, hateful to God and Men, that uses a double tongue; he
is certainly a dissembler, whose words are changed according to occasion: he is
a friend to no body; he always dispraiseth those whom he seems to admire; he
speaks good to all, whispereth evil of all, his mouth disagreeth with his
heart. All men become weary of his company; those that sometimes thought him a
Friend, soon begin to distrust him, for he is void of common honesty.

Exc. 1. Natus, prognatus, satus, etc.

Exc. 1. Natus, prognatus, satus, cretus, ortus, editus, creatus; Participles
of Verbs passive, require an Ablative Case without a Preposition, whereas their
Verbs require an Ablative with a Preposition.

1. A Son born of honest Parents, is more worthy than him that sprung from a
wicked rich-man.

2. Man sprung from the dust by his creation, has many times his mind fastened
to the earth; nor does he mount from thence, till Wisdom instruct his choice.

3. A man hating Vice, is more beautiful in the sight of God, than him that is
adorned with glittering Robes, but indulgeth sin, which God hates, who loves
Virtue sprung from Heaven.

Reg. 2. Gerundia in do pendent, etc.

Rule 2. The English Participle in ing, coming after a Preposition, Verb, or
Adjective, which govern an Ablative Case, the word that seems to be the
Participle, must be rendered by the Gerund in do, if after an Adjective or Verb,
having of, with, or by after them, without a Preposition; if after any other
English, with it.

N. B. Gerunds govern the same Case with their Verbs.

1. He that is quickly weary of attending to the Minister preaching, or tired
with kneeling while the Master prays; is a lazy and wicked boy; he loves not
the Worship of God, but has his mind busied about playing, while he seems to
serve God.

2. Idle Boys endeavor to allure others from studying, but the diligent
hearken not to their temptations; for no good is gotten by neglecting: It is
better to displease idle play-fellows, than to please them: but every place is
full of wicked boys, who corrupt others, and exhort them to various Vices.

3. Boys learn by teaching others who are more ignorant than themselves; by
repeating over those things which they have formerly learned, they fasten them
more steadfastly in their memories. They have need of all opportunities to call
over past instructions; for they are forward to forget them, tho they be Boys
of good wits, and competent memories.

4. Boys many times learn wisdom from observing the punishment of others: but
some refuse to be taught diligence that way; their own experience only reduces
them to obedience. Boys imitate men: some become wise at other men's charge,
others at their own. Experience is the best Mistress in all things; but in
sufferings altogether unwelcom.

5. But amongst Boys, as well as amongst Men, others are obstinate in
offending; neither the experience of others will move them, nor their own; they
wilfully sail in those Seas where they before scarcely escaped destruction.

Reg. 3. Gerundia in dum pendent, etc.

Rule 3. When the English of the Participle of the present Tense, comes after
the English of any Preposition which governs an Accusative Case, or after any
Adjective which will have an Accusative after it, with ad: In such case, the
English Participle must be rendered in Latin by the Gerund in dum, with the
proper Preposition set before it.

1. At eating, Boys ought to sit still, not to talk. At saying Lesson, none
ought to speak, but he that is appointed by the Master, whose leave is to be
asked before the Scholars betake themselves to pray.

2. The Boy that is chastised, because of truanting, has no cause to accuse
the Master of severity; he ought to blame himself, and to resolve, God helping,
that he will shake off idleness for the future.

Note 1. The English word must (which may be rendered by [oportet] and another
Verb of the Imperative Mood), is also to be made into Latin by quite omitting
any particular Latin for must, and only turning the Verb following must, into
the Gerund in [dum], (without a Preposition); and setting the Verb [est]
impersonally after the Gerund; and then the Noun foregoing, which seems to be
the Nominative Case, must be the Dative.

1. They must strive with their utmost might, that desire to become learned,
and to conquer the difficulties which they will meet; all things that are
excellent, are difficult to be attained.

2. The Soldier must fight valiantly, that bears a mind enflamed with a
desire to conquer the enemy: his Arm must procure him the Honor which his
Heart wishes for. But sometimes secret stratagems, and subtle policy, defeat
the most valiant Warriers. Deceit sheddeth less blood, and has sometimes more
success.

Exc. If must stand before a Verb irregular, or a Verb passive, which have no
Gerunds; oportet, with the Infinitive Mood after it, must be used, and the word
that seems to be the Nominative Case, must be the Accusative.

1. Children must be obedient to their Parents: Children that grieve their
Parents, purchase to themselves a Curse; they provoke God to deny to them that
length of life which he has promised to the dutiful; or, if he suffer Rebels
to live, he gives them Children that shall revenge their Parents disobedience.

2. Zeal is a fire, whose flame proceeds from the fire of Love; but it must
be confined within the bounds of truth. Nothing is more dangerous than blind
and false Zeal.

3. In loving God, we must not neglect our Neighbor; the observation of the
second Table of the Decalogue, must be joined with our care to keep the first.
He keeps no Commandment truly, that wilfully neglects one.

Reg. 4. Vertuntur Gerundii voces, etc.

2. Sometimes the English Participle, which should be rendered by the Gerund,
according to the former Rules, is otherwise Latined, by turning the word that
should be the Gerund, into a Gerundive Adjective in dus; and then that
Adjective must agree with the Substantive next following, which may be
practiced in this following Example, viz.

A desire to excel all others in Virtue, and in good letters, is a commendable
ambition; and a delight in obtaining praise, is worthy of encouragement,
because it is a sign of an excellent mind; but he is a wicked boy, that
applies his thoughts only to out-going the worst in villainy. Such a contention
is Diabolical.

Rule 4. The English Participle in ing, must sometimes be Latined neither by
the Participle nor Gerund, but by a Noun Substantive; which is when it has a,
an, or the before it, and of after it, or when it immediately follows an
Adjective agreeing with it.

1. The taking away Worldly Riches, sometimes tends to the increasing of
Spiritual Substance; the impoverishing of the Body, is the enriching of the
Soul. How imprudent are they that immoderately bewail losses! No loss is really
great, except the loss of life-eternal.

2. Frequent thinkings of those things that concern the Soul, are necessary for
the most tender years. None can begin to serve God too soon, none soon enough;
he that spends most time in the serving God, shall have the greatest reward.
But Youth is not only full of Vanity, but thinks it may indulge Sin and Folly
without blame: as if there were some years of our life which we may devote to
the Devil. But what if our lives be taken from us before the expiring of those
licentious years, what an Eternity must we expect? Shall those live with God,
who died before they began to live to him?

Rule 5. The English Participle in ing, coming after a Verb of motion, and
having a before it, is rendered by the first Supine, like as the Infinitive Mood.

The man that goes a hunting, hawking, or visiting his Friends, when necessary
business requires his care and time, prefers his Diversion before his Profit,
the Society of his Friends before the necessary Advantage of Himself and his
Family. Nor will any covet his Friendship, that is not a Friend to himself.

2. The Boy that goes with his School-fellows a playing, when he ought to be
diligent at the Task which the Master has appointed him, prefers Play before
his Master's Love, and his own Profit; and when he is weary of Playing, he will
return to his Book, but shall want time to prepare his appointed Exercises.

Rule 6. The Participle in ing, after a Noun (Substantive, or Adjective), that
requires a Genitive Case, must be made by the Gerund in di.

To be skilful in cheating others, is a base Art: Fools are wiser than such
Politicians. He that only inventeth knacks of deceiving, is full of Craft, but
void of Wisdom. A wise man is like a Dove for innocence, tho he be not unlike a
Serpent for caution.

Rule 7. The Participle in ing, after am, art, is, was, were, or any passive
sign, must be Latined not by the Participle, but by the Verb Active, and in
that Tense of it, and Number, and Person, which the Passive sign betokens.

1. A diligent Boy is always learning, not only while the Master is
instructing, but also while other Boys are playing, he reads Books which
promote his learning, or readeth-over-again that which he learned in the
School; he only now-and-then uses moderate rest and recreation, because it is
necessary for his health, and makes to the sharpening of his wit.

2. Excellent Apelles was daily drawing some excellent Picture with wonderful
Art; no day passed without a Line.

3. Those that use not time in the beginning of their lives, will be even
perpetually lamenting their folly afterward; they will be hourly condemning
themselves, and saying, Oh, at what a great price would I willingly purchase
time past!

Rule 8. The Participle in ing, after from, for lest that, may elegantly be
rendered by the Subjunctive Mood, with ne before it.

The Providence of God keeps us from perishing; the Power of God assisteth us
in acting those things which please him; the Grace of God keeps us from
sinning; the Goodness of God preserves us from suffering afflictions; the
Death and Righteousness of Christ have redeemed us from dying eternally.

Rule 9. The Participle in ing, after a Verb importing to cease, leave, or give
over, is rendered by the Infinitive Mood of its proper Verb.

1. Constancy and stedfastness, are signs of a generous mind: He that leaves
acting laudable things, and degenerateth into Vice, was never truly good.

2. A wise man never leaves learning, till he giveover living: He has need of
more knowledge, that has the greatest wisdom.

Rule 10. The English Participle having, when it stands immediately next before
another Participle, which comes from a Verb Deponent, is not rendered by any
particular Latin word, only is a sign that the following English must be
Latined by the Participle preter Tense of the Verb passive.

1. Poor men having gotten Riches or Honors, grow proud; they despise those
that were equal to them; they are of more scornful minds and behavior, than
those that are sprung of Noble Race.

2. Humility is the true Gentility. Men honor and reverence a Nobleman that is
courteous toward his inferiors, more than him that scorneth to speak to them,
or to hear their requests, who having relied upon their goodness, have often
entreated them.

Rule 11. Having, coming before a Participle of a Verb active, and having been,
before a passive, must be rendered by the preterperfect (if the thing spoken of,
be now doing, or will be done hereafter), or by the preterpluperfect Tense of
the Subjunctive Mood (if the thing spoken of, be past), with cum.

1. Those were the most Noble Champions, that having conquered Kingdoms and
Countries, spared the Inhabitants, and granted them largest Privileges. Their
Clemency did not hinder their Victories; it rather made many yield to their
Power, from whom they might expect lenity: but who would surrender to a bloody
Conqueror?

2. Kings and Kingdoms are under the Power of God. God sets up Kings; it is
not the Subjects part to pull them down, but to obey their Authority. They are
to pray for the Lives and Prosperity of Rulers; and having gotten a gracious
Prince, they are to bless God, who gave them him, and to defend him: He that
fears God, honors the King; and having obeyed him in Peace, hazardeth his
life for him in War.

Construction of words betokening Time.
Reg. 1. QUAE significant partem temporis, etc.

Rule 1. Nouns which betoken part of time (h. e. which answer to the Question
[when?] either expressed before it, or implied), must be put in the Ablative Case.

1. He that always designs to be good next week, or next year to amend his
life, and does not this day begin his work, seems to endeavor to mock God: He
cheateth his own Soul; he pleases the Devil, who loves such hurtful delays,
and persuadeth men with all his might to disobey God, and to prejudice
themselves. That Tempter promises them longer life, and space to repent: Men
too often believe him, rather than God, the Fountain of all Truth. Delayers
convenient season never comes. Let us not say, next year, next month, next
week, next hour, nor next moment, but embrace the offer of eternal happiness
this present instant.

2. Q. When will thou increase thy diligence?

A. The first day wherein we return to School.

Reg. 2. Quae autem durationem, etc.

Rule 2. Nouns betokening continuance of time, (h. e. which answer to the
Question, [how long?] expressed or understood), must be put in the Accusative
Case.

The Boy that loiters a whole week, becomes idle afterward, and will not study;
that Boy is wise that mingleth Study with Play, even upon Holy Days; then is
Play pleasant to him at his intervals, and his mind is ready for learning; so
that when he returns to School, he can learn all the day without weariness; and
there shall be need of no labor to the Master as to him, whilst he must strive
greatly to persuade other Boys to forget their past leisure.

1. Against or for before a word of appointed time, are to be rendered by in,
with an Accusative Case of the word of time.

1. He that promises a gift or kindness against the next week, and delays it
until the next year, does his Friend no good; gifts given in season, are
acceptable; but delays diminish the worth and thanks.

2. The man is wise, that in prosperity lays up against adversity; he that
spends all without care and foresight, commonly wants afterward without
remedy; for he is incapable to help himself, and his Friends pity him not,
because he is become poor by his own neglect.

3. Detain not a whole year, what is only lent thee for a day; thy Friend may
forgive thy breaking of thy promise, but he will be unwilling to lend, when
thou have need of his help the second time.

Note, Particular Phrases of the Noun of Time, have a different Construction
from the former.

Suetonius writes of Augustus Caesar, That when he purposed not to grant any
thing which was requested of him, he was wont to answer the suppliant, I will
do it upon the Greek Calends; because no Nation beside the Romans had Calends,
which name they gave to the first day of each month. Upon the second day the
Nones began.

Construction of Nouns betokening Place.
Reg. 1. SPatium loci in Accusativo, etc.

Rule 1. Nouns that betoken how far one place is distant from another, or any
measure of the length or breadth of a place after a Verb, may be rendered in
Latin either by the Accusative Case, or the Ablative.

1. Our Countrey-house is twelve miles off from this place; my Brother and I
walked hither in three hours; and we are still seven miles distant from our
Inn; we must walk apace, that we may arrive thither this night.

2. London, the chief City of England, is distant from York an hundred and one
and fifty miles.

3. Geographers account, That the one Pole is Six thousand eight hundred
seventy two English miles distant from the other.

Reg. 2. Nomina Appellativa and nomina majorum, etc.

Reg. 3. Omne Verbum admittit Genitivum, etc.

Rule 2. At a place, is the same with in: and if the place be a proper name of
a Country, Province, or Nation; or a Noun Substantive Common; it must be put
in the Ablative Case with the Preposition in; but in or at a smaller place; as
a single City or Town, must be rendered by the Genitive Case, if the Latin Noun
or Place be of the first or second Declension, and the Singular Number.

1. I have been in Spain, I have dwelt at Rome, I abode two years in another
City of Italy. I lodged a whole Month at Paris in France: yet foreign places
did not delight my mind; I had rather spend my time at School in London, than
live idly in a strange Land.

2. Latin Books Printed at Amsterdam in Holland, are to be preferred before all
others: Dutch Printers for the most part use better Letter, and take more care
in Correcting.

3. When Alexander the Great was in Persia, he destroyed Persepolis the Royal
City. Thais the Harlot persuaded him to destroy it, and it was wholly wasted by
his Command. It stood a league off from the River Araxis, forty Pillars Carved
with wondrous Art remain Testimonies of its former glory.

1. Hi Genitivi Humi, domi, militiae, etc.

1. On the ground, at home, in or at War, are rendered by the Genitive cases of
the Substantives.

A good Man always does good to his Country; when he is at home, he discharges
his duty, by instructing his Family, and making them useful to the
Commonwealth; he teaches them obedience toward Princes and Magistrates, that
they may not be injurious to public peace; he teaches them piety toward God;
and that they may learn, he gives them his own Example: He knows that Godly
Men are the best Subjects. When he is in War (which he never enters into
without just cause) he fights valiantly; he endures all hardship, lies on
the ground, wants sleep, suffers showers and tempests; content at his
condition, he fears not Death; but boldly meets that Enemy, the most
formidable of all, for the sake of God, the King and his Country; at last he
either dies nobly in the Field, or quietly in his Bed, and all that remember
him, bewail the public loss. None can esteem such a Man at too great a price.

2. Domi non alios secum patitur, etc.

2. The Genitive case, domi, at the house, has never any other Adjective made
to agree with it, except meae, tuae, suae, nostrae, vestrae, alienae, domi, is
never used for Latin to another word, but at home, except the English of one of
those pronouns come with it.

1. A wise Man dwells at home, he abides at his own house; the Fool is
always busy at another man's house, and in the mean while, he neglects his
own affairs.

2. He that dwells in a decayed house, is more safe from Envy, than the
rich-man, living in a Princely Palace; few envy the poor, whose condition is
therefore to be esteemed happy.

Reg. 3. Verum si proprium nomen loci, etc.

Rule 3. When the proper name of a City, or Town, is of the Plural Number
(which is when there is no Singular), or if it be of the Third Declension, in,
or at such a place, it must be rendered by the Dative or Ablative.

1. Many wise men were born at Athens: many famous Philosophers. There was at
Athens a famous University. The Grecians heretofore did so far excel all other
Nations in knowledge, that they called all other men Barbarians, in comparison
of themselves; as if all mankind were blind, beside themselves; But afterward
the glory of Greece was diminished, and the Roman splendour exceeded it.

2. The City Delphos, and the Hill Parnassus, were at Phocis, a City of Achaia,
a Province of Greece. The Oracle of Apollo, was given at Delphos; but when the
Son of God took to himself flesh, that Oracle, and all others, were reduced to
silence.

Note, When two Nouns Substantives come next to each other, whereof both
betoken place, but of a different nature, the one a Substantive proper, the
other an Appellative, and yet both belong to one thing, so that they ought by
Apposition, to be put both in one Case, when they so seem, yet they must not be
of the same Case one with the other, but each be put in its proper Case, which
it would be put in, if it stood alone.

The Seat of the Roman Empire was at Rome, the most noble Town of Italy; but
the power and strength of it, extended to the farthest known parts of the World.

Reg. 4. Verbis significantibus motum ad locum, etc.

Rule. 4. To, after a Verb of motion, and before a word of place, if the place
be a proper name of a City or Town, of whatsoever Declension or Number, must be
rendered by the accusative case, without a Preposition. If a noun Substantive
Common, or the name of a Country by the Accusative Case, with [ad], or [in].

1. Scholars go from School to Oxford, or to Cambridge, that beside the Learned
Languages, they may study the Liberal Arts. But some are of so stupid brains,
that after-that they have continued there, in the Universities, many years,
they become nothing more learned; which is greatly to be wondered at; but those
that are unteachable at School, for the most part continue such. The two
Universities are the Eyes of the Nation; but they cannot open the Eyes of the
blind.

2. Those that apply their minds to the study of Physic, are often times sent
to Holland, to Leyden; from which Universities famous Physicians have proceeded.

Reg. 5. Verbis significantibus motum a loco, etc.

Rule. 5. From, or by a place, if it be a proper name of a smaller place, must
be rendered by the Ablative case, without a Preposition, if an Appellative, or
the name of a greater place, with a Preposition.

1. Julius Caesar, the Emperor, after that he had conquered Britain, built a
Tower at London, the chief City of Britain; but he continued not ^t London; he
appointed Rulers in his stead, and returned from London to Italy.

2. Idle and wicked boys come from the Church, and from the School, more
willingly than they go to them.

3. Henry the Eighth, King of England, regarded not thet hreatnings and Bulls
which came from Italy against him: he violently shook off the Papal Power, though
he retained the Roman Religion.

Rule 6. Domus, an house, or home, and Rus, the Country, have in all respects,
the construction of proper names of Cities and Towns, as to their cases.

The Construction of Verbs Impersonal.
1. VErbs Impersonal have never any Nominative case before them, nor an
Accusative before their Infinitive.

2. Not only Verbs which have it before them in the English, are Latined by
Impersonals, but when boys find I, thou, he, etc. the signs of Verbs personals,
they will sometimes find such Latin for the Verb, as is only of the Third
Person, which Latin is an Impersonal Verb.

Reg. 1. Haec tria Impersonalia, etc.

1. Three Impersonals, viz. interest, refert, and est (which is sometimes an
Impersonal) require a Genitive case after them, of the Noun following, except
me, thee, him, us, you, or whom, come after the English of them; and those
Particles must be rendered by the ablative case of the Pronoun Possessive.

1. It much concerns boys to avoid evil company, as they would beware of the
Plague: They are more hurtful to the mind, than the most contagious Disease to
the body: Wicked and profane Play-fellows, are tempters, which do the Devil's
work; they sometimes change a boy of an honest mind, into a vile Rebel. He that
converseth with evil boys, at length becomes like them; he leaves his care to
please the Master, he gives over his endeavoring to serve God, and his
obeying his Parents: They teach him Sabbath-breaking, Swearing, Lying, and all
Vice, which it will be difficult to unteach him; and unless God bless some
instructions, and by Divine power alter him, his life being wasted in serving
sin, he perishes for ever.

2. It concerns me, and all men to look to our selves: the world is full of
Knaves and Knavery: It is hard to be known, and he is hard to be found that is
fit to be trusted.

Obs. Adjiciuntur and illi Genitivi, tanti, etc.

Those Impersonals beside a Genitive case of the person whom, have also another
Genitive of the word betokening the Degree.

1. The greatest caution is to be used in the presence of Boys; Masters must
behave themselves very warily, lest Scholars learn evil of them; and it greatly
concerns boys to imitate the Masters virtue.

2. It little mattereth, whether he that instructs be great; it i^sufficient
if he be good.

3. It little matters how-much money a man have, if he be honest; honesty is
worth loads of treasure.

Reg. 2. In Dativum feruntur haec Impersonalia, etc.

2. Accidit, certum est, contingit, constat, confert, competit, placet, dolet,
expedit, evenit, liquet, libet, nocet, obest, prodest, praestat, sufficit,
vacat; and in general all Impersonals, which have the sign to or for after
them, require a Dative case.

1. If God please, Physic shall profit a man: but God withholding his
blessing, all endeavors are vain: God uses Physicians as his servants: but
unless God help them and their sick person, they become unprofitable; he
tempts God that neglects using endeavors of men; but it best agrees with
Religion, to join Prayer with Physic. God is always at leisure to do good to
those that ask.

2. It greatly concerns those that are desirous to enjoy inward peace, to
believe the omnipotency of God; it is manifest to the eyes of the Servants of
God, that he rules the world; and trust in God banisheth all fear from the
heart. Feebleness of mind is the misery of those that distrust Divine Power and
Goodness.

Reg. 3. Haec impersonalia accusandi, etc.

Reg. His vero attinet, pertinet, etc.

Rule 3. Juvat, decet, and the Compounds of them, as also delectat and oportet,
require an accusative case without a Preposition; attinet, pertinet, spectat,
an accusative with ad.

1. It behooves men of little wisdom to hold their peace; a fool silent,
seems wise.

2. The Tongue is the Author of much evil; it therefore becomes a wise man to
restrain his own Tongue with the Bridle of Reason; it delights him to laugh
at the folly of Pratlers; it belongs to younger men especially to sit silent;
they may observe what others speak, and it may be lawful for them to break
silence, when they can produce something worthy of hearing, which none else
thought on; he that speaks warily, is prised highly by the wise.

Reg. 4. His Impersonalibus subjicitur, etc.

Rule 4. Paenitet, taedet, pudet, piget, Verbs Impersonal, require an
accusative case of the word immediately next them; (which accusative in the
English seems as if it were the Nominative case to the Verb), and beside that a
Genitive case of the word following, which has of, for, or as before it; also
miseret, miserescit, an accusative of the person pitying, a Genitive of the
thing or person pitied, e. g.

1. Good men are weary of their lives among the wicked, they pity their
madness, they are grieved at their folly; whilst in the mean time sinners are
not ashamed of their vices; nor do they repent of them, till God open their
eyes.

2. Good men only truly repent of their sins, Hypocrites repentance is but
pretended, but they are of most base minds, that repent of their good deeds. We
ought not to boast of any Actions; we must give God the Glory, who gives us
Power to perform them, yet we must do good with all our might.

3. It is worthy to be observed, how flexible the minds of Boys are; they
scarcely continue two days in the same thoughts; sometimes they keep not the
same mind two hours; when the Master lays upon them a new command, they seem
to rejoice, and are very forward to obey it for-the-present; but they soon
forget their duty, or grow slack in performing it, when by their unconstant
Parents they are removed from one School to another, they admire their new
Master, whom before-that they despised and laughed at, and they speak-against
their former Master, whom the day before they seemed to prefer before all the
World. New and sudden things please Boys, but they are soon weary of every
thing; that Boy is praiseworthy, that in his tender years begins to show
presages of future constancy; and those men are to be scorned, that in elder
years are like Children for unconstancy. Manly Boys are to be beloved; childish
men to be slighted.

4. The Master pitieth the Scholars ignorance; he loves the Scholar better
than the Scholar loves himself; which he will not now believe, but he will
believe it hereafter.

Obs. Nonnulla Impersonalia remigrant, etc.

Most Impersonals are only the third person singular, or Personals, which
Personals are themselves also in use, as decet from deceo, pudet from pudeo,
accidit from accido, placet from placeo; but paenitet, taedet, and some others,
have no Personals.

1. When God pleases he turns evils into the temporal good of those that
please him; it becomes not good men to be angry with Providence, contentedness
becomes Christians.

2. It is certain that all things shall conduce to the benefit of God's
Servants; and God requires of them, that this thing be resolved-on among them;
to wit, to love him more vehemently, even when he depriveth them of worldly
good-things.

Reg. 5. Coepit, incipit, desinit, debet, etc.

5. The English of any of these Verbs, viz. Coepio, incipio, desino, debeo,
soleo, and possum, which are indeed Personals in their own nature; when the
English of any of them comes before the Infinitive Mood of an Impersonal, the
word that seems to be the Nominative case to the Verb personal must be such
case as the Infinitive Impersonal requires after it.

1. Some begin to repent of their talkativeness, when they have betrayed and
destroyed their Friend by their lawless tongues. We must not betray the faults
of our Enemies; especially we must not say of our Friends all that we know; a
wise man speaks evil of none, but some men speak evil of all. Detraction is a
weed that poysoneth the reputation of many, which grows only in base minds.

1. Diligent Boys use to be ashamed to give place to their equals in Learning;
they are resolved that none shall excel them; they give the Master great hope;
shame works great things, it sometimes persuadeth those, that promises and
threatenings could not move.

The Construction of Adverbs.
Reg. 1. EN and ecce demonstrandi, etc.

En and [ecce] are to be used for see, behold, lo, and not vide, cerne, etc.
When one calls upon another to observe, or take notice of; and if a noun
Substantive come next any of them, that Noun must be put in the Nominative
Case. Except the word be spoken in contempt or blame, and then they will have
an Accusative.

1. Behold the love of God toward sinners, he forgiveth men their greatest and
most vile offenses; he receives those into his favor, whom he has cause to
hate because of their wickedness; repenting sinners are welcome to the arms of
his mercy; but behold the adamantine hardness of men's hearts, who refuse to
return to him, and to accept his mercy; they prefer the pleasures of sin before
eternal joy, they lose their souls to win a gilded nothing.

2. Lo the folly of Children, who love play rather than learning, that think
him the best Master that gives them oftnest leave to play: but those Masters
are to be blamed, that please their Scholars to their hurt.

Reg. 2. Quaedam Adverbia loci, etc.

2. Adverbs of quantity, time and place, and [instar], require the Noun
following them to be of the Genitive Case.

1. The Nations of the World have come to-that-pass of wickedness, that the
Earth is like to Hell, and many men have degenerated into Devils: Wickedness
and Idolatry overspread the greatest part of the World: there is profession
enough, but little true Religion; true Christians are hated; some that call
themselves the Servants of God, and are accounted Saints, bear hearts full of
all hatred, envy and malice against others. Pious frauds, ignorance,
licentiousness, contentions, divide almost the whole World amongst them.

2. How much is the veneration of Learning diminished among men! Heretofore
learned men were valued at a great rate, they were thought worthy of honor;
but now men are fond of ignorance, they soon think that they have gotten
learning enough; some are so sordidly ignorant, that they desire the utter
extirpation of Learning out of the World: they pretend the banishment of
Learning would promote the true Religion, but they are mistaken; learned men
are the best and strongest Pillars of the Church and State.

Tempori, luci, vesperi, are used as Adverbs, though Dative Cases of Nouns.

Rule 3. Adverbs which are derived of Adjectives, govern the same after them,
with the Adjective that they come of.

He that cannot conceal his Friends secrets from those that ask him, but
discloseth whatsoever is committed to his trust, acts not only unpleasantly
to his Friend, but hurtfully to himself; for he that behaves himself most
warily of all men, and lives more watchfully than other men, yet he may happen
to do something, which being known, he may be deprived of his good name; and he
that is void of Knavery, sometimes has need of Art in managing his Affairs;
which if it be revealed, he obtains not his end; he is defeated of his
purpose. Therefore punish not his Crimes, nor his innocent Designs, that
trusts thee, relying upon thine honesty. If thou betray thy Friend, thou
shall change his love into hatred, his esteem of thee into contempt. Every one
is so much wiser, by how much he is more silent.

Reg. 4. Adverbia Diversitatis, aliter, secus, etc.

Rule. 4. Aliter, secus, ante, post, Adverbs require an Ablative Case after
them, of the Noun betokening Quantity.

1. Men and Boys think liberty to sin, sweet; but all will find far otherwise.
Sinners enjoy deceitful pleasure a little-while; but that pleasure cheateth
them of eternal Paradise; a-little-while-after they must pass to eternal
sorrow. They are fools that sell heaven at so low a price: He is happier, whose
condition is imbittered with many outward miseries all his life, and obtains
Heavenly Glory, than the greatest Prince, that after his Pomp, lives with
cursed Spirits for ever.

2. He is a Liar; that denies the same thing this hour, which he most strongly
affirmed a little before; no credit is to be given to his words.

3. The anger of a fool is not to be feared; he threatens men with dreadful
things; but he has not cunning enough to act revenge; he behaveth himself far
otherwise than he speaks. A politic Foe is indeed formidable.

Reg. 5. Cedo flagitantis, etc.

Rule 5. For let me see, give me, fetch me, and such like Expressions, it is
more elegant to make cedo the Adverb, with an Accusative after it, than to
render them by the proper Verb.

Let me see that Book; reach me also thy pen; I will write these instructions
which I have given thee; otherwise thou will forget them: Thou seldom
remembrest good admonitions.

6. These Adverbs require the Verb coming next them, to be put in the
Subjunctive, and no other Mood, viz.

Quoad, until, Ceu, as Acsi, even as. Quasi, as tho, Tanquam, as Dum, until.
1. They that, when they are diseased in body, neglect sending for the
Physician, till the Distemper has gotten greater strength, than which Nature
can resist, despise their own health, as though life were worth nothing. To cure
them will be difficult.

2. Children neglected until Vice have taken deep root in them, are hardly
reformed: it is more easy to bend an Osier, or a Twig, than to twist an Oak.
Vice nourished many years, becomes a Possessor atlast, and is loath to leave its
accustomed dwelling. Parents are to be blamed that neglect their duty in the
beginning, as-if they desired their Childrens future debauchery.

Rule 7. These Adverbs, if a Nominative Case and Verb come next them, require
it to be put in the Indicative, and no other Mood.

Donec, so-long-as, Ut, after-that, Dum, whilst, or as-long-as.

1. So-long-as the Master is ignorant of the disposition of his Scholar, he
spends his labor in vain.

2. But after-that he finds out his inclination, and uses methods agreeable
thereto; his labors prosper, the Boy increases in understanding, whilst the
Master easily discharges his duty.

Rule 8. Ne for Non, in forbidding, requires the Verb following to be of the
Imperative, or Subjunctive Mood, but rather the Subjunctive. When it is used
for lest that, or lest, always the Subjunctive.

Resist not the wholesome Laws of the Land, wherein thou dwell, which are the
Princes defense, and the Peoples best safeguard, lest thou provoke not only
Earthly Lords, but also God, the Sovereign Lawgiver, who has commanded us to
obey the Powers which he has set over us.

9. The rest of the Adverbs are such as need no Rule for the Case that follows
them; and as to the Mood, may indifferently have after them either a Verb of
the Indicative Mood, or of the Subjunctive; so that to name them, would be
superfluous, as well as to heap up multitude of Sentences, wherein Boys should
exemplify their indifferency. Nor is it very pertinent to give Boys Examples
to demonstrate what they must do, in those things wherein they may do as they
list.

The construction of Conjunctions.
Reg. 1. COnjunctiones Copulativae and disjunctivae, etc.

Rule 1. Those Conjunctions, which are called Copulatives and Disjunctives,
also Tanquam, velut, item, quasi, quam, praeterquam, ceu, sic, (which are
properly Adverbs), and sed, ni, nisi, cum, tum, videlicet, scilicet, when any
of these come between two Verbs, they require them both to be put in the same
Mood and Tense; and if they come between two Nouns, they must be of the same
case.

1. Covetous men behave themselves, as though they thought themselves created for
this purpose, that they may enjoy worldly delights; they desire nothing else:
But men were born to greater things; Beasts and Creatures without life, answer
the designed purpose of their Creation, and fulfill the will of God better than
Muckworms.

2. How many men speak more honestly than they act; no man confesses himself a
Knave, but many are so; many promise, but break their promise. How happy were
that World, in which all men spoke according to their thoughts. All would enjoy
peace and plenty.

Note. Those Copulatives couple not like Tenses, when a plain sign of a
different Tense stands before either one of them, which is not before the other.

1. Honesty is the best policy, and will appear the greatest wisdom; all honest
men find not worldly success; but though they want outward good things, God
will make up to them that defect by better riches.

2. Negligent Boys have more-mirth and jollity, than the industrious; but
diligence makes lovely, and will procure honor both to Boys and men.

3. Fools mock at sin; but except they have seen at some time the folly of that
derision, and shall repent of that mistake, they shall after their mirth suffer
torments, in which they shall not be able to be merry.

N. B. If a Conjunction Copulative come between two Nouns, one of which
requires a particular Case by one Rule of Grammar, the other must of necessity
have another Case by another Rule, then it does not join like Cases together.

1. Drunkards are to be accused not only of prodigality, nor only of
beastliness, but of both; he that is given to wine, is unfit for any public or
private business; he makes himself daily void of reason; he is unworthy of the
name of a man; he changes humanity into bestiality.

2. Diligent Boys are industrious at School, and at Home; they use their utmost
endeavor, the Master seeing or not seeing.

2. These Conjunctions following, if a Verb come after them, require it
necessarily to be put in the Subjunctive Mood, viz. Etsi, tametsi etiamsi,
quanquam, quamvis, licet, cum, (for seeing-that), ne, an, number; (for whether) ut
and si.

Rule 3. These Conjunctions require the Verb following them, to be put in the
Indicative Mood, viz. Quando when, Quoniam because, Quandoquidem in as much as,
Quippe, because, Ut, as how.

Rule 4. Some are indifferent, or may have after them either the Indicative
Mood, or Subjunctive, viz. Quod that, Postquam after that, Ni unless Quia
Because, Nunquam Never, Nisi unless Quam Than, Priusquam Before that.


Construction of Prepositions.
PRaepositio in Compositione. Reg. 1.


Rule 1. A Preposition joined to a Verb, to compound it, governs the same
Case after it, as it would if it stood by it self; or a Verb compounded with a
Preposition, governs the same Case after it, which the Preposition governs,
that it is compounded withal.

1. All die not in the same age: Some go out of the World in their Youth,
others proceed to Manhood; some reach to old age; none is sure to live another
year; yet none is content to die this year; every one desires to live another.
Those are most happy that are always prepared. Whosoever is removed out of this
World into Heaven, cannot die too soon. God knows the most convenient season
to bring forth his Servants from their miseries.

2. The blessed Angels, swift Spirits, and of purest Sanctity, are always ready
to do the will of God. By them the Souls of dying Saints are carried to Eternal
Blessedness, in which they shall continue happy to Eternity.

Reg. 2. Verba composita, cum, a, ab, etc.

Rule 2. Verbs compounded with a, ab, ad, con, de, e, ex, in, may better have
an Ablative case after them, with their Preposition repeated, than without it,
e g.

1. It is a Fool's part to see the faults of others, and to be ignorant of his
own; many men are forward to reprove others, that commit the same Crimes; they
readily endeavor to pull out the more from the eye of their Neighbor, but
they neglect their own. He that reproves others, is sometimes guilty of pride;
but he that amendeth his own life, will more easily persuade his fellow.

2. It is worthy of Observation, that those men which hate Piety, and do not
practice it, yet retain a secret reverence of good men, and are sometimes
afraid to commit evil before them. When they are about to step into the filthy
road of Vice, they draw back their foot from the place, till the good man have
passed by. How great reverence ought Religion to have among her Friends, if her
beauty even amaze her Enemies!

Rule 3. The Preposition in, has an Accusative Case after it, in all
significations, except when it is Latin for in, and then it has an Ablative.

The Provident Ant condemns careless Sluggards; she lays up food in plenty,
against a time of scarcity; she carries her store into her hidden Granaries;
in Summer she hoardeth for Winter.

Rule 4. Subter, under, may have after it either an Ablative Case, or an
Accusative.

5. If a Noun follow tenus, up to, which is to be governed of it, which Noun is
of the Plural Number, it must be put in the Genitive Case.

A comely Coat reaches from the middle of the Legs, up to the Shoulders.

For the various signification of Prepositions, Boys may consult, for their
Information, the Westminster Introduction, where their Cases are likewise
largely discoursed.

Of Interjections.
HEU, Rule 1.
an Interjection of exclaiming, may have after it either a Nominative, or an
Accusative Case, ah, and proh, rather an Accusative.

1. Oh! the wickedness of these men, that thirst after the Blood of their
Neighbors; men of such barbarous Cruelty ought to be thrust out into the
Fields, among the Beasts, whom they are like, except that they exceed them in
bloodiness: Ah! the horrid murders that some have committed.

2. There is not one Atheist in Hell; those that in this World laughed at all
serious things, when they come to Eternity, cry out, Alas, my folly! alas, my
ignorance and madness! oh, the dismal effects which unbelief produces!
Heretofore I thought Hell was a Dream; but now I find I my self only dreamed,
and now that I am awakened, I begin to know, and to exercise my Senses too late.

Rule 2. Hei and vae, require a Dative Case after them.

Woe be to those, that resist the Almighty God: He is the surest Friend, but the
sharpest Enemy: his love is sweet, but his wrath is bitter: his favor is
Heaven, but his frowns are Hell. Woe, woe, to all that do not please him. Those
that mock at his threatenings, shall tremble at the execution of them.

The end of the Sentences, which are fitted as Examples to the Grammar-Rules.

Additional Notes.
1. IN making Latin, Boys are apt to be greatly puzzled, and at a loss, to know
when that is a Relative, and ought to be rendered by qui, and when it is a
Conjunction, to be Latined by quod, or ut. Let them therefore, for their help
in that difficulty, observe these following Notes: viz.

1. It is neither a Relative, nor a Conjunction, when it stands the first word
after any Point or Stop greater than a Comma: as after a Colon, Semi-colon, or
Period: but in such places it is to be rendered by the Pronoun demonstrative
iste.

That is always a Relative, when it may he turned into which, which must be
tried in reading over the English Sentence wherein it is, and judging warily
how the Sense would bear it. If it cannot be altered salvo sensu, it is a
Conjunction.

3. There is always between the Conjunction that, and the Verb, a Nominative
Case to the Verb: but between that, the Relative and the Verb, stands no
Nominative Case, except the Relative be not the Nominative Case; but that is
usually the Nominative Case to the Verb it self.

4. The Conjunction that, commonly comes next after a Verb, which signifies
speaking, knowing, finding, hearing, or some such like English.

5. It is neither a Conjunction, nor a Relative, when there follows
immediately after it, a Substantive, which must be put into some oblique Case,
to be governed of, or to follow the Verb next foregoing that. In such Case it
must be rendered by the Pronoun Demonstrative, iste, e. g.

1. All men despise that man, that boasts of his own Exploits; That man,
whose Acts Fame does magnify, retains his Honor without diminishing, even
after his Death; but whosoever praises himself, bewrays Vanity. All men will
think, that he attributes too much to himself. Deserve praise of others, but
still retain an humble mind.

2. That man was of a base mind, that having resolved to get himself a Name,
studied to execute some monstrous Villainy, for the sake of which, men might
talk of him: he chose to be famous for impiety, rather than that his Name
should be buried in oblivion. But the Emperor, in whose Land the Wretch dwelt,
frustrated him of his purpose, by forbidding his Name to be mentioned in the
History, though the Fact was chronicled.

2. That, a Relative, is sometimes understood in the English, and must be
expressed in Latin, by making qui for it. And then is it understood, when in a
Sentence there wants either a Nominative case to the Verb, or an Accusative
Case to follow the Verb, which cannot be supplied from any other word in the
Sentence. e. g.

There is none, except a fool, will sell his Inheritance that his Father left
him, for nothing. There is none, except a very indigent man will sell his
Inheritance at all. An Estate which has descended from Father to Son, ought to
be transmitted to Posterity. There is nothing Prodigality loves so well, as to
spend lavishly the fruits of the Predecessors Industry: there is nothing a wise
man desires more, than that his Children enriched by him, may bless him after
his death. God performs the Promises he has made to industrious men.

3. It is a usual thing for Boys to err in rendering the English of the Present
Tense Passive, by making it by the Participle of the Preter Tense with Sum, es,
est, which must always be carefully avoided: because that Participle with est,
makes up all the Preter Tenses, which must be confounded with the Present, e.
g.

He is praised that is of humble behavior toward all men: courtesy has a
wonderful effect: the proud man is abhorred, the meek are honorable.

Obs. In such cases as these, or in any other of like nature, where Boys are
apt by reason of the English ambiguity to translate wrong: it may not be
altogether unprofitable for them to make the Expression in which the Ambiguity
is, both ways, h. e. First right according to the Caution; and afterward as
they would, or are wont to make it, but within a Parenthesis with non before it.

4. Boys generally conclude, that when they have may, would, might, should, the
Verb must be of the Potential Mood, according to the signs mentioned in their
Accidence, (to which also ought is there added, and can, but not rightly.) But
sometimes those are not merely signs, but must be made by a distinct Verb. And
that is when the seeming sign betokens something of duty, lawfulness, or
earnestness of desire. When they have an Emphasis in them; otherwise, when they
intimate nothing Emphatical, they are only signs of particular Tenses of their
Verbs, e. g.

1. Boys may play when the Master has given leave: but without leave they may
not lotter one hour. Idle Boys would fain escape doing their duty: they would
rejoice if they might play whole weeks.

2. Children should willingly obey their Parents, but for the most part they
are Rebellious. Obedience is a lovely Sacrifice in the sight of God, whom all
should Study to please.

3. If Children should govern themselves, to what misery would they bring
themselves? yet they are seldom content with the most favorable Government:
they have a desire either to change, or to be quite left to their own will.
Their unripe Reason is like Phaeton' 's pride, who would govern a Chariot,
which was beyond his strength. Let them use Patience; he that cannot obey well,
will never command right.

5. The English of the Verb habeo, is often mistaken, because it is sometimes
only the sign of another Verb. But when the English words have, had, has,
have, have only a Substantive after them, and not a Verb, they are to be
rendered by habeo. And Boys are very apt to make had by the Preterpluperfect
Tense of habeo; whereas it ought to be rendered by the Preterperfect; though
when it is a sign only, it is of the Preterpluperfect. Let caution therefore be
used in rendering these, or the like Sentences, viz.

1. The most excellent Artificers correct their own works; they have more quick
Eyesight than other men; they see something deficient after that they have
used the greatest care.

2. an accurate Painter, having striven to draw a most deformed Woman, had
expressed her ugly features so exactly, and to-the-life; that when he viewed
the Picture earnestly, standing in his Shop, he burst out into so loud and long
a laughter, that he killed himself thereby: He had not power to moderate his
Passion. The excess of mirth as-well-as of sorrow, is fatal. He had lived, if
he had not been so ingenious.

6. Had had is the Subjunctive Mood Preterpluperfect Tense, must never be the
Indicative, e. g.

1. How many men may say, I had had money enough, if I had not been too lavish?

2. How many Boys may confess, I had had Learning, if I had had Wisdom to
discern mine own advantage, and ply my Books?

7. Boys are oftentimes at a loss concerning soleo, and utor, because both
signify to use. But they must remember, that soleo is never Latin for to use,
but when a Verb comes next to use, in all other Cases, utor.

8. When there is a Passive sign in the English, before a Verb, the Latin for
which Verb is a Neuter, if it be a sign of a Present Tense Passive, make it by
the Preterperfect Tense of the Neuter; if a sign of the Preterimperfect Tense
Passive, make it by the Preterpluperfect of the Neuter, e. g.

1. He that uses to forget those things which he desires to remember, must use
helps to strengthen his memory, or use the greater diligence and attention when
he is reading, that he may retain profitable instructions; for when they are
once passed out of the memory, there is need of fresh reading to recall them.

2. All men use to desire Riches, but all do not use Riches rightly; when they
are come to Honor and Wealth, they still are greedy to heap Pelion upon Ossa,
to add more to much. He that desires nothing, wants nothing. It is a wise
Man's part to moderate all affections: That is a man of greatness of Spirit,
that could live cheerfully, if his Riches were lost, and all his Friends were
gone.

9. Because the Passive Verbs have properly no Preter-Tenses, but use
Participles, with sum, or fui, therefore that Participle, even when it is
become a Preter-Tense, must be made to agree in Gender, with the Nominative
Case to the Verb, as if it were an Adjective.

10. And, not, two Particles with a Verb between them, or a sign of a Verb, may
not so well be rendered by and non, as by nec set before the Verb.

11. Like is not to be rendered by the Adjective similis, but by the Adverb,
when the English of any Verb stands next before like, except the English of
sum, and then it is an Adjective, e. g.

1. Honesty has always been esteemed laudable by those that do not practice
it. It is to be bewailed, that men know the evil of sin, and see the heauty of
piety; yet love deformity, and neglect beauty. How many men act like Watermen,
that look one way, and row another? that are like Medea, who confessed of her
self, that she approved better things, but followed wickedness.

2. Conscience erecteth a Tribunal in Men's own breasts; it tries, condemns,
and punishes Offenders; its judgment has always been found impartial. It
sometimes sleeps, and is stupid a long while, but it at length awakeneth; it
is dumb many times a great while, but when it speaks, it tells the truth,
and does not flatter. It punishes by intolerable horrors, and spares not.
The gnawings of Conscience torment like a biting Serpent; the Harpies and
Furies of which the Poets their Heads, are the dreadful lashes of this
Executioner. Hearken to Pythagoras 's counsel, who bids thee be afraid of thy
self, when there is no observer present. The reproofs of Conscience are
sometimes medicinal, but always bitter.

12. A before a Participle in ing, and after a Verb of motion, must be rendered
into Latin by the first Supine, the Future in rus, or the Gerund in dum with
ad. But if the Participle note something to be now in hand, or doing, it must
be made by the Verb from whence the Participle comes; and in such Tense as the
Passive sign (which usually is found before such Participles) requires.

13. A, or an before words of time, is rendered by in, and an Ablative Case of
the word of time. e. g.

1. The careless Tradesman, that goes a hunting when he has need of continual
presence in his Shop, never grows rich: but the most diligent Housekeeper, may
go a hunting once a year.

2. The idle Boy that goes a seeking Birds-Nests, or uses any suchlike sport,
when he ought to be at School, never becomes learned; But the most plodding Lad
goes a playing-once a year. If he recreate himself twice a day, for a quarter,
or half an hour, he nevertheless increases learning.

14. When for a Neuter English (which is when the signification of a Verb,
terminates in, or reaches no further than the thing, which seems to be the
Nominative Case to it), Boys find a Latin Verb, which is an Active; the Passive
of that Latin Verb, must be used for the Neuter English, unless there be a Verb
Neuter of the same signification, distinct from the Active.

15. The Particle about, is rendered diverse ways; viz. Sometimes it is the same
with concerning, and must be rendered by de; sometimes the same with near-upon,
there-abouts, and must be rendered by plus, minus. Before a word of time, it is
to be rendered by sub, or circiter; before a place, or person, by circa, or
circum: before the Infinitive Mood, to be, by futurum est, impersonally, with
ut, e. g.

1. Boys and Parents are very forward to remove from one School to another.
Boys remove because they have hope to find more easy Tasks. Idleness is their
only Argument.

2. The Heavens move most swiftly, they never slop their course. Dull Souls are
unlike the Heavenly Bodies, for they are loath to action, they covet perpetual
rest.

3. He that is most skilful in any Art, has need of clearer knowledge; he is
not ashamed to confess, that he is still ignorant; but the fool having spent a
few hours about his Studies, thinks himself a wise man; he that has Knowledge
enough, has none.

4. All Boys are not of equal Wit. Some Boys having tarried at School about
four or five years, make a great progress; but others spend seven years about
nothing, though the Master faithfully use his endeavor; and when they are
about to be removed from School, they are no whit the better. It were to be
wished Parents would discern the tempers of Children, and would not strive to
compel them to learning against nature. Some are born for the Court, others for
the Pulpit, but others for the Plow.

16. According with to after it, is made by secundum, with as after it, by
prout, proinde ut; accordingly by proinde.

17. The rendering the particle after, creates great mistakes in Exercises; let
Boys therefore observe, that after must be rendered by postquam, when a
Nominative Case comes next it; by a, ab, or post, when a Noun comes next it,
which is of any other Case; when it betokens according to, by de, or ad. After
a Noun of time, by post the Adverb, and quam, if a Verb follow. Afterward by
postea, hereafter, posthac, e. g.

1. After Caesar had conquered Pompey, his Potent Adversary, he enjoyed quietly
the Imperial Seat, according to his desire. But ungrateful and cruel men
Stabbed him after many noble exploits, whereby he increased the Roman glory.
According as it happened to many Roman Emperors after him.

2. There are different ways of writing and reading in the World; some write
and read from the right hand to the left, after the manner of the Hebrews;
others from the top to the bottom, after the Chinese fashion: but English men
from the left hand to the right.

3. He that is now jovial, shall be sorrowful hereafter; he that commits a
rash act, shall repent of it afterward.

18. The Particle again, after as big, as strong, and such like Expressions, is
made by duplo, with a Comparative Degree before it.

19. Against before a Noun of time, must be rendered by in, with an Accusative
Case before a Verb, with its Nominative Case, by dum; after mind, thought,
will, law, custom, right, by praeter. Over Against e regione, ex adverso.

20. All joined with a Substantive of the Singular Number, is rendered by totus,
not by omnis, (for omnis is Latin for every) Before a Substantive Plural by
omnis, not by totus; at-all with a Negative word before, by omnino, e. g.

1. A Camel is as good again for Traveling as an Horse, because he is not
weary, and he will continue strong five or six days without Water, which an
Horse wants twice a day.

2. A cunning Merchant lays up his Wares against a time of scarcity: But the
price sometimes falls against his expectation and will. All his hope of Selling
dear is lost; all his crafty contrivances do not succeed as he would wish. But
at other times his forecast produces treble Profit. None obtains his desire
at all times. He is not discouraged at-all, but rather increases his Caution.

21. At as, many times answer each other by way of Comparison in the same
Sentence, and must then be rendered, the former by aeque, the latter by ac; or
the former by tam, the latter by quam.

22. At, before a word betokening time, price, manner, instrument, or game,
must have no Latin made for it; it is only a Sign of an Ablative Case. To be
at, to be present at; intersum with a Dative, adsum with an Ablative, e. g.

1. A poor Man is as happy without riches, if he enjoy contentedness of mind,
as the richest Earl, that coveteth greater Honor.

2. He that spends the night at Cards, and the day in drinking, bereaveth
himself of his reason, and his Children, and all the family of due sustenance.
Be not present at unlawful Games, lest thou be tempted to trifle away thy time
with them, lest thou become as foolish as they.

23. Become of, is to be Latined by fio, with de.

24. Before, when a Verb with its Nominative Case, comes next after it, is to
be rendered by antequam, when a word of time, or place, by ante, heretofore
antehac.

25. Being, before to, with a Verb, is made by a Participle in rus.

26. Both, spoken of two, is made by ambo, or uterque; but when both is
answered by and, both is rendered by cum, and by tum, e. g.

1. What will become of the Man, that loses all his worldly Friends, and has
not hope in an Heavenly Father, whose favor lesseneth the terror of all other
losses?

2. He that gets to himself better riches, before he loses lower things, is
rich after all his poverty. He that improveth time to get sure hope of a
blessed Eternity before he dies, is happy not only after, but before death.
Being to depart out of this world, he rejoices.

3. Wealth and Honor are both vain: They both sometimes make the owner worse.
He that lays out his time upon them, both misseth of better things, and even
sometimes is frustrated of his expectation when he has obtained them.

27. But is rendered several ways: After cannot, it is rendered by non, after not
doubting, not questioning, and such like Expressions, by quin; when it
intimates so many, so often, or any quantity, and no more, by solummodo; but
for, by absque; not but that, non quod non. When it excepteth some person, or
thing, from what we have been saying before, by praeter, or nisi: sometimes it
is the same with who not, and must be rendered by qui non.

28. Either sometimes signifies one of the two, and is then rendered by utervis,
Alteruter; sometimes it is immediately answered by or, and then rendered by aut,
vel.

29. Else after who? or what? Interrogatives; after something, nothing,
somebody, nobody, is rendered by alius; for otherwise, alias.

30. So far from, having that after it, is rendered by adeo non, with us.
As-far-as, by quantum, or quoad, e. g.

1. A Fool cannot but laugh at all times, but when he cries. He knows nothing
but those two extremes. He doubts not, but he has reason enough to laugh, if
he see but the wagging of a feather by the wind. There is none, but is apt to
laugh at such an Idiot; but we ought rather to pity his hard circumstances,
but-for the kindness of God, we had been like him. It becomes boys to be of a
modest countenance and behavior, and not to signify by their faces, either
mirth or sorrow before Superiors.

2. Gold and Honor are two great Idols of the world, worshipped by more than
used to appear at Ephesus, to worship the great Goddess Diana. But he that
prefers either of them before godliness, or sets them in a chief room of
his heart, as his God, is an Idolater, as well as he that worshippeth Images,
or bends his knees to a marble Statue. There are some that desire nothing
else; they will obtain them, else a tempest is more calm than their
discontented mind. But if their wishes succeed, they are so far from being
happy, that as far as can be observed, they are less satisfied than when they
had nothing. The rich man would fain be richer.

31. For, before a Verb with its Nominative Case, must always be made by nam,
or enim. Sometimes it is the same with as, and must be then rendered by in, with
an Accusative before the names of Diseases, by contra; before other
Substantives, by pro.

32. Hither, with the before it, is always an Adjective, and must be rendered by
citerior, made to agree with its Substantive, which always stands next after
it. When it betokens place, by huc.

33. How, before Adjectives and Adverbs (derived of Adjectives), must not be
made by quomodo, but by quam. How, with much, and a Comparative Degree, by
quanto.

34. But if, must be rendered by sin; but if not, by sin minus.

35. Not, is omitted after the Verb caveo, e g.

1. It becomes children to pull off their Hats, when they meet those to whom
reverence is due from them. For by uncovering their heads, and bending their
bodies, they show an humble and obedient mind. Those Parents are to be blamed,
that teach not civility. But how much more ignorant are they, that think it a
sin to use any respectful behavior, and forbid their Children strictly to
salute any man. How clownish are those Children, that are educated by such
Parents?

2. Take heed thou offend not thy Parents. But if thou have done any thing
worthy of their anger, be sorry for thy crime; beg their pardon upon thy bended
knees, for a token of thy repentance. If thou do so, they will perhaps pardon
thee; but if not, thou must expect punishment.

3. Sometimes warm things are good for the Toothach, and sometimes cold things.
But sometimes no medicine can cure the pain. Who would think, the aching of so
small a Bone, should produce so grievous a torment?

4. If thou stand on the hither side of a Brook, which has a narrow Bridge,
and see thy superior on the farther side, by-no-means pass over, till he have
first passed. Give place, in all places, to those that excel thee.

36. If let stand before a Verb of the first Person Singular, the Verb must be
made of the Subjunctive Mood.

37. Like is not always an Adjective, but sometimes a Verb; viz. when it has a
person before it in the English; when next after a Verb, similiter.

38. Less, with a Substantive with which it may agree, is to be made by minor:
with a Verb, or no, nothing, much, little, by minus an Adverb.

39. Much, with a Substantive, is to be made by multus: with a Verb, by
magnopere; before Comparatives and Superlatives, by long; or if how be joined
with much, by quanto; if so, tanto.

40. More for rather, is made by magis; for hereafter, by posthac: The more, in
the former part of a Sentence, by quo, in the latter part, answering to the
former, by eo, e. g.

1. Let a Boy of ingenious mind be commended, and he will study the more
diligently. The more he is praised, the more he coveteth further commendation.
Let me teach those Boys that are of tender disposition, and my labor shall be
easy; but naughty Boys are always mingled among the good. No Teacher is free
from vexation.

2. Idle Boys like careless Masters; but Parents choose those that are
industrious, and virtuous, that their Children may be like them. Parents care
is less, when the Masters care is certain.

3. The Man provokes less, that knows not his duty, than he that neglects
wilfully. Much knowledge renders a Man unexcusable. How much more safe is he
that is invincibly ignorant, than he that is unmoveably obstinate?

4. Many Men see sometimes the folly of vice, and say to themselves, I will
never more commit that wickedness; but they forget their purposes, they strive
more to find out occasions of sin, than to avoid them.

41. Most with a Substantive coming immediately after it, is made by plerique.

42. Neither, when it relates to two things spoken before, is made by Neuter;
when nor answers it, it is made by nec.

43. Never with the before a Comparative, is rendered by nihilo.

44. Of after a Substantive, and before mine, thine, ours, yours, his and
theirs, is omitted, and that word, which comes after of in the English, made in
the Latin to agree with the Substantive, which went before of.

45. Over, after a Verb, is a sign only of the Dative Case, and must have no
Latin word made for it, e. g.

2. Most Authors, which Boys read, have some hurtful things in them, but they
are not therefore to be rejected. Wholesome Herbs grow among poisonous ones, and
yet are never the worse. Good Boys neither regard nor delight in those things
which are unseemly.

2. A Friend of mine lost his honor the same day in which a Friend of yours
was created Earl. But the conditions of human things are uncertain. God rules
the World. To some he gives both pleasure and profit; to others he vouchsafes
neither.

46. Self or selves must be rendered either by ipse, or by adding met to the
Pronoun foregoing, except in the Pronoun se.

47. Since for seeing-that, is rendered by cum, or quandoquidem; for from or
after, by a, ab, or ex. For ago by abhinc, in other Cases ex quo.

48. Such before a Substantive, by talis or ejusmodi; when an Adjective comes
next it, by tam, adeo.

49. That after same, is rendered by qui, or ac, after words of fear in
affirmative Speeches by ne; if not be added, by ut, or ne non, e. g.

1. He is best that thinks himself worst; Since those that think themselves
good, are fuller of Pride, than of Piety. He that considers his own past
life, will find that he he has always been an offender, since he was capable
of acting.

2. Who can say, I have not disobeyed God since my Youth? Who would be guilty
of such Pride? Who dare speak such a bold word? The best of men sins every
day; and what preventeth that God does not punish the same moment that man
offends.

3. I fear that those Children will become evil men, that have seen evil
Examples of Paronts. I fear that they will not have wisdom to shun their
parents Vices.

50. The before any Comparative, is made by quo, and answered by eo.

51. Till before a Noun, is made by usque ad; before a Verb with its Nominative
Case by donec.

52. Together after words of time, is rendered by per set before the word of
time. In company, at the same time or place, by simul.

53. So for also, is rendered by etiam, before an Adjective or Adverb by nimts,
nimium.

54. Very before an Adjective or Adverb, is only a sign of the Superlative
Degree, or may be made by valde; before a Substantive, by merus, e. g.

1. The more learned a man is, he either is, or ought to be the more humble; he
that is proud of his wisdom, is indeed a very fool.

2. That is a very excellent Rule, which Christ our Savior has given us to
observe, viz. Do to others as thou wishest they should do to thee. Do not tarry
till thou receivest a kindness from another man; only wait till a needful time,
and then help him, though he be thine Enemy, and have continued to injure thee
many years together.

3. It is not strange if Friends live peaceable together. But it is a
Christians duty to exercise amity toward his Enemy; not only to pray for his
Benefactors, but for his Persecutors too. Thou can not observe this Rule too
diligently.

55. Whether answered by or, is made by seu sive; when it notes which of the
two, by uter.

56. Soever is Latined by cunque, added to the foregoing word. (And between it
and the word, to which it is added, may elegantly be inserted another word.)

57. Yet answering to although, is made by tamen; noting hitherto, or as yet,
by adhuc, e. g.

1. A true Christian is happy, whether he lives or dies; when life and death
are before him, he is never in doubt whether he shall choose. The Glory of God
determines the matter.

2. Not whosoever professes himself Religious, but whosoever is truly
Religious, is lovely in the sight of God. Wheresoever that man dwells, God is
with him; though he dies, yet he shall live: God never yet forsook his Servants.

58. An usual error among Boys, is caused by the Ambiguity of those words in
the English Tongue, viz. your and you. Which in our Idiom, are properly enough
used in speaking either to one Person, or to more than one: but must be Latined
differently: the way therefore to avoid that mistake, is only carefully to
consider whether one Person be spoken to or more; if the English words you,
yours, refer only to one, they must be rendered by tu, tuus: if two or more, by
vos, vester.

59. If you find an English of a Verb Passive, and considering the Latin word,
find it to be the Deponent, though that Deponent will sound like a Passive, yet
it must not be used as a Passive, but the words somewhat altered, so as to keep
the same sense, and yet make use of the Deponent, or an, in its stead, e. g.

1. A wicked man's greatness is soon forgotten, but the name of the righteous
shall be remembered for ever.

2. The Holy Name of God is abused by those that call themselves his Servants;
yet run greedily into all Debaucheries.

3. The devices of the wisest men are frustrated by the wiser God.

60. The signs of Cases are sometimes in English found by themselves, at a
distance from their proper word; and in rendering such English, must be reduced
into their right place, and not Latin words made for them separately. e. g.

1. Good Instructions are as necessary as Food: men honor those that they
received good advice from, in their tender years.

2. Counsel has its effect according to the man which it proceeds from, and
the mind of him that it is given to; but chiefly according to God's blessing.

61. One another is made by alius, repeated twice according to the Gender of
the Substantives, one with the other, answering to it in another part of the
Sentence, is made by alter and alter, e. g.

Water and Ice beget one another; The one is liquid, the other condensed; The
one is ready for use, the other Servants melt over the fire. But in coldness
they resemble one another.

One-another, may also be made by invicem an Adverb, with se a Pronoun. Let
Boys render the former Examples both ways.

Larger English Exercises.
After the rendering Sentences, not only according to the Rules of the Grammar;
but also of Particles and other things observable, it will be time to proceed
to continued discourses. And before the rendering of English Dialogues,
Epistles, or such like Exercises; these few things may not be amiss to be
premised for Observation; in order to Boys acquitting themselves the more
commendably in that concern, viz.

Obs. 1. Relative Sentences are independent, h. e. no word in a Relative
Sentence is Governed of a Verb or Adjective, which stands in another Sentence;
nor does a word in any other Sentence depend upon any of the appurtenances of
the Relative.

Obs. 2. When a Pronoun of the third Person is the Antecedent to a Relative,
that Pronoun Antecedent is rather to be understood, and only the Relative
expressed; as he, that, qui, not ille qui; that which, quod, not illud quod.

Obs. 3. Verbs have many times some Particle or other, which comes after them,
and is part of their signification: For which no Latin is to be made; only the
Verb is to be taken notice of; and which Particle is sometimes parted from its
Verb by the interposure of some other words, as lay burdens upon, to rule with
rigor over.

Obs. 4. But in the beginning of a Sentence, may be made by Sed; but rather by
autem, or vero, placed the Second Word in the Sentence: Autem must never be the
first Word, nor vero.

Obs. 5. Nam is Latin for for; the first word of a Sentence; but if enim be
used, it must be the Second word, never the First.

Obs. 6. Non (especially) must stand before the Verb, and generally all
Adverbs, though the English of them stand after the Verb: as I loved him not,
non amavi, not amavi non.

Obs. 7. Make not that English by two distinct words in Latin, for which there
may be found one, which fully expresses it; as how great? not quam magnus, but
quantus, how often? not quam saepe? but quoties?

Obs. 8. In rendering English into Latin, make not rashly this or that word to
be of this or that Case, merely because it has such a Sign before it (which is
the occasion of frequent Errors), but see for some word foregoing, that
governs a Case by some Rule, and make it accordingly. For the English Signs
of Cases, to, of, etc. are liable to multitudes of Exceptions.

Obs. 9. Never go about to render an English Sentence into Latin, before
reading it warily over, from the beginning to the end: and if one reading
suffice not for a thorough understanding of the sense and construction, have
patience to read twice, thrice, or four times, as often as need require, till
thou perfectly understand the connection of each word one to another.

Obs. 10. In almost every English, if but consisting of five or six lines, thou will meet with, it may be, one or more Idiomatical Expressions, which will be
bald, if rendered verbatim. In sach Sentences, use not the Dictionary, but
either a Phrase-book ( such as Willis 's Anglicisms Latinized, Walkers Idioms,
or any other, which the Master shall have recommended to thee), or (which would
be the more commendable of the two) bethink thy self of some apt Expression,
which thy self have read, and which thou have been bidden to treasure up,
either in thy memory, or a Notebook. The Idioms of one Language cannot be
tolerably rendered but by the Idioms of another.

Obs. 11. When there is a Relative-Sentence, or a Parenthesis in the English,
read the rest of the Sentence, from one Period to another, leaving that
Relative-Sentence, or Parenthesis out, then shall thou clearly see the
dependence of each word, and shall thereby avoid much of that difficulty. And
when thou have read it so, till thou understand it, then proceed to Translation.

Obs. 12. Though an artificial placing, and ordering of words, be not essential
to the true translating of a Sentence, yet it is Ornamental. Take heed
therefore, that the words stand in some convenient and pleasant order. Take
notice therefore, That,

1. The Oblique Cases stand most handsomely in the beginning of a Sentence, the
Verb in the end, and the Nominative Case betwixt both.

2. The Substantive of the Genitive Case, stands most elegantly before the
Substantive that governs it.

3. The Adjective is more neatly set before the Substantive than after it.

4. Comparative and Superlative Adjectives, or Adverbs, stand most gracefully
in the end of the Sentence.

5. If you have a Substantive and Adjective of the Genitive Case, the former
Substantive governing, may elegantly come between them; as Caesare Clementia
Majestatis.

6. Between a Substantive and Adjective which are not of the Genitive Case,
another Substantive of the Genitive; as, -- Vera justitiae laus, humillima
subditorum obedientia.

7. A Pronoun Primitive comes elegantly between a Pronoun Possessive, and a
Substantive that it agrees with; as en offero meum tibi auxilium tuum mihi
consilium expeto.

8. The Vocative Case, the Verbs inquit and ait, must not be set First, but
Second, or third in the Sentence.

9. Longer Words conclude a Period most sweetly, h. e. of three or four
Syllables.

10. Yet beware thou make not a Sentence ambiguous, hard to be understood, in
over-striving to place words artificially; for there is no elegancy in
ambiguity:

11. Many words that begin and end with Vowels, sound unpleasantly,; they cause
an Hiatus, too much gaping: Magna avi isti utilitas -- summo oro obveni auxilio.

12. Two words meet not handsomely together, whereof one ends with the same
Consonant with which the other begins: as, Puer rudis literarum. Ingens
strepitus. Dispose such words otherwise, as strepitus ingens.

13. Many words of the like sound in the ending, meet not gratefully: as,
Multarum and magnarum miseriarum origo est ambitio. Avoid such concurrence, by
parting those words, or using other words in their stead.

Obs. 13. In seeking Latin words in the Dictionary, make use rather of the
first or second that you find, than of those that follow. And refuse to make
use of those which are very near the sound of the English: as Natio for a
Nation, commendo to commend, salvatio for salvation, vexatio for vexation, etc.
unless there be no other; as tentatio for temptation.

Obs. 14. Sometimes the same English word may have diverse significations, and
that in the same discourse. In order to the right rendering of such Sentences,
there is requisite a treasuring up such words as they occur in Authors, or are
taken notice of in correcting Exercises by the Master, that the several Latin
words which answer to the several significations, may not be used
promiscuously; as, to marry, has four significations: Nuptum dare, is to
marry, when it is spoken of a Father marrying his Daughter to any Person, or
giving in Marriage; matrimonio jungere, to marry, spoken of the Priest marrying
a Couple; Uxorem ducere, a man murrying a woman; nubo to marry, when it speaks
of a woman being married to a man, or marrying a man. And many words there be
of like diversity, which must be carefully heeded.

Dat Pater aut Matter nuptum, jungitque Sacerdos, Uxorem duco, nubit at illa
mihi.
Obs. 15. Sometimes an English Verb of the Third Person, is rendered by a Latin
of the Second; which is when in an Interrogative Sentence, the Nominative Case
to the Verb, is a man, or one, then make no Latin for man, or one, only put the
Verb into the Second Person; as Quid facias in hac re arctissima? What should
one do in such a perplexed business? Quid dicis? What can a man say? How could
one refrain? Qui abstineres?

Having committed to memory these few Notes, the following Englishes will not
be difficult.

DIALOGUE I. The Master and the Scholar.
Mast. Boy, you have always been dear to me, above the rest of your
Schoolfellows.


Sch. I have greatest reason (honored Sir) to believe that you love me: The
daily care that you take in teaching me, not only those things that belong to
Learning, but also which conduce to Piety, is a witness of your Love, which I
can no way recompense, but by hearty thanks, and willing obedience.


Mast. Diligence in teaching, is the best opportunity I have to evidence my
love. But the more I love thee, the more it grieves me, when I see thee more
idle than other Boys, whom I make not so much account of. My love constrains me
to be angry with thee, when thou neither studiest to please me, nor to profit
thy self. I find, that Learning is not as pleasant to thee, as it was formerly.


Sch. Sir, I dare not deny that I am guilty; but I earnestly entreat you, that
you would forgive me.


Mast. Pardon hurts those Boys that are not of an ingenuous Spirit, and that
strive not to requite their Master's Clemency by better diligence. It is as
easy to spoil Boys by forgiving, as by punishing.


Sch. Believe me, Sir, but once, and if ever I offend hereafter, spare me not.


Mast. Thou have often promised me amendment, but thou seldom art as good as
thy word.


Sch. I confess I have broken my promise, but let your mercy pardon that fault
too; I am resolved, Sir, to forsake all mine idle Companions, to leave off my
evil Custom of playing; to ply my Books, and to become a new Boy, as if I were
not the same, that I have been.


Mast. You design to do these things, while you are under fear of punishment;
but when you have forgotten the fear, you will return to your former folly, at
the bidding of the first naughty Boy.


Sch. I will beg of God to give me power to perform what I promise; for without
him we can do nothing; as I have heard from your mouth.


Mast. I like that word: Pray to God earnestly, and he will answer thee. I will
pardon thee, but thou must strive with all thy might, as well as crave divine
help.


Sch. I will, Sir, do both, I will both pray and strive, and I hope I shall not
be unworthy of your Clemency: you shall not repent of your pardoning me.


Mast. I shall love thee most dearly, (my dearest Boy) if thou consult thine
own profit hereafter, and study diligently. And (which is more desirable) God
shall bless thee, he shall increase thine understanding and wisdom; for he
gives wisdom as well as riches to the industrious.


DIALOGUE. II. Thomas and Giles.
T. WHY do you cry? What has befallen you?


G. I have offended God by disobeying my Parents, and I know not what will
become of me: I am ashamed of my ingratitude.


T. You are far more happy than they, that having committed a fault, deny that
they are guilty; or if they confess it, they are not sorry for it, as thy Tears
show thee to be.


G. I am indeed grievously guilty, and I am afraid God will not pardon me.


T. God is indeed angry with stubborn Children; but if they beg pardon of God,
he will forgive their sins; God delights to show mercy; it pleases him to
see sinners repenting.


G. I have been guilty of this fault many times, notwithstanding that I have
promised my Father better Obedience.


T. Be of good cheer, I will entreat your Father to pardon you, and he will
pray for you, that God also may be reconciled.


G. My Father is a man of most sweet temper; he was reconciled before I came
from home, he was even ready to pardon before my repentance.


T. I am glad of that. Beware thou displease him not for the future, that God
may bless thee. If thou study to obey God and thy Parents, thou shall be kind
to thy self, thou shall live comfortably, and enjoy Eternal Happiness.


G. By the help of God, I will be obedient.


DIALOGUE III. Master and Scholar.
S. SIR, I entreat that you would be pleased to grant me one request.


Mast. If my grant may profit thee, I will not deny; If thou ask those things
which tend to thine own hurt, I must refuse.


Sch. I only beg, Sir, that you would be pleased to repeat to me those
instructions that you gave to our Form yesterday.


Mast. I like well thy asking such things. But thou know that I always
admonish the whole School together, not one particular Form. Where were thou,
when I was admonishing?


Sch. Sir, I was not at School yesterday in the afternoon, because my elder
Brother was then returned from Italy; my Father bad me stay to spend the
Afternoon with my Brother.


M. That indeed is a sufficient reason, if thou speak the truth.


Sch. I dare not lie, Sir.


Mast. Why did not thou ask some of thy Schoolfellows, rather than me? they
certainly can remember those few Precepts, which I gave them.


Sch. The hearing them from your mouth, Sir, will more affect my mind.


Mast. I will grudge no labor, whereby I may benefit thee; I will tell thee in
short. -- I told them how necessary it was, that besides Family Prayer, and the
Prayers which they are present at in the School, each Boy privately pray to God
every Morning and Evening, with upright heart, and religious mind. So God shall
bless him Night and Day. He that does not begin and end the Day with committing
himself to the care of the Almighty God, seems to separate himself from God's
Family, and is most unworthy of his fatherly protection. -- I charge them all
the day to be diligent at School, and obedient at Home. God revengeth injuries
offered to Parents; and shame recompenceth the slothful. -- I endeavored to
dissuade them from lies. Speak the truth at all times. It is not lawful for
Boys to lie, to avoid danger or punishment. Rather suffer than sin. If thou be
worthy of punishment, confess thy guilt ingenuously, lest after thou have made
thy Master angry, by committing, thou make God thine Enemy by denying. Lie not
in mirth: Jesting lies bring serious Sorrows. He is a fool that destroys his
own Soul, to make others sport. I admonished them of the horrid nature of
Oaths: They are like Darts, that being shot out of the mouth, rebound, and
smite the shooters heart. Swear not by sacred things, for they ought never to
be mentioned, but for the confirmation of weighty Truths, before those that
have power to demand of thee an Oath: He that fears God, fears an Oath. And
lastly, I put them in mind of that Duty, which I have frequently admonished
them of, to wit, that they be mannerly and observant toward Superiors, and
courteous toward Equals.

I then minded them but of these few things; observe thou them also, that God
and men may love thee.


Sch. I thank you, Honored Sir; I will observe.


DIALOGUE IV. William and Bartholomew.
Will. Whither is the man gone that killed his Mother?


Barthol. Is it possible to be imagined, that any man should be so bloody?


Will. You know well enough whom I mean; viz. him that two men pursued last
night.


Barthol, I heard some men talk of a Murderer, that was put in Prison; but I
know not whether it be the same that you speak of, or another.


Will. I suppose then, that it is he: he is a very bloody man, he killed his
Mother, which is worse than common Murders; He stamped upon her after he had
wounded her; and after that barbarous act, broke her Skull with an Hammer,
which increases his guilt.


Barthol. The Murder, and the circumstances which you speak of, are very
barbarous. Nor is it a false Report, that I have heard. But with what moved,
did he it?


Will. Men talk of many causes, according to their various suspicions, which I
have not now time to tell: But the most probable report is, That he did it,
that he might the sooner enjoy the Money that she had hoarded up for him.


Barthol. To what a pass are things come! It is hard to be known what a man any
one is. I am sure all things were given him that he had need of. But the Devil
tempted him by desire of Riches, than which nothing is more prevalent. He that
is forsaken of the Grace of God, hearkeneth to Satan, and commits all manner
of wickedness that Hell can devise. Pleasures and profits are the Devil's
snares, which men are easily taken in.


Will. So hasty Heirs, that shorten their Parents lives, shall have their
Inheritance in Hell.


DIALOGUE V. Mark and Anthony.
MAR. My Father's Apprentice is fled from his Service, and has taken away
store of Money with him, besides my Father's Horse, that he took out of the
Stable; and many other things that used to be committed to his charge, as to a
faithful servant. He has committed many things worthy of punishment, before
this; but now he has done more evil, than in all the rest of his life.


Anth. As I remember, I have heard your Father commending him formerly.


Mark. He has been always accounted one of an excellent Nature: When he was a
Boy, every Body thought him a Child of great hope: And since his riper years,
most men, that knew him, have thought him a Servant of most faithful Conscience.


Anth. He has need of a great deal of honesty, that can behave himself
honestly among so many temptations, which lay wait for a young man. If he had
had help from God, which he had great need of, he had been safe from Satan's
Temptations. Pythagoras the Philosopher, was wont to liken young men to Colts;
and that comparison was fit; For unless they be restrained with a Bridle, they
rush headlong into their own destruction.


Mar. I was always afraid that he would be an unprofitable Servant, and I was
sorry when my Father took him Apprentice.


Anth. Did you not say, he was well thought of?


Mar. I knew one thing of him, which made me doubt concerning him: He was my
School-fellow, and was very idle and stubborn in School; he never had my
Master's love.


Anth. It is then no wonder, that he is now wicked. Those that are Rebels in
the School, are Knaves in the Shop, or Fools. A perverse and idle Schoolboy,
seldom becomes a good Servant. He is wise, that being to choose an Apprentice,
consulteth the Schoolmaster more than the Parents.


DIALOGUE VI. Master and Servant.
MAst. Will thou never become wholly good, Harry? Serve. You use to say, None is
perfect, Sir.


Mast. Do thou cavil at my words? I mean, Will thou never wholly lay aside
thy sloth?


Serve. I will endeavor, Sir, to please you always for the future.


Mast. I wish I might believe thee; Thou seem sometimes, a Boy of most
tender Spirit; but soon after, all hopes of thee vanishes. Thou art like a man
that I have heard of, that never knew his own mind; if he had determined one
thing one moment, he changed his resolution in the next; his thoughts were not
his own. I never knew but two boys like thee, Thomas Fallacio, and William
Futurio, two Neighbors Apprentices; the one (I think) is as bad, the other
somewhat worse than thy self. I am sorry thou should give me cause to say so
of thee.


Serve. I repent (Sir) that I am one of that number; but I will first amend,
that they may imitate me.


Mast. Be as good as thy word; if thou be, as thou have a-great while been
called idle, thou shall be hereafter esteemed the best. All the Neghbourhood
will commend thee. But I fear thou will sleep to morrow morning void of care. I
wish God may give thee help to be more faithful.


Serve. It is expedient for me to be industrious, Sir, and I will be.


Mast. Thou will reap the benefit of thine industry, when thou come to
Mans-Estate; the more careful and diligent thou art in my business, the fitter
thou will be for thine own; I exhort thee as well for thine advantage, as mine.


Serve. I most readily believe you, Sir; I thank you, Sir, for your kind
admonitions.


DIALOGUE VII. Master and Scholar.
MAst. Two days ago thou desiredst of me a Repetition of some instructions of
mine; I now demand of thee, attention to a few more, which I would fain have
fastened in thy mind; That thou may be ignorant of nothing that may tend to
thy good.


S. most readily, (honored Master) will I attend; for I firmly-believe, that
you aim at my good.


M. Thou may believe; but if not, I my self am assured, that out of a
conscientious care for thee, I speak and act all things. And therefore together
with the former, remember these documents also.

First, Therefore be of a Catholic Spirit, love all the World; love thy
Friends because they deserve it; love thine Enemies because Christ commands
it. Requite not injuries with injuries; but return good for evil. Abhor
revenge; it was honorable sometimes among Heathens, but it is most uncomely
for a Christian.

Secondly, Think no evil; when thou feel evil thoughts arising within thy
mind, divert thy meditation immediately to something of good. Contraries drive
out one another.

Thirdly, Learn good of every one: observe the virtues of good Examples to
imitate them; observe the vices of bad Examples to avoid them.

Fourthly, If thou know thy School-fellow Guilty of a Crime, admonish him
privately, and tell me not of him, for I delight not in punishing; try if thou
can by thy Arguments reform him; thou shall then do a blessed work; but if he
hearken not to thee, make me acquainted, lest thy Friend be ruined. It is no
part of friendship to conceal deadly vices; thou shall merit his greatest love
by revealing them; and tho he, a wicked Boy, curse thee, God shall bless thee.
Yet I would by no means have thee be a tell-tale, or common accuser. Never
discover, but when there is necessity, and the safety of a Boy requires it.

Fifthly, Hope not for safety in sin, because most men go that way; companions
will not make the flames of Hell the cooler: the more fuel, the hotter the
flame will be.

Sixthly, Abuse not the Sabbath, nor employ it either upon thy School-business;
(for I had rather that were never done, than thou shall lay out that day upon
it), or upon recreations. It is the Lord's Day, not thine own; worship God on
that day; so shall he bless thee all the week after. Those that work in Gods
Time, shall lose their labor; and those that play in it, shall repent of their
sport.

Seventhly, Never use the Name of God irreverently, he is a jealous God. Be
afraid to mention his Name without a mental adoration

Eighthly, Jeer not others upon any occasion: if they be foolish; God (not
themselves) denied them understanding; if they be vicious, thou ought to
pity them, not to revile them; if deformed, God framed their bodies, and will thou scorn his workmanship? Art thou wiser than the Creator? If poor, Poverty
was designed for a motive to Charity, not to contempt; thou can not see what
riches they have within: especially despise not thy aged Parents. If they be
come to their second Childhood, and be not so wise as formerly, they are yet
thy Parents, thy duty is not diminished.

Ninthly, If Providence promote thee to riches or honors, be not proud: God
gives thee those things for other ends; if thou abuse them, he will take them
away.

Tenthly, Take not any thing, that is thy Parents, without their leave; nothing
is thine, till it be given thee. He that Steals, is never the less a Thief,
because he Robs but his Father or Mother.

Eleventhly, Be always content; Childrens will is limited; murmur not against
thy Parents, against thy Master, much less against God.

Twelfthly, Never talk of those things, that concern thee not; be not a
busie-body.

Observe all these things most devoutly, the sum of all which is Obedience; for
that one word comprehends the whole duty of a Child toward Parents, toward
Master, and toward God; let th^^ little word be engraven upon thine heart; and
(...) thou observe it, when thou art a man thou will be useful in the
Commonwealth, and Loyal to thy Prince.


S. You have given me, Sir, a compendium of my duty. I am by nature more
forward to evil than to good; how shall I conquer that inclination? M. God can
overcome all difficulties; rely upon him, and he shall give thee strength.


EPISTLE I.
Sir,
I Were ungrateful if I should not return you the greatest thanks for your
readiness to do me good. But actions do not always succeed according to the
design of the agent. I am sorry, I have cause to complain of the Servant you
sent me last week; I am scarce at leisure to write what a bad disposition he is
of. I will only mention some few of his Features; by them you may conjecture of
the rest. He is greedy after victuals, but he is unwilling to work; he is
sottishly ignorant of all the offices of a Servant. I never knew any memory
like his; he is forgetful of all my commands; he sometimes seems doubtful in
mind, whether or no he should presently forsake mine house because of the
heaviness of his labor; he is guilty of all vices, which make him unfit for
Service. For my part, I think he is the most stupid of all blockheads. I have
one young man, that I keep, whom it has pleased God to deprive of
understanding, but I think this last fellow is the more unprofitable to me of
the two. Many ^ruit creatures are more docible than him by many ^egrees; he is
not only void of all good, but full of wickedness and vice; worthy of stripes
every hour, unworthy of praise, yea, even of life; he is of kin to a beast: he
is fit for the work of a beast, not of a man. It is hard for me to express his
qualities; I have resolved to banish him from mine house, lest my other
Servants should grow like him. Be pleased to pardon my tedious lines about so
ill a Subject, and not to think that I accuse (Sir) your endeavors; you were
ignorant (I without doubt persuade my self) of his faults, for you wrote to me
that you had heard him commended. I only blame mine own success: But as for
you, I have never the less cause to assert my self,

Your obliged Servant, T. P.

EPISTLE II.
Honored Father,
I Cannot but acknowledge that it is my part to write to you as often as I can;
to leave other less necessary things, and to prefer my duty to you before them.
It Is the duty of Children to please their Parents; and you have often told me
how much you are pleased to receive Letters from me. Ungrateful I, that do not
greedily embrace, and zealously Answer the love of so good a Father! It Is a
Father's part to love; if I should say you had done your part, those words were
too feeble to express your constant affection; but I blush to think how justly
you may blame me for ingratitude for neglecting my duty. You have been a
Father, but I have not been a Son. I have the greatest reason to value your
love at a great rate; but Boys that displease their Parents, like me, are not
to be esteemed. Yet (honored Sir) after all this my Confession and Accusation
of my self; let me beg, that you would please to take in good part this Letter
as a token of mine Obedience. I have gratis all that I enjoy, yet I presume to
offer my Pepper-corn as my acknowledgment, and oftener than once a year, because
I am daily receiving. Condemn me not for my former neglect, though I deserve
it; acquit me from my deserved punishment. Mine own thoughts accuse me of most
heinous Crimes; for what is more heinous than folly and ingratitude? I must
accuse my self of both; but I hope you cannot but pity me, and have compassion
on mine ignorance. I remember your former goodness, which pardoned great
Crimes; and the remembrance thereof makes me now hope to obtain your favorable
pardon, which I again earnestly entreat: if I obtain that, this Letter has
done its office; and none shall be more happy than (Sir),

Your Obedient Son, J. M.

EPISTLE III.
Dearest Brother,
I Have now been three weeks in the Country; and Divine Providence has made
my journey safe and prosperous. I have fully accomplished the business which I
had to do for you; an account of which I know will be grateful to you; I will
therefore send you a Letter about that business the next week. At present I
only acquaint you in general, That it is done, and add thereto the great
kindness that I received of my former Master, when I went to see him at York;
if I had done nothing else, but visited him, I should have thought my journey
had profited me enough; The sight of him delighted me very much; he is
certainly a most excellent man; I know none that may be compared with him, he
is a man of so great learning and godliness: I do not love Comparisons; but I
never found any man, that could Equalize himself to him. One may compare him to
Plato for his Temperance and Moderation. You will perhaps ask what he gave me,
when I was at his House; but I went not to receive any thing of him; he gave me
some good admonitions; a gift which pleased me better than Gold or Silver; and
besides, he returned me a Book, which I left there laft year. He bad me at all
times (when I have need) to ask Counsel of him; I promised him, I would obey
his advice; if I should not please him, as far as I can, I were mine own enemy,
and ungrateful to him, having received so many kindnesses from him; I will love
him, and honor him as long as I live. Dearest Brother, I could not but write
these things to you; but having used boldness enough already, I will not try
your Patience too much, lest you should complain (as you use to do), of the
tediousness of the Letters you receive from

Your affectionate Brother, B. J.

EPISTLE. IV.
SIR,
YOur unwearied questionings after many refusals, seem to intimate, that you
think me unconstant; but I scorn such a mind. That thing which you desire to
know, was committed to me as a secret by your Uncle; if to reveal it, would do
you good, yet after I had promised him secrecy, your utmost diligence should
never extort it from me; but to disclose this, would not help, but hurt you.
Your advantage only was the Argument which persuaded your Uncle to command me
secrecy: He charged me to tell no body. Should I now become a tatler, he would
never believe me more, and would have just reason to be angry with me. Leave
urging me therefore, and never write to me about it any more. For know, I am of
a more generous spirit than to betray innocent secrets. The more you attempt,
the more unmovable I shall be. Our Master (I remember) used to threaten us with
his severest anger if we searched into the secrets of others. It is no less an
honor to any one not to ask, than to another to conceal. I prefer that Friend,
that asks little, before him, that would fain know every thing. It would be a
praise to you, if you were content to be ignorant. Be pleased therefore to
vindicate your own honor, and to satisfy me by your future silence; for a
thousand new persuasions shall never extort that which it will do you no good
to know, from

Your Friend, as far as I honorably may, E. C.

DIALOGUE VIII. Master and Boy.
B. SIR, that Boy kicked me with his foot.


M. What injury did you do to him?


B. I did but touch him with my Glove.


M. You may think, you did not hurt him; but none can tell the effect of a
blow, but he that feels it.


B. He was not at all hurt by my blow; but he struck me out of malice, he kicked
me with great earnestness, he has some old grudge against me.


M. If it be so, I will be very angry with him, for I hate malice; it has cost
me much labor to endeavor to promote love amongst you, my Scholars; but I
strive in vain, for you often quarrel.


B. He tore in pieces my Book last week; which cost two shillings; my Father
bought it a month ago for me at Cambridge.


M. Why did he tear it?


B. Because I would not sell it him for less than it cost me; whereas I dared
not sell it at all: for you, Sir, have often commanded us to sell nothing. The
Book is very scarce, it is worth a Crown: my Father bought it cheap.


M. This Age abounds in wickedness; Boys are full of folly, they want wisdom to
oppose their own violent passions; they know not how to use those beginnings of
reason, that they are endowed with. They consider not the Torment of passion:
an angry Person enjoys no peace, he changes his own rest into trouble, and
passionate Boys create me much vexation by their quarrels; they deserve very
ill of me.


B. I was not in fault (Sir) I was siting quietly, and doing my duty.


M. I have heard of many, that you are as bad as the worst. You are born of a
passionate Father, and you will be like him. Methinks you should be ashamed,
that Boys whom you excel in learning, should excel you in virtue. I am doubtful
in mind what I shall do; I fear you are both guilty, and both to be punished, I
will not suffer Boys to injure one another; I will search into the business; if
I find you guilty, you shall be deprived of my favor. You shall not be beaten
by Boys, but you shall not abuse them. I will judge rightly as far as I can.


EPISTLE V.
Honored Father,
I Have a great desire to see you, and mine other Friends; I have the greatest
reason to love and honor you; and I cannot but desire your House more than
School, though I am very desirous to learn. Be pleased to grant me my desire
this once, and to send a Letter to my Master, that he may send me to you. To
speak the truth, I have a mind to live with another Master, or to come and live
with you, that I may go to School in Canterbury, near you. My Master is such a
severe man, that I had far rather Plow than continue here. My tasks are also so
heavy, my burdens so great, that I cannot undergo them. If you shall please to
suffer me to come to you, I shall return you greatest thanks; it is hard to be
expressed how much of my mind is at home. I will go to my Cousin, to fetch the
Cloak which you lent him, and will bring it with me. (Honored Sir) pardon my
boldness in asking, and let me hear good news, which may rejoice me. I will be
willing to obey your pleasure in all things. I will be content either to live
with you, or with my Uncle at York, or with any Friend of yours, wheresoever
you please: Only let me be removed hence, whereby you shall add one more to the
innumerable obligations wherewith you have already bound,

London, November 28. 1686. Your Obedient Son, S. H.

EPISTLE VI.
Son,
I Have formerly been greatly rejoiced at receiving Letters from London from
you; but that which came to me last week, was most unacceptable and
troublesome; I was grieved when I perceived in you the beginnings of
unconstancy and idleness; for all your Arguments are drawn from those two
Topics, which my authority shall confute. You seem to hope that your Father is
like your self, but how foolish is that expectation? know, that I not only
resolve never to gratify your unreasonable request, nor to satisfy your
foolish mind; but if so learned, so virtuous, so diligent, and faithful a
Master please you not, you shall be banished from my sight, I will send you
(against your will) to France or Holland, where I will find out for you the
severest Master. If I believed your Master (whom I love and honor) were
austere beyond reason and moderation, I would most readily deliver you from his
injustice; but I think quite otherwise of him: nor will I believe your
accusations, much less will I hearken to your complaints of the difficulty of
your tasks; all things are easy to industry, all things difficult to sloth,
and your Master is more prudent than to command things impossible. When I came
to London last year, I lived in your Master's House a whole Month, I then heard
no complaints from you, you were content, and my self also observed something
of his prudent care, and excellent wisdom, in managing the School; and whence
this new weariness proceeds, I cannot otherwise conjecture, than by thinking
that you begin to be more idle than formerly; and instead of moving you, I
shall most certainly request of your Master, that he will nip the weed before
it increase to a greater strength, and urge you the more closely to your study,
not to slacken the Reins, but strengthen them; an excellent Medicine for the
Disease that you are sick of. In short (Son) I highly esteem and approve of
your present Master, nor shall you be removed yet from his care and government,
till I certainly know some intolerable injustice, which I never expect to find.
Nor shall I hearken to your reports, nor for them the sooner slight or suspect
him. Resolve therefore to study diligently without weariness, to please him
without grudging, to obey him most willingly, to love and honor him
continually, so shall you reconcile him, whom your complaints have angered.

Your careful Father, W. H.

DIALOGUE IX.
L. I Cannot but acknowledge thee to be far more learned than my self; let me
therefore have the benefit of thy help to inform mine ignorance. I will love
thee, if thou will communicate.


E. It is not in my power to cure thy defects, nor to give thee understanding,
God only can give wisdom.


L. It is true, but God uses means to bring to pass his purposes, thou may
help me, and I question not but my Father will recompense thy love.


E. I will do as much as I can freely. In what do thou want mine assistance?


L. In translating English into Latin, I observed that thy Exercises are every
day commended, and our Master propounds thy care for our imitation, let me
hear by what means it comes to pass that thy Exercises are so commendable.


E. I should be glad if all my School-fellows pleased my Master every day, that
they might advance in Learning, and he might rejoice in their benefit. I will
conceal nothing from thee. -- I always take notice of all the Phrases or neat
Expressions which I find in Authors, I write them down, and have now a great
treasure of them, so that I have almost one in readiness for every occasion,
and the most of them I have committed to memory. -- Every great mistake, which
I am guilty of, I write down in a Book, which I read over once a week, that I
may not commit the same Error twice. -- When our Master is correcting our
Exercises, I always attend most diligently, I fix mine Eyes upon him, and my
mind upon his words. -- If any other Boy have a better Phrase or manner of
expressing, than I, I certainly take care to remember it. -- If the Exercises
of any other Form be corrected, when my Task is done, I attain to that which
seems not to belong to me; I think it concerns me to listen to every thing,
that I may get good by. -- Having furnished my self by these Methods, and
prepared my understanding, I set about my Exercise, which I always read over,
before I begin to translate it, as our Master has most wisely commanded. -- I
never write down any word or Phrase, before a certain knowledge, or accurate
enquiry, whether it be fit to my purpose. If I at all doubt, I never rest till
I be certain; If I cannot find out what I seek, I ask the next day; I scorn not
to learn of the meanest Boy; much less do I neglect to ask our Master, if no
body else know. I never slightly pass over any difficulty; the more pains I
take at one time, the less labor shall I need the next Exercise. I always
appoint my self a certain measure of time for my Exercise, a moment of which I
never bestow upon any other business I never cease till I have done; I
interrupt not my self, nor suffer the dearest Friend to interrupt me; my supper
and my sleep always give place to business. Most Boys are easily diverted,
which utterly hinders accuracy. -- I read over each Latin Sentence by it
self, (after I have made it) twice or thrice; and at last the whole Exercise
again and again deliberately, to observe any Errors which I have committed,
which I correct my self, before the Master overlook it. -- And lastly, I never
am hasty, but allow time enough to each Word and Sentence. Many Boys bring
always bad Exercises, for want of patient consideration. -- I have now answered
thy Question, and told thee the chief things which I observe.


L. I heartily thank thee; I will imitate thee for the future.


DIALOGUE X. Thomas and John.
THom. I was told that your Brother had displeased his Master, and therefore
was not only chidden, but beaten.


John, That Boy is worthy of a whipping that told you; for though I have no
desire to accuse any one for a fault before my Master, yet it is not fit that
Punishments, that any one suffers in the School, should be published openly.


Thom. You are to be commended who are careful to observe the Laws of the
School; but do not ask me the Boys Name that told me this thing, for indeed he
was afraid lest any of his School-fellows should hear of it. But I also
understand, that you excel many other Boys in writing, which I am glad to hear.


John. I must not tarry now, for I am to buy some Books, that I have need of,
Farewell.


DIALOGUE XI. Thomas and Richard.
IF I am not deceived, I saw your Brother weeping when I called you.


Rich. Both my Brother and Sister wept, and they had cause to weep, for my
Father was angry with them.


Tho. What fault had they committed? I know, that they are of a good
disposition, and therefore surely they would endeavor to please your Father,
and therefore it is not good to enquire into other men's business; yet tell me
their fault if you please.


Rich. My Father was about to take a Journey to receive some Money, which a
Countreyman, my Father's Tenant owed him, but he wanted a Saddle, and therefore
sent my Brother and Sister to buy him a Saddle. They went, but tarried so long,
that at last he would not go. This was the cause of my Father's anger; for they
tarried talking with our Neighbors Daughter, whose company they loved.


Tho. They did ill.


DIALOGUE XII. Henry and Robert.
Hen. HOW can you expect God's Blessing, who do not study to please your Father?


Rob. You always take liberty to accuse me for my Faults: I have had Chiding
enough at home to day, I did not expect to be chidden abroad also.


Hen. Do not thou fear the punishment, that God the just Judge, whose Eyes
behold all men's actions, has threatened against such Children as do not obey
their Parents? I wonder that you are not ashamed of your wickedness, by which
you break the Laws both of God and Nature; and believe me, if you do not amend
your manners, you will repent of your folly, when it is too late; what if your
Parents, whom you are so disobedient to, should cast you off? Remember my
words, which I speak not out of hatred to you; for I pity you. Reform your
life, and then both your Father and you will have opportunity to rejoice.


DIALOGUE XIII. Thomas and Francis.
THO. How do you, my good Friend Francis?


Fran. I am heartily glad that you are in health; My Brother Richard desired me
to remember his love to you.


Tho. I thank both him and you.


Fran. How much did that Book cost you, that you have in your left hand?


T. It is a Book, than which I never saw any more handsomely bound, and yet it
cost me but a little, for he that sold it me did not understand the Books worth.


Fran. Did a Bookseller sell it you?


Tho. No, I bought it of one that found that and another Book in the Street


Fran. I pity him that lost them; it may be he has sorrow enough; it is
probable that it was some careless boy, whose Parents have been sufficiently
angry with him, yea, it may be he has been beaten soundly. But thus we see it
often that one's loss is another's gain; but I must not tarry, now, lest I lose
the opportunity to send this Letter. Farewell.


DIALOGUE XIV. Joseph and Philip.
Jos. I Have brought you the Book that I borrowed, when you and I were at
London together, and I intend to buy me such a Book, for it has taught me much
wisdom. Doubtless its Author was a Man af great Piety as well as learning. Some
Books are scarce worthy of reading, but others deserve to be read an hundred
times. How much did the Book cost you?


Phil. It cost me five shillings, and I do not think it dear. For it is a Book,
than which I never read any more learned and pious, yea, every leaf thereof is
a honeycomb full of most sweet honey, drawn from the best of flowers. I bought
it over against the Exchange, at the Sign of the Black-a-moors Head, of a
Bookseller, who never uses to deceive me.


Jo. It is the same Bookseller that I use to buy Books of; he will not offer
his Books at a greater price than others; and for the most part his Books are
most neatly bound. Farewell.


DIALOGUE XV. Thomas and John.
Tho. I Saw the man that your Father sold his Horse to, walking in the street.


Joh. Which street? for my Father would be glad to see him; my Father has need
of money, and the man that you speak of, owes him fifty Pounds (if I am not
mistaken) which he has often promised to pay, but hitherto he has deceived
him.


Tho. Then he is like a man that came to see my Father, entreating him to lend
him three shillings, promising to return it in an hour; but Summer will be
colder than Winter, and Winter will become Summer, e're the money will be paid.


Joh. It is very likely now adays. It is not good to trust a Man we know not.
The care of some is to get opportunities to cheat their Neighbors. They study
only to please themselves, though they wrong others: but to obey God the
highest Judge of all, is better than to enjoy the riches of this world, if God
be angry with us. But we must use wisdom (which many want) that we neither hurt
others, nor be hurt by others. Farewell.


DIALOGUE XVI. Richard and Thomas.
RIch. I am ashamed of my fault yesterday, who was so angry with you, when you
and I were at play together, and I earnestly desire you to pardon me, and not
take it unkindly. I must confess my fault, and I desire hereafter to refrain
from immoderate anger.


Tho. It is the part of a Christian to confess the faults which he offends God
and Men by. We have need of Gods grace, that we may become more wise, and
resist the Devils temptations, which he beguiles men by. For as the Fisher
hides the deadly hook with some pleasant Bait, which the foolish Fish greedily
catches at and is taken: So the Devil promises us pleasure and profit if we
will obey him, whom if we do believe, we shall repent of our folly; and happy
are they whom God does give effectual grace to, who seeing the evil of sin, and
the worlds vanity, do apply their minds to holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord.


Rich. It is good, when we are not ignorant of the snares of the Devil, that
Enemy of God and man. The Lord make us like Christ our blessed Savior.


DIALOGUE XVII. William and Robert.
WIll. you were mist at School yesterday.


Rob. I believe you; my Father and Mother had occasion to keep me at home,
which I suppose they will signify to my Master the occasion; being you are my
Friend, I will tell you; my Brother and Sister being to go into the Country,
namely, to Ipswich, my Father and Mother were desirous to accompany them about
three miles, or a little more; and therefore I tarried to look to the Shop; for
so they commanded me. This was the cause of my absence, which I doubt not will
satisfy my Master,


Will. Can you sell the Wares in the Shop, when your Father and Mother are
absent?


Rob. When a Customer comes to ask me for any Commodity, I can show it him; for
I know where each Commodity is placed, for each Box has the name for what is
in it written upon the outside thereof, and they are disposed so
Alphabetically, that every thing is very easy to be found. And as for the
price, all the Commodities have a private mark, which no body knows but we, who
have been taught it by my Father; that mark shows the lowest price that can be
taken; if I can sell it for more, I do; but if not, I do not turn them away.
How much money do you think I took while my Father was absent?


Will. Ten Shillings it may be.


Rob. About thirty Shillings. One came and ask me for a pair of Gloves, which
when he had fitted himself with, he demanded the price (now the price signified
by the mark was two Shillings) I told him I would sell them for half a Crown;
but at last, when I had abated him two pence of what I asked him, he paid me the
money.


Will. You are a cunning Youth: but my business calls me away. Farewell at
present.


DIALOGUE XVIII. Henry and Anthony.
Hen. WHence come you Anthony?


Anth. I am come from York lately, but just now I came from Dover. Hen. And
whither are you going?


Anth. I was at Paris last year, and I am going to visit a friend that was kind
to me, when I was there.


Hen. It is well done of you to acknowledge courtesies received, which is the
part of a Christian even above others; for if we must love our enemies, and do
good to them that hate us (which Christ our Blessed Savior commanded us) much
more ought we to think that it concerns us to be mindful of our friends love.
We ought not to grieve strangers, much less those, that we are obliged to. Some
are commended in Scripture, which entertained strangers, and thereby
entertained Angels unawares. But what business had you at Paris? did you go to
learn the French Tongue, or to see remote Countries?


Anth. Neither of these was the end of my going. But my Father having some
wares that he could not sell at London for so much, as he understood he might
sell them for at Paris, he sent me thither to sell them.


Hen Then you are become a Merchant.


Anth. I had no cause to repent of my Journey, nor my Father neither, for I had
pleasure enough, and My Father gain enough.


Hen. Did you go alone?


Anth. No, had the company of a young man, a Neighbor of ours, both going and
coming back.


Hen: The better ones company is, the more pleasant is the Journey: I should
like traveling very well, having good Companions, and a full Purse. But
farewell, we have (...) discourse enough for the present.


Anth. Farewell.


DIALOGUE XIX. Thomas and Mary.
Tho. HOw do you dear Sister Mary?


Ma. I have been sick in the Country these three weeks, and therefore I have
cause to accuse you for unkindness, who never came to see me in my sickness;
yea, I sent you a Letter, and yet you did not return me answer. Believe me, I
have been very angry with you, and I think there is no body that will say but
that I have cause to be angry.


Tho. I have not been unmindful of you; yet I heard not of your sickness, but
about the end of the last week; and yet it grieved me much that I could not get
an opportunity to visit you, who have always been so dear to me, I may truly
say, the most dear of all my Brothers and Sisters. The Letter which you speak
of, I never received; but God be praised that you now enjoy your health. I hope
you will not be so unkind, that you should think that I did not care for you. I
longed to see you, but I wanted an opportunity, I enquired every day of you,
and I felt sorrow enough in my heart, when I was told how dangerously you were
sick.


Ma. Speak no further of this matter, my Sister told me last night how much
business you had which hindered your coming; and this I must confess, that as
you have always obeyed my Mother, so you have been formerly more loving to me
than the rest of my Brethren. The more loving you have been formerly, the more
I wondered at your absence. Farewell.


DIALOGUE XX. Francis and George.
Fran. I Could not choose but laugh to see how blank our School-fellow Robert
looked, when he was so staangely disappointed of his Expectation.


Geo. I know not what you mean, but first let me answer you in general. Do you
think it a Christianlike part to laugh at others mischances? I am sure that the
Christian Religion teaches us no such thing; but on the contrary we are
commanded to weep when others are afflicted, and to rejoice if any good thing
befalls them. O what a sweet lovely carriage and behavior are we taught in
that Book of Books, the Holy Scriptures! but alas where is the Boy that minds
those holy Instructions? Nay some of us are come to that pass of folly, that
they think Gods word does not concern Boys, as if Boys might live as they list,
and take their swinge according to their own will.


Fran. Far be it from me to think so. But as to what you said before concerning
grieving, when any mischance befalls another, it is true, we ought so to do;
but yet I think it is to be meant concerning any great mischance, that is an
affliction indeed; not of a mischance in a light, trivial, unconsiderable
matter: And besides, I think it has been observed, that some have laughed at
the jest, that has been accompanied with a mischance, when really they have
been sorry for the mischance it self, and have truly pitied him on whom it
fell; and it is hard to be affirmed that such do evil.


Geo. I am satisfied by your discreet and moderate answer. To return then, Pray
let me know what manner of disappoinment befell Robert?


Fra. He came of his own accord to my Master, and told him a story of what
passed between him and his Brother, expecting to receive commendation; but when
my Master had sifted the business thoroughly, poor Robert had like to have been
whipped; but by his Brothers entreaty he escaped: But I am called away. Farewell.


DIALOGUE XXI. Thomas and William.
THO. If it were worth while, we would go and enquire the reason why our
School-fellow, the Clovers Son, tarries from School; he is not used to play
truant, neither do his Parents use to keep him from School, and therefore it is
to be feared some evil has befallen him.


Will. As I was passing by his Fathers House, his Mother standing at the door,
called me, and told me, that her Son had like to have killed himself with
eating green and unriped Gooseberries.


Tho. Many are so unwise, that so their palates may enjoy a little present
pleasure, they care not how dear they pay for it afterward. Few consider how
much it concerns them to take care of their health.


Will. My Master has told us that it is an obedience which we owe to God, to
study how the health of our bodies may be maintained; and that it is contained
under the sixth Commandment of the Decalogue, and that it is a degree of
murder to do any thing that may prejudice our own or others health; and that
of all murders, self-murder is the worst: We are not our own, and therefore we
must give an account to him, whose we are, for any wrong we do to our selves.


Tho. What an account then have many to give, who by drunkenness and other
vices, do bring diseases upon themselves, and very often shorten their lives?
We ought in the first and principal place to mind the welfare of our immortal
Souls, and in the next place our Bodies; and indeed the Proverb is true, which
says, That every man is a Fool or a Physician to himself: But I am very sorry
for our School-fellows sickness, and especially, that it came by his own fault.
Have his Parents hope of his recovery?


Will. He is much better than he was, but yet I suppose he will not be able to
come to School this Fortnight.


Tho. How much pain has he suffered for a little pleasure? But so it is, we
often buy our pleasure too dear by much. If we would obey God our heavenly
Father, we should be happy both in this World and to Eternity. I hope this
sickness will teach him Wisdom; for God has promised his Servants, That
affliction shall make for their profit; and though we must not choose affliction,
yet we ought to be content with all the dealings of God with us; for whom he
loves he chastises: and they that are without affliction, which all are
partakers of, are Bastards, and not Sons. We have deserved Gods everlasting
wrath, and therefore we must not murmur, though God afflicts us; if God spare us
for ever, I mean, if we shall be admitted to the eternal enjoyment of God, no
matter how it fares with us in this Life. It is better with Lazarus to beg our
Bread from door to door here, than with Dives to beg Water in Hell. Farewell.


An EPISTLE.
Friend,
IT is my hard hap to have ever and anon some fault to charge you with, so that
I am forced to fill my Letters with Gall, which is no less unpleasing to my
self than to you; but if my Letters are for the most part reprehensory, you may
thank your self for it, not me. Do you look, I should stroke you on the head
and praise you, who deserve the utmost severity, and the most tart reproofs?
The truth is, you deserve to be schooled, and rattled up soundly, who did send
a Letter to your aged Father, that did grieve him beyond measure. I was at his
House when your Letter was brought. At first he was so overjoyed at the receipt
of your Letter, that he scarce knew on what ground he stood, but when he had
opened and read it, how soon was his joy turned into sorrow? What lamentations
and complaints did the poor old man utter? It made my heart ache to hear him
bewail his misfortune. Then it was he began to be weary of his Life. All the
skill I had was too little to pacific him; notwithstanding all I could say, he
had like to have fallen into a swoon. At last he gave me the Letter to read,
and my very hair, I think, stood an end through wonder and amazement at your
undutifulness. What! (thought I) is all the old man's cost and pains come to
this? Does so good educarion produce so bad effects? Is this he whom all men
reckoned so hopeful? To be short, I made a hard shift to put a good face on it,
lest I should increase your Fathers sorrow: But I saw he was not to blame for
the sorrow and grief that he expressed. Now except your heart is harder than
any flint, if you have any spark of good nature, or the fear of God left,
repent of this folly and madness, and mitigate his sorrow with yours. Amend
your life, lest you be the cause of his death, who was the cause of your life.
Farewell.

DIALOGUE XXII. Thomas and Francis.
THO. What are you and your Brother a doing?


Fran. My Brother was a going to write, but I had a mind to play, only I wanted
a companion whom to play withal; for part of our Schoolfellows are gone to wash
themselves, which my Father and Mother have often forbidden us on pain of
whipping; and part of them are gone to fight, which is much worse.


Tho. I have cause to praise you both, who are so desirous to please your
Father and Mother; for no doubt the more care you have to obey them, the more
will God bless you; but yet I see, that you are more negligent than your
Brother, whose only care is to get Learning. And indeed they say, that he is
the most diligent of all the Scholars your Master has, which I now believe to
be true. To have so much honor, as I perceive, he has gotten by his
diligence, is very rare to be found in boys; and indeed, when I heard some
Neighbors of mine, men both honest and of good repute, so highly extolling him
for his diligence, I began to be ashamed of mine own errors, who thought that
none was a better husband of time than my self; it is not lawful for me, I
know, to envy any one; but yet to imitate is commendable. Threatenings are the
only spur to the backward and negligent; but those that are of a noble
disposition have need rather of a bridle than such a spur. A company of Boys
may be taught by the same Master the same Lesson, and yet one would hardly
think how much some shall come on beyond the rest.


Fra. My Brother is to go (if my Fathers mind hold,) to a place beyond Sea,
which they call au University; but the proper name of it I have forgot.


Tho. If he goes thither, Books will be very necessary for him; your Father, I
believe, sees him desirous of nothing but Learning, and therefore he will not
deny him Books; and if his Learning cost your Father much (as certainly it will
an Hundred pound at least) yet he will never repent of it: for he will
hereafter be mindful of his great cost, and if he lives to be old, (but which
of us two, or whether either of us, or both of us shall see that day, is
uncertain) there will be few in England, no nor at Rome more eminent for
learning than he.


Fra. I have an Uncle, whom I believe my Brother will be like, whose Learning
has been profitable to himself, and made him admired by all that know him, who
I know would be angry with my Father, if he should oppose my Brothers desires
to obtain Learning; he has promised him some Books, yea, and Money too.


Tho. To what study does your Uncle apply himself chiefly?


Fra. Divinity.


Tho. In what City does he live?


Fra. At York, but he is shortly to come to London: Reason is common to all;
but few enjoy Learning. Some seem born to slavery, others to honor: Though his
Writing is scarce legible by any, yet he has made a Book almost two foot long,
and three inches thick, a work so full of Learning, that most admire it. Indeed
it cost him many years study; many learned men have thought it worthy of
public commendation.


Tho. It is the part of a wise man to ask counsel of such an one.


Fra. He counsels us and commands us, as if he were our own Father.


Tho. If you should not give him reverence, I should accuse you either of folly
or ingratitude, or both. Fran. I believe you indeed. You may compare me to a
Fool, and I shall take it in good part, if I do not always prefer his commands
before mine own pleasure. I pity such as indulge their own lusts, which will
not profit but hurt them. It concerns us and all wise men to value those things
but little, which will not be a comfort to them when Old Age comes on. I have
had experience enough (which teaches Fools the best Lessons) to know that
repentance is not to be bought at so great a rate as many buy it now a days.
Pleasure meets us with a smiling face, but it behooves us to think on the sorrow
that follows. Many that are sprung from good Parents, do abuse their Nobility
to the lessening of their crimes; yea, others (which is hard to be believed)
have spent their Estates in a year by vice, which their Ancestors have scarce
gotten in forty years. But I must not tarry long; it does not so much belong to
me to make a show of Virtue, in reproving others faults; neither do many words
become me; and indeed being weary of discourse, I must leave off talk.


Tho. I am most desirous of your Brothers happiness; but I cannot have while to
tarry: I must go to a place, which is almost a mile off, to see a man that
lives in the Country, but lately come from York, he Lodges beyond St. Paul's;
he took away a Knife from my Sister, though I think ignorantly; but behold a man
yonder that has red hair, I think it is he. Farewell, live a godly life,
improve your time like your Brother, and remember me to him.


FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A
TO abhor, Abominor, atis, atus, i. d. To abide, Maneo, es, si. 2. n. Ability,
Vires, 3 pl. f. To be able, Possum, es, tui, n. irr, Abominable, Vili, e, ad 3
Art. To abominate, Abominor, ari, atus, d. i. An abomination, Abominatio, nis,
3 f. To Abound, Abundo, as, avi, n. i. About, Circum, prep. Acc. Abraham,
Abrahamus, i 2. m To abstain, Abstin^o, es, ui, 2 m Abstinence, Abstinentia,
ae, 1 f. Abundance, Copia, ae, 1. f. Abundant, Abundans, antis, part 3 Art.
Accuracy, cura, ae. 1 f. To abuse, Abutor, eris, re, usus, 3 d. An abyss,
Abyssus, i. 2 f. Acceptable, Gratus, a, um, Ad. To accomodate, Accommodo, as,
avi, a. i. c. According to, Secundum, prep. Acc. An Acorn, Glans, dis, 3 f. An
Account, Ratio, onis, 3 f To Account, Habeo, es, ui, 2 Act. To account or
value, Aestimo, as, avi, a. i. con. To Acquire, Acquiro, is, sivi, 3 a. to
acknowledge, agnosco, is, ovi. 3 act. To Accuse, Criminor, aris, atus, 1 d.
Accusation, Accusatio, onis, 3 f. Accustomed, Assuetus, a, um, Adj. bon.
Achaia, ae, 1 f. To act, Ago, is, egi, 3 act. An act, Actus, us, 4 m. An
action, Factum, i, 2 n. To add, Addo, is, didi, 3 act. To Adjudg, Adjudico, as,
avi, Act. i. To admire, Honoro, as, avi, 1 con. To admire, Miror, aris, atus,
d. 1 con. To admit, Intromitto, is, misi, 3 a. To admonish, Moneo, es, ui, 2
act. Admonition, Monitum, i, 2 n. To adorn, Orno, as avi, 1 a. To advance,
Adaugeo, es, auxi, 2 a. Advantage, Commodum, i, 2 n. An Adversary, Adversarius,
ii. 2 m. Adversity, Res Adversae, rei, 5 f. Advise, Consilium, lii, 2 n. To
Advise, Consulo, is, ui, 3 a. Affairs, Res, ei, 5 f. Affection, Affectus, us, 4
m. Afflictions, Adversae res, 5 f. afflicted, afflictus, a, um par. To afford,
Praeveo, es, ui. a. 2 c. To be afraid, Timeo, es, ui, 2 d. After, Post, pre.
Ac. Afterward, Postoea, adv. Against, Contra, pre. Ac. Age, Aetas, atis, 3 f.
To agree, Consentio, is, st, n. 3. c. It agrees, Competit, imp. An Alehouse,
Caupona, ae. 1 f. Alexander, dri, 2 m. All with a Subst. sing Totus, a, ^um,
ius. All with a Subst. pl. Omnes, e, adj. 3 art. All kind or sorts of,
Omnigenus, a, um, 3 t. To allure, Allicianis, lexi, and licui. 3. a. Almighty,
Omnipotens, it is, 3 Art. Almost, Pene, pre. ac. Alone, Solus, a, um, ius, Also,
Etiam, conj. To alter, Commuto, as, avi, 1 a. Although, Quamvis, conj.
Altogether, Prorsus, adv. alphabetically, alphabeteice, ad Always, Semper, adv.
An Ambassador, Legatus, i, 2 m. Ambition, Ambitio, onis, 3 f. Amazement,
admiratio, onis, 3. f. Ambitious, Ambitiosus, sa, um; adj. b. To amend, Emendo,
as, avi, a. Amendment, Emendatio, onis. 3 f. Among Inter, prep. ac. Amongst,
Inter, prep. ac. Amsterdam, Amstelodamem i, 2 n. Ancestors, Majores, rum, 3.
pl. m. And, et. conj. An Angel, Angelus, i, 2 m. Anger, Ira, ae, 1 f. Angry,
Iracundus, a, um, adj. b. To be angry with, Irascor, eris, atus, 53 d. Another,
Alius, a, um, alius. adj. u. Another man's, alienus, a, um, adj. b. To answer,
Respondo, es, di, 2 n. To answer, Succurro, is, 3 n. An ant, Formica, ae, 1 f.
Antony, Antonius, ii. 2 m. Any, Quivis, aevis, pron. Any one, Aliquis, qua,
quod, pron. Any thing that, Quodcunque. Apace, Velociter, adv. Apelles, is, 3
m. an apple, Pomum, 1 2 n. Appollo, inis, 3 m. Appoplexy, Appoplexia, ae, 1 f.
to appear, Apareo, es, ui, n. 2. Appearance, Species, ei. 5.f. to appease,
paco, as, avi, i. a. Appetite, Appetitus, us. 4.m. to apply to, Incumbo, is,
ui, 3 a. to apply, adhibeo, es, ui, 3 a. to appoint, statuo, is, ui, 3 a. to
appoint, jubeo, es, jussi, 2 a. Appointed, Destinatus, a, um, part b. an
apprentice, servus. 1 2 m. to approach, appropinquo, as, avi, i. n. Araxis, is,
1 f. to arise, surgo, is, exi,, 3 n. Aristides, is, 3 m. an argument,
Argumentum, i. 2 n. an arm, Brachium, ii, 2 n. armed, Armatus, a, um, adj. bon.
armor, Armatura, ae, 1 f. an army, Exercitus, us, 4 m. To arrive, Pervenio,
is, ni, 4 n. art, Ars, it is, 3 f. artificial, Technicus, a, um, adj. b. artist,
Artifex, icis, 3 m. as if, Quasi, conj. as to, Erga, prep. ac. as well as,
Eque, ac, conj. as well as may be, Optime, adv. To ascend, Ascendo, is, di, 3n
To be ashamed, Pudeo, es, ui 2n ashes, Cinis, eris, 3 m. To ask, peto, it is, ii.
ivi, 3 a. an Ass, Assinus, i, 2 m. To assist, Opitulor, aris, atus, 1 d.
assistance, Adjumentum, i, 2n. To assign, assigno, as, avi, 1 c. assured,
Certus, a um, adj. at a great rate, Magni, genesis at home, Domi, genesis at length,
Tandem, adv. at present, Impraesentiatum, adv. at what rate, Quanti, genesis
Athens, Athaenae, arum, 1 d. pl. To attain to, Assequor, eris, cutus, 3. d. To
attempt, Conor, aris, atus, 1 d. an attempt, Coeptum, i, 2 n. To attend,
Attendo, is, di, 3 a attentive, Attentus, a, um, adj. Augustus, i, 2 m. an
Aunt, Amita, ae, 1 f. To avoid, Fugio, is, gi, 3 a. an Author, Author, oris, 3
m. authority, Potestas, tatis, 3 f. The autumn, Autumnus, i, 2m
B
BAbylon, onis, 3 f. Back, Tergum, i. 2 n. Bad, Malus, a, um, adj. a bag,
Sacculus, i, 2 m. To banish, Expello, is, pulsi, 3 a To be banished, Exulo, as,
avi, 1 n. A Bank of a River, Ripa, ae, 1 f. A Barbarian, Barbarus, i, 2 m.
Barbarous, Immanis, e, is. adj. 3 art. To Bark, latro, as, avi, n 1 To Bark at,
Allatro, as, avi, n. 1. Base, Vilis, e, lis. adj. 3 art. Baseness, Vilitas,
tatis, 3 f. A battle, Praelium, ii, 2 n. To bawl, Clamito, as, avi. A
Sunbeam, Jubar, aris, 3 n. A Bean, Faba, ae, 1 f. To bear, Suffero, ers,
sustuli, v. irr. To bear, Vinco, cis, vici, a. 3. con. To bear away, Aufero,
ers, abstuli, 3 irr. A Bear, Vrsa, ae, i. d. f. A Beast, Brutum, i, 2. n. A
Beast for labor, Jumentum, i, 2 n. to beat, Verbero, as, avi, 1a. to be
beaten, Vapulo, as, avi, atus, n. p. 1. Beauty, Pulchritudo, inis, 3 f.
Beautiful, Venustus, a, um, adj. Because, Quia, conj. Because of, Propter,
prep. ac. to become pale, pallesco, cis. to become, Fio, is, factus. 3 n. pass.
to become or adorn, Deceo, es, cui. A Bed, Lectum, i, 2 d. n. to be, sum es,
fui, v. irr. A Be, Apis, is, 3 f. before, antea, if a noun and a verb stand
next, antequam, otherwise ante. prep. ac. Beggary, Paupertas, atis. 3 f to
beget, Gigno, is, ui. 3 a. to begin, incipio, is, epi. 3. a. a beginning,
Initium, i. 2 n. to beg or ask, Rogo, as, avi, 1 a. to beg as a Beggar,
Mendico, as, avi. 1 a. a Beggar, Mendicus, i. 2 m. to beguile, decipio, es,
epi. 3a. to behave, Gero, is, ssi. 3 a. Behavior, Gestus, us. 4 m. to behove,
Oportet, imp. to believe, Credo, is, didi. 3 a. a Believer, Fidelis, is, 3 m. a
Bell, Compana, ae. 1 f. to bellow, Mugio, is, ivi. 4 n the Belly, Venture, tris.
3 m. to belong, pertineo, es, ui. 2 n. Beloved, Dilectus, a, um. part To be
Beloved, Diligor, is, ectus. 3 p. To bend, Incurvo, as, avi, 1 a. Beneficial,
Vtilis, e. lis. adj. 3a Benefit, Commodum, i. 2 n. a berry, vaccinium, ii. 2 n.
beside, praeter, prep. ac. besides, praeterea, adv. best with a subst. Optimus,
a, um. after a verb Optime, adv. at best, Saltem, adv. beastial, brutw, a, um.
adj. to bestow, dono, as, avi. 1 act. to betake, recipio, is, epi. 3 a. to
betray, Prodo, is, didi. 3 act. to betray or show, Indico, as, avi. 1 a.
better, melior, us, oris, adj. 3 a. between, Inter, prep. ac. to beware of,
Caveo, es, vi. 2 con. to bewail, ploro, as, avi. 1 act. to bewitch, Fascino,
as, avi. 1 act. A Bible, Biblia, ae, 1 d f. to bid, jubeo, es, jussi. a.
bigger, major, jus, eris. adj. 3 art. to bind, ligo, as, avi. 1 act. a bird,
Avis, is, 3 f. Birth, Natus, i, 2 m. to bite, mordeo, es, memordi. 2 a bitter,
Acer, ra, crum. adj. b. bitterness, acerbitas, tatis. 3 f black, Niger, a, um.
adj. b. to blame, Culpo, as, avi. blame, culpa, ae. 1 f. blameless, insons,
it is. adj. 3 art. to blast, minuo, is, ui. 3 a. to bleat, balo, as, avi, 1 an.
to bless, benedico, is, xi 3 a. to bless or prosper, secundo, as, avi, 1 a.
blessed, beatus, a, um. 3 ter. adj. blessedness, beatitudo, inis. 3 f. a
blessing, benedictio, onis. 3 f. blind, Coecus, a, um. adj 3 a. b. a Blockhead,
Hebes, etis. 3 n blood, Sanguis, nis. 3 m. bloody, Sanguinoentus, a, um, adj.
to blow, Flo, as, avi. 1 a. blunt, Obtusus, a, um. adj. to blunt, hebeto, as,
avi. 1. a Boar, Aper, i. 2 m. to boast, Glorior, aris, atus. 1 d. a boaster,
thraso, onis, 3 m. the body, corpus, oris. 3 n. bold, Audax, acis, adj. 3 art.
boldly, audacter, adv. a Bond, Vinculum, i. 2 n. a book, Liber, i. 2 m. a
Bookseller, Bibliopola, ae. 1 m. a boot, Ocrea, ae, 1 f. to be born, Nascor,
eris, natus. 3 d. born, natus, a, um. part. to borrow. mutuo, accipio, is, epi.
a Botcher, Veteramentarius, ii. 2 m. both, et, conj. both, uterque, aque umque
trius adj a blackberry, vacinium, ii. 2 n. a bound, Limes, itis. 3 m. bounty,
benignitas, atis. 3 f. a boy, puer, ri. 2 m. brains, Ingenium, ii, 2 n. brave,
grandis, e. adj. 3 art. to bray as an Ass, Rudo, is, si. 3 n. bread, panis, is
3. m. to break, rumpo, is, upi. 3 a. to break peace or promise, Violo, as, avi.
breaking subst. Violatio, onis. 3 f, to breath, Spiro, as, avi. 1 n. bribes,
munera, um. 3 plu. n. a bridle, Fraenum, i, 2 n. bright, lubicus, a, um. adj.
brimstone, Sulphur, uris, 3 n. to bring, fero, ers, tuli. irr. to bring forth,
profero, fers, tuli. 3. Britain, Brittania, ae, 1 f. broad, latus, a, um, adj.
a brook, Torrens, it is, 3 m. a brother, Frater, ris, 3 m. to be brought, Adduco,
is. uxi. 3 a. a Bruit, brutum, i. 2 n. brutish, brutus, a, um. a Buckler,
Clypeus, i. 2 m. to build, Struo, is, uxi, 3 a. a Bull, Taurus, i. 2 m. a bull
of the Pope, Bulla, a. a bulwark, munimen, inis, 2 n. to burn, Vro, is, ussi. 3
a. ardeo, es. n 2. a burden, Onus, eris. 3 n. to bury, sepelio, is, ivi. 4 a a
bush, dumetum, i. 2 n. to be busied, Occupor, aris, atus. p. busy, or busied,
Occupatus. part. a, um. business, negotium, ii 2 n. a bufie body, percontator,
ris, 3 m. but, sed, conj. but per. except, nisi. conj. to buy, emo, is, mi. 3
a. by reason of, propter, pre. ac. by much, multo. by far, long. adv. a
Butcher, lanius, ii. 2 m.
C
CAlamity, infortunium, ii. 2 n. Calends, Calendae, arum. 1 plu. f. To Call,
Apello, as, avi. 1 act. To call to any place, Voco, as, avi. 1 a. to call to
mind, reputo, as, avi. 1 a. to cackle, glocio, is, ivi. n 4. Calm, Tranquillis,
a, um. adj. Cambridge, Cantabrigia, ae. 1 f. can, possum. irr. a candle,
Candela, ae. 1 f. cannot, Nequeo, is, ivi. 4 n. Canterbury, Doroberuia, ae. 1 f
capable, capax, acis. adj. 3 art. a Captain, Dux, cis. 3 m. to care, curo, as,
avi. 1 act. care, cura, ae. 1 f. careful, sedulus, a, um. adj. carefully,
Diligenter, adv. to care for, prospicio, is, exi 3a. a Carcass, Cadaver, eris,
3 n. a Carpenter, Faberlignarius. 2 m. to carry, porto, as, avi. 1 a. to carve
meat, Carpo, is, si. 3 conj. a. to carry about, Circumfero, ers, tuli. 13 a.
Carved, Sculptus, a, um. par. to cast, jaceo, cis, eci. 3 a. a Cat. Felis, is,
3 f. to catch, arrippio, is, ui. 3 act. Cattle, Pecus, udis. 3 n. a cause or
Reason, Causa, ae. 1 f. to cause, Facio, is, eci. 3 a. cautious, cautus, a, um.
adj. to cease, desino, nis, ivi. 3 a to be certain, consto, as, titi. 1 n.
certainly, certe. adv. Caesar, aris. 3 m. A Chamber, Cubiculum. i, 2 n. A
Champion, Pugil, ilis. 3 m. A Chain, Catena, ae. 1 f. To change, muto, as, avi.
1 a. Charges, Sumptus, us, 4 plu. m. Charity, Charitas, tatis. 3 f. To
chastise, castigo, as. avi. 1 a. Cheap, Vilis, e, adj. 3 a. To cheat, fraudo,
as, avi. 1 a. A Cheek, Gena, ae. 1 f. To cherish, Foveo, es, vi. 2 a. A Chest,
Arca, ae, 1 f. A Chicken, Pullus Gallinacaeus. 2 m. Chief, Summus, a, um. adj.
A Child, puer, eri. 2 m. Children, Liberi, orum. 2 pl. m. Childish, puerilis,
e. lis. adj. A Cbimney, Caminus. i. 2 m. Choice, electio, onis. 3 f. Christ,
Christus, i. 2 m. A christian, christianus, i. 2 m. Christian, christianus, a,
um. adj. A Church, templum, i. 2. n. To choose, eligo, is, egi, 3 a. A chimist,
Alchimista, ae, m. Cicero, onis. 3. m. A city, urbs, is. 3 f. A citizen, civis,
vis, 3 c. Clean, mundus, a, um, adj. Clear, insons, it is. adj. 3 act. clearness,
perspicacitas, tatis. 3 f. clemency, clementia, ae. 1 f. A client, cliens, it is.
3 m. To climb, scando, is, di. 3 a. A cloak, pallium, i. 2 n. clothes, vestes,
ium. 3 plu. f. A clock, horologium, ii. 2 n. Clodius, ii. 2 m. A closet,
Musaeum, i 2 n. A cloud, nubes, is. 3 f. A coat, tunica, ae. 1 f. a cock,
gallus, i, 2 m. Cocker, indultus, a, um. adj. cold, frigidus, a, um. adj.
color, color, oris. 3 m. To chatter, garrio, is, ivi. 4. n. To charge, jubeo,
es, ussi. v. 2 a. Cloth, pannus, i. 2 m. A colt, pullus, equinus, i, 2 m. To
come, venio, is, veni. 4 n. To come to, pervenio, is, evi. 4 n. c. To come near
to, accedo, is, ssi 3 a. A comedy, fabula, ae. 1 f. comfort, solamen, inis. 3
n. A command, jussum, i. 2 n. To command, jubeo, es, ussi. 2 a. Commendable,
laudabilis, e, lis. adj. 3 a. Commendation, laus, dis. 3 f. To commit, credo,
is, didi. 3 a. To commit a fault, patro, as, avi. 1 a. Common, communis, e, is,
adj. 3 art. a Commodity, merces, dis. 3 f. Commonly, faepissime, adv. The
common people, vulgus, i. 2. m. The commonwealth, Respublica, ei, cae. 5 f. To
communicate, communico, as, avi. 1 act. A companion, socius, ii. 2 f. m.
Company, societas, tatis. 3 f. To compare, comparo, as, avi. 1 a. Competent,
mediocris, e. adj. 3 art. To conce^l, celo, as, avi. 1 act. Concerning, de.
praep. abl. It concerns, interest. imp. To concern, specto, as, avi. 1 act.
To condemn, damno, as, avi. 1 a. A condition, sors, it is, 3 f. To conduce,
conduco, cis, xi. 3 a. To conduct, deduco, cis, xi. 3 a. com. To confine,
coerceo, ces, cui. 2 a. To conquer, supero, as, avi. 1 a. A conqueror, victor,
oris. 3 m. Consideration, consideratio, onis. 3 f. Conscience, conscientia, ae.
1 f. Conscientious, pius, a, um, ad. To consent, assentior, iris, itus. 4 c.
Constancy, constantia, ae. 1 f. To construe, expono, is, sui. 3 a. To consult
for, prospicio, is, exi. 3 n. To consume, consumo, is, psi. 3 a. To consummate,
consummo, as, avi. 1 a. A consumption, tabes, bis. 3 f. Contagious, tabificus,
a, um. adj. To contain, contineo, es, ui. 2 a. Contempt, contemptus, us. 4 m.
Contemptible, temnendus, a, dum, part. Content, contentus, a, um. adj.
Contentedness, contentatio, onis. 3 f. Contentment, prolubium, ii. 2 n. a
Contention, lis, itis. 3 f. To continue, permaneo, es, ansi: 2 a. To contract,
contraho, his, axi. 3 a. To contract a debt, conflo, as, avi. 1 a. Contrary,
contrarius, a, um. adj. To contrive, excogito, as, avi. 1 a. Convenient,
commodus, a, um. adj. To converse, versor, aris, satus. 1 d. To convict,
coarguo, is, ui. 3 a. A Cookmaid, coqua, ae. 1 f. a Copy, exemplar, aris. 3 n.
Corn, seges, etis. 3 f. To correct, corrigo, gis, exi. 3 a. To correct a Book,
elimo, as, avi. 1 a. To corrupt, corrumpo, is, upi. 3 a. Cost, expensum, i. 2
n. To cost, consto, as, titi. 1 n. a Cottage, casa, ae. 1 f. a Covering,
tegmen, inis. 3 n. To cover, tego, is, exi. 3 a. To cover, cupio, is, ivi. 3 a.
Covetous, cupidus, a, um. Avarus, a, um. adj. Covetousness, avaritia, ae. 1 f.
Counsel, consilium, ii. 2 n. a Counselor, suasor, oris. 3 m. The countenance,
vultus, us. 4 m. Ones own Country, patria, ae. 1 f. a Country, regio, onis. 3
f. The country, rus, ruris, 3 n. a Country House, domus, us. suburbana. 2 4 f.
Courage, fortitudo, inis. 3 f. Courageous, fortis, e, ^s. adj. 3 art. a
Courtesy, beneficium, ii. 2 n. The court, aula, ae. 1 f. Courteous, comis, e,
is. adj. 3 art. to Court, ambio, vis, vivi. 4 n. a Cousin, affinis, is. 3 c 2.
a Coward, pusillanimus, i. 2 m. Cowardly, timidus, a um. adj. Craft, astutia,
ae. 1 f. To create, creo, as, avi. 1 a. Creation, creatio, onis. 3 f. Creator,
creator, oris. 3 m. a Creature, creatura, ae. 1 f. to creep, repo, is, psi. 3
n. Credit, sides, ei, 5. f a Creditor, creditor, vris. 3 m. To creep upon,
irrepo, is, si. 3 n. a Crime, crimen, inis. 3 n. Crooked, curvus, a, um. adj.
to Crop, carpo, is, si. 3 a. a Crow, corvus, i, 2 m. a Crown, diadema, atis. 3
n. Cruel, crudelis, e, lis. adj. 3 art. Cruelty, crudelitas, tatis. 3 f. to
Cry, clamo, as, avi, 1 a. Culpable, culpandus, a, dum. adj. Cunning, astutia,
ae. 1 f. Cunning, astutus, a, um. adj. a Cure, medela, ae. 1 f. a Curse,
maledictum, i. 2. n. Cursed, dirus, a, um. adj. Custom, consuetudo, inis. 3 f.
to Cut, seco, as, ui. 1 a.
D.
A Dagger, Pugio, onis. 3 f. Daily, quotidianus, a, um. adj. daily, quotidie,
adv. dainties, deliciae, arum. 1. pl. f. To dance, salto, as, avi. 1 n. danger,
periculum, i. 2 n. dangerous, periculosus, a, sum. adj. To dare, audeo, es,
ausus. 2 n. p. A daring, audacia, ae. 1 f. A dart, telum, i. 2 n. A Day, dies,
ei. 5 m. The day before, pridie. adv. dead, mortuus, a, um. part. dear, charus,
a, rum. adj. dear, without a Subst. magni. genesis death, mors, it is. 3 f. A debt,
debitum, i. 2 n. A daughter, filia, ae. 1 f. The Decalogue, Decalogus, i. 2 m.
decayed, collapsus, a, um. part. deceit, fraus, dis. 3 f. To deceive, fallo,
is, fefelli. 3 a. A deceiver, fraudator, oris. 3 m. A deed, factum, i. 2 n.
deed, res, ei. 5 f. deep, profundus, a, um. adj. To defeat, frustror, aris,
atus. 1 d. A defect, defectus, us. 4 m. To defend, tueor, eris, itus. 2 d. A
debtor, debtor, oris. 3 m. A defender, propugnator, oris. 3 m. delicate,
delicatus, a, um. adj. delightful, delectabilis, le, adj. 3 a. A defense,
tutamen, inis. 3. n. defiled, pollutus, a um. part. To deform, vitio, as, avi.
1 a. To degenerate, degenero, as, avi. 1 a. A degree, gradus, us. 4 m. To
delay, tardo, as, avi. 1 a. delay, mora, ae. 1 f. A delayer, cessator, oris. 3
m. depraved, depravatus, a, um. part. To delight, juvo, as, vi. 1 a. delight,
voluptas, tatis. 3 f. delights, deliciae, arum. plu. f. 1. To deliver, trado,
dis, didi. 3. a. Delphos, phl. 2 f. To demand, postulo, as, avi. 1 a. To deny,
denego, as, avi, 1 a. A denial, abnegatio, onis. 3 f. To devour, voro, as, avi,
1 a. A diamond adamas, antis. 3 m. A dictionary, dictiona^ium, ii, 2 n. To dye
colors, tingo, is, xi. 3 a. A dyer, tinctor, oris. 3 m. A Diety, Dietas,
tatis. 3 f. To deprive, deprivo, as, avi. 1 a. Descent, origo, inis. 3 f. To
deserve, mereor, eris, ritus. 2 d. Deserve, dignus, a, um. Deservedly, merito.
adv. A design, prepositum, ti. 2 n. to design, statuo, is, ui. 3 n. Designed,
destinatus, a, tum. p. Desire, Cupido, inis. 3 f. A desire, votum, i, 2 n.
Desirous, cupidus, a, um. Desirable, exoptabilis, e. lis. adj. 3 a. To
despise, temno, nis, psi. 3 a Destitute, Orbus, a, um. adj. To destroy, perdo,
dis, didi. s a. Destruction, Exitium, ii. 2 n to detain, detineo, es, ui. 2 a.
detraction, detractio, onis. 3 f. the Devil, diabolus, i. 2 m. Devilish,
diabolicus, a, um. adj. To devote, voveo, es, vi. 2 a A digger, fossor, oris. 3
m. Dignity, dignitas, tatis. 3 f. Diabolical, diabolicus, ca, cum. adj. A
dinner, prandium, ii. 2 n. different, diversus, a, um. ad. difficult,
difficilis, e. lis. adj. 3 a difficulty, difficultas, tatis. 3. To dig, fodio,
is, di. 3 a. To discover, retego, is, exi. 3 a. To discourse, confabulor, aris,
latus. d 1. diligence, sedulitas, tatis. 3 f diligent, sedulus, a, um. adj.
diligently, sedulo. adv. to dim, offusco, as, avi. 1 a. To diminish, minuo, is,
ui. 3 act. discreet, prudens, it is. adj. 3 art. dirt, lutum, i. 2 n. dirty,
caenosus, a, sum. adj. dirtiness, turpitudo, inis. 3 f. To disagree, dissideo,
es, edi. 2 n. To despise, sperno, is, sprevi. 3 a. A discourse, colloquium, ii.
2 n. To discharge, fungor, ris, unctus. 3 d. To distract, distraho, his, axi. 3
act. A disease, morbus, i. 2 m. disgrace, dedecus, coris. 3 n. dishonest,
inhonestus, a, um. adj. A dishonor, dedecus, oris. 3 n. To dishonor,
dedecoro, as, avi. 1 act. To dismiss, dimitto, it is, mist. 3 act. disobedience,
inobedientia ae. 1 f. disobedient, immoriger, ra, rum. adj. To disobey,
repugno, as, avi. 1 act. A divine, theologus, i. 2 m. To displease, Offendo,
is, di. 3 act. A disposition, ingenium, ii. 2 n. To dispraise, vitupero, as,
avi. 1 act. A dissembler, simulator, toris. 3 m. Dissimulation, dolus, i. 2 m.
To be distant, disto, tas, titi. 1 n. To distinguish, dignosco, cis, vi. 3 a.
Divinity, theologia, ae. 1 f. To distrust, diffido, dis, di, 3 a. Docile,
docilis, e. lis, adj. 3 art. diversion, recreato, onis. 3 f. To divide, partio,
is, ivi. 4 a. divided. discors, dis. ad. 3 art. divine, divinus, a, um. to
divulge, patefacio, cis, eci. docible, docilis, le. lis. adj. 3 a. Doctrine,
doctrina, ae. 1 f. to do, facio, es, eci. 3 act. to do evil, patro, as, avi. 1
act. to do good, benefacio, is, eci. 3 act. to do hurt, dedo, dis, didi.
domestic, domesticus, a, ^m. adj. dominion, dominium, ii. 2 n. A door, Ostium,
ii. 2 n. double, duplex, icis. adj. 3 art. to double, ingemino, as, avi. 1 act.
to doubt, dubito, as, avi. 1 act. A Dove, columba, ae. 1 f. downward, deorsum.
adv. A dog, canis, is. 3 m. to draw or entice, allicio, is. exi. and licui. 3
act. To draw, traho, is, axi. 3 a to draw a picture, delineo, as, avi. 1 act.
dreadful, horridus, a, um. ad. a Drawer, promus, i. 2 m. to draw. promo, is,
psi. 3 a. to draw down, invoco, as, avi. 1 act. a droan, fucus, i. 2 m. drink,
potus, us. 4 m. To drink, bibo, is, by. 3 a. To drown, mergo, is, si. 3 act. A
drunkard, bibo, onis. 3 m. drunkenness, ebrietas, tatis. 3 f. due, debitus, a,
um. adj. A dunghill, stercorarium, ii. 2 n. dunghill, adj. sordidus, a, um.
adj. Dutch, Batavus, i. 2 m. dutiful, moriger, ra, um. adj. Duty, Officium, i.
2 n. Duty, adj. Officiatus, a, um. To dwell, habito, as, avi. 1 a. to die,
morior, ris, mortuus. 3 and 4 d.
E
EAch singulus, a, um. adj. Each other, alter, a, rum. adj An Eagle, aquila,
ae. 1 f. An ear, auris. is. 3 f. Early, mature. adv. Earnestly, strenue, adv.
Earth terra. ae. 1 f. Earthlv. terrestris, re. tris. adj. 3 art. To ease. levo.
as. avi. 1 a. Easily, facile. adv. Easy, facilis, e. adj 3 a. To eat. edo, is,
edi. v. irr. The edge, acumen, inis. 3 n. Education, educatio, onis 3 f To
effect. efficio, is, eci. 3 a. Effectual. effi^ax. acis. adj. 3 art. An effect,
effectus. eventus. us. 4 m. An Egg, ovum, i. 2 m. the eighth. octavus. a. um.
adj. eight hundred, octigenti, ae. ta. adj. pl. Elder, se^^or, oris. adj. 3
art. Elegancy. elegantia. ae. 1 f. The element, elementum. 2 n An Elephant,
elephas. antis. 3 m. the eleventh, undecimus, a, um. adj. Eloquence, faecundia,
ae. 1 f. eloquent, faecundus, a. um adj. else, alius. a, um. alius. adj. To
embrace, amplexor, aris, xatus. i. d. an emperor, imperator, oris. 3 m. an
empire, imperium. ii. 2 a. an employment, negotium, ii. 2 n. Empty, vacuus, a,
um. adj. To encompass, cingo, is, xi. 3 n. Encompassed, cinctus, a, um. part.
To encourage, animo, as, avi. 1 a. Encouragement, incitamentum, i. 2 n. To
increase, Augeo, is, xi. 2. To increase, Cresco, is, crevi. 3 a. Increase,
incrementum, i. 2 n. increasing, auctio, onis. 3 f. the end, exitus, us, 4 m.
An end, Finis, is. 3 m. To end, absolvo, vis, vi. 3 a. To endeavor, nitor,
ris. xus. 3 d. An endeavor, Conatus, us. 4 m. Endless, Aeternus, a, um. adj.
Endowed, praeditus, a, um. adj an endowment, dos, it is. 3 f. To endure, patior,
ris, sus. 3 d. an enemy, inimicus, i. 2 m. To enfeeble, debilito, as, avi 1 a.
Enflamed, ardens, it is. part, 3 ar. England, anglia, ae. 1 f. English, anglicus,
a, um. adj. To enjoy, Fruor, eris, itis. 3 d. an enlightner. illuminator. ris.
3 m. Enmity, Inimicitia, ae, 1 f. to encamp, castrametor, aris, tus. 1 d. to
incline, inclino, as, avi. 1 a. Enough, Sat. adv. to enquire, rogo, as, avi. 1.
a. Enriching, Locupletatio, onis. 3 f. to enlighten, illumino, as, avi. 1. To
ennoble, Nobilito, as, avi. 1. to ensnare, Illaquco, as, avi. 1 a. to enter
into, ingredior, eris, ssus. 3 d. an enterprise, Caeptum, i. 2 n. to entice,
allicio, is, ^i. 3 a. Entrails, Viscera, um. 3 plu. a. to entreat, Oro, as,
avi. 1 a. Envy, invidia, ae. 1 f. to envy, invideo, es, di. 2 a. Envious,
invidus, a, um. adj. Equal, par, aris. adj. 3 art. an error, erratum, i. 2 n.
To escepe, Evado, is, si. 3 a. Especially, praecipue, adv. To establish,
stabilio, is, ivi. 4 ac. An Estate, sacultates, tum. 3 pl. f. to esteem, or
value, Aestimo, as, avi. to esteem or reckon, Aexistimo, as, avi. 1 a. Eternal,
Aeternus, a, um. adj. Eternally, In Aeternum, o. Eternity, Aeternitas, tatis. 3
f. Even, Vel, conj. an event, Eventus, us. 4 m. Everlasting, Aeternus, a, um,
adj. Every, Singulus, a, um, adj. Every one, etc. unusquisque, unaquaeque
unumquodque Every man, Vnusquisque Every where, Vbique adv. An evil, Flagitium,
ii, 2 n. Evil, mo^us, a, um, adj. Exact, Accuratus, a, um, adj. To examine,
examino, as, avi, 1 act. An example, exemplum, i, 2 n. To exceed, exsupero, as,
avi. 1 act. To excel, praesto, as, titi. 1 act. Excellent, promptus, a, um,
adj. Excellent, praestans, it is. part. Excellency, dignitas, tatis, 3 f. except,
praeter. prep. Acc. except, praeter. conj. except, nisi. conj To excuse, purgo,
as, avi. 1 act. A exercise, exercitium, ii. 2 n. To exercise, exerceo, es, ui.
2 act. Exhortation, hortatus, us. 4 m. To exhort, hortor, aris, atus, 1 d.
Exile, exilium, ii. 2 n. To exist, Existo, is, titi. 3 neut. Expectation,
expoctatio, onis. 3 f. To expect, expecto, as, avi. 1 act. Experience,
experientia, a. 1 f. Expiring, completio, onis 3 f. To expose, periclitor,
aris, atus. 1 d. Exposed, obnoxious, a, um. adj. exposed, expositus, a, um.
part. To express, exprimo, is, ssi. 3 a. to extend, attingo, is, xi. 3 a. to
extend, Intendo, is, di. 3 a. to extinguish, extinguo, uis, ui, 3 a. to extol,
efferro, ers, extuli. 3 a. A extreme, extremum. 2 n. An eye, Oculus, i. 2 m.
Ever and anon, subinde. ad.
F.
AFable, Apologus, i. 2 m. A Face, facies, ei. 5 f. To facilitate, facilito,
as, avi. 1 act. To Fade, marcesco, is. 3 Incept. To fail, deficio, is, eci. 3
act. to faint, deficio, is, eci. 3 a. Fair, pulcher, a, um. adj. Faithless,
infidus, a, um. adj. Faith, fides, ei. 5 f. Faithful, fidus, a, um.
Faithfulness, fidelitas, it is. 3 f. The faithful, fidelis, e. lis, adj. 3 Art.
To fall, ruo, is, ui. 3 n. To fall, cado, dis, cecidi. 3 n. False, erroneus, a,
um, adj. Fame, gloria, ae. 1 f. A family, familia, ae. 1 f. Famous, eximius, a,
um. adj. Fancy, affectus, us. 4 m. Far, remotus, a, um. adj. far, long. adv. A
Farmer, agricola, ae. 1 m. and f. A Farthing, Assis, is, 3 m. Farther,
ulterior, us, oris adj. 3 art. Farthest, extremus, a, um, adj. To fast, jejuno,
as, avi. 1 neut. To feel, or handle, tracto, as, avi. 1 a. Fat, pinguis, e, is,
adj. 3 art. Fate, fatum. i. 2 n. To fasten, figo, is, xi. a 3. Fastened, fixus,
a, um. adj. A Father, Pater, tris 3 m. To fatten, incrasso, as, avi, a. 1. A
fault, culpa, ae. 1 d. f. A Favor, gratia, ae. 1 f. A Favorite, gratiosus, i,
2 m. To fear, timeo, es, ui, 2 n. Fear, timor, oris. 3 m. Fearful, timidus, a,
um. adj 3 ter. Feeble, debilis, e, is, adj. 3 art. Feebleness, debilitas,
tatis. 3 f. To feed, pasco, is, avi. v. a. 1 c. To feel, tracto, as, avi. To
feel, sentio, is, si. 4 act. To feel, patior, ris, assus. 3 dep. Felicity,
felioitas, it is. 3 f. A Fellow-souldier, commilito, onis. 3 m. To fetch, peto,
is, ii, and ivi. 3 act. A fever, febris, is. 3 f. Few, pauci, ae, a, an adj.
pl. 3 ter. A field, ager, i, 2 m. A Field for Wars, campus, i, 2 m Fiery,
ferox, cis. adj. 3 art. Fifty, quinquaginti, ind. plu. To fight, pugno, as,
avi. 1 accu. Fighting, pugnans, it is. part. 3 To fill, impleo, es, evi. 2 act.
Filty, turpis, e, is. adj. 3 art. To find out, inquiro, is, ivi. 3 a. To find,
invenio, is, ni. 4 act. Fine, eligans, it is. adj. 3 art. To finish, consummo,
as, avi. 1 a. Fire, ignis, is. 3 m. Firm, firmus, a, um. adj. First, primus, a,
um, adj. Fishing, expiscatio, onis. 3 f. A Fisherman, expiscator, oris. 3 m. A
fist, pugnus,, i. 2 m. To fit, apto, as, avi. 1 a. Fit, idoneus, a, um. adj.
Five, quinque, adv. A flame, flamma, ae. 1 f. Flat, supinus, a, um, adj. 3 ter.
A Flatterer, Adulator, oris. 3 m. To flatter, adulor, aris, atus, 1 dep.
Flattering, adulatorius, a; um, adj. Flattery, assentatio, onis. 3 f. A fleece,
vellus, ris. 3 n. Flesh, caro, nis. 3 f. Flexible, flexilis, is. adj. 3 art. A
flight, fuga, ae. 1 f. Flourishing, florens, it is. adj. 3 art. A flower, flos,
oris. 3 m. To fly, fugio, is, gi. 3 neut. Flying, volitans, it is. part. 3 art.
Flint, filix, icis. 3 f. A flying, volitans, it is. part. 3 a. A foe, hostis, is.
3 com. 2. To follow, sequor, eris, utus. 3 dep. Folly, stultitia, ae. 1 f. To
be fond of, indulgeo, es, si. 2 a. Food, cibus, i. 2 m. A fool, stultus, i. 2
m. Foolish, stolidus, a, um. adj. A foot, pes, dis. 3 m. A footman, pedes,
itis. 3 com. 2. A footstep, Vestigium, i. 2 n. For, nam. conj. For, pro. prep.
abl. To forbid, prohibeo, es, ui. 2 a. Forbidden, vetitus, a, um. adj. To
force, compello, is, ull. 3 a. Force, vires, ium. 3 plu. f. To forego, praeco,
is, ivi. 4 neut. A forehead, frons, it is. 3. f. Foresight, prospectus, us. 4 m.
For ever, in aeternum. To foresee, prospicio, is, xi. 3 act. To forget,
obliviscor, ris, itus, 3 dep. Forgetful, inmemor, ris. adj. 3 art. To forgive a
fault, remitto, is, si. 3. a. To forgive a person, ignosco, is, ovi. 3 n. To
fain, fingo, is, xi. 3 a. A form, classis, is. 3 f. Former, prior, oris. adj. 3
art. Former, pristinus, a, um. adj. Formerly, antehac. adv. Formidable,
formidabilis, lis. adj. Foreigner, peregrinus, a, um. adj. For the most part,
plurumque. adv. For the time to come, posthac. adv. Fortitude, fortitudo, inis,
3 f. Fortune, fortuna, ae. 1 f. Forty quadraginta. adj plu. ind. forward,
pron^s, a, um. adj. foul, foedus, a, um. adj. To foul, maculo, as, avi. 1 a.
foundation, fundamentum, i. 2 n. A fountain, fons, it is. 3 m. four, quatuor.
adj. pl. inde. fourth, quartus, a, um, adj. A fowler, auceps, cupis. 3 com. 2.
A fox, vulpes, is. 3 f. France, Gallia, ae. 1 f. free, immunis, e, is. ad. 3
art. To free, expedio, is, ivi. 4 act. To freeze, congelo, as, avi. 1. n.
frequent, frequens, it is, adj. 3 art. frequency, assiduitas, it is. 3 f.
frequently, frequenter, adv. To fret, vexo, as, avi. 1 a. A friend, amicus, i.
2 m. friendship, amicitia, ae. 1 f. friendly, amice adv. To fright, terreo, es,
ui. 2 a. from, a, ab, abs, prep. Abl. from door to door, ostiatim. adv. To
frown, frontem contrahere. A frown, ruga, ae. 1 f. fruit, fructus, us. 4 m.
fruitful, faecundus, a, um. adj. full, plenus, a, um, adj. a Fuller, fullo,
onis, 3 m. To fulfill, adimpleo, es, evi. 2 a. a funeral, funus, eris. 3 n.
Furious, furiosus, a, um, adj. Fury, furor, oris, 3 m. Future, futurus, a, um.
adj. For the future, in posterum, adv.
G.
GAin, lucrum, i, 2 n. A Gall, fell, lis, 3 n. To Gallop, cursu concitato,
feror, equum agere. The Gallows, Patibulum, i, 2 n. A Gamester, Aleator, oris,
3 m. A Garden, hortus, i. 2 m. A Garment, Vestis, it is. 3 f. To Gather, colligo,
is, egi, 3 act. Gay, elegans, it is, adj. 3 art. A General of an Army, Imperator,
ris. m. Generosity, magnificentia, ae. 1 f. Generous, generosus, a, um.
Gentility, generositas, it is. 3 f. Gently, leniter, adv. A Geographer,
Geographus, i. 2 m. To get, acquiro, is, sivi. 3 a. To get, assequor, eris,
cutus. 3 dep. To get, a dipiscor, eris, ptus 3 dep. A Giant, Gigas, ntis. 3 m.
g. A Girl, puella, ae. 1 f. A Gift, donum, i. 2 n. To give, do, as, dedi. 2. 1
act. To give, or restore, reddo, is, didi. 3. act. To give thanks, Gratias ago.
3. To give over, desino, is, ivi, ii. 3 neu. Given, Deditus, a, um. part. To be
Glad, gaudeo, es, visus. 2. n. p. To Gladden, exhilaro, as, avi. 1 act.
Glittering, fulgidus, a, um adj. Glory, gloria, ae. 1 f. Glorious, Eximius, a,
um. adj. A Glove, Chirotheca, ae. 1 f. A Glutton, Helluo, onis. 3 m. God, Deus,
i. 2 m. Godly, pius, a, um. adj. Godly, pie. adv. Godliness, Pietas, tatis, 3
f. To go, Eo, is, ivi. 4 n. To go, gradior, eris, essus. 3 dep. To go away
hence, abeo, is, ivi. 4 n. To go out, Exeo, is, ivi. 4 n. To go up, ascendo,
is, di. 3 n. Gold, Aurum, i. 2 n. golden, aureus, a, um. adj. Good, subst.
Vtilitas, it is. 3 f. good, bonus, a, um. goodness, bonitas, it is. 3 f. good for,
utilis, le, lis. adj. good things, bona. plu. n. a Goose, Anser, eris. 3d. com.
2. the Gospel, Evangelium, ii. n. 2. to govern, guberno, as, avi. 1 act.
Government, Regimen, nis. 3 n. a Governor, Gubernator, oris. 3 m. to grace,
condecoro, as, avi. 1 a. Grace, Gratia, ae. 1 f. gracious, benignus, a, um,
adj. graciously, benign. adv. the Grammar, Grammatica. ae to grant, concedo,
is, si. 3 act. Grass, Gramen, inis, 3 n. grassy, gramineus, a, um. adj. to
gratify, placeo, es, ui, tus. 2. ^eu. pass: a Grave, Sepulchrum, i. 2 n.
great, magnus, a, um. adj. greatly, magnopere. adv. greatess, magnitudo, inis.
3 f. Greek, Graecus, a, um. adj. green, viridis, e, is. adj. 3. art. a Grecian,
Graecus, i. 2 m. greedy, avidus, a, um. adj. greedily, avide. adv. Greece,
Graecia, ae. 1 f. g. a grief, dolor, oris. 3 m. grief, maeror, oris. 3 m. to
grieve, ango, is, xi. 3 n. to be grieved, contristor, aris, atus, 1 p. to
grieve, doleo, es, ui. 2 n. to grin, ringor, eris, rictus. 3 dep. to grind,
molo, is, ui. 3. act. to groan, gemo, is, ui. 3 n. a Groat, Dram, ae. 1 f.
the ground, humus, 4 and 2 f. on the ground, humi, genesis to grow, cresco, is,
evi. 3 n. to grow or become, ^o, is, factus. n. p. To grow pale, palesco, is,
ui. l. 3 n. To grow proud, suberpiasco, is, ui. 3 n. A Guardian, Tutor, oris. 3
m. A guest, Conviva, ae. 1 c. 2. Guilt, Reatus, us. 4 m. Guilty, reus, a, um.
adj. Guiltless, insons, it is. adj. 3 a.
H
Heinous, detestabilis, e, lis. adj. 3 a. Hair, crinis, is. 3 m. An hairlace,
Vitta, ae. 1 f. To halt, claudico, as, avi. 1 n. A halter, capistrum, i. 2 n.
An hand, manus, us. 4 f. To handle, tracto, as, avi. 1 a. Handkerchief,
sudariolum, i. 2 n. To hang, suspendo, is, di. 3 act. Hang, pendeo, es,
pependi, 3 n. handsome, venustus, a, um. adj. hap, fortuna, ae, 1 f. d g.
happy, faelix, icis. adj. 3 a. To happen, accido, is, di. n 3. happiness,
Faelicit as, it is. 3 f hard, durus, a, um. adj. hard, difficilis, e, is. adj. 3
a. hard, malus, a, um. adj. An hare, lepus, oris. 3 m. An harlot, meretrix,
icis. 3 f. harmless, innoxius, a, um. adj. To have, propero, as, avi. 1 act. To
hasten, propero, as, avi. 1 act. hasty, properus, a, um. adj. A hat, gaterus,
i. 2 m. To hate, odi. defect. hated exosus, a, um part. hating exosus, a, um
part. hateful exosus, a, um part. hatred, Odium, ii. 2 n. to have, habeo, es,
ui. 2 act. to hawk, aucupor, aris, atus. 1 dep. A hawk, accipiter, tris. 3 m
Hay, faenum, i. 2 n. the head, caput, itis. 3 n. the headache, cephalalgia, ae.
1 f. An hedge, sepes, is. 3 m. To heal, sano, as, avi. 1 act. Healing,
salutifer, a, um. adj. Health, salus, utis. 3 f. to heap up, accumulo, as, avi.
1 ac. to hear, audio, is, ivi. 4 act. hearing, subst. auditus, us. 4 m. to
hearken, ansculto, as, avi, 1 act. the heart, animus, i. 2 m. An heart, Cor,
dis. 3 n. heat, ardor, oris. 3 m. An heathen, Ethnicus, i. 2 m. Heathenish,
Ethnicus, a, um. Heaven, Caelum, i. 2 n. heavenly, Caelestis, e, is. adj. 3 a.
heavy, gravis, vis. adj. 3 a. he, ille, a, ud. pron. adj. A heifer, juvenca,
ae. 1 f. Hell, Orcus, i. 2 m. hellish, infernalis, e, is. adj. 3 art. help,
auxilium, ii. 2 n. An helper, adjutrix, icis. 3 f helpful, auxiliaris, e, is.
adj. 3 art. to help, adjuvo, as, avi. 1 ac. to help on, promoveo, es, ui. 2 ac.
Henry, Henricus, i. 2 m. her, ejus, from is ea. id. pr. adj. A herb, herba, ae.
1 f. hereafter, posthac. adv. to hide, abscondo, is, di. 3 a hidden, abditus,
a, um. adj. highly, summus, a, um. adj. highly, sum, adv. An hill, Collis,
is. 3 m. himself, se, pron. subst. to hinder, impedio, is, ivi. 4 act. to hire,
conduco, is, xi. 3 n. his, ejus. pron. adj. his own, suus, a, um. pron. adj. An
historian, historicus, i. 2 m hitherto, adhuc, adv. An hog, porcus, i. 2 m. to
hold, teneo, es, ui. 2 act. to hold ones peace, taceo, es, ui. 2 n. holy,
sanctus, a, um. adj. Honest, honestus, a, um. adj. Hones^y, probitas, it is. 3 s.
Honestly, honest, adv. Honey, mel, lis. 3 n. Honor, honor, oris. 3 m.
Honorable to, decorus, a, um. adj. Hopeful, spei bona. Hope, spes, ei. 5 f.
Hope, fiducia, ae. 1 f. An horn, cornu. 4 n. Horrid, horridus, a, um. adj. An
horse, Equus, i. 2 m. An horseman, eques, itis. 3 com. Hot, violentus, a, um.
adj. An hour, hora, ae. 1 f. Hourly, in horas. A house, Domus, i, us. 2, 4 f.
how, quam. conj. how greatly, q^anto, pere, adv. how many, quot. adv. plu.
inde. adv. how much, quantum. how, with an adjective. quam. To howl, Vlulo, as,
avi. 1 n. huge, ingens, it is. adj. 3 a. humane, humanus, a, um. humble, humilis,
e, lis. adj. 3 a. Humility, humilitas, it is. 3 f. an hundred, Centum. indec.
hungry, famelicus, a, um. adj. to hunt, venor, aris, atus, 2 dep. a
Hunting-pole, Pertica venatoria. 1 f. Huntsman, Venator, oris. hurtful, noxius,
a, um. 3 term. adj. to hurt, caedo, is, cidi. 3 act. to hurt, noceo, es, ui. 2
a. A Husband, Maritus, i. 2 m. Husbandman, Agricola, ae. 1 com. 2. an
hypocrite, hypocrita. ae. 1 m. hypocrisy, hypocrisis, is. 3 f.
I
IEgo, pron. subs. genesis mei. Jason, Jason, onis. 3 m. the Jaundice, Isterus, i.
2 m. a Jaw, maxila, ae. 1 f. joy, gaudium, ii. 2 n. joyful, hilaris, e, is.
adj. 3 art. Idle, Otiosus, a, um. adj. idleness, ignavia, ae. 1 f. idly,
otiose. adv. an Idol, Imago, inis. 3 f. jealous, zelotipus, a, um. adj. to
jear, irrideo, es, si. 2 act. Jerusalem, Hierosolyma, ae. 1 f. Jesus, Jesus,
us. 4 m. Jet, gagates, it is. 3 m. a Jewel, gemma, ae. 1 f. ignoble, ignobilis,
e, is. adj. 3 art. ignominy, ignominia, ae. 1 f. ignorant, ignarus, a, um. adj.
ignorauce, ignorantia, ae. 1 f. an Image, Imago, inis. 3 f. to imitate, imitor,
aris, atus. 1 dep. immoderately, immodice. adv. impartial, aequus, a, um. adj.
an impediment, impedimentum, i. 2 n. impiety, scelus, sceleris. 3 n. impious,
impius, a, um. adj. to impose upon, impono, is, sui. 3 act. impoverishing,
subst. diminutio, onis. 3 f. to improve, promoveo, es, vi. 2 act. imprudence,
inscitia, ae. 1 f. imprudent, imprudens, it is. adj. 3 art. impudent, impudens,
it is. adj. 3 art. I my self, ipse, a, um. pro. adj. in, in. prep. Abl.
inclination, propensio, onis. 3 s. In comparison of, prae. prep. Abl.
inconvenient, inconveniens, it is. adj. 3 art. increase, incrementum, i. 2 n.
indulgence, indulgentia, ae. 1 f. to indulge, indulgeo, is, si. 2 act.
industry, sedulitas, it is. 3 f. industrious, sedulus, a, um. adj. ineffectual,
inefficax, acis. adj. 3 a. an Infant, Infans, it is. 3 c. com. 2. inferiors,
inferiores, um. adj. plu. 3 art. infinite, infinitus, a, um. adj. ingenuous,
ingeniosus, a, um. adj. ingratitude, ingratitudo, inis. 3 f. an inhabitant,
incola, ae. 1 com. 2. an inheritance, haereditas, it is. 3 f. injustice,
injustitia, ae. 1 f. to injure, noceo, es, ui. 2 act. injurious, noxius, a, um.
adj. Ink, atramentum, i. 2 n. an Ink-horn, atramentarium, ii. 2 n. an Inn,
diversorium, ii. 2 n. innocence, innocentia, ae. 1 f. innumerable, innumerus,
a, um. adj. an instant, momentum, i. 2 n. instead, loco. adv. instrument,
instrumentum, i. 2 n. intemperance, intemperantia, ae. 1 f. to invade, invado,
is, si. 3 act. to intend, statuo, is, ui. 3 act. intermission, intermissio,
onis. 3 f. a interval, intervallum, i. 2n. an intention, intentio, onis 3 f. in
the mean time, interea. adv. in the mean while, interea. adv. in vain, frustra.
adv. to invent, excogito, as, avi. 1 act. invincible, invictus, a, um. adj. to
instruct, erudeo, is, ivi. 4 act. an instructor, institutor, oris. 3 m. an
instruction, documentum, i. 2 n. instruction, monitus, us. 4 d. m. to invite,
invito, as, avi. 1 act. into, in. prep. Acc. inward, intimus, a, um, adj.
inviolable, inviolabilis, e, lis. adj. 3 art. a Journey, Iter, neris. 3 nen. to
join, annecto, is, ui. 3 act. inksome, molestus, a, um. Iron, Ferrum, i. 2 n.
Irreparably, irreparabiliter, adv. Isaac, Isaacus, i. 2 m. It is, ea, id. pron.
adj. Italy, Italia, ae. 1 f. The itch, scabies, ei. 5 f. Joyful, Laetus, a, um.
A Judge, judex, icis. 3 m. To judge, judico, as, avi 1 a Judgment, judicium, i.
2 n. Julius, julius, ii. 2 m. To jump, salto, as, avi. 1 n. Just, Justus, a,
um. adj. Justice, justitia, ae. 1 f. Justly, just, adv.
K
TO keep, custodio, is, ivi. 4 act. to keep, detineo, es, ui. 2 a. to keep a
command, Observo, as, avi. 1 ac. to keep under, subjugo, as, avi. 1 act. to
keep off, prohibeo, es, ui. 2 act. A Key, Clavis, is. 3 f. to kick, Calcitro,
as, avi. 1 a kind, benignus, a, um. kindly, leniter, adv. kindness, beneficium,
i. 2 n. kindness, benignitas, it is. 3 f. A King, Rex, gis. 3 m. A Kingdom,
regnum, i. 2 n. to kill, Occido, is, di. 3 a. A knack, artificium, ii. 2 n. A
knave, Nebulo, onis. 3 m. Knavery, impostura, ae. 1 f. A knee, genu, u. 4 n.
inde. To kneel, genuflecto, is, xi. 3 act. A knife, culter, i. 2 m. A Knight,
eques, itis. 3 m. Knowledge, scientia, ae. 1 f. A knot, nodus, i. 2 m. To know,
scio, is, ivi. 4 act. Not to know, nescio, is, ivi. a Known, cognitus, a, um.
adj.
L
LAborious, sedulus, a, um. adj. Labor, labor, oris. 3 m. To labor, conor,
aris. atus. 1 dep. Laden, onustus, a, um. adj. A Lady, domina, ae. 1 f. A lamb,
agnus, i 2 m. Lamentation, lamentatio, onis. 3 f. To lament, lamentator, aris,
atus. 1 ac. To lament, lugeo, es, uxi. 2 n. Lamentable, lamentabilis, e, lis.
adj. 3 a. A land, regio, onis. 3 f. A language, lingua, ae. 1 f. Languid,
languidus, a, um. To languish, languco, es, ui. 2 n. Large, amplus, a, um. adj.
Last, ult^mus, a, um. adj. At last, tandem, adv. late, serus, a, um. adj.
Latin, latinus, a, um. adj. laudable, laudabilis, le, lis. adj. 3 art. to
laugh, rideo, es, si. 2 act. to laugh at, irrideo, es, si. 2 act. to lavish,
prodigo, as, avi. 1 ac. lavishly, profuse, adv. A law, lex, egis, 3 f. lawful,
legitimus, a, um. adj It is lawful, licet. impers. lawless, Illex, icis, adj. 3
a. A lawyer, juris peritus. 2 m. laurel, laurus, i, u. 2, 4 f. to lay, struo,
is, xi. 3 ac. to lay aside, abjicio, is, eci. to lay open, patefacio, is, eci.
3 a. to lay out, impendo, is, di. 3 a. to lay up, repono, is, sui. 3 a to lay
upon, impono, is, sui. 3 a lazy, otiosus, a, um. adj. laziness, ignavia, ae. 1
f. to lead, transfero, ers, tuli. v. irr. A league space, leuca, ae. 1 f. to
learn, disco, is, didici. 3 art. A learner, discipulus. Learned, doctus, a, um.
p. Learning, doctrina, ae. 1 f. to leap into, insilio, is, ui. and ii. 4 n.
Leisure, Otium, ii. 2 n. Leave, Venia, ae. 1 f. To leave, relinquo, is, qui. 3
a To leave off, defino, is, ivi. and ii. 3 n. To be left, relinquo, eris, ctus.
p. 3. Leyden, lugdanum, i. 2 n. To be at leisure, vacat, imp. To lend, commodo,
as, avi. act. 1. length, longitudo, inis. 3 f. lenity, lenitas, it is. 3 f. lent,
commodatus, a, um. par. To be lent, Commodor, aris, atus. 1 pass. less, minor,
us, oris. adj. 3 a. To lessen, diminuo, is, ui. 3 act. A lesson, lectio, onis.
3 f. lest, ne, conj. let, imp. mood. letter, typus, i. 2 m. letters, literae,
arun. plu. f. A liar, mendax, acis. 3 com liberal, munificus, a, um. adj
liberal, ingenuns, a, um. adj. liberty, libertas, it is. 3 f. licentious,
libidinosus, a, um. adj. To lick up, lambo, is, by. 3 act. To lie upon,
incumbo, is, ui. 3 n. Life, Vita, ae. 1 f. Light, Lux, cis. 3 f. like, similis,
e, lis. adj. 3 art. a limb, artus, us. 4 m. limb, membrum, i. 2. n. a line,
linea, ae. 1 f. a Lion, Leo, onis. 3 m. a lip, labium, ii. 2 n. little, parvus,
a, um. adj. little, paululum. adv. a little while, parumper. adv. little,
parum. adv. little, exiguus, a, um. adj. the liver, jecur, oris. 3 n. to live,
vivo, is, xi. 3 neu. a load, sacrina, ae. 1 f. to be laden, oneror, aris,
atus. 1 p. to lodge, diversor, aris, atus. 1. dep. lofty, sublimis, e, is. adj.
3 art. To loiter, moror, aris, atus. 1 dep. London, Londinum, i. 2 n. long,
longus, a, um. adj. long, diu, adv. to look to, consulo, is, ui. 3. ac. to look
to it, curo, as, avi. 1 act. to let loose, remitto, is, si. 3 act. to loose,
solvo, is, vi. 3 act. loquacity, loquacitas, it is. 3 f. a Lord, Dominus, i. 2 m.
to lose, perdo, is, didi. 3 act. a loss, damnum, i. 2 n. a lot, sors, it is, 3 f.
love, amor, oris. 3 m. to love, amo, as, avi. 1 ac. loud, sonorus, a, um. adj.
a Lover, Amator, oris. 3 m. loving, blandus, a, um. adj. loveliest,
amantissimus, a, um. adj. lovely, amabilis, e, lis. adj. a Louse, Pediculus, i.
2 m. low, abjectus, a, um. adj. loyal, pius, a, um. adj. luxury, luxuries, ei,
5 f. to lie, cumbo, is, ui. 3 ne. a lie, mendacium, ii. 2 n. to lie flat,
procumbo, is, ui. 3a. to lie, mentior, is, itus, 4 dep. lying, mendax, acis,
adj. 3 art.
M.
TO be made equal, adaequor, aris, atus. 1 pe. mad, insanus, a, um. adj. a
Madman, Demens, it is. adj. 3 art. madness, insania, ae. 1 f. a Magistrate,
magistratus, us. 4 m. magnaminity, fortitudo, inis. 3 f. a Magpye, Pica, ae. 1
f. a Maidservant, famula, ae. 1 f. to make, efficio, is, eci. 3 act. to make,
paro, as, avi. 1 act. to make Exercise, compone, is, sui. 3 act. to make happy,
felicito, as, avi, 1 act. to make for or to, facio, is, eci. 3 act. a Maker,
Creator, oris. 3 m. a Malefactor, Reus, i. 2 m. malice, malitia, ae. 1 f. a
Man, Vir, ri. 2 m. manhood, virilitas, tatis. 3 f. mankind, genus, humanum. 3
n. it is manifest, certum, est. imp. manly, virilis, e, lis. adj. 3 art. a
manner, Mos, ris. 3 m. a Manservant, Famulus, i. 2 m. Manslaughter,
Homicidium, ii, 2 n. man's estate, pubertas, tatis. 3 f. manuscript,
manuscriptum, i. 2 n. many, multus, a, um. many times, saepe. adv. a Mare,
Equa, ae. 1 f. marble, marmor, oris. 3 n. to march, iter facio, is, eci. 3 act.
a mark, nota, ae. 1 f. a Market, Mercatus, i. 2 m. a Marketplace, Forum, i. 2
n. to marry, nubo, is, psi, nupta sum. 3 n. pass. a mask, larva, ae. 1 f. a
Mason, Coementarius, ii. 2 m. the master, praeceptor, oris. 3 m a master,
Dominus, i. 2 m. a mastiff, molossus, i. 2 m. a matter, res, ei. 5 f. matter,
materia, ae. 1 f. it mattereth, resert. imp. a Mayor, Praetor, oris. 3 m,
means, modus, i. 2 m. meat, cibus, i. 2 m. a measure, mensura, ae. 1 f. to
meddle with, attingo, is, tgi. 3 act. a medicine, medicina, ae. 1 f. a meadow,
pratum, i. 2. n. mere, merus, a, um. adj. meet, aequus, a, um. adj. to meet,
obvenio, is, ui, 4 n. memory, memoria, ae. 1 f. to mend, reparo, as, avi. 1
act. to mention, memoro, as. avi. 1 act. a Merchant, Mercator, oris. 3 m. a
mercy, beneficium, ii. 2 n. mercy, misericordia, ae. 1 f. Merciful, misericors,
dis. adj. 3 art. Merciful, clemens it is. adj. 3 art. Merit, meritum, i. 2 n. To
merit, mertor, eris, it us. v. dep. A message, nuncium, i. 2 n. Metal,
mettallum, i. 2 n. A method, modus, i. 2 m. Middle, medius, a, um. adj. In the
midst of, inter. prep. ac. With all his might, provinctus. Milk, lac, it is. 3
neut. A mile, milliare, is 3 n. Mild, clemens, it is, adj. 3 a. A mind,
sententia, ae. 1 f. A mind, men's, it is. 3 f. mindful, memor, oris. adj. 3 art.
mindsulness, memoria. 1 f. To mingle, misceo, es, ui. 2 a A minister,
concionator, oris. 3 m. A minute, momentum, i. 2 n. Mire, coenum, i. 2 n.
Mischief, malum, i. 2 n. A misery, miseria, ae. 1 f. Miserable, miser, a, um.
adj. A misfortune, infortunium, ii. 2 n. To mistake, erro, as, avi. 1 a A
mystery, artificium, ii. 2 n. Mistress, magistra, ae. 1 f. To moan, lugeo, es,
xi. 2 n. To mitigate, minuo, is, ui. 3 act. To mock, ludo, is, si. 3 act.
Moderate, mediocris, e, is. adj. 3 a. Moderately, modice, adv. Modesty,
modestia, ae. 1 f. Moist, humidus, a, um. adj. A moment, momentum, i 2 n Money,
pecunia, ae. 1 f. A month, mensis, is. 3 m. A moon, luna, ae. 1 f. Moral,
moralis, le, lis. adj. 3 art. more, plus, ris. adj. 3 a. more, plures, rium,
adj plu. more, magis, adv. more, after a verb of buying, pluris, genesis Mortal,
mortalis, le, lis. adj. 3 a. most, plurimum, adv. most men, plerique, aeq. aq.
adj. Mother, matter, is. 3 f. To mount, assurgo, is, xi. 3 n. Mount Aetna,
Aetna, ae. 1 f A mountain, mons, it is. 3 m To mourn, lugeo, es, xi 2 n To move,
moveo, es, ui. 2 a. To move, migro, as, avi. 1 n Moveable, mobilis, le, lis.
adj. 3 n. A mouth, Os, oris. 3 n. To mow, meto, is, sui. 3 act. A mower,
messor, oris. 3 m. much, multum. adv. mud, limus, i. 2 m. much, multum, adj. A
multitude, turba, ae. 1 f. Murder, homicidium, ii. 2. A mushroom, fungus, i. 2
m. Music, musica, ae. 1 f. mutual, mutuus, a, um. adj. A murderer, homicidia,
ae. 1 m. my, meus, a, um. pro. adj.
N
THe name, nomen, inis. 3 n A nation, gens, it is. 3 f. nature, natura, ae. 1 f.
A nature, ingenium, ii. 2 n. Naughty, nequam, adj. ind. Near, prope, adv. near,
propinquus, a, um. adj. neatness, elegantia, ae. 1 f. A necessary, necessarium,
ii. 2 n. necessary, necessarius, a, um. adj. necessity, necessitas, tatis. 3 f
A neck, collum, i. 2 neut. need, opus. indec. adj. needy, indigus, a; um. adj.
neglect, neglectus, us. 4 m. To neglect, negligo, is, xi. 3 act. negligence,
negligentia, ae. 1 f. A neghbour, proximus, i. 2 m. neighing hinniens, it is.
part. neither, with not, nec. neither, neuter, a, um. rius, adj. never,
nunquam, adv. nevertheless, nihilo-minuus. adv. news, fama, ae. 1 f. new,
recens, it is. part. 3 a. next, proximus, a, um. adj. next, proxime. adverb. A
nest, nidus, i. 2 m. A net, rete, it is. 3 neut. nigh, vicinus, a, um. adj.
night, nox, ctis. 3 f. nimble, agilis, le, lis. adj. 3 art. noble, nobilis, le,
lis. adj. 3 a. A nobleman, heroes, ois. 3 m. nobly, fortiter, adv. no body,
nemo. genesis caret. dar. ini. 3 com. 2. A noise, strepitus, us. 4 m. A noise,
clangor, oris. 3 1. nones, nonae, arum. plu. 1 f. no, with a subst. nullus, a,
um, ius. adj. no one, nullus, a, um. ius. no man, nemo. genesis car. dat. mini. 3
com. 2. none, nullus, a, um, ius. A nose, nasus, i, 2 m. not, non. adv. not at
all, nonomnino. adv. notwithstanding, veruntamen. co^j. nothing, ni^i^. n. s.
indec. nothing, nihilum. 2 n. A nourisher, altor, oris. 3 m: nourishment,
allmentium, i. 2 n. now, nunc. adv. now and then, identidem, adv. number,
numerus, i, 2 m. numerous, numerosus, a, um. a Nurse, Nutrix, icis. 3 f. a Nut,
Nux, ucis. 3. f.
O.
AN Oak, Quercus, us. 4 f. Obedience,, Obedientia, ae. 1 f. obedient, moriger,
a, um, adj. To Obey, Obtempero, as, avi. 1 act. to observe, observe, as, avi. 1
act. to observe or regard, curo, as, avi. 1 act. observation, observatio, onis.
3 f. obstinacy, contumacia, ae. 1. f. obstinate, contumax, acis, adj. 3 art. to
obtain, assequor, eris, utus. 3 dep. occasion, occasio, onis. 3 f. odiousness,
detestabilitas, tatis. 3 f. of; de. prep. abl. off to be, disto, as, titi. 1 n.
to offend, pecco, as, avi. 1 a. to offend, provoco, as, avi. 1 act. an
Offender, Delinquens, it is. 3 com. 2 an offense, delictum, i. 1 n. an offer,
conditio, onis. 3 f. to offer, offero, ers, obtuli, irr. 3. Offspring, Proles,
is. 3 f. often, saepe. adv. oftentimes, saepe. adv. ointment, unguentum, i, 2
n. old, senior, nius, oris. adj. 3 art. old age, senecta, ae. 1 f. omnipotency,
omnipotentia, ae. 1 f. once, semel. adv. one, unus, a, um,, ius. adj. on each
side, utrinque. adv. only with a subst. unicus, a, um. adj. only, solummodo.
adv. to open, aperio, is, ui. 4. a. opportunity, opportunitas, it is. 3. f. to
oppose, repugno, as, avi. 1 a. an Oracle, Oraculum, i. 2 n. an Orator; Orator,
ris. 3 m. Order, Ordo, inis. 3 f. Orestes, is. 3 m. an ornament, ornamentum, i.
2 n. orthodox, orthodoxus, a, um. other, alius, a, ud, ius adj. others, alii,
ae, a. plu. otherwise, alias. adv. to overcome, vinco, is, ici. 3 act. to
overflow, inundo, as, avi. 1 act. over fond, indulgens, it is. adj. over hasty,
praeproperus, a, um. adj. over-love, indulgentia, ae. 1 f. to overspread,
permano, as, avi. 1 act. to offend, laedo, is, si. 3 a. to over-joy, gaudeo,
es, visus, 2 n. p. the overthrow, ruina, ae. 1 f. Ovid, Ovidius, ii, 1 m.
ought, debet. impers. ought, oportet. impers. our, noster, a, um, pron. our
own, noster, a, um, pron. to our-go, exsupero, as, avi. 1 act. to owe, debeo,
es, ui. 2 n. an Owner, Dominus, i. 2 m. an Ox, Bos, vis, 3. com. 2. Oxford,
Oxonium, ii, 2 n. Oil, Oleum, ii. 2 n.
P.
PAganism, Ethnicismus, i. 2 m. to Paint, Pingo, is, xi. 3 a. a Painter,
Pictor, oris. 3 m. pains, labor, oris. 3 m. painful, laboriosus, a, um. adj, a
Palace, Palatium, ii. 2 n. the palate, palatum, i. 2 n. pale, pallidus, a, um.
adj, paleness, pallor, oris. 3 m. Papal, Papalis, le, lis. adj. 3 art. Paper,
Charta, ae. 1 f. pardon, venia, ae. 1 f. to pardon a Person, ignosco, is, ovi.
3 to pardon a Crime, remitto, is, isi. 3 a. a Parent, Parens, it is. 3. com. 3.
Paris, Lutetia, ae. 1 f. a Parlour, Conclave, is. 3 n. Parnassus, Parnassus, i,
2 m. a Parrett, Psittacus, i. 2 m. a Part, pars, it is. 3 f. A part of lesson,
praelectio, onis. 3 f. For the most part, plerumque. adv. To pass, preteraeo,
is, ivi. 4 n. To pass by, remitto, it is, misi. 3 ac. A passenger, vector, oris.
3 m past, praeteritus, a, um. adj. To patch, sarcio, is, ivi. 4ac. A path,
semita, ae. 1 f. patience, patientia, ae. 1 f. patiently, paeienter, adv: A
Patron, patronus, i. 2 m. Paul, Paulus, i, 2 m. To pay, solvo, vis, vi. 3 ac.
peace, pax, acis. 3 f. A Pear, pyrum, i. 2 n. A pibble-stone, lapillus, i. 2 m.
A piece, particula, ae. 1 f. A pencil, penicillus, i. 2 m. To pierce, penetro,
as, avi. 1 a. To pity, misereor, eris, rtus. placable, placabilis, e, lis. adj
3 arr. penitent, poenitens, it is. adj To prescribe, prescribo, is, psi.
Penknife, scalpellam, i. 2 n. A penny, denarius, ii. 2 m. The people, populus,
i. 2 m. perception, acumen, inis. 3 n perception, sagacitas, it is. 3 f. perfect,
sincerus, a, um. adj. to perform, perago, es, egi. 3 a to perform, praesto, is,
stiti. 1 a A perfume, odoramentum, i. 2 n. to perish, pereo, is, ii. and ivi. 4
n. pernicious, extialis, le, lis. a perpetually, perpetuo, adv. Persepolis, is.
3 f. Persia, Persis, idis. 3 f. persuasion, suasus, us. 4 m. to persuade,
suadeo, es, si. 2 ac. to be persuaded, moveor, eris, motus. 2 p. perverse,
protervus, a, um. adj. pestilence, pestis, is. 3 f. Philip, Philippus, i. 2 m.
A philosopher, philosophus, i. 2 m. Phocis, idos. 3 f. A phrase, phrasis, is. 3
f. physic, ars medica. 3 f. A physician, medicus, i. 2 m. A picture, imago,
inis. 3 f. A pebble, calculus, i. 2 m. Piety, pietas, tatis. 3 f. A pillar,
columna, ae. 1 f. pious, pius, a, um. adj. piously, sancte, adv. piper,
tibicen, inis. 3 m. Pythagorus, Pythagoras, ae, 1 m. A place, locus, i. 2 pl.
m. and n. To gave place, cedo, is ssi. 3 n the plague, pestis, is. 3 f. to
pain, dolo, as, avi. 1 ac. A Planet, Planeta, ae, 1 m. To Plant Sero, is, vi, 3
act. Planted Plantatus, a, um, adj. To play, Ludo, is, si, 3 ac. Plain, Planus,
a, um, adj. A Playfellow, Collusor, oris, 3 m. Pleasant, Jucundus, a, um. adj.
Pleasantly, Amene, adv. To please, Placeo, es, ui, and Placitus, 2 n. p.
Pleases, Placet, imp. Pleasure, Voluptas, atis, 3 f. To plead, Ago, is, egi, 3
act. Plenty, Copia, ae, 1 f. A Pledge, Pignus, oris 3 n. A Poet, Poeta, ae, 1
m. To poison, Veneno, as, avi. 1 act. To Plow, Aro, as, avi 1 act. Plowed,
Aratus, a, um, par. A Plowman, Arator, is, 3 m. To Pluck, Vello, is, vulsi, 3
act. To Pluck down, Evello, is, ulsi, 3 act. A Plum, Prunum, i, 2 n. A Pocket,
Sacellus, i, 2. m. A Pole, Polus, i. 2 m. Policy, Calliditas, tatis, 3 f.
Poisonous, Venenosus, a, um, adj. A Politician, Politicus, i. 2 m. Poor,
Pauper, ris, adj. 3 art. Poor with a Subst, Egenus, a, um, adj. Polished,
Politus, a, um, part. Porridge, Jusculum, i, 2 n. Potent, Potens, it is, 3 act.
and part. Poverty, Paupertas, tatis, 3 f. A Pond of Money, Mina, ae, 1 f. A
Pound-weight, Libra, ae 1 f. Power, Potestas, tatis, 3 f. Practice, Exercitium,
ii, 2 n. To Practice, Ago, is, egi, 3 act. To Practice Vice, Patro, as, avi, 1
act. Praise, Laus, dis, 3 f. Praiseworthy, Laudabilis, le, lis. adj. 3 art. To
Praise, Laudo, as, avi, 1 act. To be praised, Laudor, aris, atus, pass. A
Pratler, Garrulus, i, 2 m. To Pray, Precor, aris, atus, 1 dep. Prayer, Preces,
cum, 3 plu f. To Preach, Concionor, aris, atus, 1 dep. A Preacher, Concionator,
oris, 3 m. A Precept, Praeceptum, i, 2. To prefer, Antefero, ers, tuli, 3 irr.
To be Preferred, Praeponendus, a, dum, parti. Prejudicial, Incommedus, a, um,
adj. To prejudice, Laedo, is, si, 3 act. Preparation, Paratus, us, 4 m. To
prepare, Paro, as, avi, 1 act. A Presage, Praesagium, ii, 2 n. The Presence,
Praesentia, ae, 1 f. Present, Praesens, it is, adj. 3 art. Presently, Statim,
adv. Preservation, Conservatio, onis, 3 f. To preserve, Conservo, as, avi, 2
act. To preserve, Tueor, eris, itus, 2 dep. To press, Premo, is, ssi, 3 act.
Pretense, Praetextus, us, 4 m. Pretended, Simulatus, a, um, particip. Pretty,
Bellus, a, um, adj. Precious, Pretiosus, a, sum, adj. To prevent, Praeverto,
is, ti, 3 act. Price, Pretium, ii, 2 n. To prick, Pungo, is, xi, 3 act. Pride,
Superbia, ae, 1 f. A Prince, Princeps, ipis 3 com. 2. Princely, Regius, a, um.
adj. A Printer, Typographus, i. 2 m. Printed, Impressus, a, um, part. A Prison,
Ergastulum, i, 2 n. To be prised, Aestimor, aris, atus, 1 Passi. Private,
Arcanus, a, um, adj. Privately, Private, adv. A Privilege, Privilegium, ii, 2
n. To prise, Aestimo, as, avi, 1 act. Probable, Probabilis, le, lis, adj. 3
art. To proceed, Orior, eris, and iris, orsus, dep. To proceed, Provenio, is,
ni, 4 n. To procure, Paro, as, avi, 1 act. Prodigal, Prodigus, a, um, adj.
Prodigality, Luxuria, ae, 1 f. Prodigy, Prodigium, ii, 2 n. To produce, Affero,
ers, attuli, 3 act. Professed, Professus, a, um, adj. Proficience, Profectus,
us, 4 m. Profit, Utilitas, tatis, 3 f. To profit, Prosum, es, ui. Profitable,
Utilis, le, lis, adj. 3 art. A Promise, Promissum, i, 2 n. To promise,
Promitto, is, isi, 3 act. Promised, Promissus, a, um, Part. To promote,
Promoveo, es, vi, 2 act. To prompt, Incito, as, avi, 1 act. To prop, Fulcio,
is, si, 4 act. Proper, Proprius, a, um, adj. Property, Proprietas, tatis, 3 f.
Profane, Profanus, a, um, adj. To propound, Propono, is, sui, 3 act.
Prosperity, Res-prospera, 5 f. To prosper, Secundo, as, avi, 1 act. Prosperus,
Secundus, a, dum, adj. Proud Superbus, a, um, adj. Proudly, Superbe, adv.
Provender, Pabulum, i, 2 n. To provide, Paro, as, avi, 1 act. Providence,
Providentia, ae, 1 f. Provident, Providus, a, um, A Province, Provincia, ae, 1
f. To provoke, Incito, as, avi, 1 act. Prudence, Prudentia, ae, 1 f. Public,
Publicus, a, um, adj. To pull, Vello, is, ulsi, 3 act. To pull down, Evello,
is, ulsi, 3 ibid. To pull down Kings, Solio deturbo, as, avi. To punish, Punio,
is, ivi. 4 act. Punishment, Paena, ae, 1 f. To purchase, Emo, is, mi, 3 act. To
purchase, Acquiro, is, sivi, 3 act. A Purse, Crumena, ae, i. f. Pure, Purus, a,
um, adj. To purpose, Statuo, is, ui. 3 act. To put forth, Exero, is, ui, 3 act.
To put on, Induo, is, ui, 3 act. To put over, Superinduo, is, ui, 3 act. To put
under, Suppono, is, sui, 3 act. Pylades, Pylades, um, 3 f.
Q.
TO Quake, Fremo, is, ui, 3 n. A Quarrel, Jurgium, ii, 2 n. Quickly, Statim,
adv. Quiet, Tranquillus, a, um, adj. Quietly, Quiet, adv. Quietness,
Tranquillitas, tatis, 3 f. Quicksand, Syrtes, is, 3 f. A Quill, Calamus, i, 2
m. Quite, Prorsus, adv.
R.
RAce or Family, Orige, inis, 3 f. Racks, Fidiculae, arum, 1 plu. f. Rage,
Impetus, us, 4 m. To rage, Furio, is, insanivi, 3 neu. Raging, Furens, it is,
part. 3 art. Rain, Pluvia, ae, 1 f. To raise, Incendo, is, di, 3 act. Rare,
Rarus, a, um, adj. Rash. Temerarius, a, um, adj. Rashness, Temeritas, tatis, 3
f. A Rate, Pretium, ii, 2 n. To rattle, Increpo, as, avi. Rather, Potius, adv.
A Raven, Corvus, i, 2 m. A Razer, Novacula, ae, 1 f. To have rather, Malo, vis,
ui, irr. To rattle, Crepito, as, avi, 1 neu. To read, Lego, is, gi, 3 act. To
read over again, Relego, is egi, 3 act. Reading, Lectio, onis, 3 f. Ready,
Promptus, a, um, adj. Ready, Paratus, a, um, adj. Really, Revera. adv. To reap,
Meto, is, sui, 3 act. A Reaper, Messor, oris, 3 m. A Reaping-Hook, Falx, cis,
a, 1 f. A Reason, Causa, ae, 1 f. Reason, Ratio, onis, 3 f. To Reason,
Discepto, as, avt, 3 f. A Rebel, Rebellis, is, 3 f. To rebel, Repugno, as, avi,
1 act. Rebellious, Pervicax, acis, adj. 3 art. To recall, Revoco, as, avi, 1
act. To receive, Accipio, is, epi, 3 act. To receive, Recipio, is, epi, 3 act.
To reckon, Habeo, es, ui, 2 a. A Recompense, Compensatio, onis, 3 f. To
recompense, Penso, is, avi, 1 act Recovering, Recuperatio, onis, 3 f.
Recreation, Lusus, us, 4 m. A Receipt, Receptio, onis, 3 f. To recreate,
Recreo, as, avi. 1 act. Red, Ruber, a, um, adj. To Redeem, Redimo, is, emi, 3
act. A Redeemer, Redemptor, oris, 3 m. To reduce, Reduco, is, xi, 3 act. To
reduce, Adigo, is, egi, 3 act. To reel round, Glomero, as, avi, 1 n. To reel or
stagger, vacillo, as, avi, in. A Refresher, Refocillator, oris, 3 m. A
Refreshment, Refectio, onis, 3 f. A Refusal, Repulsa, ae, 1 f. To Refuse,
Recuso, as, avi, 1 act. To refute, Refello, is, i, 3 ac. To regain, Redimo, is
emi, 3 act. Toregard, Curo, as, avi, 1 act. To Reign, Regno, as, avi, 1 n.
Reins, Fraena, orum, 2 plu. n. To rejoice, Exhilaro, as, avi, 1 act. To
rejoice, Gaudeo, es, visus, 2 n. p. Religion, Religio, onis, 3 f. To rely,
Nitor, eris, nixus' 3 d. Relying upon, Fretus, a, um, adj. To remain, Permaneo,
es, si, 2 n. A Remedy, Medicina, ae, 1 f. Remedy, Remedium, ii, 2 n.
Remembrance, Memoria, ae, 1 f. To remember, Reminiscor, eris, recondatus, 3 d.
Remission, Remissio, onis 3 f. Remote, Remotus, a, um, part. To remove, Moveo,
es, vi, 2 act. To render, Reddo, is, didi, 3 act. To renew, Renovo, as, avi, 1
act. A Rent, Fissura, ae, 1 f. A Repairer, Refectrix, icis, 3 f. To repair,
Redintegro, as, avi, 1 act. To repay, Resolvo, is, vi, 3 act. To repeat,
Inculco, as, avi, 1 act. Repeated, Repetitus, a, um. part. Repentance,
Poenitentia, ae 1 f. It repents, Poenitet, imp. A Report, Fama, ae, 1 f.
Reprehensory, Culpabilis, le, lis, adj. Reproof, Reprehensio, onis, 3 f.
Toreprove, Arguo, is, ui, 3 act. Reputation, Fama bona, 1 f. To Request, Peto,
is, ii, ivi, 1 act. To require, Postulo, as, avi, 1 act. To resist, Repugno,
as, avi, 1 act. Toresolve, Statuo, is, ui, 3 act. To be resolved on, Stat, imp.
Resolvedly, Obstinate, adv. Rest, Quies, etis, 2 f. To rest, Quiesco, is, evi,
3 n. To Restore, Reddo, is, didi, 3 act. To Restrain, Inhibee, es, ut, 2 act.
To Retain, Retineo, es, ui, 2 act. A Return, Reditus, us, 4 m. To Return,
Reddo, is, didi, 3 act. To Return, Redeo, is, ivi, 4 n. To Reveal, Patefacio,
is, eci, 3 act. To Revenge, Ulciscor, eris, ultus, 3 d. Reverence, Reverentia,
ae, 1 f. To Reverence, Veneror, aris, atus, 1 d. To be reviled, Exprobror,
aris, atus, 1 pass. Reward, Merces, dis, 3 f. To Reward, Munero, as, avi, 1
act. Rich, Dives, it is, adj. Riches, Divitiae, arum, 1 plur. f. Ridiculous,
Ridendus, a, dum, part. Right, Jus, uris, 3 n. Rightly, Recte, adv.
Righteousness, Justitia, ae, 1 f. Righteous, Justus, a, um, adj. Righteously,
or Justly, Just, adv. A Ring, Annulus, 1, 2 m. Ripeness, Maturitas, tatis, 3
f. To rise with Brightness, Orior, iris, ortus, 3 dep. To Rise, Surgo, is,
rexi, 3 act. A River, Amnis, is, 3 m. The Road, Trames, itis, 3 m. Roaring of a
Lion, Rugitus, us, 4 m. To Rob, Spolio, as, avi, 1 act. A Robe, Palla, ae, 1 f.
A Rock, Petra, ae, 1 f. A Rod, Virga, ae, 1 f. Rome, Roma, ae, 1 f. Romans,
Romani, orum, 2 m. pl. To Root out, Eradico, as, avi, 1 act. A Rose, Rosa, ae,
1 f. Rough, Asper, a, um, adj. To Roll, Volvo, is, vi, 3 act. Rolling,
Volubilis, le, lis, adj. 3 art. Royal, Regalis, le, lis, adj. 3 art. Royalty,
Majestas, tatis, 3 f. To Rub, Frico, as, ui, 1 act. Rugged, Asper, a, um, adj.
Ruin, Exitium, ii, 2 n. A Rule, Norma, ae, 1 f. A Ruler, Gubernator, oris, 3 m.
To Rule, Rego, is, exi, 3 act. To Rule or Reign, Regno, as, avi, 1 n. A Rumor,
Rumor, oris, 3 m. To Run, Curro, is, cucurri, sum, 3 act. To Run headlong, Ruo,
is, ui, 3 n. To Run away, Fugio, is, gi, 3 n. Running, Currens, it is, part. A
Rush, Juncus, i, 2 m. To Rush, Ruo, is, ui, 3 n.
S
Sabbath, Sabbatum, i, 2 n. Sabboth-breaking, Violatio, onis, 3 f. Sabbati. To
Sacrifice, Immolo, as, avi, 1 act. Sacred, Sacratus, a, um, adj. To be sad,
Moereo, es, oestus, 2 n. p. A Saddle, Sella, ae, 1 f. Safe, Tutus, a, um, adj.
A Safeguard, Tutela, ae, 1 f. Safety, Incolumitas, tatis, 3 f. Sagacious,
Sagax, acis, adj. 3 art. A Sail, Velum, i, 2 n. To Sail, Navigo, as, avi, 1
act. A Saint, Sanctus i, 2 m. The Sake, Gratia, ae, 1 f. For the Sake, Gratia,
abl. The same, Idem, eadem, idem, ejusdem, pron. The Sand, Arena, ae, 1 f. To
Satisfy, Satisfacio, is, eci, 3 act. To Satisfy, Satio, as, avi, 1 act. Sauce,
Condimentum, i, 2 n. Saucy, Petulans, antis, adj. 3 art. A Savior, Salvator,
oris, 3 m. A Saw, Serra, ae, 1 f. Sauciness, Procacitas, tatis, 3 f. To say,
Dico, cis, xi, 3 act. To say a Lesson, Repeto, is, ii, vi, 3 act. A Scabbard,
Vagina, ae, 2 f. Scarcely, Vix, adv. A Scepter, Sceptrum, i, 2 n. A Scholar,
Discipulus, i, 2 m. Scholastic, Scholasticus, a, um, adj. A School, Schola,
ae, 1 f. A Schoolfellow, Condiscipulus, i, 2 m. A Schoolmaster, Praeceptor,
oris, 3 m. To School, Increpo, as, ui, 1 act. Schorching, Torridus, a, um, adj.
To Scorn, Temno, is, psi, 3 act. Scornful, Fastidiosus, a, um. To Scratch,
Scalpo, is, psi 3 act. To Scrape, Scalpo, is, psi. A Scrivener, Scriba, ae, 1
m. A Scyth, Falx, cis, 3 f. The Sea, Mare, is, 3 n. A Seaman, Nauta, ae, 1 m.
To search out, Rimor, aris, atus, 1 dep. Seas, Undae, arum, 1 plu. f. Season,
Occasio, onis, 3 f. A Seat, Seeds, is, 3 f. The Second, Secundus, a, um, adj.
The Second time, Rursus, adv. Secrecy, Taciturnitas, atis, 3 f. A Secret,
Arcanum, i, 2 n. Secretly, Secret, adv. Security, Tutamen, inis, 3 n. To see,
Video, es, di, 2 act. Seed, Semen, inis, 3 neuter. To Seek, Quaero, is, sivi, 3
act. To Seek, Persequor, eris, cutus, 3 dep. To seem, Videor, eris, visus, 2 p.
To seize, Occupo, as, avi, 1 act. Seldom, Raro, adv. Self, Ipse, ipsa, um,
pron. Self-murder, Suicidium, ii, 2 n. To Sell, Vendo, is, didi, 3 act. Selves,
Ipsi, pron. plur. To send, Mitto, is, si, 3 act. The Senses, Sensus, us, 4
plur. m. Sensitive, Sensitivus, a, um, adj. A Sentence, Sententia, ae, 1 f. To
Separate, Separo, as, avi, 1 act. Serious, Serius, adv. A Sermon, Concio, onis,
3 m. Serpent, Serpens, it is, 3 com. 2. A Servant, Servus, i, 2 m. To serve,
Servio, is, ivi, 4 n. Service, Servitus, us, 4 m. The Service of God, Cultus,
us, 4 m. To set, Pono, nis, sui, 3 act. Settled, Stabilis, le, lis, adj. 3 art.
To set up, Constituo, is, ui, 3 act. Seventy, Septuaginta, adj. plu. indecl.
Seventy five, Septuaginta quinque, ibid. Severe, Severus, a, um, adj. Severity,
Severitas, it is, 3 f. A Shade, Umbra, ae, 1 f. To shake off, Excutio, is, ussi,
3 act. Shame, Pudor, oris, 3 m. Shape, Forma, ae, 1 f. Sharp, Acer, cris, acre,
adj. 3 art. Sharpness, Aciditas, tatis, 3 f. Sharpning, Aouens, it is, part. 3
act. To shade, Obumbro, as, avi, 1 act. To Shave, Rado, is, si, 3 act. To shed,
Effundo, is, udi, 3 act. A Show, Species, ei, 5 f. A Shilling, Solidus, i, 2 m.
To shine upon, Affulgeo, es, si, 2 n. To shine, Splendeo, es, ui' 2 n. Shining,
Splendour, oris, 3 m. A Ship, Navis, is, 3 f. A Sheep, Ovis, is, 3 f. A Shoo,
Calceus, i, 2 m. A Shoemaker, Calcearius, ii, 2 m. A Shop, Officina, ae, 1 f.
Short, Brevis, e, is, adj. 3 art. A Shout, Plausus, us, 4 m. To show, Monstro,
as, avi, 1 act. To show, Indico, as, avi, 1 act. A Shower, Imber, ris, 3 m. To
shun, Fugio, is, gi, 3 act. To shut, Claudo, dis, si, 3 act. Sickly,
Valetudinarius, a, um, adj. A Sickle, Falcula, ae, 1 f. Sickness, Aegritudo,
inis, 3 f. A sick Person, Aeger, i, 2 m. A Side, Latus, eris, 3 neut. A Sieve,
Cribrum, i, 2 n. The Sight, Conspectus, us, 4 m. A Sign or Token, Indicium, ii,
2 n. A Sign, Signum, i. 2 n. Silly, Insulsus, a, um, adj. Silence, Silentium,
ii, 2 n. Silent, Tacitus, a, um, adj. A Sinner, Peccator, oris, 3 m. Sin,
Peccatum, i. 2 n. To Sin, Pecco, as, avi, 1 n. Sinful, Peccaminosus, a, um,
adj. To Sing, Cano, is, cecini, 3 act. Sincerity, Sinceritas, tatis, 3 f. Sir,
Dominus, i, 2 m. Sister, Soror, oris, 3 f. To sit, Sedco, es, di, 2 n. Six,
Sex, plu. indec. adj. Sixth, Sextus, a, um, adj. Six Thousand, Sexies Mill.
Skilful, Peritus, a, um. adj. Slack, Tardus, a, um. adj. To be slain, Perimor,
eris, emptus, 3 pass. A Slave, Servus, i, 2 m. To slay, Perimo, is, emi, 3 act.
Sleep, Somnus, i. 2 m. To sleep, Dormio, is, ivi, 4 n. To slide, Labor, eris,
psus, 3 d. To slight, Aspernor, aris, atus, 1 dep. Sloth, Pigritia, ae, 1 f.
Slothful, Piger, a, um, adj. Sloven, Squalidus, a, um, adj. Slow, Tardus, a,
um, adj. Slowly, Tarde, adv. A Sluggard, Dormitor, oris, 3 m. Small, Exiguus,
a, um, adj. To smell of, Oleo, es, ui, and evi, 2 n. A smile, Subrisio, onis, 3
f. To smite, Percutio, is, ussi, 3 act. A Smith, Faber, i. 2 m. Smooth, Levis,
e, vis, adj. 3 art. A Snare, Laqueum, ei. 2 n. To snatch, Rapio, is, ui. 3 act.
Snow, Nix, ivis, 3 f. Soberly, Sobrie, adv. Society, Societas, tatis, 3 f. So
Tam adv. So far, Adeo, adv. So great, Tantus, a, um. So greatly, Tantopere,
adv. So much, Tantum, adv. Soever, Cunque, conj. Soft, Mollis, e, lis, adj.
Some, Aliquis, a, quod, pron adj. Some, Nonnulli, ae, a, pron plu. Some body,
Aliquis, qua, quod and quid, pron. Something, Aliquid, pron. Sometimes,
Aliquando, adv. A Son, Filius, ii, 2 m. Soon, Cito, adv. Sordid, Vilis, e, lis,
adj. 3 art. A Sort, Genus, eris, 3 n. Sorrowful, Maestus, a, um, part. A
Sovereign, Rex, egis, 3 m. Sought, Petitus, a, um, part. A Soldier, Miles,, it
is, 3 m. The Soul, Anima, ae, 1 f. Sound, Sanus, a, um, adj. A Sound, Sonus, i.
2 m. To Sound, Sono, as, ui, 3 Neu. Sour, Acidus, a, um, adj. Soundly, Acriter,
adv. To sow, Sero, is, evi. 3 act. A Sow, Sus, suis, 3 com. 2. Space, Spatium,
ii. 2 n. A Spade, Ligo, onis. 2 m. Spain, Hispania, ae. 1 f. To spare, Parco,
is, peperci, 3 act. A Spark, Scintilla, ae. 1 f. To speak, Loquor, eris, utus.
3 dep. To speak against, Contradico, is, xi. 3 act. Speaking, Sermo, onis, 3 m.
Speed, Celeritas, tatis. 3 f. With all speed, Celerrime, adv. To spend,
Impendo, is, di. 3 act. Spent, Impensus, a. um. part. The Spirit, Animus, i. 2
m. Splendour, Splendour, oris. 3 m. To spin, Neo, es, vi, 2 act. A Spirit,
Spiritus, us, 4 m. Spiritual, Spiritualis, le, lis. adj. 3 art. Splendid,
Splendidus, a, um. adj. To spoil, Spolio, as, avi, 1 act. A Spout, Epistomium,
ii. 2 n. Sprightly, Alacer, is, cre. adj. A Spring, Scaturigo, inis, 3 f. To
spring, Orior, riris, ortus. 4 ad. To sprout, Germino, as, avi. 2 act. The
Spring, Ver, eris, 3 n. Sprung, Ortus, a, um. part. A Spur, Calcar, aris, 3 n.
A Squirrel, Sciurus, i. 2 m. To stab, Jugulo, as, avi. 1 act. Stable, Stabilis,
e, lis, adj. 3 art. A Stag, Cervus, i, 2 m. To stand, Sto, as, teti, 1 n. To
stand before, Antesto, as, iti, 1 n. To stand as a City, Jaceo, es, ui. 2 n.
Standing, Stans, it is, part. 3 art. A Star, Stella, ae, 1 f. To start,
Expaveseo, is, nui, Incep. 3. A Staff, Baculum, i, 2 n. A Statesman, Politicus,
i, 2 m. To stay, Manco, es, si, 2 n, To starve, Fame, eneoo, as, ui. 1 act. To
steal, Furor, aris, at us, 1 d. To stay away, Absum, es, fui, irr. A Stick,
Baculus, i, 2 m. Steadfast, Firmus, a, um, adj. Steadfastly, Firm, adv.
Stedfastness, Firmitas tatis, 3 f. A Sting, Aculeus, i. 2 m. Stinking,
Foetidus, a, um, adj. Still, Adhuc, adv. To sting, Pungo, is, pupugi: and
punxi, 3 act. To stir up, Incito as, avi, 1 act. A Stone, Lapis, idis, 3 m. A
Stomach, Stomachus, i, 2 m. A Storm, Procella, ae, 1 f. A Story, Fabula, ae, 1
f. Stout, Validus, a, um. To stop, Sisto, is, stiti, 3 a. A Stranger,
Peregrinus, i, 2 m. A Storehouse, Cella, ae, 1 f. Straw, Stramen, inis, 3 n. A
Stream, Torrens, it is, 3 m. A Street, Platea, ae, 1 f. Straight, Rectus, a, um,
adj. Strange, Mirus, a, um. adj. A Stratagem, Machina, ae, 1 f. Strength, Vis,
vis, 3 f. To strengthen, Animo, as, avi, 1 act. To strike, Percutio, is, cussi,
3 act To strike as a Clock, Sone, as, ui, 1 n. Stripes, Plagae, arum, 1 plu. f.
To strive, Certo, as, avi, 1 act. A Stroke, Ictus, us, 4 m. Strong, Fortis, e,
it is, adj. 3 art. Stubborn, Contumax, acis, adj. 3 art. Study, Studium, ii, 2 n.
To study, Studeo, es, ui, 2 n. Studious, Studiosus, a, um, adj. To stuff,
Farcio, is, si, 4 act. Stupid, Stupidus, a, um, adj. To subdue, Subigo is, egi,
3 act. Subject, Subditus, a, um, adj. A Subject, Subjectus, us, 4 m. To Submit,
Submitto, it is, si, 3 act. Submitting, Supplex, icis, adj. 2 art. Substance,
Res, ei, 5 f. Subtle, Astutus, a, um, adj. Subtilty, Astutia, ae, 1 f. To
stroke, Demulces, ces, si, 2 act. To Succeed, Excipio, is, epi, 3 act.
Succeeding, Secundatus, a, um, part. Success, Successus, us, 4 m. To succor,
Opitulor, aris, atus, 1 dep. Such an one, Talis, e, is, adj. Suddenly, Repent,
adv. Such, Talis, e, lis, adj. Sudden, Subitus, a, um, adj. To suffer, Sino,
is, sivi, 3 act. To suffer, Patior, eris, ssus, 3 dep. To suffer, Subeo, is,
ivi, 4 n. Sufferings, Mala, orum, plu. 2 n. Sufficient, Sufficiens, it is, adj. 3
art. Sufficiently, Satis, adv; Sulphurous, Sulphureus, a, um, adj. Summer,
Aestas, atis, 3 f. The Sun, Sol, lis, 3 m. To sup, Coeno, as, avi and atus, 1
n. p. A Supper, Coena, ae, 1 f. A Suppliant, Supplex, icis, 3 m. To supply,
Suppedito as, avi, 1 act. To supply, Occulto, as, avi, 1 act. Sure, Certus, a,
um, adj. To surrender, Dedo, dis, didi, 3 act. To survive, Supersum, es, fui,
irreg. comp. To swear, Juro, as, avt, and atus, 1 act. Sweet of Smell, Suavis,
e, vis, adj. 3 art. Sweet or pleasant, Jucundus, a, um, adj. To fall in a
Swound, Lanquesco, is, ui, incept. 3. Swift, Velox, ocis, adj. 3 art. Swiftly,
Velociter, adv. Sweat, Sudor, oris, 3 m. Swearing, Juramentum, i, 2 n. Sweet,
Dulcisonus, a, um, adj. Sweet, Blandus, a, um, adj. Sweetness, Dulcedo, inis, 3
f. A Swimmer, Natator, oris, 3 m. Sword, Gladius, ii, 2 m. To fall in a Swoon,
Languesco, is, ui, 3 n. To Swim, No, as, avi, 1 n. A Swine, Porcus, i, 2 m.
Swelling, Tumidus, a, um. The Sirens, Syrenes, plu. 3 f.
T
A Table, Mensa, ae, 1 f. To take, Accipio, is, epi, 3 act. To take away,
Aufero, ers, abstuli, 3 irr. comp. To take care of, Curo, as, avi, 1 act. To
take, Adibeo, es, ui, 2 act. To take from, Aufero, ers, abstuli, irr. To take
notice of, Observo, as, avi, 1 act. To take pains, Laboro, as, avi, 1 n. To
take to, Assumo, is, psi, 3 act. To take upon Conquest, Expugno, as, avi, 1. To
talk, Confabulor, aris, atus, 1 dep. A Tale, Delatio, onis, 3 f. To Tame, Domo,
as, ui, 1 act. To Tarry, Maneo, es, si, 2 n. To Teach, Doceo, es, ui, 2 act.
Taken away, Ablatus, a, um, part. A Taking away, Ablatio, onis, 3 f. Taking
away, Ablatus, a, um, part. A Talk, Sermo, onis, 3 m. Talkativeness,
Loquacitas, (...) 3 f. Talking, Garriens, it is, part, 3 art. To Tare, Lacero,
as, avi, 1 act. Tart, Severus, a, um, adj. A Tailor, Sartor, oris, 3 m. A
Teacher, Doctor, oris, 3 m. To tell of, Annuncio, as, avi, 1 n. A Temper,
Ingenium, ii, 2 n. Tempest, Tempestas, atis, 3 f. A Temple, Templum, i, 2 n.
Temporal, Temporalis, le, lis, adj. 3 art. Temperance, Temperantia, ae, 1 f. To
Tempt, Tento, as, avi, 1 act. A Tempter, Tentator, oris, 3 m. A Temptation,
Tentatio, onis, 3 f. Tenacious, Tenax, acis, adj. 3 art. A Tenant, Manceps,
ipis, 3 m. To tend, Facio, is, eci, 3 act. Tender, Tener, a, um, adj. Terrible,
Terribilis, le, lis, adj. 3 art. To testify, Testor, aris, atus, 1 dep. A
Testimony, Testimonium, ii, 2 n. Thais, idis, 3 f. Thanks, Gratiae, arum, 1 f.
plu. Than, Quam, adv. That, Qui, ae, od, pron. adj. That, Quod, conj. That,
Iste, a, ud, pron. adj. The former, Ille, a, ud, pron. adj. The latter, Hic,
pron. The one, Hic, pron. The other, Ille, pron. A Theme, Thema, atis, 3 n. A
Theater, Theatrum, i, 2 n. Theft, Furtum, i, 2 n. A Thief, Fur, uris, 3 com. 2.
Their own, Suus, a, um, pron. adj. From thence, Inde, adv. There are, Sunt,
from Sum, 3 plu. There is, Est, from Sum, 3 sin. Thereby, Ita, adv. Therefore,
Igitur, adv. They, Illi, from Ille, pron: plu. Thick, Densus, a, um, adj.
Thine, Tuus, a, um, pron. To think, Puto, as avi, 1 act. To think on, Cogito,
as, avi, 1 act. Thirst, Sitis, is, 3 f. To thirst after, Sitio, is, ivi, 4 act.
A thinking, Cogitatio, onis, 3 f. Thirteen, Tredecim, adj. indec. This, Hic,
pron. Thither, Illuc, adv. Tho, Quamvis, conj. Thoroughly, Penitus, adv. Those,
Ille, pron. adj. Thou, Tu, pron. sub. Tho, Etsi, conj. A thought, Cogitatio,
onis, 3 f. Thousand times, Millies, adv. To Threaten, Minor, aris, atus, 1 d. A
Threatening, Minae, arum, 1 f. plur. Three, Tres, tria, pl. adj. 3 art. Three
hundred, Trecentiae, a, adj. plur. Thrifty, Parcus, a, um, adj. Thriftiness,
Frugalitas, tatis, 3 f. A Throt, Guttur, uris, 3 n. To throw down, Deturbo, as,
avi, 1 act. To thrust, Trudo, is, si, 3 act. Thunder, Fulmen, inis, 3 n. To
Thunder, Tono, as, ui, Thy, Tuus, a, um, pron. Till, Donec, adv. Time, Tempus,
onis, 3 n. Tired, Fessus, a, um, adj. A Title or Name, Nomen, inis, 3 n. Titus,
Titus, i, 2 m. To, Ad, prep. acc. Together, Simul, adv. A Token, Indicium, ii,
2 n. The Tongue, Lingua, ae, 1 f. Too much, Nimium. Too great, Nimium, adv. Too
late, Seronimis, adv. A Toad, Bufo, nis, 3 m. The top, Culmen, inis, 3 n.
Torment, Cruciatus, us, 4 m. To torment, Crucio, as, avi, 1 act. Torn, Lacerus,
a, um, adj. Torture, Cruciatus, us, 4 m. Torrid, Torridus, a, um. To touch,
Tango, is, tetigi, 3 act. Toward, Erga, prep. acc. A Town, Oppidum, i, 2 n. A
Tower, Turris, ris, 3 f. A Tradesman, Mercator, oris, 3 m. Traffic,
Commercium, ii, 2 n. To Traffic, Negotior, aris, atus, 1 dep. Tranquillity,
Tranquillitas; tatis, 3 f. To transgress, Erro, as, avi; 1 act. A
Transgression, Transgressio, onis, 3 f. To Translate, Transfero, ers, tuli,
irr. comp. A Traveller, Viator, oris, 3 m. To Traverse, Pervio, as, avi, 1 n.
Treacherous, Perfidus, a, um, adj. To tread upon, Calco, as, avi, 1 act.
Treasure, Thesaurus, i, 2 m. A Tree, Arbor, oris, 3 f. Trembling, Trepidus, a,
um, adj. A Trench, Vallum, i, 2 n. A Trick, Technae, ae, 1 f. Trifles, Tricae,
anum, 1 plur. f. To trifle away, Prodigo, is, egi, 3 act. To trim, Orno, as,
avi, 1 act. To trot, Succutio, is, ssi, 3 act. Trouble, Anxietas, tatis, 3 f.
To trouble, Molesto, as, avi, 1 act. To be troubled, Discrucior, aris, atus, 1
p. A Truant, Cessator, oris, 3 m. To truant, Cesso, as, avi, 1 n. Truanting,
Cessatio, onis, 3 f. Troublesome, Molestus, a, um. Troy, Troja, ae, 1 f. True,
Verus, a, um, adj. Truly, Sane, adv. Trumpet, Tuba, ae, 1 f. Trust, Fiducia,
ae, 1 f. Trusty, Fidus, a, um, adj. To trust, Fido, is, di, 3 act. Truth,
Veritas, tatis, 3 f. To try, Experior, iris, ertus, dep. 4. To turn, Converto,
is, ti, 3 3 act. Twelve, Duodecim, ind. adj. plur. Twenty Viginti, adj. plur.
indec. Twice, Bis, adv. Two, Duo, adj. plur. Two hundred, Ducentiae, a, adj.
plu. Tiger, Tygris, is, 1 f. A Tyrant, Tyrannus, i, 2 m. To tire, Fatigo, as,
avi, 1 act.
V
VAin, Inanis, e, is, adj. 3 art. In Vain, Frustra, adv. Vainly, Vane, adv.
Valiant, Magnanimus, a, um, adj. Valiantly, Fortiter, adv. A Valley, Vallis,
is, 3 m. Valor, Fortitudo, dinis, 3 f. To Value Aestimo, as, avi, 1 act.
Vanity, Nugae, arum, 1 plu. f. Vanity, Vanitas, tatis, 3 f. Various, Varius, a,
um, adj. Vehemently, Vehementer, adv. A Verse, Versus, us, 4 m. Virtue, Virtus,
tutis, 3 f. Virtuous, Pius, a, um, adj. Very, Valde, adv. Very ill, Pessime.
adv. Very much, Maxim, adv. Vespasian, Vespasianus, i, 2 m. To vex, Ango, is,
xi, 3 act. A vexation, Vexatio, onis, 3 f. Ugly, Turpis, e, isdeformis, e, is,
3 art. adj. Vice, Vitium, ii, 2 n. Victory, Victoria, ae, 1 f. Victorious,
Victorius, a, um, adj. Vile, Vilis, le lis, adj. 3 art. Villainy, Nequitia, ae,
1 f. To vindicate, Vindico, as, avi, 1 act. Vinegar, Acetum, i, 2 n. To
violate, Violo, as, avi, 1 act. Violence, Vis, vis, 3 f. Violently, Ferociter,
adv. Virgil, Virgilius, ii, 2 m. A Virgin, Virgo, inis. 3 f. A Vision, Visum,
i, 2 n. To Visit, Viso, is, si, 3 act. To Visit, Saluto, as, avi, 1 act. Vital,
Vitalis, le, lis, adj. 3 art. Unblameable, Innocuus, a, um, adj. Incapable,
Incapax, acis, adj. 3 art. Uncle, Avunculus, i, 2 m. Unconstancy, Mobilitas,
tatis, 3 f. Unconstant, Mobilis, le, lis, adj. 3 art. Under, Sub. pre. Ac. or
Abl. To undergo, Subeo, is, ivi, 4 neut. To Understand, Intelligo, is, xi, 3
ac. Understanding, Scientia, ae, 1 f. The Understanding, Intellectus, us, 4 m.
To undertake, Suscipio, is, epi, 3 act. An Undertakeing, Coeptum, i, 2 n.
Undutifulness, Contumacia, ae, inobedientia, ae, 1 f. Unfaithful, Malefidus, a,
um, adj. Unfeignedly, Sincere, adv. Unfit, Ineptus, a, um, adj. Ungodly,
Impius, a, um, adj. Ungrateful, Ingratus, a, um, adj. Unhandsome, Indecorus, a,
um. adj. An University, Academia, ae, 1 f. Unjust, Iniquus, a, um, adj.
Unkindness, Asperitas, atis, 3 f. Unknown, Ignotus, a, um, part. Unless, Nisi,
conj. Unlike, Dissimilis, le, lis, 3 art. Unmarried, Innuptus, a, um.
Unpassable, Invius, a, um, adj. Unpleasant, Injucundus, a, um, adj. Unpleasing,
Ingratus, a, us, adj. Unprofitable, Inutilis, le, lis, adj. Unpunished,
Impunis, e, nis, adj. Unquiet, Inquietus, a, um, Unsatiable, Inexplebilis, le,
lis, adj. 3 art. Unshaken, Immotus, a, um, part. Unskilful, Inexpertus, a, um,
p. Unspotted, Immaculatus, a, um, adj. To unteach, Dedoceo, es, ui, 3 a.
Unteachable, Indocilis, le, lis, adj. 3 act. Until, Usque, adv. Untouched,
Intactus, a, um, part. Unweary, Incautus, a, um, adj. Unwaried, Indefessus, a,
um, adj. Unwelcome, Ingratus, a, um, adj. Unwholesome, Insalubris, bre, bris,
adj. 3 art. Unwilling, Invitus, a, um, adj. Unworthy, Indignus, a, um, adj. A
Voice, Vox, ocis, 3 f. Void, Inanis, e, nis, adj. 3 art. A Voyage, Iter,
ineris, 3 n. To vomit, Vomo, is, ui, 3 act. Votary, Cultor, oris, 3 m. To
upbraid, Exprobro, as, avi, 1 act. Upright, Erectus, a, um, adj. To urge,
Urgeo, es, si, 2 act. To use, Utor, eris, usus, 3 d. To use, Soleo, es, litus,
2 n, pass. To be used, Adhibendus, a, um, part. Useful, Utilis, le, lis, adj. 3
act. Usually, Fere, adv. Utmost, Extremus, a, um, adj.
W.
A Walk, Ambulacrum, i, 2 n. To walk, Ambulo, as, avi, 1 n. A Wall, Murus, i, 2
m. To wallow, Voluto, as, avi, 1 act. The Walls, Moenia, orum, 2 plu. n. To
wander, Vagor, aris, gutus, 1 dep. To want, Egeo, es, ui, 2 n. To be wanting,
Desum, es, fui, irr. comp. Wanton, Lascivus, a, um, adj. War, Bellum, i, 2 n.
In War, Belli. genesis also adv. Wares, Merces, edum, ne, 3 plu. f. Warily, Caute,
adv. Warlike, Bellicus, a, um, adj. To warn, Moneo, es, ui, 2 act. To wash,
Lavo, as, avi, 1 act. To wast, Consumo, is, psi, 3 act. To waste a City,
Spolio, as, avi, 1 act. Wasted, Consumptus, a, um, adj. Water, Aqua, ae, 1 f. A
Wave, Fluctus, us, 4 m. To wax pale, Pallesco, is, ui, 3 n. A Way, Via, ae, 1
f. A way or manner, Modus, i, 2 n. incept. Weak, Debilis, le, lis, adj. 3 art.
Weakness, Debilitas, atis, 3 f. Wealth, Opes, um, 3 plu. f. Wealthy Opulentus,
a, um, adj. To wear out, Tero, is, trivi, 3 act. To wear Clothes, Induo, is,
ui, 3 a. To weary, Fatigo, as, avi, 1 act. Weary, Pertaesus, a, um. adj. To be
weary, Taedet, imp. To be wearied, Fatigor, aris, atus. 1 p. Weariness,
Taedium, ii, 2 n. Wearisome, Molestus, a, um, adj. To weave, Texo, is ui, 3
act. A Weaver, Textor, toris, 3 m. We, Nos, pron from Ego. A Weed, Alga, ae, 1
f. A Week, Septimana, ae, 1 f. To Weep, Flee, es, vi, 2 n. A Weight, Pondus,
eris, 3 n. Weighty, Gravis, e, vis, adj. Welfare, Salus, utis, 3 f. Well, Been,
adv. Well, Sanus, a, um, adj. Well fed, Satur, a, um, adj. A Whelp, Catulus, i,
2 m. What, Quid, pron. sub. When, Quando, adv. Where, Ubi, adv. Whether, Number,
adv. Whether, Uter, a, um. Which, Qui, pron. Rel. Whilst, Duin, adv. A Whip,
Flagellum, i, 2 n. To whisper, Susurro, as, avi, 1 act. White, Candidus, a, um.
Who, Qui, Rel. Who, Quis, pron. Whole, Totus, a, um. Wholesome, Saluber, bris,
bre, bris, adj. 3 art. Whorish, Incestus, a, um. Wholly, Penitus, adv. Why,
Quare, adv. Wicked, Scelestus, a, um, adj. Wickedness, Impietas, tatis, 3 f. A
Wife, Uxor, oris, 3 f. Wild, Ferus, a, um, adj. A wild Beast, Fera, ae, 1 f.
Wilful, Contumax, acis, adj. 3 art. Wilfully, Libenter, adv. Will, Voluntas,
tatis, 3 f. Willing, Promptus, a, um, adj. Willingly, Libenter, adv. Willing,
Libens, it is, adj. 3 art. To win, Concilio, as, avi, 1 act. Wind, Ventus, i, 2
m. Wine, Vinum, i, 2 n. Winged, Alatus, a, um, adj. To wink, Niveo, es, vi, 2
n. The Winter, Hyems, emis, 3 f. Wisdom, Sapientia, ae, 1 f. Wise, Sapiens,
it is, part. 3 art. A wise Man, Sapiens, it is, 3 m. A Wish, Votum, i, 2 n. To wish
for, Exopto, as, avi. Wit, Ingenium, ii, 2 n. To wit, Scilicet, conj. A Witch,
Saga, ae, 1 f. With, Cum, praep. abl. To Wither, Aresco, is, ui. With all the
Heart, Ex animo. To withold, Detineo, es, ui, 2 act. Without, Absque, pron.
abl. A Witness, Testis, is, 3 com. 2. A Woer, Procus, i, 2 m. A Wolf, Lupus, i,
2 m. A Woman, Mulier, eris, 3 f. Womanish, Muliebris, e, bris, adj. 3 act.
Wonderful, Mirus, a, um, adj. Wondrous, Mirus, a, um. To Wonder, Miror, aris,
atus. To be wont, Soleo, es, itus, 2 n. Wonted, Solitus, a, um, part. A word,
Verbum, i, 2 n. Work, Opus, operis, 3 n. To work Operor, aris, atus. A Workman,
Opifex, icis, 3 com. 2. The World, Mundus, i, 2 m. Worldly, Mundanus, a, um.
Worse, Pejor, jus, oris, adj. Worship, Cultus, us, 4 m. A Worshipper, Cultor,
ori^ Worst, Pessimus, a, um. Worth, Dignitas, tatis, 3 f A wound, Vulnus, 3 n.
To wound, Vul^^ro, as, av^ 1 a. A wrack, Cruciatus, us, 4 m To write, Scribo,
is, psi, 3. Wretched, Miser, a, um, adj.
Y
A Yard, Ulna, ae, 1 f. A Year, Annus, i, 2 m. Ye, Vos, pro. plu. of tu. To
yield, Praebeo, es, ui, 2. To yield to, Cedo, is, cessi, 3 n. Yellow, Flavus,
a, um, adj. Yesterday, Heri, adv. Yet, Tamen, conj. York, Eboracum, i, 2 n.
You, Vos, Tu, pron. subs. Young Junior, ius, oris, adj. Younger Junior, ius,
oris, adj. Your, Vester, a, um, pron. Youth, Juventus, tutis, 3 f. A Youth,
Adolescens, it is, 3 corn. 2.
Z
ZEal, Zelotypia, ae, 1 f. Zoilus, i, 2 m.
A SUPPLEMENT; CONTAINING A Catalogue of several Verbs, Adjectives, Impersonals
and Participles, showing what Cases they will govern: With a hint of the Rules
to which they belong.
These Verbs will have a Nominative Case before them, and a Nominative after
them: Sum, Forem, Fio, Existo, Dicor, Vocor, Salutor, Appellor, Habeor,
Scribor, Existimor, etc.


By Sum, Forem, Fio, Existo, etc.

Verba Substantiva Sum Forem, etc.

Also Incedo, Curro, Sedeo, Appareo, Bibo, Cubo, Studeo, Dormio, Somnio, etc.


By Verbs that betoken bodily moving, going, etc.

Item Verba gestus, etc.

These Verbs will have a Genitive Case.

Sum. By this Verb Sum, when it, etc.

Sum Genitivum postulat, etc.

Satago, Misereor, Miseresco,
By Satago, Misereor, etc.

These a Genitive, and Accusative.

Reminiscor, Recordor, Obliviscor, Moneo, Accuso, Arguo, Convinco, Damno,
Absolvo,
By Reminiscor, obliviscor, etc.

Reum Criminis.

By Verbs of accusing, condemning, etc.

Verba, Accusandi, etc.

Aestimo, Potior,
A Genitive or Ablative.

Potior aut Genesis aut Ablat. etc.

Aestimo vel Genesis vel Abl. etc.

Sum will have a double Dative Case.

Also Sum with his Compounds, etc.

By Sum cum multis, etc.

These Verbs will have a Dative Case.

Adulor, Blandior, Cedo, Do, Edico, Faveo, Gratulor, Haereo, Indulgeo,
Lenocinor, Moderor, Opitulor, Malo, Parco, Queror, Respondeo, Suadeo, Tempero,
Valedico, Commodo, Incommodo, Noceo, Obsum, Prosum, Placeo, Irascor, Minor,
Indignor, Pareo,
By all manner of Verbs etc.

Omnia Verba acquisitive, etc.

Impero, Servio, Dominor, Promitto, Credo, Consido, Polliceor, Medeor, Reddo,
Fido, Solvo, Nubo, etc.
By all manner of Verbs, etc.

Omnia Verba acquisitive, etc.

Also these Verbs will have a Dative Case.

Satisfacio, Benefacio, Malefacio,
Also Verbs compounded with Satis, been, male, etc.

These Verbs will have two Accusatives after them.

Doceo, Rogo, Posco, Celo, Exuo,
By Verbs of asking, teaching, and arraying, etc.

Verba Rogandi, docendi, etc.

Induor, Moneor, Doceor, Rogor, Poscor, Hortor,
Passives with an Accusative.

These Verbs will have an Ablative Case after them.

Careo, Egeo, Indigeo, Opus est, Vinco, Abundo, Affluo, Impleo, Onero, Levo,
Emo, Licitor, Vendo, Vescor, Vivo, Reor, Nascor, Victito, Sto, Consto, Nitor,
Utor, Fungor, Fruor, Laetor, Glorior, Gaudeo,
By Verbs of plenty, etc. By Verba abundandi, etc.

See the Rules for these at, and after all Verbs, require an Ablative Case, etc.

By Quodvis Verbum admittit Ablativum, etc.

By Utor, Fungor, Fruor, etc.

These Adjectives will have a Genitive Case, of following them.

Memor, Immemor, Reus, Insons, Peritus, Rudis, Cupidus, Timidus, Similis,
Dissimilis, Par, Impar,
By Adjectives that signify desire, knowledge, etc.

Adjectiva quae desiderium, notitiam, etc.

Also

Aliquis, Uter, Neuter, Nemo; Nullus, Solus, Unus, Medius, Quisque, etc.
By Nouns, Partitives, and certain Interrogatives, etc. Nomina partitiva aut
partitive, etc.

These Adjectives will have a Dative Case; to following them.

Utilis, Inutilis, Noxius, Gharus, Fidelis, Infidelis, Supplex, Adversarius,
etc.
By Adjectives that betoken, profit ordisprofit, likeness, etc. Adjectiva
quibus commodum, etc.

Also Adjectives, in bilis.

Similis, Dissimilis, Par, Impar,
A Genitive or Dative, Case, ibid. Quaedam ex his, etc.

These Adjectives will have an Accusative Case with a Preposition.

Natus, Commodus, Incommodus, Utilis, Inutilis,
By Natus, commodus, incommodus, etc.

These Adjectives will have an Accusative, The Measure of Quantity in English
ser first; and sometimes an Ablative and Genitive Case.

Longus, Latus, Crassus, Altus, Profundus,
By the measure of length, breadth, thickness, etc.

Magnitudinis mensura, etc.

These Adjectives will have an Ablative, and a Genitive, of following them.

Plenus, Vacuus, Dignus, Indignus, Fretus, Contentus, Praeditus, Gaptus,
Extorris,
By Adjectives signifying fullness, emptiness, etc.

Adjectiva quae ad copiam egestatemve, etc. Dignus indignus, etc.

Opus, Usus,
An Ablative by Opus and usus, when they be Latin, etc. Opus and usus, etc.

These Impersonals will have a Genitive Case.

Interest, Refert and est, for Interest.
By Interest Refert and est, for Interest.

These Impersonals will have a Dative Accidit C^rtum est Contingit Constat
Confert Competit Conducit Convenit Placet Displicet Dolet Expedit Evenit Liquet
Libet Licet Nocet Prodest Praestat Patet Stat Restat Benefit Mal fit Satisfit
Superest Sufficit Vacat, etc.


By certain Impersonals require a Dative, etc.

By In Dativum Feruntur haec Impersonalia, etc.

These will have an Accusative only, Delectat, Decet Juvat Oportet


By some will have an Accusative only.

Per haec Impersonalia accusandi.

These Impersonals will have an Accusative with a Genitive.

Paenitet Taedet Miseret Miserescit Pudet Piget
By some besides an Acc. will have a Genesis etc.

His Impersonalibus subjicitur accusa^ivus, cum Genitivo, etc.

These Participles will have an Accusative Case, when they signify actively.

Exosus Perosus Pertaesus But Exosus Perosus
By these participial voices, etc. Exosus Perosus, etc.

Dat. when they signify passively, Exosus and Perosus etiam cum, etc.

These Participles will have an Ablative Case.

Natus Prognatus Satus Ortus Cretus Creatus Edi^^s
By Natus, Prognatus, etc.

These Words (if the Late Learned Mr. Wase, formerly Master of the Free School
at Tunbridge may be credited, as who will question it)? being got perfectly
without Book will much advantage Boys in putting Words in the true Case, and
revive the Rules they have learned; Neither will it be lost Labor (as I
suppose) if once or twice in a Month they read them over to fix them in their
memory.

These Words having escaped the Press in the Index, the Learner is desired to
write them under their Proper Letters.
TO blind, Caeco, as, avi, 1 act. To charge, Jubeo, es, ussi. 2 act. To
commend, Laudo, as, avi. 1 act. A Dog-Day, Canis, canicularis. 3 m. To Dye
Colors, Tingo, is, xi, 3 act. Farewell, Vale, defect. A Fishing-Cane, Arundo,
inis. 3 f. Fierce, Atrox, ocis. adj. 3 art. A Hen, Gallina, ae. 1 f. Icy,
Glacialis, le, lis, adj. 3 art. To make fit, Concinno, as, avi. 1 act. Prudent,
Prudens, it is, adj. 3 art. A Scent, Odor, ris. 3 m. Sluggish, Ignavus, a, um.
adj. Smooth, Planus, a, um, adj. To Sow with a Needle, Suo, is, ui. 3 n. An
Embrace, Amplexus, us. 4 m. Lust, Cupido, mis. 3 f. A portion, Des, it is. 3 f. A
Persecutor, Persecutor, is. 3 m.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by THOMAS COCKERIL, at the Three Legs over against the
Stocks Market.
THE Works of the Late Learned Divine, Stephen Charnock, B.D. In 2 Vol. Fol.

A Demonstration of the First Principles of the Protestant Applications of the
Apocalypse. Together with the Consent of the Ancients, concerning the Fourth
Beast in the 7th of Daniel, and the Beast in the Revelations; By Drue
Cressener, D. D.

The Morning Exercises at Cripplegate, of several Cases of Conscience,
practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4to.

A Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, or several more Cases of
Conscience, practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4to.

Speculum Theologiae in Christo: or a view of some Divine Truths, which are
either practically exemplified in Jesus Christ, set forth in the Gospel, or may
be reasonably deduced from thence; by Edward Polhil of Burwash in Sussex,
Esquire, in 4to.

(...): A Succinct and Seasonable Discourse, of the Occasions, Causes, Nature,
Rise, Growth and Remedies of Mental-Errors: Written some Months since; and now
made public, both for the healing and prevention of the Sins and Calamities
which have broken in this way upon the Churches of Christ, to the great scandal
of Religion, hardening of the Wicked, and obstruction of Reformation. Whereunto
are subjoyned by way of Appendix.

I. Vindiciarum Vindex: Being a Succinct, but full Answer to Mr. Philip Cary's
Weak Impertinent Exceptions to my Vindiciae Legis and Faederis.

II. A Synopsis of Ancient and Modern Antinomian-Errors, with
Scriptural-Arguments and Reasons against them.

III. A Sermon composed for the preventing and healing of Rents and Divisions
of the Church; by John Flavel, Preacher of the Gospel at Dartmouth in Devon:
With an Epistle of several Divines, relating to Dr. Crisp's Works.

A Discourse of Regeneration, Faith and Repentance, Preached at the Merchants
Lecture in Broadstreet, by Thomas Cole, Minister of the Gospel, London.

A Discourse concerning Liturgys, by the Late Learned Divine, Mr. David
Clarkson.

Precious Faith considered, in its nature, working and growth; by Edward
Polhil, Esquire; etc. in 4to.

Geography Rectified: or a description of the World, in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes, Forts; their Ancient and
Present Names, Inhabitants, Situations, Histories, Customs, Governments, etc.
And also their Commodities, Coyns, Weights and Measures, compared with those of
London: Illustrated with above sixty new Maps. The whole Work performed
according to the accurate Discoveries of Modern Authors: The Third Edition
Enlarged: in 4to.

The right use of an Estate, briefly directed and urged in a Sermon lately
Preached to a Person of Quality, upon his coming to Age; by Tho. Dorrington,
4to.

Christus in Cord: Or the Mystical Union between Christ and Believers
considered, in its Resemblances, Bonds, Seals, Privileges and Marks, by Edward
Polhil, Esquire; in Octavo.

De Causa Dei: Or a Vindication of the Common Doctrine of the Protestant
Divines, concerning Predetermination, (i. e.) the Interest of God, as the first
Cause, in all actions, as such, of all Rational Creatures) from the invidious
consequences with which it is burdened, by Mr. John How, in a late Letter of
Postcript of God's Prescience, in Octavo.

The Spiritual Remembrancer: Or a brief Discourse of those who attend upon
Preaching the Gospel, by Samuel Wells, in 8vo.

Poesews Graecae Medulla; in qua continentur Insigniores Poetarum Graecorum
gnomae, versus Proverbiales, and Epigrammata quaedam selecta, and in memoriae
subsidium Alphabetice disposita; cum versione Latina in usum Scholarum; per
Johannem Langston, in 8vo.

Poems in two Parts: First, An Interlocutory Discourse concerning the Creation,
Fall, and Recovery of Man. Secondly, A Dialogue between Faith and a Doubting
Soul. By Samuel Slater, in 8vo.

A Renunciation of several Popish Doctrines, because contrary to the Doctrine
of Faith of the Church of England, by R. R. B. D. in 8vo.

A Practical Grammar: Or the Easiest and shortest way to initiate young
Children in the Latin Tongue, by the help whereof, a Child of seven years old
may learn more of the Grounds of that Language in three Months, than is
ordinarily learnt in a years space by those of a greater age in a common
Grammar School. Published for the use of those that love not to be tedious. To
which are added Tables of Mr. Walker's. Particles; by the assistance whereof,
young Scholars may be the better enabled to peruse that excellent and most
useful Treatise, by J. Philomath. Master of a Free School, in 8vo.

A Treatise of Divine Providence: First, In General. Secondly, In Particular,
as relating to the Church of God in the World, by that Eminent Minister of
Christ, Mr. Stephen Charnock, B. D. sometimes Fellow of New-College in Oxon, in
8vo.

The Evidence of things not seen: Or diverse Spiritual and Philosophical
Discourses concerning the state of Holy Men after Death, by that Eminently
Learned Divine, Moses Amyraldus, translated out of the French Tongue, by a
Minister of the Church of England, in 8vo.

A Dialogue between a Romish Priest, and an English Protestant; wherein the
Principal Points and Arguments of both Religions are truly proposed, and fully
examined, by Matthew Pool, Author of Synopsis Criticorum, in Twelves.

God, a Christians Choice, completed by particular Covenanting with God;
wherein the Lawfulness and Expediency is cleared, by Samuel Winney, in 12s.

Mr. West's Legacy, being a Discourse of the Perfect Man, in 12s.

The Sin and Folly of Drunkenness considered. 1. What it is: 2. What is vicious
and sinful in Drinking (whether Men will call it Drunkenness, or no): 3. What
may be said against it; by Edward Buckler of Bradford in Somersetshire, the
Author of God all in all, 12s.

Familiaria Colloquia Opera Christophori Helvici, D. etc. Professeris
Gleffensis olim, ex Erasmo Roterodamo, Ludovico Vive, etc. Schottenio Hasso
selecta. Editio Decima tertia ad pristina exemplaria denuo recognita, in in 12s.

The School of Manners, or Rules for Childrens Behavior; by the Author of the
English Exercise for Schoolboys, etc.

Gradus ad Parnassum, sive novus Synonymorum, Epithetorum, and Phrasium
Poeticarum Thescurus, Elegantias, flavissas Poeticas, Parnassum Poeticum,
Thesaurum Virgilii, Smetium, Januam Musarum, Aliosque id genus libros ad poesin
necessarios Complectens.

A Discourse of Secret Prayer; first Preached, and now Published, at the
Request of those that heard it. By Samuel Slater, Minister of the Gospel, in
12s.


