A DISCOURSE Concerning ANTICHRIST, Grounded upon the Angel's Interpretation of
the Vision, Rev. xvii; and from thence proceeding to a particular Explication
of the xiith and xiiith Chapters.

Showing, That the Church of Rome is that Woman mentioned Rev. xvii. 3. and the
Bishops of Rome that eighth King spoken of v. 11. who is usually known by the
name of Antichrist.

By WALTER GARRETT, Vicar of Titchfield, sometimes Fellow of Trinity College in
Cambridg.

We have a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed.
2 Pet. 1.19. LONDON, Printed for the Author, to be sold by I. Harrison at the
Greyhound in Chancery Lane, and at his Shop in Lincoln's Inn Gate, 1680.

Collegium St^^ Mariae. Magdalenae apud Oxonienses
bookplate of Magdalen College, University of Oxford

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Incomparable Sisters, my very good Ladies, The Right Honorable the Lady
Elizabeth Noel, The Lady Russel, The Countess of Northumberland; The Countess
of Northampton, and the Lady Dursley.
Right Honorable,
THe divinely inspired Prophet, whose sacred Oracles I here endeavor to
explain, has bin my Precedent in this Address, inscribing one of his Epistles
to a Lady. For if to one; why not to many? Especially since those many are so
one, in Virtue, Honor, Blood, Affinity, Religon, Heart and Mind; that it might
seem a crime to separate those, whom God has joined together in so strict a
Bond, so sweet an Harmony. And if a crime in any one, much more in Me, who am
so very much obliged to all.

I must therefore humbly beg your Ladyships Acceptance of this tristing
Testimony of the greatest Gratitude. And because I know 'twill signify but
little to tell your Ladyships. I am sorry my Oblation is no better: I needs
must own, that had it been as good as I could wish it, or (if possible) equal
to the merits of the Subject, I should and had bin bound in duty to have laid
it at your Honors feet.

But why to Ladies such a puzling Argument? They who are Strangers to your
Ladyships, may justly wonder at my choice in this respect. But all that have
the honor of your Ladyships Acquaintance, do us deservedly admire not only the
exactness of your Conversations in the Practick part but also the acuteness of
your Judgment in the Mysteries of Religion. And certain I cannot be so vain to
think, that what my own weak Judgment seems in any sort to comprehend, shall be
too hard and intrical for your Ladyships.

Take therefore in good part, most Honored Ladies, that which in Duty
Gratitude, and Observance I here humbly offer you. The Subject of it is a
Woman; and she the best and worst, the noblest and the vilest of her Sex. The
best and noblest in her Primitive Purity: the worst and vilest in her
Subsequent Apostasy. At first the chastest Matron, and at last (as is
endeavored in the following Papers to be prove 'd) the basest Harlot in the
World. This Subject seems to claim a Female Patronage; And who more fit than
Ladies of your Honor and Integrity, to countenance this whatever Vindication
of a Chaste Religion?

I humbly beg your Ladyships Pardon for this boldness I have taken, and this
trouble I have given you. I shall only add my hearty Prayers to Almighty God,
That he would graciously be pleased to keep both You and Yours under the
Protection of his good Providence; That he would spare You a long Blessing to
his poor afflicted Militant Church, and after crown your Faith and Piety in his
Church Triumphant. To this purpose shall he ever pray, who is,

(Most Honored Ladies)

Your Ladyships most obedient, and entirely devoted Servant in the Lord, Walter
Garrett.
Titchfield, Sept. 25. 1679.
The Introduction.
I Am so sensible how great a crime it were to charge a Church of Christ with
Anti-Christianism, or but cherish a suspicion of it undeservedly; that though
the Church of Rome be many other ways a mortal enemy to our Profession, yet if
she had bin clear in this particular, I should much rather have bestowed my
pains in vindicating, than aspersing her. For even the best of the Reformed
Churches has lately bin so great a sufferer under this very same unjust and
execrable Censure (a Censure which is therefore execrable because unjust;) that
no true Son of hers (I verily believe) would easily presume to load a Christian
Church, (though otherwise never so corrupt) with this most odious and
unchristian Calumny. For we have had some rash hot-spirited Adversaries, who
have worn the name of Antichrist so threadbare with their repeated outcries,
and made it so ridiculous by their most ignorant applications of it; that for a
Man to name the Revelation, and but give a hint of Antichrist, the Beast, the
Dragon, or the Purpled-Whore, has bin almost accounted scandalous, and he could
hardly have escaped the censure of a proud, pedantick or a factious Person.

Yet notwithstanding, since (as De Romans Pont. lib. 3. Cap. 1.
Bellarmine informs us) All the Heretics (that is, the famous Protestants and
Reformers) of his time, did jointly teach this Doctrine, That the Pope is
Antichrist; why should not We, who follow and approve their Judgment in most
other Points, believe that there is something more than dotage, and the spirit
of railing, in this their so unanimous accusation of the Roman Bishop? If then
this Doctrine (That the Pope is Antichrist) be true, let it not be
discountenanced but proclaimed: if not, let it for ever be condemned and
silenced. As for my own particular, if any thing that I shall write against the
Successor of that great Apostle (as they tell us) shall be proved erroneous; I
shall more willingly retract, than I have written it: and shall beg his
Holiness's Pardon (though I would not buy it) with the most devout and
Catholic of his Romish Proselytes.

But above all, I here unseignedly submit whatever I have said, to the
impartial Judgment of the Sober, Learned, and Religious of the Church of
England; but especially of such Persons, who have bin a little conversant in
this kind of Study, and have a Genius prompting them to these Discoveries. For
else I must confess, that though my Reader should be never so judicious in
other Points, he is not such a Judge as I could wish to have. For he that comes
with an aversion to the Subject, prejudges the Discourse before he reads it.
But if any Man propense to these Enquiries, shall happen to peruse this sorry
Treatise: I hope that he will either find some satisfaction here from mine, or
give me better by his Labors.

Let this then be the Question, which it is the adequate scope and drift of
these ensuing Papers to resolve, Whether or no the Pope be Antichrist? But
since the name of Antichrist is ambiguous, (to avoid all needless cavils about
Words and Names;) by Antichrist I mean that Beast described Revel. xvii. called
The Beast that was, and is not, and said to be the Eighth King of that City and
Empire which are represented in that Chapter. This is the Antichrist, and none
else intended in the present Disputation, of whom we purpose to enquire
exactly, Whether the Roman Bishops be this Antichrist or not. And in this
disquisition I shall use the greatest plainness and sincerity in the World, not
wilfully misquoting, straining, or misrepresenting any Type or Passage I shall
meddle with; but carrying through the whole as even an hand as possible, that I
may neither do the Truth an injury, nor give any just occasion to the Adversary
to speak reproachfully of that which I intended for his good, and for the
common benefit of the Church of God. For as I think the contrary a dishonest
course, and utterly misbecoming both the Truth which I pursue, and the Religion
I profess: So certainly it is as needless upon this occasion, as on any other
Subject whatsoever. For I am here engaged upon an Argument, wherein not only
Truth (as I conceive) is evident, and therefore needs no Stratagem to defend
it; but is withal so sad a Truth, that one would rather fear than hope for
Victory in contending for it.

Now as to the Method of this Treatise, I shall begin with the Angel's
Interpretation of the Vision, which we have in Revel. xvii; and when I have
cleared the meaning of the Angel's words in that Chapter, I shall proceed from
thence to the xiith and xiiith Chapters, which have the nearest correspondence
and affinity with the other, and may, as I suppose, be fully explicated by that
light the Angel gives us in the xviith Chapter. For there are some things
concerning Antichrist more needful, to be known than others, more clearly
revealed in the Holy Scriptures, and upon which the knowledge and unfolding of
the rest does very much depend. I shall therefore begin with those things which
are most perspicuously revealed concerning Antichrist, and thence proceed to
such descriptions of him as are more mysterious and obscure. For therefore I
suppose the Holy Ghost has made some things so clear and evident, that by the
light of these we might the better penetrate into those that are more dark and
mystical. Since then the Angel in my judgment has most manifestly described to
us the Mystery of that Beast, and of the Woman that was seen to sit upon him,
Rev. xvii. I shall begin with these; and if I can but give the Reader
satisfaction as to these particulars. I doubt not by the help of these to make
an easy passage through the rest, though in themselves more difficult and
almost inexplicable.

In order then to the unfolding of this Question concerning Antichrist, I shall
premise this general Maxim; That he to whom all Signs and Tokens, Characters
and descriptions, of that Antichrist we are now enquiring after, according as
the Scripture lays them down, are nationally and truly applicable, without any,
manner of absurdity in Reason, or inconsistence with the Analogy of Scripture,
is that very Antichrist we are seeking for. This I thought good to admonish the
Reader of aforehand, because there are very many Texts of Scripture, but
especially in the Prophetical part of it, which may (for ought I know) admit of
diverse good and sound interpretations; and there may be some marks of
Antichrist, that singly are as applicable to other Persons not at all intended
or designed in the holy Scripture. But this is certain, that he or they to
whom, not only one or two, but all the signs and marks of Antichrist are
rationally and truly applicable, must needs be Antichrist; and therefore if
they be thus applicable to the Pope, the Pope is Antichrist. For certainly it
cannot be, that the holy Spirit of Prophecy should have described Antichrist by
such dubious and uncertain Circumstances, as may every one be rationally
accommodated to the true and undefiled Spouse of Jesus Christ.

That therefore we may put this Question to a speedy issue, I shall observe but
one thing more, whereof it may be requisite to forewarn some Readers, lest
otherwise they should be discouraged by the abstruseness and mysteriousness of
the Prophetic style, especially of those Prophecies we have now to deal with.
For Prophecy affects a different sort of Language from the vulgar Phrase, and
loves to cloth it self in Allegories and obscure expressions, appearing, like
the Author of it, in a Cloud: there being many Chapters of the Revelation which
seem to be but one continued Metaphor, and hardly any single Verse without its
Figure. Here therefore we shall meet with Cities called Women; People, Waters;
Idol-worship, Whoredom; Kings and Kingdoms typed out by Beasts, and Heads, and
Horns of Beasts. Which Types are not devices to obscure the Prophecy, or to
help it out by giving scope to greater latitude of Interpretation, (for they
are capable of a certain sense, as will be seen hereafter:) but they serve to
render it the more illustrious, by hiding it from common view, and so securing
it from profane approaches; quickening the pious industry of the Faithful in the
discovery of it, and procuring great esteem and veneration to it. Nor is there
any cause to wonder that the Spirit of Prophecy should appropriate to himself a
form of speech and manner of expressing diverse from the vulgar: since there is
hardly any Art or Science but affects the same. Which though it look like
Canting to the Ignorant; yet to those that are experienced in the Study, the
terms are known to be most proper and significant. It is not therefore any
strangerthing to meet with Beasts and Horns, and Whores, and such like terms
and types, and figurative expressions in Prophetic Writings, than to read of
Nouns and Verbs in Grammar: of Predicaments, and first and second Notions in
Logic: or of Rhombs, Rhomboides, Parallelograms, and such like odd exotic
Names and Figures in the Mathematick Sciences.

PART I. Of the time of Antichrist's Coming.
CHAP. I. Of the time of Antichrist's Coming according to the Doctrine of the
Primitive Church. The same confirmed from the Angel's Interpretation of the
Vision, Rev. xvii.
IT is well known to those that have bin conversant in the Writings of the
Fathers, and confessed by Bellarmine himself ( De Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 5.)
that the Primitive Church was taught to look for Antichrist upon the
dissolution of the Roman Empire. In which point Tertullian (an early Writer) is
very clear, in his Apology for Christians, Chap. xxxii. where, that he might
vindicate the Christians from the Crime objected to them, viz. of being enemies
to the State; he alleges first, that this was contrary to the known Precepts
of the Christian Religion, which commands them to pray for their Enemies and
Persecutors. Next, that Christians were expressly bound to pray for Kings, and
Princes, and Powers, that all things might be quiet and peaceable. For (says
he) if the Empire be shaken, we that are members of it must needs partake of
the common calamities. Lastly, He alleges, that Christians Est and alia major
necessi as nobis orandi pro Imperatorib, etiam pro omni statu Imperii, rebusque
Romany, quod vim ma^imam universo orbi imminentem, ipsamque claus^lam saeculi,
acerbitates horrendas comminemem, Romani Imperii commertu scimus retardari.
Itaque nolumus experiri, and dum prec^mur differri Romanae dint^micati favemus.
have a greater necessity ye^ of praying for Emperors, yea and for the whole
state of the Empire, and the Reman Affairs, because (says he) we know that the
greatest Persecution hanging over the whole World, nay, the very end of the
World it self, threatening horrid Calamities, is retarded by the interposition
of the Roman Empire. Wherefore we would not willingly feel this misery, and
while we pray that it may be deferred, we are Friends to the perpetuity of the
Roman State.

I will not go about to prove that the Father speaks here of the Persecution
under Antichrist, for I never heard of any that denied it. Only we may observe,
that Tertullian speaking in the name of the Whole Church of Christ, delivers it
as the sense of all Christians in general, and that not doubtfully, but
peremtorily, that this greatest of Persecutions was to come upon the
dissolution of the Roman Empire, Scimus (says he) vim maximam vniverso orbi
imminentem, ipsamque clausulam saeculi acerbibates horrendas comminantem,
Romani Imperii commeatu retardari; that is, We know these miseries are retarded
by the interposition of the Roman Empire. It was therefore, it seems, a thing
not questioned in those primitive times, but that Antichrist should raise
himself upon the ruins of the Roman Empire.

And this was looked upon to have bin the tradition of St. Paul. For writing to
the Thessalonians (2 Thessalonians. 2.) and speaking there concerning the Revelation of
Antichrist, and what it was that obstructed his coming at that present time, he
has these words, at verse. 5. and 6. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with
you, I told you these things? And now ye know what withholds, that he might
be revealed in his time. From whence it appears, that the Apostle had told
these Thessalonians by word of mouth, what it was that impeded the coming of
Antichrist, and upon the removal whereof Antichrist was presently to be
revealed. (For that the Apostle speaks here of Antichrist, de novissimo illo
Antichristo, of that last Antichrist, the forerunner of the day of Judgment;
nulli dubium est, (as De Civit. Dei. Lib. 20. cap. 19.
St. Austin tells us) i. e. no man doubts.) But the thing which hindered, being
the present Power of the Roman Empire, the Apostle does not openly declare in
Writing what it was, ibid.
lest he might seem a person disaffected to the Government; for it was hoped by
the Romans that their Empire should endure for ever. Hence that complaint of
St. Austine in the place aforequoted, who descanting upon those words of the
Apostle, And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his
time; does thus lament the obscurity of this Mystery: and therefore we (says
he) who know not what they knew, desire to attain with labor the Apostles
meaning, yet we are not able. So that this point so well known to the
Thessalonians in the Apostles time, and for about two hundred years after,
namely to those Christians of the age Tertullian lived in, was come, it seems,
(such is the nature of unwritten Tradition) to be accounted difficult if not
unexplicable, by St. Austin's days.

And indeed this was no more than what might well have bin expected, that
seeing Antichrist was to come, and to prevail so mightily even in the Temple of
the living God, the nearer we approach his time, the more obscure should be the
marks and tokens of his coming; lest being known, he should have mist of that
reception which he was to meet with. Yet notwithstanding, this Notion of his
coming we are speaking of, had so much credit in St. Austin's time, that he
himself esteemed it no absurdity, to interpret, that which hindered, of the
Roman Empire. His words are these ibid.
Illud tamen quod ait Apostolus, Tantum qui modo tenet, teneat, etc. i. e. But
that which the Apostle says, Only he which now withholdeth, let him withhold,
until he be taken out of the way, is not absurdly believed to have bin spoken
of the Roman Empire it self, as if it were said, Only he that now reigns, let
him reign, until he be taken out of the way, i. e. until he be destroyed: And
then shall that Wicked be revealed, by whom that Antichrist is intended, no Man
doubts.

Since therefore this Tradition, though at first not doubted, has not with
equal certainty bin delivered in succeeding Ages: We shall further show, that
this Tradition is not merely oral, but has a most unquestionable foundation in
the Holy Scriptures. For what St. Paul did not think fit to speak of openly in
his Epistle, was afterward declared to St. John in Vision, and is by him
delivered to the Church in writing, in the xvii Chapter of his Revelation.

Now, Reader, that thou may be able clearly to discern, and certainly
comprehend the proof that we shall bring from hence, (for I desire thee to take
notice that the main hinge of our Dispute concerning Antichrist does chiefly
turn upon this very Chapter) I shall therefore set it down verbatim as it lies,
dividing it (as it divides it self) into two general parts, the Vision, and the
Interpretation of it.

Rev. xvii. The Vision.

Ver. 1. And there came one of the seven Angels, which had the seven Vials, and
talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show unto thee the Judgment
of the great Whore, that sits upon many Waters.

2. With whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, and the
Inhabiters of the Earth have bin made drunk with the Wine of her Fornication.

3. So he carried me away in the Spirit into the Wilderness: and I saw a Woman
sit upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of names of Blasphemy, having seven
heads, and ten horns.

4. And the Woman was araied in Purple, and Scarlet-colour, and decked with
Gold, and Precious-Stone and Pearls, having a Golden Cup in her hand full of
Abominations, and filthiness of her Fornication.

5. And upon her forehead was a Name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE
MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.

6. And I saw the Woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great
admiration.

Thus far the Vision, the Interpretation follows in these words.

7. And the Angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee
the Mystery of the Woman, and of the Beast that carries her, which has the
seven Heads and ten Horns.

8. The Beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless Pit, and go into Perdition: and they that dwell on the Earth shall
wonder, (whose names were not written in the Book of Life from the foundation
of the World) when they behold the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

9. And here is the mind which has Wisdom. The seven Heads are seven
Mountains, on which the Woman sits.

10. And there are (...), and they are seven Kings.
seven Kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and
when he comes, he must continue a short space.

11. And the Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eight, and is of the
seven, and goes into Perdition.

12. And the ten Horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have received no
Kingdom as yet; but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast.

13. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
Beast.

14. These shall make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for
he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are with him, are called,
and chosen, and faithful.

15. And he says unto me, The Waters which thou saw, where the Whore
sits, are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues.

16. And the ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the
Whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her slesh, and
burn her with fire.

17. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his Will, and to agree, and
give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the Words of God shall be fulfilled.

18. And the Woman which thou saw, is that great City, which reigns over
the Kings of the Earth.

And thus we have the meaning or Interpretation of the Vision. Which that we
may the more distinctly comprehend, let us observe, 1. That the seven Heads
which St. John saw upon the Beast, are not to be conceived as coming up upon
the Beast all at the same time, but as succeeding one another. This is clear,
from ver. 10. where the Angel interpreting the seven Heads to be seven Kings,
tells us that five of them were fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come,
etc. The plain meaning whereof is this, That the seven Heads are seven Kings
successively coming up upon the Beast, five whereof were come and gone at the
time when the Angel interpreted this Vision to St. John, one was then in being
at that very time, and the other was not then come, etc. So that for
distinction's sake, when we shall have occasion to speak of any thing done by
the Beast in the time of his first Head, we shall call him the Beast under the
first Head; if of any thing done by him in the time of his second Head, we
shall call him the Beast under the second Head; if of any thing done by him in
the time of his third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh Head, we call him
respectively the Beast under the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh Head.

2. We must observe that St. John in the Vision saw but seven Heads, which the
Angel expounds to be seven Kings. But when he comes to reckon up these seven
Kings, he enumerates eight. Five (says he) are fallen; one is, and the other is
not yet come, etc. And the Beast that was, and is not, he is the eighth King,
and is of the seven. So that there must be one of these eight Kings that is not
typisied by any Head. For there are but seven Heads, and those seven Heads the
Angel tells us are seven Kings. If they had bin eight Kings, the Angel would
have told us so. But when he tells us, the seven Heads are seven Kings, he
means, they are but seven, and no more. Notwithstanding he reckons up eight
Kings, to let us know that there is one of them; that is not of the same nature
with the rest; and therefore is not typified by any Head of the Beast. For
otherwise how easy had it bin, either for the Angel to have said, The seven
Heads are eight Kings; or rather for the Spirit to have represented the Beast
with the eight Heads, if there had bin eight Kings to be typified by the Heads?

Neither will it suffice to say, That the seventh of these eight Kings was to
continue but a short space, and therefore may be included in one of the seven
Heads together with another King. For there are no eight Kings whom we can with
any reason imagine to be here meant, but the seventh of them will appear to be
of as long continuance as some one or other that is typified by a Head.
Wherefore it must needs be granted, that one of these eight Kings is not
typified by any Head.

And which is he? Not any of the six first Kings; for there is no doubt
concerning cerning any one of them, but that they are all of the number of the
seven Kings, that are typified by the seven Heads. But concerning the seventh
and eighth Kings, the Angel seems to answer a doubt that might arise, viz.
Which of them is of the number of the seven Kings, that are typified by the
seven Heads? And he tells us plainly, That the Beast that was, and is not, he
is the eighth King, and is of the seven. Which is, as if he had said, The
seventh King is none of the seven Kings which are typified by the seven Heads,
but the eighth King is one of that number. So that between the sixth Head and
the seventh there was a King to come, that should be of a quite different
nature from the other Kings: during whose Reign, the Beast, which is described
at verse. 3. as being full of names of Blasphemy, should want an Head, but
afterward he should revive, and get another Head, who should be the eighth
King, and of the number of the seven, which are typified by the Heads of the
blasphemous Beast

3. We must observe that although the Woman was seen sitting upon the Beast
with seven Heads, yet in the Interpretation she is considered only as sitting
upon the Beast under his seventh or last Head. This is evident from ver. 11. in
these words, And the Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is
of the seven; that is, he is the eighth King in respect of the King that is
typified by no Head, and he is one of the seven Kings that are typified by the
seven Heads. For that this Beast which was, and is not, is the Beast which was
represented to St. John in Vision, appears from ver. 8. where the Angel
beginning to interpret the Vision to St. John, tells him, That the Beast which
he saw, was, and is not, etc. This Beast therefore, which was, and is not,
being the Beast upon which St. John saw the Woman sitting: since this Beast is
interpreted to be, not the Beast in general under all his Heads, nor under the
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, or sixth, but only under his seventh or
last Head; it is manifest that the Woman is considerable in this Prophecy, only
as sitting upon the Beast, under his seventh or last Head, and also that the
Beast himself is here considered under no other Head but that.

And this appears yet further from the particular enumeration of the several
Heads, as the Angel mentions them in the Interpretation of the Vision. For is
the Beast considered under his first five Heads? No; these are fallen, says the
Angel; and so, past and gone; and therefore not of this consideration. Is then
the Beast considered here under this sixth Head? No neither; for there is no
more said of this Head or King, but only that he is. It remains therefore that
the Beast should be considered here only under his last Head of all. And indeed
of this only it is said at ver. 8. The Beast which thou saw, was, and is
not, etc. For at ver. 11. The Beast which was, and is not, is interpreted only
of the seventh or last Head of all. Nor is there any thing foretold in all this
17th Chapter, of any other Head but this. So that, whereas the Woman is
represented sitting upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of names of Blasphemy,
arrayed in Scarlet, with a Golden Cup in her hand, and on her forehead this
Inscription, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, etc. And drunken with the Blood of the
Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. It is as evident as any
thing can be, that by the Beast, is to be understood the Beast under his last
Head only; and that the Woman sitting upon the Beast in the time of his last
Head, should be thus accoutred and arrayed, inscribed and drunken.

Hence then we may understand the meaning of the Angel, when at ver. 8. he
tells St. John, that the Beast which he saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend
out of the bottomless Pit. And again, at the end of the same verse; that the
Beast was, and is not, and yet is. For hereby is signified that the Beast which
St. John saw, was the same Beast which had bin under the first five Heads, that
were then fallen; yea, and the same that was then in being under the sixth
Head, but that he was not as then come under his seventh or last Head, in which
only he was considerable in the Vision. Which Exposition as it is easy and
obvious in it self, considering how the Angel has interpreted the seven Heads
or Kings: So the Angel himself may seem on purpose to direct us to it, in that
so soon as he had spoken so mysteriously of the Beast, telling us, that he was,
and is not, and yet is, he presently subjoins, Here is the Mind that has
Wisdom. Which is as if he had said, You shall easily perceive what is meant by
this mysterious description of the Beast, by comparing it with the following
Interpretation For the Beast was in respect of his fi^e Heads that were fallen;
he is not, both in respect of those, and of that which i^ to come; and yet he
is, in respect o^ that which now reigns.

Having thus cleared what might seet difficult in the Angel's Interpretation o^
the Vision, let us proceed to the application of it. And let us enquire, who
this Woman is that St. John saw sitting upon the Beast under his seventh or
last Head?

This Woman is certainly to be known by two sorts of marks, (though the first
sort alone I take to be abundantly sufficient to distinguish her from all other
Women in the World, and shall partly ground my self upon that Supposition in
the discovering of the other.) Of the first sort are such Marks as belong to
her self. Of the other sort are such as belong to the Beast she sits on. The
Marks belonging to the Woman her self, are described by the Angel at ver. 9, 18.

At ver. 18. she is described in these words; The Woman which thou saw, is
that great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. Here the Woman
sitting upon the Beast, is interpreted to be that great City which reigns
over the Kings of the Earth. So that the Woman plainly signifies that Great
Imperial City; her sitting on the Beast denoting her Imperial Sovereignty.

Now though it be said, The Woman is that great City, (...), i.e. which now
reigns over the Kings of the Earth (it being spoken in the Present tense:)
Yet some may cavil, and object, That it is not needful to understand it of any
City then in being, but of some other that should afterward arise. Because in
Prophesies it is a common thing to use the present for the future Tense, and
speak of things as being, which are yet to come.

But this will appear to be a mere Cavil, when we shall have considered,

1. That one of the Kings of this great City, was then reigning, being the
sixth of those Kings she had enjoied. So that this great City, of whom it is
said that she reigns over the Kings of the Earth, must needs have bin a City
then in being, and then reigning also under that King who had the Sovereignty
at that time over her.

2. That these words are not to be looked upon as a Prophecy, but as an
Interpretation of a Prophecy. It were therefore very absurd to apply those
rules of speaking to Interpretations, which are observed to be used in
Prophecies. For therefore the Interpretations should be plain, because the
Prophecies are obscure.

3. That although (as we said) the Beast be here considered as to his last Head
only; yet St. John saw the same Woman sitting upon him under all his seven
Heads. So that she which sat upon him under his seventh or last Head, was seen
to sit upon him under the sixth, and all the rest of them.

4. If we consider how precisely the Angel all along in this Interpretation
observes the punctual differences of the Times past, present, and to come; we
cannot think without the greatest folly and absurdity, that he confounds them
only in this 18th verse. For at ver. 8. he tells St. John concerning the Beast,
that he was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless Pit, expressly
noting the differences of the times. And so again at the end of the same verse,
he calls him the Beast which was, and is not, and yet is. The like we find a
little after concerning the seven Kings. Five (says he) are fallen, one is,
and the other is not yet come, etc. Likewise it is spoken of the ten Horns,
that they are ten Kings which have received no Kingdom as yet, but receive
power as Kings one hour with the Beast. And thus we shall find that the Angel
is exceeding punctual all along, that no Man might with any show of Reason
misinterpret or misunderstand him. Wherefore we cannot doubt, but that he uses
the same plainness at ver. 18. where he tells St. John, The Woman which thou
saw is that great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth; and that
he meant it of that great Imperial City which then reigned at that present time.

If it be further urged, That even in this Interpretation we are speaking of
the Angel has no less than four times used the present tense for the future.

I answer, True; But then we must observe withal, that he has never used one of
these Tenses for the other, but when he has as good as told us in the Context,
that he does so: So that he leaves no doubt or scruple in what Tense he means
it. As for example; when at verse. 11. it is said, The Beast which was, and is
not, he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goes into Perdition. Here the
word goes, is used for shall go; but without any Ambiguity at all; for he had
plainly told us just before, that the Beast he speaks of was to come. Since
therefore it is manifest to every Man, that the Beast could not go into
perdition before he came, we cannot understand his going into perdition, but in
the future Tense. So that although the Angel says he goes, yet it is as
certain that he means shall go, as if he had expressed it in that very form.

The same Answer, mutatis mutandis, will serve for the other three places in
this Interpretation, where the Angel uses the present for the future Tense. As
at ver. 12. Where receive is put for shall receive; at ver. 13. where These
have one Mind, is put for These shall have one mind. And lastly, at ver. 17.
where it is said, That God has put into their hearts, instead of God shall put
into their hearts. In all which places, although the present or the preter
tense be used for the future; yet is the sense as perfect and unquestionable,
as if the future were expressed. So that indeed in such a case, where it is not
possible to mistake the Tense, the present and future are not to be looked on
as two different Tenses, but the very same.

But now at ver. 18. where it is said, The Woman which thou saw, it is that
great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth: There is not only no
such certainty from the Context, that reigns cannot be understood, as it is
spoken, in the present tense; but rather, as has bin already showed, there is
all reason from the Context, to evince the contrary. I conclude therefore, that
when the Angel tells St. John, The Woman which thou saw, is that great City
which reigns over the Kings of the Earth; he means it of that great Imperial
City, which then reigned, when this Vision was interpreted.

And now, What City could this be but Rome? For, what City was there then in
all the World, so comparable with that of Rome, (much less so far exceeding her
in Greatness and extent of Empire) as to be called by way of eminency, The Lady
of the World, (...), That great City, that reigns over the Kings of the Earth?

But this will further yet appear from certain other Descriptions of this Great
Imperial City, which the Angel gives us at ver. 9, 10. where we have the
meaning or interpretation of the seven Heads, which St. John saw upon the
Beast. These seven Heads have a twofold signification: they signify seven
Mountains and seven Kings. At ver. 9. they are interpreted to be seven
Mountains; The seven Heads (says the Angel there) are seven Mountains upon
which the Woman sits; that is, upon which the great Imperial City is
situated. Here again we have the Verb sits in the Present Tense, and the
meaning must be this; That the Woman did then sit upon these seven Heads or
Mountains, when she was represented in this Vision to St. John. And to contend
for any other City, (as designed by this Vision) which should afterward arise,
cannot proceed from any thing but ignorance or prejudice; nor produce any
better effects in the explication of this Prophecy than nonsense, and
confusion, and absurdity. Especially since there was then a City, the most
famous in the World, that was known as well by the name of Vrbs Septicollis,
that great Imperial City, situate on seven Hills or Mountains, as by any other
name. And to this the Poet alludes in this Distick.

Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit orbem
Montibus, Imperii Roma Deumque locus.
Ovid. Trist. Lib. 1. Eleg. 4 Rome which from Mountains seven the whole World
descries,
The seat of Empire is, and Deities.
Rome therefore is undoubtedly the City, which is thus described by the Angel,
to be That great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth, and is
situate on seven Hills or Mountains.

But we have further evidence of this matter yet, from that other
interpretation which is given us of the seven Heads, to wit, that they are
seven Kings. But before I proceed to the Application of this part of the Angels
interpretation, it may be needful to enquire, in what place these seven Heads
or Kings are to be sought for. This place the Angel intimates to us at ver. 18.
The Woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns over the Kings
of the Earth. For, for what other reason can this City here be called the
Reigning, Sovereign, or Imperial City, but because she was Imperii locus (as
Ovid styles her) the proper Seat or Residence of her Kings?

And this the Angel yet more plainly explicates. ver. 9, where he tells us,
that the seven Heads are seven Mountains, on which the Woman sits, or, on
which that great City is seated. For hence it is evident, that these seven
Heads are to be sought for not in any other place or places of the Empire, but
only in this great seven-hill'd City. For St. John saw but seven Heads in all,
and these seven Heads the Angel tells us were within the City. Whatever
therefore is the meaning or interpretation of them, it must there be sought for.

As therefore these seven Heads signify seven Mountains within the City, so
they must signify seven Kings within the same. For where the Heads were placed,
there also must be sought whatever is designed by them. Since therefore these
seven Heads as they are put to signify the Mountains, are placed by the Angel
in the City, there also we must place them as they signify the Kings. And thus
we have another Character of this Woman in the Vision, which we may thus
express together with the rest: That she was that great City which in St.
John's time reigned over the Kings of the Earth, was situate upon seven
Mountains, and was to be the Royal Seat, or Residence of seven Kings succeeding
one another in her.

But possibly some may here imagine, That in this Notion concerning the placing
of the seven Heads, I am very far departed from the exactness of the Vision,
which I have all along pretended to observe. For whereas St. John saw a Woman
sitting on a Beast, having seven Heads, (whereby is signified that the seven
Heads belonged to the Beast) I contrariwise have placed them in the Woman. But
the Answer is obvious; For,

1. It is not I that place them in the Woman, but the Angel in effect that does
it. For so he tells us at ver. 9. The seven Heads are seven Mountains, on which
the Woman sits. Since therefore the seven Mountains are placed by the Angel
in the City, it follows of necessity, that the seven Heads which signify the
seven Mountains must belong also to the Woman in the Vision. And on the
otherside again, because the seven Heads belong unto the Woman in the Vision,
it follows by the like necessity of Reason that the seven Kings also, which are
signified by the seven Heads, should be assigned to the City in the
Interpretation.

This I speak upon supposition, that the Angel has not interpreted the seven
Heads to belong unto the City, as they signify seven Mountains; and not to
belong unto the City, or to belong but partly unto the City, and partly to some
other place, as they signify seven Kings. For since the Angel has placed the
seven Heads (as they signify seven Mountains) within the City; and has not
displaced them, nor any of them as they signify seven Kings: we are obliged to
follow the Authority of the Angel, and it were a most intolerable presumption
in a worse Interpreter to displace them. But,

2. In making the seven Heads to belong entirely to the Woman, we do not in the
least dispoil the Beast of them. For since the Woman is interpreted the
Imperial City, as the Imperial City, is a part or portion of the Kingdom, so is
the Woman of the Beast. Whatever therefore appertains to the Woman, must of
necessity appertain as well unto the Beast. And,

Lastly, If we consider that the Imperial City is the most considerable part of
any Kingdom for the bigness of it; where can we better place the Heads
belonging to the Beast or Kingdom than in the noblest and most conspicuous part
about him?

And now it is time that we proceed to show who are meant by these seven Heads
or Kings successively coming up upon the Beast within this great City. In order
whereunto we must observe; That this word King is otherwise taken in the
Interpretations of Prophetic Visions, than it is wont to be in other Writings.
For whereas in other Writings it usually signifies but one single King: it is
used in the Interpretations of Prophetic Visions, for a Kingdom with the whole
Order or Succession of its Kings.

Neither is this any critical or casual Observation, but the constant course
and method of the Scriptures in our present case, as we may see in Dan. 2.32.
Where King Nabuchadnezzar is said to have represented unto him in a Dream a
great Image, whose Head was of pure Gold; his Breast and his Arms, of Silver;
his Belly and his Thighs of Brass; his Legs of Iron; his Feet, part of Iron and
part Clay. For the Prophet Daniel interpreting this Vision to King
Nabuchadnezzar, thus addresses himself to him, at ver. 37. Thou, O King, art a
King of Kings, etc. thou art this head of Gold. Now although the Prophet Daniel
seems thus particularly to interpret this Golden Head of King Nebuchadnezzar's
Person, saying, Thou art this Head of Gold: Yet indeed he does not mean it of
his Person only, but also of his Kingdom, and his Successors. And this appears
to be the Prophet's meaning from what he adds at ver. 39. After thee shall
arise another Kingdom inferior to thee, and another third Kingdom of Brass,
etc. where by comparing of King Nebuchadnezzar with other Kingdoms, it is plain
that he speaks not of the King's person only, but of his Kingdom too. And
because the Prophet tells him, That after him should arise another Kingdom
inferior to him, it is likewise evident that he includes his Successors also.
For that other Kingdom did not arise after King Nebuchadnezzar, but by the
intervention of his Son Evil-merodach, and his Grandson Balthassar.

Thus again, Dan. ii. 44. the Prophet uses the names of Kings and Kingdoms
promiscuously. His words be these, And in the days of those Kings, (viz. of the
Kingdoms before spoken of) shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall
never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other People, but it
shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, (which at the beginning
of this verse are called Kings) and it shall stand for ever.

The like we may observe Dan. 7.17. These great Beasts which are four, are four
Kings, etc. Now although in this ver. 17. these four Beasts are said to be four
Kings; yet at ver. 23. the fourth of them is said to be the fourth Kingdom. And
as it is said in the description of this Vision at verse. 7. that the fourth
Beast should be diverse from all the Beasts that were before it. So here, at
ver. 23. it is said by way of Interpretation, that the fourth Kingdom shall be
diverse from all Kingdoms; that is, from all the Kingdoms that were before it.
As therefore at ver. 17. the four Beasts are interpreted four Kings: So we see
that at ver. 23. they are expounded Kingdoms. And seeing that these four Kings
were to reign from Daniel's time until the Judgment should sit, and the Kingdom
should be given to the Saints of the Most High; that is, as all Interpreters
confess, almost until the first coming of Christ; and, as the most and best of
them expound it, (amongst whom even Bellarmin himself is one) until the second
coming of Christ to Judgment; it is manifest that by these four Kings or
Kingdoms cannot be meant any four single Kings reigning in their several
Kingdoms, but four several Kingdoms with the whole order or succession of their
Kings.

These things may be sufficient for the satisfaction of such as are not well
acquainted with this Argument: and for such as are, they know so well the truth
of what I here assert, that they will think I have enlarged too much already.

Notwithstanding, because there is one place even in the interpretation of a
prophetic Vision wherein this word King is used to signify a single King
apart from others of the same Kingdom: though I have said so much already, yet
I must crave the Reader's patience to consider it a little further, that I may
make the Argument as clear, and leave as little prejudice as I can against it.
It is truth therefore that in Dan. 8.21. a King is set to signify a single
King. The words are these, The rough Goat is the King of Graecia; and the great
Horn between his Eyes is the first King. Observe here that by the King of
Graecia, in the first clause of this verse, is meant the whole Kingdom of
Graecia under all its Kings. Now this Kingdom of Graecia being reckoned but as
one Kingdom, and typified by no more Beasts but one, to wit, the great rough
Goat; when in the latter clause of the same verse, it is said, that the great
Horn between hi^ Eyes is the first King, it is evident ever from the Text it
self, that by the first King cannot be meant the first Kingdom, but the first
single King apar^ from others that succeeded him; because the kingdom was but
one. S^ that there lies no ambiguity in the word although it be not taken in
the usu^ sense.

Thus again at ver. 23. by that Ki^ of fierce Countenance, is meant but on
single King, to wit, Antiochus Epiphan^. But here the Context leads us to the
meaning of it. For he is typified by a little Horn, as you may see it, at ver.
9. which little Horn, is there said to come out of one of those four notable
Horns which arose up in the stead of the first great Horn. Since therefore (as
has bin showed) by the first great Horn is meant but one single King: how can
we think that by that King, who in the same Vision is typified but by a little
Horn, should be meant any more Kings than one? And therefore it is observable
in this one Vision, that, lest we should mistake the other four notable Horns
for four single Kings also, they are interpreted at ver. 22. not four Kings (as
is usual in other Visions) but four Kingdoms.

And there is one thing more to be observed in this case that we are speaking
of, concerning the use of that type of an Horn, to signify a single King. For
when a Beast is represented with two, four, ten, or more Horns, they always
signify that Beast or Kingnom to be divided into a like number of Kingdoms,
viz. as many Kingdoms as the Beast had Horns. But now when a Beast, or Kingdom,
is seen to have but one Horn (as in the case of the great and little Horns we
were speaking of but now) this one Horn cannot signify the division of a
Kingdom into one Kingdom, (for that were nonsense;) and therefore when this
single Horn coming out of a Beast, or out of another Horn (or Kingdom) is
interpreted a King; since it cannot signify a Kingdom into which that Beast, or
other Horn, should be divided, it must needs signify one single King apart
from others of his dignity in that Beast or Kingdom. So that although in this
Chapter the word King be twice used to signify but one single King: Yet this
will not hinder but that in all other places it should signify a whole Order
or Succession of Kings, where there is not the like special Reason from the
Context, or from the singularity of the Horn, to expound it otherwise.

But now in Rev. xvii, in the Angel's Interpretation of that Vision there,
there is not only no such Reason as in Dan. 8. to expound the seven Kings there
spoken of, to be seven single Kings apart from others of the same Order, but
there is great reason from the Context, and from the plurality of Kings, to
evince the contrary. For we see there are seven Kings spoken of, and not one
single King; and whereas there is mention made but of seven Kings in one verse,
and of ten in another: it is confessed generally, and even by Bellarmin
himself, that by the ten Kings are meant not ten single Kings, but ten several
Kingdoms, with the whole Order or Succession of their Kings.

And this is also clear even from the very Circumstances of the Text it self.
For of these ten Kings it is said, Rev. xvii. 12. That they are ten Kings which
have received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the
Beast. Seeing therefore that these ten Kings receive their Kingdoms not
successively, but altogether with the Beast; we cannot understand them of ten
single Kings. We cannot think therefore but that when the Angel, (that most
excellent Interpreter of the Vision) speaks of seven other Kings in the same
breath (as it were) without any intimation of a difference in the acceptance
of the word, he means the same thing by Kings in one, as in the other place;
and that he would not have us understand seven single Kings, but seven several
series of seven several Kings, including all that had and should succeed them
in their several Times and Orders.

And thus we have one Argument from the use of this word King in the
Interpretations of Prophetic Visions, that by these seven Kings cannot be
meant seven single Kings, but seven several Orders, Series, Catalogues, or
Successions of them.

But yet we have another Argument, which is likewise taken from the Text it
self, and may well serve both to confirm the former, and explain it. And this
is drawn from the use of the word [Beast] in Prophetic Visions: which being
always interpreted a King, or Kingdom, is never set to signify a single King
apart from others of the same Order in his Kingdom. Not but that a Beast may be
used to typifie a Kingdom with one single King, if it has never had more Kings
than one; which is a very rare unusual case: but that when any single King is
meant to be designed from amongst his fellow-Kings, he never has bin typified
by a Beast, but only by a single Horn coming out of a Beast, or out of another
Horn. And therefore when there was occasion in Dan. 8. to typifie two single
Kings (as has bin said) they are not represented by two Beasts, but by two
single Horns.

But I shall make it manifest, that in the interpretation of this Vision of the
Beast having seven Heads, we are to consider every Head together with the Body
of the Beast, and to interpret them as if they had bin seen seven several
Beasts or Kingdoms.

And for this Method of interpreting we have the most unquestionable Authority
of the Angel himself. For as for the last of the seven Heads he plainly calls
it the Beast, and interprets it as such at verse. 11. The Beast (says he) which
was, and is not, even he is the eighth King, and is of the seven, etc. that is,
he is the last of the seven Kings. Nothing therefore can be more evident, than
that the last of the seven Kings is to be understood as that word King is
always taken in the interpretations of Prophetic Visions, when it is typified
by a Beast; and that is not for any single King, but for a whole series, or
succession of them.

But yet I must not pass over in silence, That Bellarmin ( Lib. iii. de Pont.
To. cap. 2.) says, (and he does but say it) that in Dan. viii. by the Ram is
meant Darius, the last Persian King; and by the Goat the first King of the
Grecian Monarchy; viz. Alexander the Great. But as for the Goat, the Angel,
which interpreted the Vision, gives him the untruth. For the Angel tells us,
That the Goat is the King of Graecia, and the great Horn between his Eyes is
the first King. verse. 21. that is, The Goat is the Kingdom of Graecia, and the
great Horn is the first King of that Kingdom, viz. Aleander the Great.
Wherefore Alexander she Great is not particularly typified by the Goat, but by
the great Horn between his Eyes. And it is manifest that the Goat continued
longer than the great Horn; for when that was broken off, there came up for it
four other notable Horns upon the same Beast; that is, after Alexander's death,
his Kingdom was divided into four Kingdoms, as the Angel explains it, ver. 22.

And as for the Ram, that by it, is not particularized the last King of the
Persian Monarchy, but that the whole Monarchy in general is typified by it, we
shall prove by these five Arguments, taken from the Characters of the Vision it
self, and the Angel's Interpretation. First, The Angel interprets the Ram, at
ver. 20. thus: The Ram which thou saw, having two Horns, are the Kings of
Media and Persia. Now if by the Ram be meant Darius only, then Darius, having
two Horns, are the Kings of Media and Persia. Which (besides that is
unintelligible) will instead of making the Ram a single King (which Bellarmin
would fain do) make Darius two Kings, to wit, one of Media, and the other of
Persia. But the plain meaning is, That by the Ram is signified that whole
Kingdom, which consisted of the two Kingdoms of Media and Persia, which are
represented by the Horns.

2. If by the Ram were particularly designed the last King of the Persian
Monarchy, there is no reason why the Angel should not have interpreted it so,
as well as he tells us of the Goats great Horn, that it is the first King of
the Grecian Monarchy. But this the Angel does not, neither does Bellarmine
assign any reason of it. And therefore by the Ram cannot be meant Darius only,
but the Persian Monarchy under all or any of its Kings indefinitely.

3. Daniel saw this Ram with one Horn first, verse. 3. and then the other (which
proved to be the highest) came up after it. But of Darius the last Persian
Monarch this is not true. For he was possessed of both Horns together, and if of
either first, it was of the Kingdom of Persia, which was the highest Horn,
though Media were the first Kingdom. But they being both united into one
Kingdom long before this Darius his time; I say, they came to Darius both
together. But of the whole Monarchy, that the Ram had the Horn of Media first,
which was the first Kingdom; and then afterward Persia, the highest and the
noblest Horn, was added to it.

4. Daniel says at ver. 4. that he saw the Ram pushing Westward, and
Northward, and Southward, so that no Beasts (or Kingdoms) might stand before
him, etc. But of the Person of Darius this is not true; For what Kingdoms were
subdued to the Persian Monarchy in his time? He Reigned but six years, or
thereabouts; and in that time he fought three Battles with Alexander the Great,
and was overcome in every one of them. This then is true, if by the Ram be
meant the Persian Monarchy indefinitely, but not so of the Person of Darius,
the last King of it.

5. Although it be said of the Goat with his great Horn (to wit Alexander the
Great) that he came unto the Ram, and overcame him, verse. 6, 7. which happened
indeed in the time of Darius, the last King of the Persian Monarchy: yet that
was but casual, as to this Prophecy. For it had bin as well fulfilled, if
Alexander the great had come in the Reign of any other of the Persian Monarchs,
and if there had three, or four, or more Persian Monarchs succeeded one another
in the time that Alexander was subduing that Kingdom. For these things are
spoken only of the Ram, which in the sense of these prophetic Visions, might
have signified any other of the Persian Monarchs as well as Darius; as has bin
before abundantly proved, and as Bellarmin himself tacitly acknowledges, while
he can find no other Beast but this, to signify a single King. And therefore
all these Reasons against his only Ipse dixit, may certainly suffice to prove
what we intended.

Having thus cleared the matter as to the last of these seven Kings, let us
look back upon the rest. Observe therefore that which is said of this Beast,
verse. 8. The Beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of
the bottomless Pit, and go into Perdition: and again at the end of the same
verse, it is called the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is. Now in regard
that it is said of this Beast, that after the time when this Vision was
interpreted, he should ascend out of the bottomless Pit, and that he was not
then in being; it follows, that the Beast which then was, is here considered as
another Beast. And since the Beast was then in being only under his sixth Head;
it follows, that this sixth Head also is to be considered as another Beast; and
so to be interpreted, not of any single King, but of that whole Order or
Succession of the Kings then reigning.

The like might easily be proved of the sive Kings then fallen, for the same
reason, and in the same manner. But I need not trouble the understanding Reader
any further with it. For the Head is so considerable a part of any Beast, that
the falling off of the old, and coming up of any new one, may well make him to
be looked on as another Beast. Wherefore as this seven-headed Beast, in regard
of his one body, is but one: so in respect of his seven several Heads, he is to
be considered and interpreted as seven several Beasts or Kingdoms.

Thus then, as I conceive, we have made good another mark or token of the Woman
we were speaking of. She is that great Imperial City which in St. John's time
reigned over the Kings of the Earth; was situate upon seven Mountains; and had,
and was to have within her seven several Heads or Orders and successions of
Kings, which should make the Beast she sat on, look like seven several Beasts
or Kingdoms; five whereof were fallen in St. John's time; one was then reigning,
and then another King was to succeed, who should be a King of like dignity with
the former, but of a different temper, and therefore is not typified by any
Head, so that during his short Reign the blasphemous Beast should want an Head.
But afterward it should revive again, and get another blasphemous Head, who
was to be the eighth King, and one of the seven Kings that are typified by the
seven Heads.

Now I believe that there is no City in the World, nor ever was but Rome, to
whom all these Marks and Tokens may well and truly be accommodated. But to Rome
they may. And this I have showed already of the foregoing Marks. I come now to
show the same of the seven Heads or Kings. Let us here observe therefore, that
of the five first of them there is no more notice taken by the Angel, but only
this, that they were fallen. As for the manner of their succeeding one another,
what Interregnums there have bin, and such like matters, the Angel mentions not
a word. So that to make our application of these five Kings exactly answerable
to the Angel's Interpretation, we have no more to do but to show, that before
St. John's time the Roman Empire had bin governed by five such several Heads,
and that those five were fallen.

The first Head then that had Supreme Authority in Rome, were called Kings; the
second, Consuls; the third, Decemvirs; the fourth, Tribunes; the fifth,
Dictators. Each of these several Head; had had a share successively in the
Supreme Government of the Roman Kingdom; and were all fallen before the time in
which this Vision was interpreted. One other, namely that of Heathen Emperors,
was then in being. And these were the sixth Head.

Now to this sixth Head the Roman Heathen Emperors, was to succeed that other
King, who is not typified by any Head: who was to be a King, and of like Royal
Dignity with the six Kings that were before him. But being of a different
nature from the rest, he is not represented as a Head of that Beast, who is
said at ver. 3. to have bin full of Names of Blasphemy; but has a Type peculiar
to himself, as we shall find hereafter in the xiith and xiiith Chapters of the
Revelation; where the History of the Head that reigned in St. John's time, of
this other King, not typified by any Head; and of the Beast that was, and is
not; who is the eighth King, and one of the seven Kings, that are typified by
the seven Heads, is more at large described and foretold of.

This other King then that was to interpose between the sixth and seventh Heads
of the Blasphemous Beast, are the Christian Roman Emperors. Who because they
were not guilty of the like Blasphemy or Idolatry with the rest (for by
Blasphemy is meant Idolatry, as shall be shown hereafter) are not typified by
any Head. The reason is, because the Beast, whose Heads they were, is said to
have bin full of Names of Blasphemy, at ver. 3. and these Names of Blasphemy
were written on his Heads. Which is evident from Rev. 13.1. where the same
Seven-headed and ten-horned Beast is again described, and a Name of Blasphemy
is said to have bin seen upon his Heads.

Wherefore the Christian Roman Emperors, though they were Kings of equal
dignity with the rest, yet are they not designed by any Head, because they were
not Blasphemous or Idolatrous as the others were. So that the Blasphemous Beast
did seem to have received a mortal Wound, and utterly to have bi^ destroyed,
while these Christian Emperors reigned, as being destitute of a^ Head, which
is a most Essential part o^ any Beast.

But lest we should think that by thi^ other King, who is not typified by an^
of the Blasphemous Heads, are mea^ not only the Christian Roman Emperors, but
all the other Potentates that Rome has since enjoyed (for they have all bin
called by the name of Christians:) the Angel gives us two manifest Characters,
whereby to know the difference between this seventh King, who is not typified
by any Head, and the Beast that was, and is not, who is the eighth King, and is
one of the seven Idolatrous Heads. For,

First, This seventh King, who is not typified by any Head, is expressly noted
for his short continuance. Now, it is manifest that Rome has bin governed by
such as have professed Christianity, for above these thirteen hundred years.
And if we call this a short time, how long must he reign, who is to be the
eighth King of Rome, and is called the Beast that was, and is not, and typified
by the seventh Blasphemous or Idolatrous Head? But now the Christian Roman
Emperors, which were truly such before the Roman Empire was destroyed,
continued but a little while, not half so long as did the Heathen Emperors,
nor hardly half a quarter of the time that the succeeding Head has governed.
And therefore we must reckon that he reigned but a short time; because there is
no difference of short and long, but only in comparing them with one anoher.
But,

2. The Angel gives us a most manifest designation of the time when the Reign
of this seventh King (not typisied by any Head) is to be reckoned to determine.
For he tells us, that at the time when the Beast or eighth King should arise,
the ten Kings that are typified by ten Horns, should arise together with him,
verse. 11, 12. that is, that the Roman Empire should be divided into ten
Kingdoms, (as Bellarmine himself confesses, speaking to that purpose Lib. 3.
Romans Pont. Cap. 5. and indeed there is no place for any other Interpretation.)
Now if the Roman Empire h^ not yet bin divided into ten Kingdom^ when will it
ever be? It seems therefore a most unquestionable thing, that the eight King is
come by this time, becau^^ not only the seventh King was to reign so short a
time, but also the ten Horns of the Roman Empire (with whom the eighth King was
to begin his Reign) for near twelve hundred Years have bin so branched and
conspicuous.

But although the Reason why the Christian Roman Emperors, are not typified by
any Head, is, because they were not Patrons of that Blasphemy which was common
to the Heads: yet there is another Reason to be given, why the Christian Roman
Emperors should be reckoned as another King, and be distinguished from the
Heathen Emperors that preceded them. For the first Christian Emperor
Constantine the Great new modelled the Government of the Empire, dividing it
into two parts, and appointing two Imperial Seats, the one at Rome, the other
at Constantinople: the Roman Emperor having his ordinary Residence at Rome, and
the Emperor of the Eastern Division at Constantinople; So that the Government
of the Roman Empire having received this so notable an Alteration by the
Christian Emperors, these Christian Emperors may well be looked on as another
King. But if there had bin no other difference between the Heathen and the
Christian Emperors but only that of their Religion, (the one persecuting the
Woman, and the other supporting and abetting her) it might very well have given
occasion to the Holy Spirit to make a different account of them, and to
represent them by two several Types, which is sufficient to our purpose.

But since the Roman Empire has bin long since ruined, and has for many years
bin nothing but an empty title; and since his other King (not typified by any
Head) was to continue but a little while, it is time for us now, to look out
for a successor for him, who was to be the eighth King, and one of the seven
Heads of the Blasphemous Beast. For the sixth Head was reigning in St. John's
time, and I would feign know whether that Head be still in being or not. If it
be still in being, then is the Blasphemous Beast in being still; and
consequently that Head of Rome that now is reigning (for all the Heads were to
have their residence in Rome, as has bin proved before) is the Head of that
Blasphemous Beast. But if that Blasphemous Head, which reigned in St. John's
time, be perished; I would as willingly know the time when it expired. For was
it continued in the Christian Emperors, or not? We cannot think that they were
any part belonging to that Beast, which is described full of names of
Blasphemy. Wherefore that Head which in St. John's time reigned, must needs
have ended in the Christian Emperors. These therefore are that other King not
typified by any Head. And since this King was to continue but a little while,
his Successor, the Antichristian Beast, must needs be come 'ere this, and
therefore we shall make a further search after him.

And here to take as much Light with us as the Text affords us, for the certain
finding and discovering of him: Let us observe, 1. That at the same time when
this last Head was to appear, there were ten Horns or lesser Kingdoms to arise
together with it. Whereby is signified (as has bin already proved) that the
Roman Empire should then first come to be divided into ten parts or lesser
Kingdoms.

Now that these ten Kings or Kingdoms should arise together at the same time
with the last Head, is evident by comparing the 11th and 12th verses. At verse.
11. it is said, The Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is
of the seventh, and goes into Perdition; that is, (as has bin abundantly
declared already) the Beast which St. John saw the Woman sitting on, and which
is the principal concern of this Vision, is the seventh or last Head of the
Roman Beast or Kingdom. Now, as at this ver. 11. the Beast is interpreted the
seventh or last Head, so at verse. 12. it is said o^ the ten Horns, That they
are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdoms as yet. but receive Power as
Kings, (...), i. e. one hour with the Beast, viz. with the Beast just before
spoken of, namely the seventh or last Head.

But it being said, That these ten Horns, or lesser Kings, receive Power as
Kings, (...), one hour with the Beast. I hope that no Body will imagine, that
because (...), one hour is expressed in the Accusative Case, it does not
signify the time when these ten Kings were to receive their Kingdom, but only
the time how long they were to reign. But if any will contend, let him consider
that (besides the strangeness of the thing, that ten Kings or Kingdoms should
be said to last so short a while) the time when is usually expressed in the
Accusative Case. We have so apposite an instance of this in John iv. 52, that
it may serve in stead of many others. The words are these; Then enquired he of
them the hour, when he began to amend: and they said unto him, Yesterday (...),
at the seventh hour the Fever left him.

And further; That it cannot well be taken in any other sense in the Case we
have in hand ( Rev. xvii. 12.) appears from the opposition that (...), one hour
in the latter clause of this verse, has to (...) not as yet in the former. For
when the Angel had said, that these ten Horns (or Kings) have received no
Kingdom as yet; would not any one be ready to ask, When then shall they receive
it? To this therefore the Angel answers, when he adds immediately after, but
they shall receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast. Hence therefore I
conclude that the Roman Empire was to be divided into ten Horns, or smaller
Kingdoms, much about the same point of time when it should appear under its
last Head.

2. Let us observe the difference that is between the seven Heads and ten
Horns. For each of the seven Heads was to have dominion over the whole Roman
Beast, or Kingdom: but the ten Horns are ten several Kings, that were to keep
within their own respective bounds and limits of their several Kingdoms; and
none of them to be the Head or Supreme Governor of the Roman Beast or Kingdom.
For else we should confound the Vision, and make no difference between the
Heads and Horns, if we should make any of the ten Horns the Head: whereas it is
said, that the ten Horns are ten Kings, none of which should be the Beast or
last Head, but which should receive their power as Kings together with him. So
that the Beast, or last Head, was still to have the Sovereignty of the whole,
even then when the whole Beast or Kingdom was to stand divided into ten parts,
or lesser Kingdoms; and by consequence to have Authority over those ten Kings
themselves. Which was not to be any forcible Authority, and such as Kings do
ordinarily compel their Subjects to submit to: but a voluntary subjection of
the ten Kings to him, according as it is foretold of them at ver. 13. that with
one mind, or one consent, they should give their power and strength unto the
beast.

Now then as to the accomplishment of this Prophecy, we find that about the
Year 456, the Roman Empire came to be divided into See Dr. Heylin 's
Cosmography, who gives a particular Account of all the Kingdoms hereafter
mentioned.

See also Mr. Mede in his Comment upon the second Trumpet.


Ten Kingdoms: For at this time we find in Britain two new Kingdoms severed
from the Roman Empire, the one of the Britans, the other of the Saxons. In
Gallia two more, one of the Franks, the other of the Burgundians. In the South
of Gallia, and part of Spain, we find the Kingdom of the Wisogoths: In Gallicia
and Portugal, the Kingdom of the Suevians and Alans: In Africa, of the Vandals;
In Rhaetia, of the Almans; In Pannonia, of the Ostrogoths; And in the residue
of the Empire, there continued still the Kingdom of the Greeks. Whence we may
conclude that we are to reckon the eighth King, (i.e. the Antichristian Beast)
to have begun his reign about the Year 456, when these ten Horns or Kings were
risen in the Roman Empire.

But notwithstanding I have thus assigned ten Horns or Kingdoms in the Roman
Empire, according to the strictest acceptance of the number ten: yet (to avoid
all cavils and unnecessary litigations touching the preciseness of the number)
I would nor here be understood to bind the exposition of this Prophecy to an
unite, but have pitched upon the Year 456, or thereabouts, as the most likely
time (all circumstances considered) from which to calculate both the ruin of
the Roman Empire, and the beginning of the eighth King's Reign. For in a
computation of this nature some latitude of Years in any Reason ought to be
allowed. Especially since the Kingdom of this eighth King (the Antichristian
Beast,) together with the ten Horns or smaller Kingdoms and divisions of the
Roman Empire, was to continue for above twelve hundred Years, as will appear
hereafter from the thirteenth Chapter. Now therefore in so long a time as this
ten-horned Beast was to continue; the allowance of the space of forty years, or
half a hundred, for the fixing of his Epoch, is not much considerable.

And whereas the Angel tells us, that the eighth King, and the ten Horns that
were to give their Power and Strength and Kingdom to him, should receive their
Power as Kings together: the frequent Scripture-usage of the number ten will
easily admit that latitude of interpretation, and assigning of the Epoch we
contend for. For that the number ten in Scripture phrase, is used for an
indefinite and uncertain number, be it more or less than ten, is evident from
the places cited in the As, 1 Samuel 1.8. Am not I better to thee than ten Sons?
Neh. 4.12. They said unto us ten times. From all places, etc. Job 19.3. These
ten times have ye reproached me. Dan. 1.20. In all matters of Wisdom he found
the^ ten times better than all the Magicians. Amos 6.9. And it shall come to
pass, if there remain ten men (...) one House, that they shall die. Zech. 8.23.
Ten (...) shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew. Rev. ^.10. Ye
shall have tribulation ten days.
Margin. So that, if there had been eleven o^ twelve, or if but nine or eight
divisions of the Roman Empire at the time that we assign, they would suffice to
verify this Prophecy, and to warrant us in our Application of it.

But since (as has bin said) these ten Divisions of the Roman Empire, more or
less, were to continue for above twelve hundred Years; yet cannot be expected
that they should last through all that period, without the usual fate of
Neighboring Kingdoms, who are wont to lose and get of one another, according
to the various Fortunes and Successes that attend them. Sometimes therefore we
may look to find them ten; sometimes eight; sometimes six; sometimes twelve;
sometimes fifteen or sixteen. And all this no ways inconsistent with the
Prophecy, where the Beast is still represented with ten Horns; this being the
fittest number to express them by, as being the most capable of an indefinite
acceptance, of any number thereabouts.

So likewise when the Angel tells us of the agreement of these ten Horns, or
Kingdoms and divisions of the Roman Empire to give their strength and power to
the Beast: We cannot think the Angel means, that they should all conspire
throughout the aforesaid period to promote the interest of the Beast. But it
suffices, that they all came to it by degrees; that from the very first this
plot was laid, and by the Policy of the Roman Bishops took effect within a
reasonable space of time, proportionable to the term their headship was to
last; and that all the Kingdoms and divisions of the Roman Empire have from
time to time so far submitted, and advanced the Interest and the Grandeur of
these Bishops, that it is rather to the astonishment of the World that they
have bin so much, then any prejudice to the verification of this Prophecy,
that they have bin no more obsequious to them. And thus much I thought good to
observe here by way of explication of the ten Horns, and of what the Angel has
foretold concerning them. But we may have occasion to say more hereafter in the
explication of the xiii Chapter.

In the mean time, that it may appear that this division of the Roman Empire
into these ten Kingdoms, was no casual or ordinary mutation, but that the hand
of God was eminently conspicuous in the effecting of it, to the end the
Scriptures might be fulfilled: I shall here subjoyn that observation of the
learned Dr. Heylin upon these passages, which we find in his description of
Italy: and the rather because he was a person, (who as far as may be gathered
from his Writings) did not think of any Accomplishment of this or any other
Prophecy in these great Mutatations. His words are these: Their sins, (says
he) that is, the sins of the Romans and Italians, and those other Western
parts, being ripe for Vengance; God sent the Barbarous Nations, as his
Executioners, to execute his Divine Justice on the impenitent Men, and made
them sensible, though Heathens, that it was God's work, they did, and not their
own, in laying such Afflictions on these Western Parts. Ipsi fatebantur non
suum esse quod facerent, agi enim se and perurgeri divino jussu, as Salvian
that Godly Bishop does inform us of them. On this impulsion the Vandals did
acknowledge that they first wasted Spain, and then harried Africa, and at the
same time did Attila the Hun insert into his Royal Titles the style of Malleus
Orbis, and Flagellum Dei; acknowledging thereby his own apprehension of some
special and extraordinary calling to this public Service. Nay, as Jornandes
does report, some of these Barbarous People did not stick to say, That they
were put on by some Heavenly Visions, which did direct them to the Work which
they were to do. In prosecution of which, in less time then the compass of
eighty years, this very Italy (though anciently the strength and seat of that
Empire) was seven times brought almust to Desolation by the Fire and Sword of
the Barbarians.

And thus much I thought good to advertise the Reader of concerning the
wonderful Providence of God, in the ordering and disposing of these events. For
it is very apt to persuade any considering person, that God had a more than
ordinary concern in this so strange a work; and what can that more probably be
thought to have bin, than the accomplishment of his Word? For it is certain
that this Prophecy we are treating of, had a great and signal verification and
accomplishment in it.

Having thus noted the precise time (as near as a matter of this nature is
capable of) when the Roman Empire began to be divided into ten Horns or
Kingdoms, and when the full number of them came to be consummate; which
appears to have bin done within the space of Forty six Years (a very short
time for the effecting of so great an alteration in that potent Monarchy) let
us now return to that great City we were speaking of, to see if we can find
therein another Head, to be a Successor to the former King in the supreme
Authority of this once entire, but now divided and ten-horn'd Kingdom.

And here it is to be observed, that when the Roman Empire came to be divided
into ten Horns, or Kingdoms, he that is master but of one of these Kingdoms,
though it were the most considerable of them all, yet can he not be accounted
any more than a Horn, and therefore not the Head that we are seeking for. For
this Head we now speak of, is not the Head of any one Kingdom only, but of the
whole Beast or Kingdom, as it stands divided into ten Horns, or lesser
Kingdoms. For beside the ten Horns, there was to be a seventh or last Head to
whom the Horns should give their power and strength, ver. 13. So that as all
the other six foregoing Heads, had been the Heads of the whole Roman Empire
then entire, so might this last Head also be a kind of general or universal
Head, by the consent or favor of the ten partial or particular Princes.

And to make this yet more clear, let us have recourse to another instance much
like this in Dan. viii. where Alexander the Great, King of Macedon, and first
founder of the Grecian Empire, is typified by a great Horn: and though after
him Cassander succeeded in the Kingdom of Macedon, yet because the Empire of
Alexander was then divided into four Horns or smaller Kingdoms, whereof
Cassander's was but one, he is not reckoned in the same account with Alexander
for succeeding him, in his Seat Imperial, and Title of King of Macedon; but
because he was possessed of but a part of Alexander's Empire, the Scripture makes
no reckoning of his Kingdom, more than of any other of the four Horns or
smaller Kingdoms. When therefore, in our present case, the Roman Empire once
entirely governed by its Emperors and preceding Kings, was come to be divided
into ten Horns or Kingdoms, as was foretold it should: no Man succeeding them
whether in the Imperial Seat or Title, so long as he possesses but one of the
ten Horns or Kingdoms, can be reckoned with the former Emperors as the Head,
but only as a Horn or smaller Kingdom.

And now by this time we have made our way so plain to this our last discovery,
that I suppose that I shall meet with very few Readers, though never so
inexpert almost in these affairs, but can resolve me this Question, viz. Who it
was, that having his Imperial Seat, or ordinary residence in the City of Rome
was Successor to the Christian Roman Emperors, (at what time that once mighty
Empire came to be divided into ten Horns or lesser Kingdoms,) in the Headship
or Supremacy not of any Horn or smaller Kingdom, but in General of the Roman
Empire; and to whom those Horns or partial Kings by voluntary Contribution (as
it were) did give their Power and Strength. If thou art a Protestant, I know
partly what thou will say; and if thou art a Romanist, I know partly what thine
own Conscience will suggest to thee, That it was the Pope or Bishop of Rome.

And surely thou art not much mistaken in thy Judgment of him. For he it was
who for some years before this time, but especially under the gentler
Government of the Christian Emperors, had been contending earnestly for this
Supremacy, and laying the foundation of his Greatness, by encroaching on the
Christian Churches. But while the Empire flourished, and the Emperors had
their residence in the City of Rome, they so obscured the Glories of their
Bishop that he was never but an Underling in comparison of them.

But now about the Year four hundred and ten, when Rome was sacked and set on
Fire; at what time six of the ten Horns began to come upon the Stage: that the
seventh or last Head might show it self in Rome together with them, (see by how
wonderful a Providence these things have happened) Honorius the then Emperor
betook himself to Ravenna; (his Successors following his example) and (as it
were in token of their future Greatness) he left the ancient Seat of Empire to
the Roman Bishops. From which time forward the Roman Empire still declined,
till about the Year four hundred fifty six it was utterly ruined, and those few
Emperors that succeeded were of no account. But for the Roman Bishop he was
still rising as the Empire was declining. Insomuch that Leo who presided in the
Roman See even in that very year 456, wherein (as we have said) the ten Horns
were risen and the Roman Empire ruined, is found to have boasted in his Sermon
de Apostolis, That the Temporal Government of the Roman Emperors was changed
into the power of Roman See. It has not bin my happiness yet to get a sight of
Pope Leo's Sermons: but this passage I find quoted in Bishop Morton's Cathelick
Appeal for Protestants, Lib. 2. Cap. 5 Sect. 10. in these very words; In cuj^
(viz. Romanae) sedis potestatem fuit Tem^ porale illud Imperium (speaking of
the whole Imperial Authority) commutatum, ut author est Leo Papa, Sermon de
Apostolis. Which Testimony of Pope I eo himself, about this change of
Government that was made about his time in Rome, and in the Roman Empire, I
look upon to be of no small moment in the business we are treating of.

But further yet; The Roman Bishop much about that very time was first
acknowledged by a General Council, holden at Chalcedon (where were present
Martianus the Greek Emperor himself in Person; and of Bishops and Reverend
Fathers, from all parts of the World, six hundred and thirty) CAPUT
ECCLESIARUM, or the Head of the Churches.

This we may learn from De Romans Pont. Lib. 3. Cap. 3.5. Haec sententia.
Belarmin himself, who tells us, That the Greek Emperor Phocas, was not the
first that called the Pope the Head of the Churches; but that Justinian had
done the same long before; and before him also the Council of Calcedon in an
Epistle to Leo the then Bishop of Rome. Thus far the Cardinal derives that
title, and no further. From whence we gather that he could not fetch it
further: for if he could, it had bin much more pertinent to his purpose to have
done it.

And though he did not at the first enjoy this new acquired Headship without
much opposition and contention especially from the Churches of Constantinople
and Ravenna; yet did he nevecease from grasping after it, till he became not
the Head only, but the Terr^ of the Churches; nor of these only, b^^ of Princes
too, and Emperors, and wh^ ever else would venture to oppose hi^.

An early Instance we have of this (...) the strife that happened between the
Gr^^^ Emperor Philippicus, and Pope Const^^tine, 1. about the matter of Images^
the Emperor (about the Year 710) commanding them to be pulled down, be^ cause
they were abused to Idolatry, an^ the Pope utterly refusing to obey; an^ not
only so, but (that he might make a clear experiment of his Headship and
Supremacy even over Emperors and Kings themselves) he set up more Images in
opposition to him, in the Portico of St. Peter, and forbad the use of the
Emperor's Name and Title in any Public Writings or Coins.

The same Command was not long after renewed by Leo 3. upon which says
Onuphrius, Gregory the second, then Pope, took away the small remainder of the
Roman Empire from him in Italy. And Sigonius more expressly, that he not only
excommunicated the Emperor, but absolved all the People of Italy from their
Allegiance, and forbad the payment of any To this purpose, Petavius an Author
of great account in the Roman Church, l. 7. c. 8. p. 372. part. pri. Ratio
Temp. speaking of the Contest between Leo Isaur. and Greg. the 2d says of this
latter, Romae and quicquid Italiae reliquum erat, a Graecorum abstraxit imperio
tributaque it is ultra pendere prohibuit.
Tribute to him: whereupon the Inhabitants of Rome, Campania, Ravenna, and
Pentapolis, i. e. the Region about Ancona, immediately rebelled, and rose up in
opposition to their Magistrates, whom they destroyed. At Ravenna, Paulus, the
Emperor's Lieutenant or Exarch was killed; At Rome, Peter the Governor had his
Eyes put out; In Campania Exhileratus, and his Son Hadrian, were both murdered
by the People of Rome; and not content with this, he writ a Letter to the
Emperor full of the greatest Reproaches imaginable.

And that the Pope was he that drew the People off from their obedience to the
Emperor, is not only affirmed by the Greek Historians, Theophanes, and
Zonaras; but by those also of the Church of Rome. Sigibert says, that Gregory
the 2d finding the Emperor incorrigible, he made Rome, Italy, and all the West
to revolt from him, and forbad his Tributes. The same is affirmed by Ott^
Trisingeneis, Conradus Vspergensis, Hi^ronymus Rubeus, and others who cannce be
suspected of any enmity to the Roman Church.

And (to show his Story to be every way pertinent to our present purpose) it is
well observed by Hadrianus Valesius, That the Pope durst not thus have
affronted the Emperor in confidence of his own Strength, but by a precarious
Power, and under the Protection of a Private Correspondency which he held at
that time with Charles Martel, whose Honor and Arms were the greatest in these
Western parts. Having therefore strengthened his Interest against both, the
Emperor his known enemy, and the Lombards that were at best but unfaithful
friends, he makes what advantage he can of the Places that owed Subjection to
the Emperor, to make up the Patrimony of the Church (as Valerius observes)
particularly of Sutrium; but Sigonius faith, The People not only east off the
Emperor, but did swear to be faithful to the Pope.

Not long after the Pope takes upon him to authorize Pepin Son of the said
Charles Martel to depose his lawful King Childeric, and usurp his Kingdom; and
when this was done, he was afterward absolved by the Pope from his Oath of
Fidelity, with all the Nobles and People. And thus poor King Childeric had his
Poll shaven, and was thrust into a Monastery, Pepin succeeding by the Pope's
Authority.

And further; That the Pope might make the clearest demonstration of his
Headship in the World; having thus exalted himself above the Emperors of
Greece, deposed the King of France, and set up Pepin in his room, with some
such notable exploits: that he might show himself the very source and fountain
of all Power and Greatness in the Roman Empire, he undertakes upon his own
Authority to create a Roman Emperor, as Bellarmine asserts upon the testimony
of no less then three and thirty Authors, some of them Historians, some Popes,
some Emperors themselves. And since the Roman Emperor (as they call him,
though indeed he be but magninominis umbra, a shadow of that great name) is now
become the Popes creature, we cannot expect that the Emperor should have very
much observance from him. And it fell out accordingly; for the Emperor owning
his Imperial Crown and Dignity to the Pope, he never could be quiet till he not
only has absolved the Popes from their Allegiance to him: but was at length
constrained himself to swear, Cerem. Romans Charta 21. ad quaecunque fidelitatem
juramenta.

Cerom. Romans Charta 21 Lib. 5.


quamcunque fidelitatem, all kind of fealty to the Pope, ^ere he could be
received into Rome.

Nor is this all; but further yet the Pope constrains him truly and openly to
declare that he has no right in Rome, and that he will stay no longer there
then only during the Popes pleasure; and in all humility, to request his Crown
at his Holiness's hand. Insomuch that the Popes have maintained and affirmed
both by the Authority of their Decrees, and by open force of Arms, that they
were Superiors to the Emperors, who were their Vassals, and held their Empire
by Fealty and Liege Homage from them; that they were Monarchs of the whole
Universe, and direct Lords of all the World. By which Right, so soon as any
Countries of the newfound World were discovered, they blushed not to give them
in Feoffe, and divide them among Kings, as the Patrimony of St. Peter; as
witness also these words, which they are wont to use in the Investiture of
Popes, Cerem. Romans l. 1. Cap. 2.
I invest thee with the Popedom, ut presis Vrbi and Orbi, to command over the
City and the whole World. Lastly, that of right, it belonged unto them to
invest and Degrade, to Ordain and Depose Emperors and Kings at their pleasure.

Nor do we hear of any higher Office the Roman Emperor (as they please to style
him) has had in Rome these many years, than to hold the Popes Stirrup when he
mounteth or alighteth from his Horse; or to sit at the Popes Feet, Ibid. l. 1.
Chart. 21, 22, 26, 54, 59, 87
or to give him Water to wash his Hands; or to hold up his Train at Mass; or in
collation to present him with a Napkin. For this is with the Pope a general
Maxim, Nemini ominino mortalium reverentiam facit, Ibid lib. 3. Sect. 1. Fol.
120.
He does Reverence to no Man, neither by rising manifestly, nor by bowing of
the Head, nor by uncovering it: only to the Emperor of the Romans, the Pope
being set, after he has kissed his Feet and his Hand, he rises a little and
receives him to kiss with the mutual embracement of Charity.

And when the Pope rides in solemn manner about the City, Ibid. Chart. 140,
141, 150.
mounted on a white Horse sumptuously Caparason'd, his Horse is led by the hand
of an Emperor, or a King, or the greatest Person there present; and he himself
Gorgeously Apparelled in Scarlet, wears a Fiara or Diadem on his Head,
adorned with a Triple Crown, which they commonly call, Regnum, Kingdom, in
token say they, of his Supreme Dignity, both Sacerdotal and Imperial. And this
I look upon a sufficient demonstration of the Popes Headship or Supremacy in
the Roman Empire. For if any Emperor or King be Head, I would feign know who is
the Pope's Groom, or Page, or Footman.

But we need the less to labor in this Argument, because the Romanists
themselves have done it so abundantly to our hands. For it would grieve ones
Heart to see how Bellarmin and Baronius have sweat in large Voluminous Works,
to magnify the greatness of their Bishop, and unawares to prove him Antichrist.

But let any Man show, if he be able, wherever any Pope, before the Emrour
Honorius his time, or indeed for some years after, (for the Popes did not
presently arrive at the height of their affected Grandeur) deposed any Emperor,
whether Heathen, Arrian, or Eutichian Persecutor, or absolved their Subjects
from their Allegiance to them, or took away any part of their Demesnes from
them, or violently opposed their Edicts, or put them upon any serrvile Offices,
like those wherewith they honor the now Roman Emperors. But if this cannot be
done, we must conclude, That before Honorius his time, (who left the Seat
Imperial to the Pope) the Pope was never Head in Rome, or in the Roman Empire:
but since that time he is, and has declared it abundantly to all the World;
and we have seen it evidently fulfilled in him, how all the Princes of the
Roman Empire, since it came to be divided, have truckled under him, and
submitted in a shameful measure their Royal Diadems and Scepters to him.
Wherefore the Bishop of Rome is that very seventh or last Head of the Roman
Beast or Kingdom, who was to appear upon the Stage, together with the ten Horns
or smaller Kingdoms, in which the Roman Empire was to be divided, and to whom
those ten Kings were to give their Power and Strength.

And thus much of the seven Heads and eighth King, who successively have headed
the Roman Empire, and have had their Seat Imperial in the City of Rome, viz.
Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes, Dictators, Heathen and Christian
Emperors, and Popes. These were the eight several Forms of Supreme
Governments, which the Roman Empire has enjoyed, and besides it no other
Kingdom that has bin before it. Which though they were not so clearly revealed
to the Prophet Daniel, when this Kingdom was represented to him in Vision (for
it is typified by the four Beasts, Dan. vii.) yet it may ^e very well supposed
that he saw so much of these mutations, (though at a greater distance than St.
John, and therefore not so dictinctly) as thereupon he pronounces the fourth
Beast, to have bin diverse from all other Beasts. For certainly it were enough
to difference the Roman Kingdom, from all other Kingdoms in the World, that
continuing still to be the same Kingdom, and to have the Supreme Government in
the same People within the same City, it has bin subject to so many several
sorts of Kings or Supreme Governors.

But possibly it may be objected, that some of these were not Kings, and that
especially Consuls, Decemvirs, and Tribunes are very improperly called by that
name.

To this I answer, That they may very well be called Kings, for these Reasons.

1. Because the Supreme Government, which began in Kings, was devolved upon
every one of these successively, so that they all enjoyed the same power as
Kings.

2. Because the denomination of several sorts of things included under the same
general Head, (as these are all under the general notion of Supreme Governors)
may very well be taken A priori, usitatiori, vel digniori; from the former, the
more usual, or more worthy of them. And upon this score it is, that when we
address our selves to a whole Congregation, we call them altogether Brethren,
taking no notice of the inferior Sex.

3. Because the names of Kings and Kingdoms are used in such a lattitude, as to
comprehend all sorts of State sand Supreme Governors, as when the Tempter is
said Mat. IV. to have showed our Savior all the Kingdoms of the World, by
Kingdoms are meant all sorts of Supreme Governments, whether Monarchieal,
Aristocratical, or Democratical. So the Roman Empire is called in Dan. vii. the
fourth Kingdom, and is there typified by the fourth Beast, which with the other
three, are interpreted four Kings, although the Roman Kingdom has not bin
governed by Monarchs only, but by Consuls, Decemvirs, and Tribunes; the general
name of King and Kingdom including all the other sorts of Supreme Governors.
Thus also, where it is said, Psalm. 72.10, 11. The Kings of Tarshish and of the
Isles shall bring Presents: the Kings of Sheba, and Seba shall offer Gifts; Yea
all Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him. Where it
would be very strange to understand Kings in the strictest sense, for Monarchs
only; especially since by all Kings are meant all Nations, without any
difference or distinction of their forms of Government. Many other places of
Scripture might be produced to this purpose, as Psalm. 89.27. Psalm. 102.15. but
I will not give my self a needless trouble in a thing so common, and so obvious
to every eye.

But it may be, it will further be objected, That Rome had enjoyed more sorts
of Supreme Governments than five, and all of them fallen before St. John's
time. For there had bin also a Triumvirate managed by the joint Forces and
Counsels of Augustus, Lepidus, and Antonius. But this lasting but a very little
while, and being but the passage to the greatness of Augustus, and, which is
more observable, being only an oppression of the Commonwealth, and not a
Government established by the consent of the Senate, and the People of Rome, as
all the other five had bin, it ought not in any reason to be numbered with them.
And this I look upon as a sufficient Account of those five Kings that were
fallen: because the Angel does not descend to any particularities concerning
them, but only says in general words, that five were fallen. And so much for them.

But because the main stress of our Argument depends upon the right
interpreting of these seven Kings, and particularly of the sixth of them,
(which was then reigning when this Vision was presented to St. John) whether he
were a single King, or the whole Order and Succession of the same kind of
Kings: We shall therefore in particular demonstrate further concerning this
sixth King, together with the seventh King, who is not typified by any Head,
that it cannot be meant of any two particular Kings, but of as many Orders and
Successions of them.

For it is certain that this Vision was showed to St. John when Rome was
governed by Heathen Emperors, and particularly in Domitian's Reign, no Author
affirming it to have bin later, that I know of. If therefore Domitian were the
sixth King then reigning; Nerva must be the other, who was not then come, and
when he came, was to continue but a little while; and the Beast which was, and
is not, and is interpreted the eighth or last King, will happen on it to be the
Emperor Trajanus, who reigned about the beginning of the second Century. But
the Angel tells us, that together with the Beast, the Roman Empire was to be
divided into ten Horns, or smaller Kingdoms, which were to give their Power and
Strength unto the Beast. But these ten Horns did not arise till above three
hundred years after Trajan's time; and therefore cannot the sixth and seventh
Kings be understood of any two single Kings apart from other of the same Order;
but of the whole Order and Succession of the Roman Emperors, Heathen first, and
then Christian; according as we have before declared. And consequently the five
that were fallen, must be such too, to wit, not five single Kings, but five
Orders or Successions of five several sorts of Kings. And therefore they must
needs be those that I have named; or if any Man can assign five other such, he
shall have my free consent.

CHAP. II. A Refutation of Bellarmin 's Exposition of the Angel's
Interpretation of the Vision, Rev. xvii.
AND now I cannot imagine what to add, or what can be desired further, in
confirmation of this Truth, than to show how unsuccessfully that great and
learned Champion of the Church of Rome, Cardinal Bellarmin, has endeavored
another manner of explication of this Vision, and Interpretation. This Learned
Author then, to do the Popes a kindness, has thus explained, (or, if you
please, obscured) the Angel's meaning. John (says he De Pont. Romans Lib. 3.
Chap. 5. Sect. Denique Joannes, cap. 15. (potius 17. Apoc.) describit bestiam
cum septem capitibus, and december cornubus, super quam mulier quaedam sedebat,
and explicat mulierem esse urbem magnam, quae sedet super septem colles; i. e.
Romani septem capita esse seprem illos montes, and etiam septem Reges, quo
numero intelliguntur omnes Roman^ Imperatores; december Cornua, dicit, esse december
Reges, qui uno tempore simul regnabunt; and ne putemus hos fore Romanos Reges,
addit, quod hi reges odeo habebunt Fornicatiam, and desolatam facient, quia
inter se ita divident Romanum Imperium, ut illud penitus destruant.
) in the xviith Chapter of the Revelation describes a Beast with seven Heads,
and ten Horns, upon which Beast a certain Woman sat: and he explains the Woman
to be the great City which sits upon seven Hills, that is, Rome: the seven
Heads to be those seven Mountains, and also seven Kings, by which Number are
understood all the Roman Emperors. He says, that the ten Horns are ten Kings
which shall reign together at the same time. And lest we should think that
these should be Roman Kings, he adds, that these Kings shall hate the Whore,
and make her desolate, because they shall so divide the Roman Empire among
themselves, that they shall utterly destroy it. Thus far Bellarmin.

But never was an Exposition in the World so huddled up together, as this is.
The Angel tells us that the seven Heads are seven Kings: five, says he, are
fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come, and when he comes he must
continue a short space. And the Beast which was, and is not, he is the eighth
King, and is of the seven, and goes into Perdition. Now by this number of
seven Kings, are understood says Bellarmin, all the Roman Emperors; and De
Romans Pont. Lib. 3. Cap. 5.
he accounts all those Roman Emperors, who have any ways enjoyed that Title
from Julius Caesar's time to this present day; and God only knows how many such
Emperors may come after. So that by his reckoning we cannot account all the
Roman Emperors fewer in number than one hundred and thirty, I speak within
compass. Now is it not very strange that seven Kings, should be put to signify
one hundred and thirty? For let us grant that seven, a certain number, may be
put for an uncertain: yet who ever heard that so small a number as seven, has
bin put for so great a one, as has bin the number of all the Roman Emperors?
This therefore is one great Absurdity, but not comparable to those which follow.

For if by these seven Kings are meant all the Roman Emperors, then why does
not the Cardinal proceed to show us, which be those five that were fallen;
which is the one that was; which the other that was not then come, who when he
was come, should continue but a short space, and which is the Beast that was,
and is not, who is said to be the eighth King, and yet to be of the seven? All
which particulars of the Angel's Interpretation the Cardinal has thought fit to
smother in profound silence, lest the vanity and absurdity of his Exposition
should be too apparent and contemtible.

For he acknowledges more than once, De Verb. Dei. Lib. 1. Cap. 20 sect.
Deinde in isto Canone de Romans Pent. Lib. 3. Cap. 3. sect. Quinta opinio est.
That the Revelation was given in Domitian's Reign. Whereupon it will follow,
that if by the seven Kings are meant all the Roman Emperors, then by the five
Kings that were fallen, must be meant those eleven Emperors that had reigned
before Domitian; by the one, that then was, must be meant Domitian himself; by
the other, Nerva, successor to Domitian; and by the last King, who is the
Beast that was, and is not, must be meant all the Roman Emperors, to the number
at least of one hundred and seventeen. And is not this an admirable Exposition,
which in the same breath as it were, makes seven to signify one hundred and
thirty, and yet five of those seven to signify but eleven; one to signify but
one; and yet in the very next clause, one to signify one hundred and
seventeen? If this be to interpret Prophecies I wonder it should ever be
thought difficult to interpret them. And if any Man can make sense of this
Exposition, let him enjoy it for his pains. Certainly it was for mere shame
that Bellarmin went no further in his application of these seven Kings; and if
we had not minded more the truth then good manners, we had not thus exposed it
to the World.

But I believe the Cardinal has committed a greater error yet against his own
Principles than possibly he might be aware of. For if the seven Kings typified
by the seven Heads of the Beast, be set to signify all the Roman Emperors, and
if the present Emperors be of that number, (as he himself would have them) then
are the present Roman Emperors typified by some one or other of the Heads. But
of the Beast here mentioned, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, it is said that
he was full of names of Blasphemy. And Rev. xiii. 1. it is said of the same
Beast, that he had upon his Heads (not on any one, but on all of them, for
there is none excepted) a name of Blasphemy. And therefore the present Roman
Emperors, if they be any of those seven Kings, which are typified by the seven
Heads, they also have this name of Blasphemy in common with the rest.

Neither will it here suffice to say, that it is only noted, that the Beast had
upon his Heads a name of Blasphemy, but not that he had the same upon all his
Heads; So that it will be true, if any of the Roman Emperors had it. This
answer will not serve. For the Christian Emperors have reigned near five times
as long again, as the Heathen Emperors had done. And therefore there is no
likelihood at all that the Spirit should say of the Heads in general, that they
had the name of Blasphemy, without distinguishing of them, if either he had
understood by the seven Heads, the whole Order of the Roman Emperors (as
Bellarmin reckons them,) or if the present Emperors be not, and have not bin
guilty of this Blasphemy in common with the Heathen Emperors.

As for what the Cardinal adds concerning the ten Horns, or ten Kings, which
says he, shall reign together at the same time, the Angel tells us more
precisely that they should reign together with the Beast, or seventh and last
Head. But Bellarmin having not thought fit to tell us which of the Roman
Emperors are this Beast, or seventh and last Head: he does not say as the Angel
does, that the ten Horns should reign together with the Beast, but only that
they should reign together at one time. And thus again he has very pitifully
shuffled in the most meterial point of this Prophecy. And this he has done,
lest because he has expounded the seven Kings, to be all the Roman Emperors, we
should suspect the present Roman Emperors to be that Antichristan Beast, whom
the Angel calls the eighth and last of those Kings; for if six of them were
come in St. John's time, and the other should continue but a little while; the
eighth and last, who is the Antichristian Beast, must needs be come by this, or
he is never to be looked for. Since therefore by the seven Kings are meant all
the Roman Emperors, and Domitian must be the sixth; Nerva must be the other,
who was to continue but a short time; and all the Emperors succeeding Nerva,
and by consequence the new Roman Emperors, the Popes Creatures and Disciples,
must be the Antichristian Beast, or the eighth and last of those Kings.

As for what he adds, concerning the ten Horns, that they should not be Roman
Kings, because they should hate the Whore, (i.e. the City of Rome) and make her
desolate: it is as unintelligible as the rest. For, does he mean that they
shall not be Kings in Rome? Who ever said it? Or does he mean, that they should
not possess each one his portion of the Roman Empire? Himself confesses it Or
lastly does he mean, that none o^ them should be, or should be called a Roman
King? How does he prove it? He says, they shall not be Roman Kings, because
they shall hate the Whore, (i.e. the City of Rome) and make her desolate. But
this they may do, though any one, or all of them should be, or (as Bellarmin
himself expresses it) should be called Roman Kings, when once they come to be
enlightened, and to perceive how that adulterous City has poisoned, and
infected, and besotted them with her abominable Cup of Spiritual Fornication.

As for what he further adds concerning these ten Kings, proving that they
should not be Roman Kings, because they shall so divide the Roman Empire among
them, as utterly to destroy it: which he gathers from what is said of them Rev.
17.16. These shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate: it is to be observed,
that these ten Kings were not to bring this desolation upon that whorish City,
till after that they had given their power unto the Beast, (who was to be the
last Head or King in that City) and had made war with the Lamb, and the Lamb
had overcome them. For till this, it is said, that God should put into their
minds to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their Kingdom to the
Antichristian Beast; until by their warring with the Lamb, and being overcome
by him, the words of God should be fulfilled, ver. 17. for so it had bin
foretold of them, at v. 13. that they should have one mind, and should give
their power and strength unto the Beast; that they should make War with the
Lamb, and that the Lamb should overcome them. And being thus worsted by the
Lamb, when they should come to see their Error, they should hate the Whorish
City, the Metropolis of the Beast, that had seduced them, and in revenge of her
impiety, should make her desolate, and naked, and should eat her flesh, and
burn her with Fire. These ten Kings therefore might be Roman Kings for all
their laying of that City desolate: because they should not do it, till after
they had spied their Error in confederating with her.

But lastly, If these ten Kings shall so divide the Roman Empire among them as
utterly to destroy it; how can it then be said, that they should give their
Power and Strength, and Kingdom to the Roman Emperors? For if by the seven
Heads or Kings be meant (as Bellarmin tells us) all the Roman Emperors; then
must the seventh of those Kings be some, or one at least, of the Roman
Emperors. But it is manifest from, ver. 11. that the seventh of those Heads or
Kings, is the Beast that was, and is not; to whom, it is said in the next verse
but one, that the ten Kings should give their Power and Strength, (nay, and
their Kingdom also, as is said a little after.) If then these ten Kings shall
give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom, to the Roman Emperors; how shall
they so divide the Roman Empire among themselves, as utterly to destroy it? And
thus much of the Cardinal's Exposition, which indeed is utterly misbecoming the
Judgment of so great a Disputant: but we must pardon this, and many other
suchlike failings, to the weakness of his Cause. For certainly it cannot be
ascribed to any other thing, that Bellarmin, a Man so learned, so ripe of
Judgment, quick of Wit, and skilful in the Art that he professed, should be so
utterly puzzled and confounded in this Argument above all others (though in
others also not a little) even to the grossest and most palpable effects of
Dotage and Stupidity.

CHAP. III. The Opinion of H. Grotius and Dr. Hammond, touching the sense of
the Angel's Words, considered, and rejected.
HAving thus acquitted my self of Bellarmin's Exposition of this passage, who
may well be thought our greatest Adversary in this Argument; I cannot pretermit
(tho I would feign have pretermitted it) that Exposition which Hugo Grotius,
and after him the learned Dr. Hammond, (who has taken the pains to perfect and
digest the Posthumous and imperfect Notions of the former) have offered in
their Comments on the Revelation: to the examination of which their Exposition,
I am the more obliged, because it is not only contrary to that which I have
hitherto asserted, but also the Authors and Propugners of it are Men of great
esteem in the Reformed Churches, who cannot reasonably be thought to have
invented, and asserted it in favor of the Church of Rome, but only for the
evidence of the truth, which they conceived it carrys with it.

This Reverend Author then, in his Premonition to the Revelation, and in his
Paraphrase and Annotations upon the xviith Chapter of that Book, confessing the
great City, situate upon seven Mountains, to be Rome, does thus expound the
seven Heads, which the Angel interprets to be seven Kings; These seven Kings,
says he, are eight Roman Emperors, namely, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho,
Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus and Domitian. The five that were fallen when this
Vision was interpreted, were Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius. The
one which was then reigning, was Vespasian; the other, not then come, who
should continue but a little while, was Titus; and the Beast that was, and is
not, who, as the Angel tells us, is the eighth King, and is of the seven, etc.
was Domitian. The ten Horns or Kings, who, says the Angel, have received no
Kingdom as yet, but receive Power as Kings one hour with the Beast, were (says
Dr. Hammond) ten Kings of the Barbarous Nations bordering upon the Roman
Empire, viz. Goths, Vandals, etc.

But against this way of Explicating this Prophecy, there are so many and so
great Reasons, that I know not where to begin, or where to make an end with
them. For,

First, It is a notable prejudice against this Exposition, that this Prophecy,
so punctually interpreted by the Angel, as is no other Vision in the
Revelation, and having bin fulfilled in Domitian's Reign, that is, about one
Thousand and six hundred years ago, should never yet have bin interpreted of
Domitia^ till this present age; for it is evident, that Hugo Grotius was the
first discoverer of it.

But what then is become of that known Maxim in these cases, viz. Iren. Lib. 4.
Cap. 43.
That Prophesies, before they come to be fulfilled, are difficult and obscure,
but afterward they come to be familiar and intelligible? And if this Prophecy
so interpreted by the Angel, has not bin understood in sixteen hundred years,
that it has bin fulfilled; how can we think that any other Vision not
interpreted has bin understood? But Dr. Hammond speaks in general of the Book
of the Revelation, that it was written for the comfort of the Christians of
those times, while they were daily exercised with Persecutions. But alas! what
comfort from such Prophesies, and particularly from this Vision we are now
treating of, if none of those that were concerned in them, could attain their
meaning? I suppose it therefore ablolutely necessary for the credit of this
Exposition, that it be shown, that in those early days of Christianity, the
Church of God, which was so nearly concerned in this Prophecy, did understand
it as the Doctor has explained it. For else indeed 'twere a great disparagement
to the Prophecy it self, if having bin fulfilled these sixteen hundred years,
although it be so punctually interpreted by the Angel, yet all that while the
Church could never understand it. But

2. If we should let this worthy Author have his way, yet when all is done, he
makes so cold, so flat a story of this greatest and most noble Prophecy of all
the Revelation, as it seems to be by that ceremonious entrance, apt to raise
ones expectation, which is prefixed to it at the beginning of the Chapter: by
that magnificent description which is made of the Vision it self, in the
following Verses: and by that Divine Interpretation which the Angel has
subjoined to it: that I know not how his application of it to Domitian should
(I say not pass for current, but even) admit of an Excuse.

For what think we is the main thing that he affirms to have bin represented to
St. John in this Vision? Nothing but Rome in great Pomp and Splendour, under
that Heathen Persecuting Emperor Domitian, whom he calls the Beast, wonderfully
addicted to Idolatry, and drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and of the
Martyrs of Jesus. And might not any Man of prudent foresight have seen as much
without a Vision, living at that time, wherein he supposes this Prophecy to
have bin written by St. John, to wit, after that Domitian had given an
experiment of his temper, while he administered the Government for his Father
Vespasian, who was then leading an Army into Judea: might not any one in such
Circumstances as these have very probably conjectured, that Domitian would have
his turn again after his Father's, and his elder Brother's Death, and that he
would then show himself what he had bin before, an enemy to the Christian Faith.

As for the ten Horns that were to receive Power as Kings one hour with the
Beast Domitian; he complains that he cannot make that out for want of Histories
to inform him in these Particulars. What was it then St. John was carried into
the Wilderness for to see? The Heathen Roman Beast arrayed in Scarlet? He was so
before. Or that great Ctty decked with Jewels, and notorious for her Idols?
When was she otherwise? Or drunken with the Blood of Saints? She had bin so in
Nero's time but just before. Or went he thither to behold Domitian coming to
the Throne, and Persecuting Christians? Yet all this while here is no great
matter of admiration, that Domitian, an Heathen Man, and a Son of the Emperor
that then reigned, should come at last to that Dignity, and persecute the
Christian Faith. But the Angel tells us, ver. 8. that they that dwell upon the
Earth should wonder, (whose names were not written in the Book of life, etc.)
when they behold the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is: that is, according
to the Doctor's Exposition, it should be matter of great astonishment to all
that were not Christians, when they beheld Domitian, who was in Power at Rome,
while his Father went into Judea; and is not now, his Father having reassumed
it to himself, and yet is a private person. This therefore being every way so
lame and short-sighted a business, as it is thus made out, we cannot in any
reason think it to be the meaning of this glorious Vision, here presented to
our Apostolical Prophet by the Ministry of an Angel. But,

3. As these Authors have ordered the matter, the Angel's Interpretation is
very insignificant; because he has not noted the precise time, when this Vision
was interpreted: for if the seven Kings be so many single Emperors, to what
purpose is it to tell us, Five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come,
etc. without assuring us which of them is that one, of whom the Angel tells us,
that he is? For it is most certain, that if this Vision were not interpreted in
Vespasian's Reign, of whom they interpret these words of the Angel, One is,
meaning that Vespasian then reigned, when this Vision was interpreted: there
cannot be a word of truth, no, nor of common sense in all their Exposition. For
then it cannot be said of the five that were fallen, that they were Claudius,
Nero, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius; of the one, that is, that he was Vespasian;
or that Titus was the other, not then come, etc. Nay, if this Vision were not
interpreted not only in Vespasian's Reign, but in that very point of it which
happened after his return from Judea, and a reassumption of the Government from
his Son Domitian to himself: it cannot be said of Domitian, as they distinguish
of him very subtly, that he was an Emperor, and is not now an Emperor, and
yet is a private person. Since therefore the knowledge of the precise time,
when this Vision was interpreted, is so necessary to the certain understanding
of it, according to their way of explicating it; and yet the Angel amongst many
other particularities, has utterly omitted this so necessary a business here,
and so usual in other Prophecies, where perhaps it is not altogether so
necessary: we cannot but think that there is a greater latitude of time to be
allowed in the explication of this Prophecy, and must be forced to reject this
Exposition as a reproach to the Angel's interpretation.

But hold a little, it may be the Doctor can assure us that this Vison was
interpreted by the Angel, at that very point of Vespasian's Reign, which makes
for his purpose, and which we have already noted. But there is no such matter.
For in his Premonition to the Revelation he is very solicitous about this very
circumstance of the time, and can find but two Opinions of the Ancients (the
only competent Witnesses in this affair) concerning it; and both of them
equally inconsistent with this Exposition. The one is that of Ireneus, who
affirms St. John to have prophesied toward the end of Domitian's Reign. And if
so, it could not then be said of Domitian, that he was Emperor, and is not
Emperor. For if this Vision were interpreted in Domitian's Reign, then must
Domitian be the one that is; Nerva the other not yet come; Trajan the Beast
that was, and is not, etc. and Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, and Titus,
the five that are fallen.

But he has a pretty fetch for this: for he tells us, That by the end of
Domitian's Reign, may be meant the end of his former Reign while he reigned for
his Father Vespasian. But besides that this reflects upon the credit of
Ireneus, who makes no such distinction, and therefore should in all reason be
understood of Domitian's Reign, while he reigned for himself: yet for once let
this be granted, and let us see what can be made of it for the advantage of
this Exposition. For thus also Domitian cannot be the Beast, which was Emperor,
and is not Emperor; but he must be the one that is; Vespasian (after his
return) the other, not yet come, (although it is certain that Vespasian must
needs have bin come to the Imperial Dignity before he could depute Domitian in
his stead) and Titus must be the Beast that was, and is not, etc. And thus the
Exposition cannot stand if there be any truth in the Testimony of Irenaeus, who
affirms St. John to have prophesied toward the end of Domitian's Reign; whether
we understand it of his former Reign for Vespasian, or of his latter for
himself.

Although I cannot forbear to give the Reader notice that we have done this
Exposition no small favor, when we allow Domitian's Reign simply and
absolutely so called, to be interpreted of that Reign which he administered as
Vespasian's Deputy, and not rather of that other while he reigned for himself.
To which we may add that Domitian's Deputative authority was so short, that the
beginning and the end of it are hardly distinguishable, as to this matter of
St. John's Prophesying. For Vespasian leaving his Son Titus to besiege
Jerusalem, returned from his Expedition to Rome again in the first Year of his
Reign. Neither is there any Author, that affirms St. John to have bin
banished into the Isle of Patmos (where he received his Revelation, as he
himself testifies) at this time, or near it.

The Doctor therefore would feign take Sanctuary in the Testimony of
Epiphanius, who affirms St. John to have bin banished into Patmos by the
Emperor Claudius, and to have returned from his banishment in the Reign of the
same Emperor. And he makes so much of this Testimony, that he endeavor to
confirm it, and to disparage the contrary Testimony of Ireneus, by no les^ than
four Arguments. I will not here stand to examine his Arguments, but for once let
us suppose them to be una^swerable. If then St. John received be Revelation in
the Reign of Claudin^ how comes the Angel to say, That sw^ of the seven Kings
were then fallen? O^ rather, How come these Authors (...) expound them of
Claudius, Nero, Galla, Otho, and Vitellius, none of which were then fallen, and
four of them not yet come? How also could Vespasian be the one, that then
reigned? Or Domitian be the Beast, that was Emperor, and is not Emperor?
Nothing you see hits right, according to the Testimony of Epiphanius, and yet
the Doctor had much rather his Testimony should be credited, than that of
Ireneus, who affirms St. John, to have prophesied toward the end of Domitian's
Reign. Because, although both their Testimonies be very inconsistent with his
Hypothesis, yet he had rather make St. John, to have prophesied of a thing to
come, as it was in the Reign of Claudius, than of a thing past, or present, as
it must needs have bin, according to his Exposition, toward the end of
Domitian's Reign. For he makes the main of this Prophecy to have bin fulfilled
in Domitian.

But then, how does he salve up those great Absurdities, which we have shown to
follow upon supposal of the truth of Ephiphanius's Testimony? Why thus; If St.
John received his Vision in the Reign of Claudius, we may very well suppose him
to have committed it to writing in the Reign of Vespasian, after his return
from Judea. So that although he received the Vision before any of the Kings
were fallen, yet he wrote it not till the sixth of them was come. The Doctor
brings no Proof of this, but such a thing he supposes possible: and if it be
but possible, he will have it current.

But this which he here supposes in his Premonition, viz. That St. John
received his Visions in one Emperor's Reign, and committed them to writing in
another's; he seems to have forgotten by that time he was arrived at the
Exposition of the tenth Chapter of the Revelation. For there at ver. 4. we have
these words of St. John, And when the seven Thunders had uttered their voices,
I was about to write, and I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me, Write
them not. Upon which words the Doctor thus paraphraseth: And as I had before
written what I had seen and heard, so now I was about to do, etc. Whence it
appears, even from his own Confession, that St. John as soon as he had seen and
heard his Prophecies, committed them to writing. And therefore it is a little
vainly supposed by him, that St. John received his Prophecies in one Emperor's
Reign, and committed them to writing in another's.

But, if you please, let us suppose that St. John wrote some Prophecies so soon
as he had seen and heard them, but did not so in our present case: or that he
wrote them foul, so soon as he had seen and heard them, but did not write them
fair afterward. Now then let us examine upon this supposition how well this
explication will agree with those words of the Angel, which we have, Rev. xvii.
8. The Beast which thou saw, was, and is not; and again, The Beast which
was, and is not, and yet is; and again a little after, The seven Heads (says
the Angel) are seven Kings; five are fallen; one is; the other is not yet come;
and the Beast which was, and is not, he is the eighth, etc. That these are the
very words which the Angel spoke to St John, is affirmed by St. John, at ver.
7. Let us suppose then that the Angel interpreted this Vision toward the end
of Domitian's deputative Reign, while he reigned by Vespasian's Authority. But
how could it then be true of Domitian (for of him he understands it) what the
Angel says of the Beast, That he was, and is not, and yet is? for according to
the Doctor's Paraphrase the Angel's meaning must be this: Domitian was an
Emperor, and is not now an Emperor, and yet is a private Person. Which words,
supposing them to have been spoken toward the end of Domitian's former Reign,
can have neither sense, nor truth in them. For if Domitian then first reigned,
how could he mean of him, that he was an Emperor, and is not an Emperor, and
yet is a private Person. But if the Testimony of Epiphanius be true (which the
Doctor most contends for) viz. That St. John prophesied in the Reign of
Claudius, who is the first of the eight Kings; how can it be true what St. John
recites as the Angel's words, at ver. 10. Five are fallen, viz. Claudius, Nero,
Galba, Otho, and Vitellius; one is, viz. Vespasian? So that we must be forced
to admit either that the Angel did not exactly describe the time, or that St.
John has not set down the Angel's words, or lastly, that this exposition of
them is not good.

And indeed he saw full well, that with all that he could do, he could not make
the Time agree to his Hypothesis, for he as good as confesses it in his
Premonition, telling us, That in a matter of some uncertainty he may be
mistaken as to the particularity of Time. But it is evident, that whosoever is
mistaken in this circumstance of the Time, can make no sense at all of the
Angel's words, who has so punctually designed the Times, past, present, and to
come, throughout his whole Interpretation.

But it were pity to omit (and I had like to have omitted it) that excellent
Artifice, which the Doctor uses as his fourth and last Argument, to prove what
time this Vision was received in. For in his Premonition he proves that it was
received, or at least committed to writing at such time as he would have it,
because it will not else be applicable to those eight Emperors that he expounds
it of. So that he takes it for granted, that this Prophecy cannot be otherwise
interpreted than of those eight Kings, and therefore must have bin written at a
time agreeable. Which Argument, as it is an odd illogical way of reasoning: so
it can prove nothing but this, that the Doctor was so fond of this conceit,
that nothing could remove him from it.

Certainly therefore he imagined that there was some extraordinary agreement of
it with all other circumstances of this Prophecy, that he would needs retain it
in despite of all the aforementioned absurdities we have proved it guilty of.
We therefore come now to enter upon a further examination of particulars. And

1. From this Hypothesis the Doctor gives us no good account, why St. John was
carried by the Angel into the Wilderness (as is said Rev. xvii. 3.) to see this
Vision of the Woman. He seems to hint a Reason in his Paraphrase upon that
verse, viz. That he was carried into the Wilderness, as a fit place to
represent the Desolation that was to be expressed in this Vision. So that it
seems this Desolation (as he calls it) was to be expressed in the Vision, and
represented by the Wilderness. As if the place whither he was carried in Spirit
to see the Vision, were intended for a Type of that which is expressed in the
Vision. Now this were an excellent Reason why this Vision was represented in
the Wilderness, if it could be proved that the Wilderness (for it is mentioned
several times before in this Book) is used as a Type to represent a Desolation
by: and why St. John, having had so many mighty Desolations represented to him
both before and after this, was never called into the Wilderness to see any of
them. Since therefore the Doctor has not thought fit to clear this Point, which
yet is necessary for the explicating and confirming this Hypothesis, I can see
no reason it should be admitted. For indeed we have had mention of this Woman
before, Chap. xii. and also of her flying into the Wilderness. If any Man
thinks that, and this, two different Women, he ought to prove it: for I suppose
a better Reason cannot be given nor desired, why St. John was carried into the
Wilderness to see the Woman, than because the Woman was fled thither.

2. Upon the Doctor's Hypothesis no good Reason can be given why St. John at
the sight of this Woman, is said at v. 6. to have wondered with such great
admiration. Did he wonder at her Bravery, or at her Idolatry, or at her Enmity
to the Saints? Nothing of these was in those days any strange thing at all. And
St. John had seen so many strange things before, without any such expression of
his admiration, that we cannot think but that there is some particular reason,
why St. John is said to have bin stricken with such wonder and astonishment at
this Woman only in the Vision we are treating of. The plain reason therefore is
this (which, though it agrees exactly with our Exposition, as shall hereafter
be declared more at large, yet not at all with that which the Doctor gives us)
viz. That St. John wondered with great admiration to see that Woman, whom before
at Chap. xii. he had seen in Heaven clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under
her Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars, persecuted by the Dragon,
and despising all worldly things, and resisting unto blood for the Testimony of
Jesus: to see this Woman, I say now that she is come into the Wilderness,
glittering in such secular Pomp, arraied in Purple, bedecked with Jewels,
sitting upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, having seven Heads and ten Horns, (the
Beast that had persecuted her See Chap. xii. 3.
not long before) become a great Idolatress, making all the Kings of the Earth
drunken with the Wine of her Fornication, and her self with the blood of
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. And this so great, and so
supprising an alteration of this Woman, as it was the true, so it was a worthy
reason of the Prophets admiration and astonishment. But,

3. If we suppose with the Doctor, that the Woman here spoken of is old Heathen
Rome, there can no good account be given, why, though she were confessedly a
great Idolatress, yet should here be represented as having a golden Cup in her
hands full of Abominations, and filthiness of her Fornication, wherewith (as is
said ver. 2.) the Inhabitants of the Earth have bin made drunken. For by this
it should seem, that old Heathen Rome was a great promoter of her own Idolatry
amongst other Nations. Whereas it is manifest in the Histories of those times,
that Heathen Rome did rather receive her Idol-Worship from other Nations, than
impose her own upon them, even on those she conquered. For it has been
observed of the ancient Romans, that at their laying Seige to any City, they
made their first attempt by solemn invocation of its tutelar God's, that having
these propitious to them, they might obtain the easier Victory. Neither was it
ever heard, that ancient Rome intoxicated any other Nation with her Cup, she
having found, not made them Idol-Worshippers.

And of this we have a pregnant instance in the Jewish People; who being at
that time the only People that were not Idolaters, the Romans having conquered
them, did never yet impose their Superstitions on them, but permitted them the
free and quiet exercise of their own Religion. And though they went about, in
mere despite to Christianity, to make the Christians sacrifice to their Idols;
yet this was only an Attempt, and uneffected. So that I know not whether it may
truly be affirmed of any Nation under Heaven, that Heathen Rome has made them
drunken with her Fornication. This therefore the Doctor should have cleared
also, if it had bin possible, and given us sufficient convictions of it (and
particularly that Rome did so in Domitian's time, whom he makes the Beast she
sits upon) or else his Exposition cannot stand, though Rome were otherwise
never so addicted to Idolatry? But,

4. It does not well appear from the Analogy of Scripture, and the use of this
word [Whore] in Scripture-Prophecy, how it can be applied, (as here it is,
according to this Exposition) to old Heathen Rome. For she is called at ver. 1.
the great Whore that sits upon many Waters. But now in Scripture Prophecy,
no City, that I can find i^ ever called a Whore, but only God's own People,
when they have fallen from his Worship to Idolatry. And of these how often is it
said in Scripture tha^ they were a Whorish People, and tha^ they had committed
Whoredom wi^^ their Neighbour-Nations? But of no other People, no not of
Babylon herself, the great Metropolis of Idolatry, we do not find the like
expressions, at least we may be confident that it is no usual thing, if it be
any where to be found in Scripture.

The Reason is, because God's People are in Covenant with him, and there has a
kind of Conjugal Obligation past between them: which when his People break by
serving other God's, they act the part of an Adulteress, who violates the Faith
she plighted to her Husband. And this also is the reason which the Prophets
themselves have given us of this compellation; as you may see, Ezekiel. xvi. 8.
and again Chap. xxiii. 4. Jer. iii. 1. etc. Hos. ii. 2. Jer. iii. 20. And in
many other places of holy Scripture. Since then old Heathen Rome had never bin
in Covenant with God, nor reckoned as his peculiar People, either the holy
Spirit of Prophecy is very far departed from his usual phrase, in calling
Heathen Rome a Whore, or else the Doctor is very much mistaken in applying of
this name to Heathen Rome. And I cannot but observe here also, that he quite
forgets his usual method of interpreting Scripture-difficulties, in taking all
he says for granted, and not so much as offering to clear this point by any
single instance how this word is used otherwise.

5. The Doctor is alike wanting to his Cause, in the Exposition of the word
King, and that of Beast: which he ought to show us from like
Scripture-instances, to be applicable to single Kings apart from other of the
same line and order. But this he could not do, for I have proved already from
all the instances that we have in Scripture, that in Interpretations of
prophetic Visions, neither of these words is so used. Only a King when he is
typified by a single Horn, must signify a single King, as we have before
explained it. But besides that this is not applicable to our present case,
which speaks not of any single Horn or King, but of seven Kings together: it
had become the Doctor's learning to have shown us, wherever any single King
is typified by a Beast. But instead of this In his Annot. on Rev. xvii. Edit.
ult.
he tells us how this word, (...), Beast, is used in Julian's Satyr against the
Caesar's; who introduces the Emperor C. Caligula, under the notion of (...), an
evil Beast; and calls Domitian with a peculiar Epithet, to denote his cruelty
(such as was proverbially observed in Phalaris) (...), the Sicilian Beast; and
again, (...), the bloody Beast, exactly parallel (says the Doctor) to the
Scarletcoloured Beast in this place. But to cite a passage of Julian's Satyr,
to show the meaning of a Prophetic Type, in holy Scripture, is all one as if a
Man should go about to expound those words of our Savior, I am come to send
Fire on the Earth, of the natural Element of Fire; because it is so used in
Aristotle's Physics. And besides we may observe how well the Doctor has
improved that Satyr of Julian; for whereas Julian has introduced Domitian only
as a bloody Beast, the Doctor has so ordered the matter, that he has given him
ten Horns too, and if he had quoted another Satyr for the meaning of the Horns,
he would have made Domitian such a Monster as no Satyrist ever dreamed of. But,

6. The Doctor has given us no good account, why his eight Emperors are
typified by no more then seven Heads or Kings. Of this he seems to give us this
reason in his Paraphrase upon ver. 11. The Beast (says the Angel there) which
was, and is not, he is the eighth King, and is of the seven: that is, according
to the Doctor's Paraphrase, Domitian, who was Emperor, and is not Emperor, he
is the eighth, and is the Son of one of the seven, to wit, of Vespasian. But
then he should have shown, 1st, How, these words, (...), can signify, He is
the Son of one of the seven. And, 2dly. Why (upon supposal of this Exposition
to be valid) his eight Emperors are not rather typified by six, then by seven
Heads. For if Domitian be one of the seven Heads, because he was the Son of one
of them: then both Titus and Domitian might have bin included in but six Heads,
because they were both of them the Sons of the sixth Emperor, Vespasian. Or if
the reason, as the Doctor seems to intimate also, why these eight Emperors are
represented in the Vision by but seven Heads or Kings, be, because Domitian had
reigned for his Father, before he reigned for himself: this seems to be a
Reason, why they should rather have bin represented by nine, or ten, than by
seven Heads or Kings.

For by this means are made two several Reigns of Vespasian's (one before
Domitian's former Reign, as the Doctor calls it, and the other after;) and two
more of Domitian's, one for his Father, and the other for himself. And this is
the more observable, because the Doctor drives on this Notion so far, as to
interpret those words of Ireneus (...), toward the end of Domitians Reign, as
if it were meant of Domitian's Reign, while he reigned for his Father: Whereby
either the Reigns of Vespasian and Domitian must be confounded; or we must make
two several Reigns of Vespasian's, and two other of Domitian's. And thus we
have no good reason given us either way why these eight Emperors are typified
by but seven Heads or Kings. But,

7. Why are these eight Heathen Emperors, singled out from among their fellows,
that were both before and after them? And why must we begin to reckon them from
Claudius, or end them with Domitian? Or what need was there to have represented
these eight Emperors in the Vision, when there is nothing purposely said of any
of them, but Domitian only? Now the reason of this from our Hypothesis, is very
clear: for so the seven Heads or Kings, upon the Roman Beast or Empire,
representing its seven several sorts of supreme Governments, five whereof were
fallen in St. John's time, etc. will serve for a most incomparable and exact
distinction of the Roman Kingdom from all other Kingdoms in the World. And why
is any Beast particularly described, as this is here said to have had seven
Heads and ten Horns, but to distinguish it from other Beasts? and further,
since, (as has bin showed) none of these Heads is concerned in this Prophecy,
but the last: what can the mention of the six others signify, but only to
define this Beast, and to distinguish him from other Kingdoms? But nothing of
this is applicable to the Doctor's Exposition. Only he seems to give this
reason in his Paraphrase, why we should begin to reckon the eight Kings from
Claudius, because he was the first of the Roman Emperors that had to do with
Christians. But had Tiberius then nothing to do with Christians, in whose Reign
our Savior Christ himself was put to Death? Or was Domitian the last Roman
Emperor that had to do with Christians? But of this enough.

And now although the Doctor seems to me to have done the part of a very
indifferent Expositor hitherto; yet, if there were no other Reason to reject
his Exposition, but for the many inconsistances he has heaped together in his
Exposition of the Mystery of the ten Horns, which now come to be considered, it
could not possibly be admitted.

For, 1. He expounds these ten Horns of the Roman Empire, to be ten Kings of
ten Barbarous Nations, which bordered upon the Roman Empire. But it is manifest
from all the Prophetic interpretations of holy Scripture, where this type is
used, that it never signifies any neighboring Kingdom, but when a Beast or
Kingdom is represented with Horns, they always signify that Kingdom to be
divided into so many smaller Kingdoms as the Beast had Horns. And all Men must
needs acknowledge the truth of this assertion, who understand any thing of the
Idiom of Prophetic Language.

2. It is said of these ten Horns at ver. 12. That they are ten Kings, which
have received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the
Beast. The plain meaning of which Words is this: That although the Roman Empire
be not yet divided into these ten Horns or smaller Kingdoms, yet when the Beast
appears, these Horns shall rise together with him. And since by this Beast the
Doctor understands Domitian, his Exposition cannot possibly be true, unless the
Roman Empire came to be divided into these ten Horns or smaller Kingdoms in
Domitian's time. But because he was not able to give us any proof or likelihood
of this, see how he wrests the meaning of that verse next before quoted, to
force it to comply with his Hypothesis. The ten Horns are ten Kings, which have
received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast;
that is, as he expounds it, They have received no Kingdom as yet within the
Roman Empire, but comply for a short time with the Roman Power.

The Angel tells us, That these ten Horns receive Power as Kings one hour with
the Beast. Which words the Doctor thus expounds, They comply, says he, for a
short time with the Roman power. He had told us all along before, that this
Beast was Domitian: But now he calls it the Roman Power. And to receive Power
as Kings, he interprets to be (...) complying with the Roman Power. So that it
seems, to comply with the Roman Power, is to receive Power as Kings. And
therefore not only these ten Horns here spoken of, but also all the Subjects of
the Roman Empire, and all Nations that were conquered by them, may equally be
said to have received Power as Kings, by their complying with the Rom^^ Power:
So great a Dignity it was, it be subdued to the Roman Yoke. But,

3. It is further said of those to Horns, That they have one mind, an^ should
give their Power and Strength (...) the Beast, ver. 13. That they should agre^
and give their Kingdom unto the Be^^ ver. 17. Now therefore let us hear how
those ten Kings of the Barbarous Nations, whom the Doctor makes to be the^ ten
Horns, did give their Strength and Power, and Kingdom to Domitian. Of any
Strength, or Power, or Kingdom that they gave him, he mentions not a word, but
only tells us, That they persecuted Christians in their Territories, as the
Emperor did. So that to Persecute Christians as the Emperor did, was to give
their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom to him. And now any one would expect,
that the Doctor having taken so vast a latitude of interpreting these Words,
had bin able to make it out exceeding manifestly, That these ten Kings did
persecute Christians, as Domitian did. But if any Man will take the pains to
consult his Annotations upon this Chapter, he shall find him hunting over all
the Histories of those times, but yet not able to produce any the least proof
or evidence of this matter. So he concludes at last, That there had not bin any
authoritative Persecution of Christians in those Barbarous Kingdoms, till about
the eighteenth year of the Reign of Dioclesian; that is, about 200 years after
Domitian's time, but, says he, it is like there was in Dioclesian 's Reign;
although for want of Histories recording the particular passages of those
times, he complains he could not make it evident. But if he could, what would
it signify? For he should have proved that they persecuted Christians, not in
Dioclesian's Reign, but in Domitian's, whom he makes the Beast, to whom these
ten Kings should give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom.

4. The Doctor gives us a lame account of what is said concerning these ten
Horns, at ver. 17. That God had p^^ in their Hearts to fulfill his Will, and to
agree and give their Kingdom to the Beast, until the words of God shall be
fulfilled. For instead of proving this Argument of theirs to give their Kingdom
to Domitian, See the Doctor's Annot. upon that place.
he only proves the strangness of God's Judgment in destroying the City of
Rome, and the immediate hand of God in it But of Alaricus's (by whose Arms the
City of Rome was spoiled) or of the other nine Horns agreeing to give their
Kingdom to Domitian (which only the verse he comments on, does mention) he is
utterly silent. And indeed he might well be so; For Alaricus, nor any other
King of his time, was hardly born within two hundred and fifty years after
Domitian's Death.

Lastly, We shall dismiss the Doctor's Exposition, with this one Observation
more, viz. That whereas it is said of these ten Horns at ver. 16. That they
should hate the Whore, and make her desolate, etc. The Doctor tells us this was
done when the Barbarous Nations sacked Rome. But we must observe that Rome at
that time, if ever, was a Christian City, and governed by a Christian Emperor.
So that, what he should have proved to have bin don to Heathen Rome, whom he
makes the Whore, (and that by right in Domitian's time too; for Rome is
concerned no further in this Vision, than as sitting upon the Beast,) he proves
to have bin done more than three hundred years after, when as Idolatry had bin
destroyed in Rome, and she was now become a Christian City. But he seems to
give some Reason of this Exposition, viz. That there were yet remaining several
Monuments of Idolatry; that even the Christians themselves were very much
addicted to carnal Lusts, and that there were many Heathens in her at that
time, whom chiefly that Calamity befell. But so there were also many Monuments
of Christianity in Heathen Rome, and multitudes of Saints and pious Christians.
So that either Rome Heathen was no Whore, who had so many excellent Christians;
or else Rome Christian was no Whore, though possibly she had many Heathens in
her. And let the Reader take his choice; though still we should grant, that
Christian Rome when she was thus infested by the barbarous Nations, was the
Whore here spoken of: yet were the Miseries which they brought upon her, too
light for the accomplishment of the Desolations of this Prophecy. For it is
here said of the ten Horns, that they should hate the Whore, and make her
desolate and naked, and should eat her flesh, and burn her with Fire.

Upon which destruction of this great City Babylon the Spirit descants both
more plainly, and more fully, Chap. xviii. 8. telling us, That her Plagues
shall come in one day, Death, and Mourning, and Famine, and she shall be
utterly burnt with Fire, etc. And again at ver. 14. The fruits that thy Soul
lusted after, are departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and
goodly are departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more at all. With
many other expressions to like purpose, which cannot otherwise be interpreted,
but of the utter ruin and destruction of that City, and consequently cannot
have bin accomplished in that cursory pillage of it by Alaricus, who burnt some
part indeed, and made some havoc of the rest, but lest it in a very little
time, and did no great, nor lasting mischief to it.

And thus much of that Exposition, which interprets the seven Kings of so many
single Kings, and makes the Beast to be Domitian, and the Woman to be Heathen
Rome.

CHAP. IV. The Conclusion of the first part, with a summary recapitulation of
the Arguments before used; together with some occasional Observations tending
to the clearing of the Prophecy.
TO conclude. I suppose that it will not be denied by any, but that by the
seven Heads or Kings are meant, either seven single Kings, with H. Grotius; or
an uncertain number of them, with Bellarmin; or lastly, seven several Orders
and successions of supreme Governors, according as has bin before explained.
Since therefore they cannot be understood either of seven single Kings or of an
uncertain number of them: they must be interpreted of seven several Orders or
Successions of Supreme Governors, which can be no other, than those already
named, viz. Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes, Dictators, Heathen Emperors,
and Popes. The Christian Emperors, being that other King, not come in St.
John's time, (neither any Head of the Blasphemous Beast) who when he came, was
to continue but a short time, in respect either of the preceding, or succeeding
King, that is, either of the Heathen Emperors that went before them, or the
Popes that followed them.

And thus we have clearly shown, that all the Marks and Characters of the
Beast, which St. John saw the Woman sitting on, (according as the Angel has
explained them) are most truly, genuinely, properly, and reasonably, without
any the least constraint or violence, applicable to the Roman Bishops, from
that time wherein the seventh King, the Roman Christian Emperors, came to be
destroyed, and the Empire to be divided into ten Horns or smaller Kingdoms. It
must therefore follow of necessity, that the Popes are that Beast under whose
conduct, those Horns were to make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb to overcome
them: and that the Woman, or City of Rome, sitting upon the Beast under this
seventh Head or King, is that great Whore which St. John saw ver. 4, 5, 6.
arraied in Purple, and Scarlet color, and decked with Gold and Precious Stone,
and Pearls, having a Golden Cup in her hand, full of abominations and
filthiness of her Fornication. And upon her Forehead a Name written, MYSTERY,
BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And
whom he saw also drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus.

And now, I hope, it will not be expected from me, that I should prove by any
other Arguments not contained in this Prophecy, That the Kings have, by the
procurement and instigation of the Popes, from time to time, made War against
the Lamb, Christ Jesus; or that the City of Rome under the Government of the
Popes (since they came to be the last Head or King of the Roman Empire) has
bin the Metropolis of Spiritual Fornication or Idolatry, making the Inhabitants
of the Earth drunk with the golden Cup of her abominable Superstitions, and her
self with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus;
that is, of such as for the Gospel's sake have dared at any time to reprove and
censure her Impieties. No; this was none of my design, but it has bin
abundantly performed already by all those famous Writers, who from the first
appearance of the Romish Superstitions, have opposed themselves against them.
And it is manifest to all the World how little favor they have had from Rome,
who have at any time bin so hardy as to censure her Religion, and condemn it as
Idolatrous.

My business therefore was only this; To search out who this Woman was, and who
the Beast that carries her, according as the Angel has described them in his
Interpretation of the Vision, promising St. John at ver. 7. that he would tell
him the Mystery of the Woman, and of the Beast that carries her, which has
the seven Heads and ten Horns. Whereby, I suppose, is meant, that he would give
such a description of them, as should sufficiently distinguish them from all
other Beasts and Women in the World. So that whatever Woman, and whatever
Beast can be proved to have all those Marks and Characters appertaining to
them, whereby the Angel here describes the Woman and the Beast we speak of,
must needs be that Woman and that Beast which St. John saw in such unhappy and
amazing circumstances as were represented to him in the Vision.

And whereas the Angel tells us at ver. 14. concerning the ten Horns, That they
should make War with the Lamb, and that the Lamb should overcome them; and
afterward, That they should hate the Whore, and make her desolate, etc. If we
have plainly showed from all the Circumstances whereby the Angel has described
these Horns, that such and such Kings and Kingdoms are designed by them; it
must follow of necessity, upon supposition of the truth of the Prophecy, That
such and such Kings and Kingdoms should make War with the Lamb, and that the
Lamb should overcome them; and that they should hate the Whore, and make her
desolate, etc.

As if any Man pretending to the Spirit of Prophecy, should foretell, That the
next Emperor of the Turks, who shall be called by the name of Bajazet, and
shall have his Residence at Constantinople, shall be a Christian: if hereafter
it shall be evidently demonstrated, that such an Emperor is really and truly
that next Emperor of the Turks, that is called by the name of Bajazet, and
that he has his Residence at Constantinople, either this Prophecy must be
false, or else that Emperor must be a Christian. So, in our present case, The
Angel tells us that these ten Kings, whom he had before described, shall make
War with the Lamb, etc. If therefore any Man can plainly show that all the
Marks and Characters whereby the Angel has defined them, do really and truly
appertain to such and such Kings; it must likewise follow of necessity either
that the Prophecy must be false, or that these Kings, to whom these Marks and
Characters do belong, shall war against the Lamb.

And this was all I intended to demonstrate, namely, Who this Woman, this
Beast, and these Horns or Kings should be, of whom such horrid things are
spoken by the Angel, and represented in the Vision to St. John. And if any Man
can give a better account of them, no doubt he will perform an acceptable piece
of service to the Church of Christ.

But though it be not my business to prove the Roman Church guilty of Idolatry,
and consequently the Opposers of it, Saints (in the sense of this Prophecy) by
any Arguments not contained in the Prophecy it self; yet notwithstanding, to
make the proof of it more easy, (so far as is requisite to the verification of
this Prophecy) and to put the matter almost out of question, I shall add an
Observation, which, it may be, has not bin so generally taken notice of; viz.
That the Name of her Idolatry is not said to have bin written in the Woman's
Heart, where none but God can see it, but in her Forehead, visible and
conspicuous to the Eye of Man. Wherefore we have nothing more to prove against
the Church of Rome for the verification of this Prophecy, but that her outward
act of Worship is Idolatrous. Wherefore we only say, (and I think they cannot
easily deny it) that they bow, they kiss, they burn Incense, they kneel before
their Images, and in that posture of address, they say their Prayers with their
Eyes upon their Images, which to the Eye of the Beholder looks as if they said
their Prayers to them. Wherefore as to the outward act, they worship them by
these addresses. Nay, they confess they do so; nay, they proclaim it, they
enact it as a Law, they curse and persecute the opposers of this Worship.

But they add, They worship them with a relative Worship, that is, they intend
the worship of their Images to their Prototypes. But whether they do this or
no, God only knows. Yet still this Name is written in their Foreheads, That
they are Idolaters. They pray to Saints, to Angels, and especially to the
Virgin Mary, as frequently, as devoutly to appearance, with the same postures
of Address, and with like forms of Prayer, as they do to God. And here they say
again, they worship them with a relative Worship, not as Gods, but as the
Friends of God. And we answer them again in like manner as before, that still
this name is written in their Foreheads, That they are Idolaters. So that for
all their relative Worship, and their good Intention, this Prophecy of a Name
written in the Woman's Forehead, (Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of
Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth) may be verified in them. For certainly
in appearance they are as great Idolaters, and promoters of it, as was ever
Babylon her self.

Now therefore I shall draw up my Arguments from what I have, as I conceive
sufficiently demonstrated, in this Form that here follows:

The Woman which St. John saw in this Vision, sitting upon the Beast, was to be
the Mother of Spiritual Fornication or Idolatry, and drunken with the Blood of
the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

But the City of Rome having the Sovereignty of the Roman Empire under the
Government of her Bishops, from such time as that Empire came to be divided
into ten Kingdoms, is the Woman which St. John saw in this Vision sitting upon
the Beast.

Therefore the City of Rome from that time forward was to be the Mother of
Spiritual Fornication, or Idolatry, and drunken with the Blood of the Saints,
and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

Again,

The Beast which St. John saw the Woman sitting on is the seventh and last Head
of the Blasphemous Roman Empire.

But the Bishops of Rome, from such time as that Empire came to be divided into
ten Kingdoms, are the seventh and last Head of the Blasphemous Roman Empire.

Therefore, the Bishops of Rome from that time forward, are the Beast which St.
John saw the Woman sitting on.

Lastly,

The ten Horns which St. John saw upon this Beast, were to make War with the
Lamb, and the Lamb to overcome them, and they afterward to hate the Whore, and
make her desolate, etc.

But those ten Kings (with their Successors) who have bin already shown to have
shared the Roman Empire amongst them about the Year 456, are the ten Horns
which St. John saw upon this Beast.

Therefore those ten Kings (with their Successors) were to make War with the
Lamb, and the Lamb to overcome them, and they afterward to hate the Whore, and
make her desolate, etc.

I had almost forgot the Interpretation which the Angel gives us of the Waters
upon which St. John saw the Whore sitting, ver. 1. These Waters (says the
Angel, ver. 15.) are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues; But the
meaning of this is both very obvious, and as applicable to the City of Rome
under the Headship and Supremacy of her Bishops, as at any other time. For
hereby is only signified, that she should then enjoy a kind of Catholic or
Universal Headship, not over any one People, Multitude, Tongue, or Nation, but
over very many of them,

Only here it may not be amiss to observe the Scheme and Constitution of the
Vision. For the Roman Empire is here represented to St. John by a Woman situate
upon seven Heads or Mountains, (as upon an Island) with the Nations subject to
her Jurisdiction, circumfus'd like Waters round about her. By which the two
constitutive parts of the Roman World, like those of this wherein we live, are
Earth and Water: the Woman dwelling on the one, and her subjects on the other.
Which Observation will be of great use to us hereafter, in the explicating of
the xiith and xiiith Chapters, where I must remind the Reader of it.

And now as I have very studiously inquired into the meaning of this Mystery:
So I hope it will not give offense to any Man, that I have thus plainly opened
to the World, what has bin the result of my enquiry. However I a^ well
satisfied within my own self, that I have done it with an upright Conscience,
not out of a desire of Contention, and to aggravate the Differences between Us
and Rome, which are b^ too irreconcilable already; but of promoting the Glory
of God, and the Salvation of Men's Souls. For I confessi^^ have taken but
little pleasure in this disquisition, save only that of finding out the Truth,
(as I suppose) and of imparting it to others.

And yet, if after all my Labor, it shall be evidently proved that I have
erred in the main of my Design, and Bellarmin's or Hugo Grotius's Exposition
clearly vindicated, or some other offered that might serve Rome's turn as well,
and that confirmed and demonstrated from the undoubted Characters of the
Angel's Interpretation and the genuine signification of the Prophetic Types
which are made use of in the Vision, according as they are constantly, or most
usually observed to signify in other Prophecies, and especially in Prophetic
Visions and Interpretations like this that we are speaking of: I should be so
far from repining at my misadventure, or from envying that Man the glory of his
great Performance, that I should rather further it with all my might, and from
my very heart rejoice in that so welcome News, and acceptable piece of service
to the Church of God.

And yet, notwithstanding that we have proved the Bishops of Rome from about
the Year 456, to be the last of the seven Heads or Kings of Rome, and of the
Roman Empire, and, by consequence, to be the Antichristian Beast described in
this Vision; as also those ten Kings, with their Successors, who at that time
shared the Roman Empire between them, and became one Kingdom (as it were)
again, under the Headship and Supremacy of the Popes, to be the Kings that were
to make War with the Lamb; and the City of Rome from that same time to be the
Woman here described as the most abominable City in the World for her Idolatry,
and her persecuting of the Saints: We must not therefore rashly hence conclude,
that there was never any Christian Bishop of Rome from that time forward, or
Christian King in all the Roman Empire, or that the City of Rome her self has
bin alike polluted with Idolatry all along, and no Salvation to be had in her
Communion.

No, it is enough for the fulfilling of this Prophecy (and we need not make it
worse) that her Impieties arrived to the height they now are at, and have bin
at these many years, insensibly and by slow degrees; and that it has bin the
main design of those ten Kings, with their Successors, to advance the Roman
Bishops, together with their Interests and Idolatries, and to assist them with
their power and strength against whatever stood in opposition to them. For as a
wicked person may have some commendable qualities, which sometimes may exert
themselves in Christian works, and yet the person be exceeding vicious, as to
his habitual course and conversation: so doubtless there has bin much good in
Rome, before she made her wound incurable; and many intervals of eminent
Christians (for ought I know) among her Bishops, and among those Kings and
their Successors that confederated with them. According as we may observe in
those three Warnings which we find given to them Rev. xiv. The first was only,
That they should fear God, and worship him, etc. Exhorting them to keep
themselves from Idols, and to worship God only, ver. 7. The next was a
denunciation of the greatness of the Fall of Babylon, in not only committing,
but propagating her Idolatries, ver. 8. But the last was more severe yet, at
ver. 9. That if any man worshipped the Beast, and his Image, and received his
mark in his forehead, or in his hand, (a mystical periphrasis of adhering to
him) the same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is powered out
without mixture, into the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, etc. By which it seems, that it has not bin always
alike dangerous to communicate with Rome, and that she did not fall but by
degrees: but yet at last, that it should be so dangerous as to be inconsistent
with Salvation. And whether that time be not long since come, (as we may fear
it is) I leave the Reader to determine.

And now from all that has bin hitherto said, it is manifest, That Antichrist
was to be expected soon after the destruction of Rome's Heathen Emperors; for
the other King, ( viz. the Christian Emperors) who was to interpose between the
Heathen Emperors, and the seventh Head, (the Antichristian King) was to
continue but a little while. So that upon the dissolution of the Roman Empire,
and the division of it into ten Kingdoms, the Antichristian Beast should
presently ascend the Imperial Throne, and show himself the next Head of Rome,
and of the Roman Empire.

And hence we see the reason of that Tradition of the Primitive Church, viz.
That the Roman Empire was the thing which hindered the revealing of Antichrist.
For it was necessary that the Head which then reigned, and the other King of
short continuance, (who is not typified by any Head, because he was not
blasphemous) should be first destroyed, before the next (that is, the
Antichristian Beast) could possibly succeed him. Hence it appears also, That
the Seat of Antichrist was to be the City of Rome. And lastly, That the
Doctrine that he was to teach, was to commit Idolatry; and that the War he was
to make, should be to persecute the Saints. Which will be further yet confirmed
from the explication of the xiith and xiiith Chapters, which now come to be
considered.

PART II. An Exposition of REV. xii. from ver. 1. to the middle of ver. 12.
CHAP. I. Of the Pure, Primitive, Heavenly State of the Roman Catholic Church
under her Egyptian Persecutors, the Heathen Emperors, who were the King that in
St. John 's time reigned. Which State of hers is described from Rev. xii. 1. to
the middle of ver. 12. To the Exposition of which part of the Chapter is
subjoined a Paraphrase upon the same.
FRom that Prophecy which we have Rev. xvii, the only Vision of this mysterious
Book, so punctually and so purposely expounded by an Angel; as if it were
designed for a Key to all the other Visions; We proceed now to the xiith and
xiiith Chapters, where we find this Woman, and this seven-headed and ten-horned
Beast again, though in a little different guise from that we have already seen
them in. But before I undertake the Exposition of these Chapters, I must here
give the Reader notice, that I must take for granted what I have already proved
from the Angel's words, to be the meaning of the Heads and Horns of this
seven-headed Beast, and of the Woman that was sitting upon him. If therefore
what I have already proved be not done effectually, whatever I shall build
upon it, must needs fall together with it. But if that ground work and
Foundation have any firmness or solidity in it self, I doubt not upon that
Hypothesis, to show these other Visions not only so exactly, but so wonderfully
answered by the events of things, that the Explication of them shall not seem
to borrow strength from its Foundation, but rather to confirm and strengthen it.

In order therefore to the explication of the xiith and xiiith Chapters, let it
be remembered, that in the xviith we had mention of eight Kings; five whereof
were fallen; and the other two to come. Seven of them ( viz. the six first, and
the last) were typified by the seven Heads of the Blasphemous Beast: but the
seventh not.

As for the five that were fallen, because they were fallen, this Prophecy concerns
it self no further with them. But of the other three we have a prophetic
History and description in the Chapters we are now upon: as also of the state
and condition of the Woman under every one of them.

Of the King that reigned in St. John's time, and of the state of the Woman
under his Reign, we have an account in the xii Chapter from ver. 1. to the
middle of ver. 12. From thence to the end of that Chapter is set forth to us
the state of the Woman, under the other King of short continuance, who was to
be no Head of the Blasphemous Beast, and is there typified by two wings of a
great Eagle. From hence to the end of the xiiith Chapter (which answers to the
xviith) is represented the state of the Woman under the eighth King, at what
time the ten Horns came to be crowned, and to receive Power as Kings.

Under these three Kings this Woman was diversely treated. By the first she was
persecuted, by the second indulged and supported; by the third caressed and
pampered to the greatest height of Pomp and Pride, of Wantonness and Luxury.
Accordingly we must expect that she should demean her self diversely under each
of them. Under the first, while she was persecuted by the secular Power, she
continued pure and spotless, both in Life and Doctrine; I mean comparatively
pure, in reference to her subsequent demeanor under the two Kings that
followed. Under the second, while she was indulged and supported by the secular
Power, she began to be less circumspect in her conversation, to degenerate to
Covetousness and Ambition in Manners, and Superstition in Worship.
Notwithstanding being very much exercised by the fraud and malice of Heretics,
she persisted Orthodox in the Faith. Under the third, having gotten the secular
Power into her own hands (at least as far as might serve her own purpose) she
waxed wanton, and played the Harlot, intoxicating the Nations with her
Fornications, and rioting in the Blood of her opposers.

Under the first King therefore she is represented in the starry Heaven, in
token of her Heavenly Purity. Under the second she is represented upon Eagles
Wints, in a much lower Sphere and Region than before, and as it were flying
down from Heaven to Earth, in sign of her declension and degeneracy. Under the
third, she is represented sitting upon a ten-horned blaspemous Beast, that
arose out of the Abyss, in token of her utter depravation and Apostasy. All
which will be much more clear by the particular consideration of the Prophecy
it self; and therefore I shall begin with that part of it, which concerns the
Woman under the Reign of the first of the three Kings, ( viz. the King that
reigned in St. John's time) while she continued in her state of heavenly purity.

This state of hers is set forth by the Prophet in these words:

Rev. xii. chap.

1. And there appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a Woman clothed with the Sun,
and the Moon under her feet; and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars:

2. And she being with Child, cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be
delivered.

3. And there appeared another wonder in Heaven, And behold a great red Dragon,
having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and seven Crowns upon his Heads.

4. And his Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them
to the Earth: and the Dragon stood before the Woman which was ready to be
delivered, for to devour her Child as soon as it was born.

5. And she brought forth a Man-Child, who was to rule all Nations with a Rod
of Iron: and her Child was caught up unto God, and to his Throne.

6. And the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she has a place prepared of
God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days.

7. And there was war in Heaven; Michael, and his Angels, fought against the
Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels;

8. And prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in Heaven.

9. And the Great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent, called the Devil and
Satan, which deceives the whole World: he was cast out into the Earth, and his
Angels were cast out with him.

10. And I heard a voice saying in Heaven, Now is come Salvation and Strength,
and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ: for the Accuser of our
Brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.

11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
Testimony; and they loved not their Lives unto the death.

12. Therefore rejoice, ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them. --

Thus far is a description of the Woman's Heavenly purity in her primitive
State.

Now I take it to be one of the plainest things that can be demonstrated in any
Prophecy, that by the Woman here, is meant the Church of Rome. For of this
Woman it is said, at ver. 6. that she fled into the Wilderness; the manner of
her flight being described at ver. 14. And in the Wilderness she was seen by
St. John sitting upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, etc. Rev. xvii. 3. This Woman
therefore is the same with her whom St. John saw in the Wilderness; only here
she is described in all the Glories of her primitive purity: whereas she is
there set forth in all the scandalous deformities of her secular pomp, and
earthly domination. But now in the Wilderness this Woman is interpreted by the
Angel to be that great City, which we have before proved, and which is
generally, even by the Romanists themselves, confessed to be the City of Rome.
But they would have it to be understood of Heathen Rome; which cannot be, not
only for the reasons heretofore alleged in the Exposition of the xviith
Chapter, but because it were the absurdest thing in the World to understand
these things of Heathen Rome, which are here spoken of this Woman before her
flying into the Wilderness. For when, I pray, was Heathen Rome clothed with
the Sun, the Moon under her Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars?
When was Heathen Rome in Travail, persecuted by the Dragon (whom we shall prove
anon to signify Romes Heathen Emperors) and delivered of a Man-Child, who was
caught up to the Throne of God?

Wherefore by the City of Rome, Rev. xvii. 18. cannot be meant the Heathen
City, but the Christian City of Rome; that is, the City of Rome at such time
when she was generally Christian, and when the same People that were the City,
were also the Church of Rome. Which agrees exactly which that account which we
have given of this Woman in the Exposition of the xviith Chapter, where it has
bin proved that by the Woman is meant the City of Rome, such as she was to be
under the Head-ship and Supremacy of her Bishops.

As therefore we have seen this Woman in the Wilderness, sitting upon the Roman
Beast, that is, domineering over the Roman Empire, glittering with earthly
Pomp, and intoxicating the Nations with the Wine of her Spiritual Fornication:
so let us now behold her as she is represented in her heavenly Purity, clothed
with the Sun (by which is doubtless meant the Sun of Righteousness, the light
of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ;) and having the Moon under her Feet:
where by the Moon (as it stands opposed to the Sun of Righteousness, the bright
daylight of the Gospel) must be meant the dim light of Jewish Ceremonies, and
the darkness of Heathenish Superstitions. Which is a sense that is very
agreeable to Scripture-use, where the Gospel is called Light, and all other
Religions in opposition to it, are called night and darkness. Thus St. Paul,
Romans xiii. 12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand, etc. And St. John 1
Ep. ii. 8. The darkness is past, and the true light now s^ineth. And this is so
usual a Metaphor in holy Scripture, that I cannot easily believe any other
thing to be meant by the Sun, than the Light of the Gospel; nor by the Moon,
than the darkness of all other Dispensations. Certain I am that these Types as
they are here used, will easily admit the sense that I have given them; which
to my purpose is sufficient.

And whereas this Woman is further represented with a Crown of twelve Stars,
these Stars by their number twelve, have a manifest reference to the twelve
Apostles. And they signify the communion of the Church of Rome with the twelve
Apostles, that is, with all the Churches of the Roman Empire that were planted
by the twelve Apostles, and persisted in their Faith and Doctrine. And it is to
be observed, that in her state of Heavenly purity, she is not represented
sitting upon these twelve Stars (as afterward upon the Roman Beast) in token
of their subjection to her: but having them as a Crown upon her Head, that is,
adorned with their fellowship and communion, as in the same most holy Faith, so
in partaking of like sufferings with her.

And this Exposition of the Woman for the Church of Rome, as it is every was
agreeable to the Angel's interpretation of her Rev. xvii. so we shall find it
no strange thing in Scripture-prophecy to have the States of all subordinate
Cities represented by that one of the Imperial or Metropolitical City. And for
this I might quote well near an hundred places out of the Prophets of the old.
Testament. But the Reader may fully satisfy himself out of the xvi and xxiii
Chapters of Ezekiel, and the first of Micha. But as for the twelve Stars, we
shall yet give afurther account of them anon, from the Analogy of a like Type
used in the description of the Dragon. To proceed therefore.

By this Woman's being with Child, crying, and travailing in birth, and being
pained to be delivered, ver. 2. is plainly signified the sorrows and
afflictions she endured, in gaining Proselytes to the Faith of Christ. Her
Children therefore are her Converts: her being with Child, denotes her Zeal in
propagating the Gospel to them: and her bringing forth, is her converting them.
And though there seems to be mention made, but of one Child or Convert: yet we
are to consider, that as by one Dragon are meant all the Heathen Emperors, and
as by one Wo^an are meant all the members of the Church of Rome from time to
time, so by one Child are typified all the Converts in those Primitive times
since first there was a Church established in that City. And it is a very usual
thing in Prophecy, by one particular thing to typifie a whole sort or order of
the same kind of things.

By the great red Dragon, ver. 3. is meant the Roman Heathen Emperors,
represented in the shape of a Dragon, in token of their open enmity to the Name
of Christ, without any color or disguise; as they were also great in Power,
and red with their bloody use of it. And this is evident from that further
description of this Dragon in the next words, where he is fet forth with seven
Heads, and ten Horns, and upon his Heads seven Crowns, but none as yet upon his
Horns. For we have proved, that the seven Heads and ten Horns, are a type of
the Roman Empire. And since the Horns are not crowned (as they are in the
xiiith Chapter, when the time was come wherein they had received their Power as
Kings) it cannot be represented here under its last Head the Popes; for
together with the last Head, the ten Horns were to receive Power as Kings, Rev.
xvii. 12. And since the other five were fallen before St. John's time, it cannot
be represented under any of them. It remains therefore, that it is here
represented under its sixth Head, the Heathen Emperors; under whose Government
the Roman Empire, with respect to Christians, could not more fitly be compared
to any thing than to a great red Dragon.

But here let us observe by the way the reason why this seven-headed and
ten-horned Beast is represented in the xiith Chapter, under the shape of a
Dragon; and in the xiiith under the shape of a Leopard; but in the xviith under
no shape at all. The reason is, because the Beast was to partake of diverse
qualities, and accordingly to be expressed in diverse shapes, according to the
different qualities of his Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis.
Heads.

When therefore he was to be expressed under one Head only; as in the xiith
Chapter under the sixth Head; and in the xiiith under the seventh; he is
particularly described in all his features. But in the xviith Chapter, where he
is considered under all his Heads, on purpose to distinguish him from all other
Beasts or Kingdoms in the World, he is described in the Vision only by such
Marks and Characters as he had in common under all his Heads, especially the
two last of them, which only are the subject of this Prophecy.

But to proceed, whereas it is said of this Dragon at ver. 4. that his Tail
drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them to the Earth; the
meaning is, that a third part of the Kingdoms of the then known World were
subject to his jurisdiction. This is thus proved. By Heaven is typified the
Earth; for it is very evident that the things which are here said to have bin
seen in Heaven, were really transacted on the Earth. But the Scene is laid in
Heaven, to represent (as has bin said) the Woman's heavenly purity under
Persecution. The casting down to the Earth is a typical phrase, to signify
subduing, or overcoming. This appears from ver. 9. where the Victory of Michael
over the Dragon is expressed by his casting him down to the Earth. Wherefore by
the Dragon's casting the Stars of Heaven down to the Earth, must be meant his
subduing and overcoming them. By the third part of the Stars of Heaven
therefore, which the Dragon's Tail is said to have drawn, and cast them to the
Earth, must be meant a third part of something on the Earth, which the Roman
Emperors held in subjection under them by right of Conquest. And what could
that be but a third part of the Kingdoms of the then known World? And
consequently the twelve Stars in the Woman's Crown, will signify by a plain
Analogy, all the Apostolical Churches of the Roman Empire, not cast down to the
Earth by her, or made to truckle under her, but worn as a most glorious Crown,
or Ornament on her Head.

The Roman Dragon being thus described as to his features and appendixes, the
next thing to be considered are his qualities: that we may see how well they
answer to his shape and name. Of these therefore it is said, That the Dragon
stood before the Woman, which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her
Child as soon as it was born. Which is a manifest allusion to the Persecution
of the Church of Israel in the Land of Egypt. And the plain meaning of the
Types here used is this, viz. That the Dragon [the Heathen Roman Emperors]
stood before the Woman [the Church of Rome] which was just under his Eye, as
she was ready to be delivered (that is, as she was busied in gaining
Proselytes) to devour her Child as soon as it was born, or to destroy her
Converts in the infancy of their profession of the Faith. The like to which we
must understand to have bin done by the Roman Deputies, in all the Stars or
Provinces subject to the Dragon's Jurisdiction, who persecuted the twelve Stars
or Apostolical Churches of the Roman Empire that were conspicuous in the
Woman's Crown, with like watchful rage and malice as the Dragon did the Church
of Rome.

But for all this the Woman brought forth a Man-Child, who was to rule all
Nations with a Rod of Iron: And her Child was caught up to God, and to his
Throne. This was Constantine the Great, a truly Masculine Emperor, as appeared
by his zeal and vigor in the Churches Service. Which Constantine, like another
Moses, being wonderfully preserved from the Dragon's Persecution, was caught up
to the Throne of God, that is, to the Imperial Throne. For because the Earth is
typified by the Heaven, it was but reasonable and analogous to that fundamental
Type, that the Emperors, the Supreme Ministers and Vicegerents of God on Earth
(as St. Paul calls the Heathen Emperors, Romans xiii.) should be typified by God,
and their Throne by his. This Constantine, I say, was like another Moses, in
being wonderfully preserved from the Dragon's vigilent fury, and exalted to the
Supreme Government of the People of God, to be their Savior and Deliverer out
of their Egyptian Persecution. And because he was to save the Christian, as
Moses did the Jewish People, he is therefore described by a borrowed Type,
which other-where we find applied to our Savior Christ. Of whom it is said in
the second Psalm, as here of Constantine, That, he should rule all Nations with
a Rod of Iron. But in that the advancement of this Christian Moses to the
Imperial Seat, is expressed by his being caught up to God, and to his Throne;
it is to be explained by an easy and familiar Hendiadis, as if it had bin
said, to the Throne of God.

And now so soon as ever the Church had gotten a Christian Emperor, she
presently begins to change her State, the face of all things being altered with
her. For hereupon it is said at ver. 6. That she fled into the Wilderness,
where she has a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a
thousand two hundred and sixty days. Which her flying into the Wilderness is
afterward more particularly described, with the manner how, the Persecution
which then happened to her, together with the means whereby the Dragon, who
before had persecuted her by the Emperors, was disappointed in his design upon
her at this time also. But here the Spirit only hinteth at her flying into the
Wilderness, to give us notice, that this change of her Condition happened under
the first Emperor of her own Profession.

But what is meant by this Type, the Wilderness? I answer. As in many other
places of the Revelation, (even almost throughout the whole Prophecy) the Types
are borrowed from the Jewish dispensation; so here the holy Spirit, intending
to set forth the various Fortunes of the Christian Church, describes it with a
manifest reference to the Jewish. The Comparison is laid thus; The state of
Christ's Church under her Heathen Persecutors, is likened to that of the Church
of Israel in the Land of Egypt, (for there also the Egyptian See Psalm. 74.14.
Thou brakest the heads of the Dragons, ( viz. the Egyptians) in the waters.
Dragon watched to devour the Jewish Children as soon as they were born.) Her
state under her Christian Emperors is likened to that of the Church of Israel
in her passage to the Wilderness. For these, like Moses, rescued her out of her
Egyptian Persecution, and set her safe, as Moses did the Israelites in the
Wilderness. Her state under the Supremacy of her own Bishops, when she was out
of fear (as it might seem) of Persecution from the secular power; is likened to
the state of Israel in the Wilderness, when they were clean escaped from the
Host of Pharaoh, and secure of danger by the interposition of that Sea wherein
their Persecutours were overwhelmed. And as the Church of Israel in the
Wilderness soon Apostatized to Idolatry: so here the Christian Church, in token
of the same transgression, is stigmatized with that opprobrious name of
Babylon, and the Mother of Harlots. But as something has bin said already of
this State of here is upon the xviith Chapter, so more remains hereafter to be
said upon the xii^th Chapter, which is parallel to it.

In the mean time the Spirit gives us to understand by what means it came to
pass that the Church was thus Victorious over her so potent Persecutors. And
this is done in the following verses, in these words. And there was war in
Heaven; Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought
and his Angels; and prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in
Heaven, ver. 7, 8. The meaning of which in general is this; That the Church
became victorious by the Arms and Courage of those glorious Champions that
fought for her. Which Champions of hers, that they were mortal men, though they
be here typified by Michael and his Angels, appears from ver. 11. where it is
said of them with relation to this Combat, that they loved not their lives unto
the death. And indeed since the Scene of all things here is laid in Heaven; it
was but reasonable and analogous to that fundamental Type, to represent the
Woman's Champions by those Heavenly Spirits, who, as the Scripture speaks, are
great in power and might, 2 Pet. ii. 11. But we must make a more particular
enquiry after them, to see if we can find what sort or order of Men they were
by whom the Church obtained this Victory. To which end, let it be here observed,

First, That (as has bin said already) the Fate of all other Churches is here
described by that of the particular Church of Rome, whereupon it will
necessarily follow, (unless we would confound that most excellent constitution
of the Types here used) that the Champions also of all other Churches should be
represented by the Champions of the Church of Rome, that great Exempler of all
Christian Virtues to the Catholic Church, her Faith being spoken of (as St.
Paul tells us Romans 1.8.) throughout the whole World. In the next place let it
be observed, that the Champions on the Heathen side are represented by the
Dragon and his Angels. Now since the Dragon represents the Heathen Emperors,
what can be typified by his Angels, but their Underofficers? For as good
Angels are the Ministering Spirits of God, Heb. 1.14. so are bad Angels of the
Dragon. As therefore by the Dragon are meant the Emperors of Rome; so by his
Angels are meant those Ministers of State within that City, which were in
Authority under them.

These Considerations being thus premised, we may easily perceive what sort of
Men they were within the City of Rome, that were the Woman's Champions, and are
here typified by Michael and his Angels. For as the Dragon on the one side is
the Prince of the evil Angels, and represents the Emperors: so See Dan. 10.13,
21. and Jude ver. 9.
Michael on the other side is a Prince of good Angels, and must therefore by
the necessary Analogy of the Types represent some leading sort of Persons on
the Woman's side. In a word therefore, Michael and his Angels fighting for the
Church of Rome, cannot be understood of any but of the Roman Bishops, and the
inferior Clergy. The Bishops being typified by the Archangel Michael, as the
Emperors by the Dragon: and the inferior Clergy by Michael's subbordinate
Angels or ministering Spirits, as the under-ministers of the Emperors by the
Dragon's Angels.

And although this only consideration of the nature and analogy of the Types
might be sufficient to confirm this Exposition: yet we shall further offer
these two Reasons for the Reader's fuller satisfaction.

1. That the Church of Rome in general is typified by the Woman, v. 1, 4. her
Converts by her Child, v. 2, 4. her Christian Professors in general are
expressed by the name of Brethren. They therefore that are typified as her
Champions, by this peculiar Type of Michael and his Angels, cannot well be
understood, either of the Roman Church in general, or in general of her
Converts, or the Brethren, but of some special leading Persons in that
Christian Warfare. And that these Persons were that Churches Pastors, I come
now to prove in my second Argument.

2. For it is observable of those persons that are typified by Michael and his
Angels, that they are said at ver. 11, to have overcome the Dragon by the word
of their Testimony, that is, by their consent and undaunted preaching of the
Word of God. For to testify the Word of God, is one of the most usual Phrases
of the New Testament to express the preaching of the Word. And though it be
used in that sense near forty or fifty times, yet is it never applied to any
persons, but only such as were peculiarly commissionated to the preaching of
the Word. I shall therefore only name some few places in the Revelation, where
this word is used, that we may see whether it be any otherwise taken there or
not. Rev. 1.2. St. John is said to have born record (or to have testified) of
the Word of God, and of the Testimony of Jesus Christ, i. e. to have testified
or preached the Gospel. Again, Rev. xi. we have much mention of Witnesses and
their prophesying, and their testimony: which I suppose there is no Man
understands otherwise than of Preachers and their Preaching. And to name no
more places, in the end of this xiith Chapter, the Clergy of the persecuted
Church are accordingly distinguished from the Laity by their having the
testimony of Jesus Christ, where it is said, That the Dragon was wroth with the
Woman, and went to make War with the remnant of her Seed, which keep the
Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, i. e. with the
Saints, Rev. xiii. 7. and their Witnesses or Preachers, Rev. xi. 3, 7. They
therefore who are here typified by Michael and his Angels, and are said to have
overcome the Dragon by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
Testimony, must needs be understood of the Roman Bishops, and their Clergy, the
Ministers, and Preachers of the Word of God.

To which considerations if we add those places in the Revelation, in the
second and third Chapters, where advices (...) directed to the seven Churches
of (...) under the names of their respective Angels: as the proper Arguments
drawn from those places will give strength to this: so the proper Arguments of
this place, will add strength to those; and one will make the other undeniable.

And yet when I affirm, that by Michael and his Angels here, no other sort of
Men are typified, but the Roman Bishops and their Clergy only; I mean, no
others are immediately typified thereby: But, by way of concomitancy, all other
Saints and Members of that Church are signified: But the Bishops and the Clergy
only are expressed; because it is an usual thing in such cases, to ascribe
Victories, not to common Soldiers, but their chief Commanders. And by this way
of concomitancy, are understood not the Bishops, Clergy, and other Christians
of the Church of Rome only; but of all other Churches in the Roman Empire. As
on the other side, by the Dragon and his Angels are signified not only the
Emperors, and their under Officers of State in Rome; but their Vicegerents
also, and their respective Underofficers in all the Provinces of the Roman
Empire.

Now as to the issue or event of this War, it is said, That the Dragon and his
Angels prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in Heaven; that
is, they were cast down to the Earth, or overcome.

And that we may understand, that it was not only the Heathen Emperors, and
whatever other persons in Authority under them, typified by the Dragon and his
Angels; because they were the more immediate instruments of those wicked
Spirits in upholding their Worship, and persecuting the Servants of the only
true God; we are told in the next verse, that it was really the Devil and his
Angels, whose shape their wicked instruments are represented in, and whose work
they did, that were subdued in them, that is, deprived of that Power and
Tyranny, which by those Heathen Emperors they exercised over the bodies of
Christians, and the Souls of their deluded worshipers. The words are these, And
the great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan,
which deceives the whole World; he was cast out into the Earth, and his Angels
were cast out with him. v.9.

Now that this War between Michael and his Angels on the one side, and the
Dragon and his Angels on the other side, was before the Woman's flying into the
Wilderness, nay, before her Man-Child was caught up to the Throne of God, may
be thus proved. When the Dragon was overcome, his Angels were overcome at the
same time: But the Dragon was overcome in his Representatives, the Heathen
persecuting Emperors: Therefore his Angels were overcome then also. Now the
Heathen Persecuting Emperors were overcome, when the Woman's Man-child was
caught up unto the Throne of God: Therefore the War wherein they were overcome,
was before the Woman's Man-Child was caught up to the Throne of God.

Neither may it here be objected, that Julian the Apostate was after this an
Heathen Persecutor; for he was but one amongst many Christian Emperors, and
therefore is not particularly taken notice of, but belongs to the next Period,
where the Christian Emperors are represented by the two wings of a great Eagle.
And it is manifest, that the Woman was in her flight before Julian's time. For
she is said to have fled into the Wilderness, ver. 6. so soon as the Woman's
Man-Child, Constantine the Great, was caught up to the Throne of God. Wherefore
Julian the Apostate who did not reign till after that time, cannot be concerned
in the War which was before. But this will appear more plainly, when we come to
speak of the next Period of the Church in her declining state, while she was
flying upon those two Wings of the great Eagle, ver. 14. from Heaven to Earth,
from the Egyptian Persecution into the Wilderness.

Again, That this War was before the Woman's flying into the Wilderness,
appears from ver. 13, 14, etc. Where it is said, that when the Dragon saw that
be was cast unto the Earth, he persecuted the Woman that brought forth the
Man-Child. And this Persecution was while the Woman was upon the Eagle's wings,
as appears by what follows. Whence it is evident, that the Dragon had not done
any thing mentioned in this Prophecy, from the time that he was cast down to
the Earth, till the time of the Woman's flying into the Wilderness. The War
therefore wherein the Dragon was cast down to the Earth, was before the Woman's
flying into the Wilderness. And that it was before the Woman's Manchild was
caught up to the Throne of God also, may appear from hence, in that so soon as
ever the Man-Child was caught up to the Throne of God, without any delay, the
Woman is said to have fled into the Wilderness, ver. 5, 6. We cannot therefore
understand this War of any other time, than while the Dragon was watching to
devour the Woman's Offspring; and that both she her self, with all her
Offspring, were preserved from the Dragon's fury, and escaped out of her
Egyptian Persecution under the Heathen Emperors, through the Prowess of her
Champions, Michael and his Angels.

In short, why is there mention made of the Woman's flying into the Wilderness,
so soon as ever her Man-Child was caught up to the Throne of God, if she did
not presently thereupon begin to take her flight? And why is the particular
description of her Flight suspended till after the account given of the War,
and the Joy that followed thereupon; if the War had not happened before her
flying into the Wilderness, and consequently, before her Man-Child was caught
up to the Throne of God? And why is there no voice of rejoicing heard in the
Church upon the Woman's Man-Child's being caught up to the Throne of God; as
well as on the casting down of the Dragon and his Angels? Was it not because
the catching up to the Throne of God, and the casting down the Dragon to the
Earth, were Correlatives, and happened both together, and so the Joy is for them
both? Let these things be well considered, and I doubt not but the thing I
contend for will not be denied.

Now presently upon this Victory is described the Church's Joy and Triumph in
it, in these words: And I heard aloud voice, saying, in Heaven, Now is come
Salvation, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: For the
Accuser of our Brethren is cast down: (that is, those vile Slanderers, the
Instruments of that great Accuser Satan, are defeated) which accused them
before God day and night, ( i. e. which with malicious Slanders were
uncessantly reproaching the most Holy Faith and Pure Lives of Christian People,
before our Emperors.) And here again the Emperors are typified by God, (as
before at ver. 5. their Throne is called, The Throne of God) because this being
spoken in the Persons of rejoicing Christians, the Spirit would not teach them
to call their Emperors, though Heathen Men and Persecutors, by the name of
Dragons, but to look upon them (as indeed they were by Office) as the Ministers
of God, and his supreme Vicegerents upon Earth, and call them Gods. Which
should teach all Christians modest language toward those that God has set in
Authority over them; agreeable to that Maxim in the Law of Moses (which St.
Paul applies to wicked Rulers, Acts xxiii. 5.) Thou shall not revile the Gods,
nor curse the Ruler of thy People.

In ver. 11. there follows the manner of their obtaining this Victory: And they
overcame him (the Dragon) by the Blood of the Lamb ( i. e. by Faith in the
Blood of Christ) and by the word of their Testimony (the Preaching of his
Gospel;) and they loved not their Lives unto the Death, (but were ready to seal
their Preaching with their Deaths.)

Whereupon in the beginning of ver. 12. we have this short (...), or Triumphal
Hymn, by way of congratulating this Victory to them, in these words; Therefore
rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them. And presently upon this, a Veil
is drawn over the whole face of Heaven, and all upon the sudden the Scene of
things is shifted to the Earth. For it follows in the very next words: Woe to
the Inhabitants of the Earth, and of the Sea, etc. And thus much of the pure
Primitive state of the Church, in respect of which she is represented as in
Heaven. And because the Church is thought fit to be represented there, her
Persecutors are represented there also. So that by Heaven (the Scene of all
those Actions, that were done by the Dragon, and the Woman, etc. till the
Woman's Man-child was caught up to the Throne of God, and the Dragon and his
Angels were cast down to the Earth) is meant the Earth for about three hundred
and ten years, to wit, in the primitive times of Christianity, till the Church
began to decline and take her flight into the Wilderness, upon the assumption
of her Man-child, Constantine the Great, to the Imperial Throne. From that time
the Woman is represented in a lower state, to wit either upon the Eagles Wings,
or in the Wilderness in her Earthly state. The sense then of those words,
Therefore rejoice, ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them, is this: Therefore
let every pious Soul congratulate this your happy Victory to you, O Primitive
times of Christianity; and to you, O valiant, pure, and innocent Christians of
those Primitive times, who are worthy to be accounted as the Inhabiters of
Heaven.

Now according to the Exposition which I have here given of each particular
Type, so far as concerns the Heavenly state of Christ's Catholic Church,
described in that of the Particular Church of Rome; I shall subjoyn this short
Paraphrase, that the Reader may see at one veiw (as it were) what sense the
whole will make according to this manner of explaining it.

A Paraphrase on Rev. xii.

ANd there appeared a great Wonder on Earth in the pure Primitive times of
Christianity, Rome clothed with the Sun of Righteousness, shining with the
bright Light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; exalted above the dimness of Jewish
Ceremonies, and the darkness of Heathenish Superstitions; and adorned with a
glorious Crown of the fellowship and communion of all the other Apostolical
Churches of the Roman Empire, professing the same most holy Faith, and
partaking of like Sufferings with her.

2. And she being zealous to gain Souls to Christ, did groan heavily under the
Cruelty of her Persecutors, while she was employed in that excellent Service of
converting Sinners from the error of their ways.

3. And there appeared another Wonder on the Earth at the same time, and
behold, the Roman Heathen Emperors, the professed Opposers of the Faith of
Christ, and Instruments of the infernal Dragon, great in Power, and red with
the Blood of Saints; being the sixth King, or sort of Supreme Governors, which
that City had enjoyed, to whom one more was to succeed when that Empire should
come to be divided into ten Kingdoms.

4. And these Emperors had the third part of the Kingdoms of the then-known
World in subjection to them, and they (like the Egyptian Persecutors of the
Jewish Church) stood before the Church of Rome, (she being in the same City
just under their Eye) as she was busied in gaining Proselytes to the Faith of
Christ, to destroy them as soon as ever they professed Christianity.

5. But for all their vigilant Rage against her, she obtained at the last a
Christian Moses, to deliver her out of this Egyptian Persecution; and he was
assumed to the Imperial Seat to rule all Nations of the Roman Empire with a
Christian Scepter.

6. And presently hereupon she began to decline from her Primitive Heavenly
Purity to an Earthly state, and fled upon the Roman Eagle out of her Egyptian
Persecution into such a state of things as was that of the Israelites in the
Wilderness: in which her Wilderness-condition God has appointed that they
should feed her with such things as her Soul lusts after for the space of One
thousand two hundred and sixty years. See Com. upon Chap. xiii. 5.

7. But before I speak particularly of her Flight into the Wilderness, I must
here take notice of the means whereby she escaped, that both her self, and all
her Converts were not destroyed by those Heathen Persecuting Emperors: which
came to pass by means of a Spiritual Conflict, which I saw on Earth in those
Primitive times; the Roman Bishops, and their inferior Clergy, fought against
the Heathen persecuting Emperors, and the Heathen persecuting Emperors fought,
and their subordinate Ministers.

8. And they could not prevail, but were overcome and utterly subdued in that
Contest.

9. Neither was it the Heathen Persecuting Emperors that were thus vanquished,
but in effect the Dragon himself, whose work they did; I mean, that old
Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole World: He indeed
it was that was overcome, and his Angels were overcome with him.

10. And so soon as the Church had obtained this Victory, I heard a loud voice
of rejoicing amongst them, saying, Now has God saved us, and brought us out of
this Egyptian bondage with a mighty hand; and instead of Heathen Persecutors,
we have a Christian Emperor, that will advance the interest of the Kingdom of
God, and will propagate the Gospel, which is the power of his Christ unto
Salvation: for those vile slanderers of our Brethren, those instruments of the
grand Accuser, are defeated, who never ceased to reproach their pure and
innocent conversation, and so to render them odious to our Emperors, God's
Vicegerents.

11. And they overcame him by steadfast Faith in the Blood of Christ, and by
their undaunted preaching of his Gospel; sealing and being ready to seal it
with their Deaths.

12. Therefore let every pious soul congratulate this most glorious victory to
you, O Heavenly times of Primitive purity, and to you, O pure, courageous
Champions of the Christian Faith that lived in them, and may be likened to the
Inhabiters of Heaven.

CHAP. II. An Exposition of Rev. xii from the middle of verse. 12. to the end of
the Chapter. And therein of the Airy or Declining State of the Roman Catholic
Church, while she is flying out of her Egyptian Persecution into the
Wilderness, upon the two Wings of the great Eagle, the Christian Emperors, (
who were that King of short continuance, not come in St. John's time, nor typed
by any head of the Blasphemous Beast,) with a Paraphrase subjoined.
WE come now to speak of the second state of the Roman (and in her, of the
Catholic) Church; which was no fixed state, but only like the passage of the
Israelites out of Egypt into the Wilderness; a falling from her Heavenly
Primitive Purity to a state of Earthly Feculency and Corruption. And as to this
declining state of the Roman Church, there are these following Particulars most
remarkable in the Histories of those times in general, (I speak the sense of
all those Histories, and therefore I cite none.)

First, That in this short Period the Roman Emperors were Christian, I speak of
these Emperors in general: as for Julian the Apostate, he was but one single
Emperor, the rest were all Christians.

2. That in this Period the Roman Empire was divided into two Parts, one
Emperor residing at Rome in the Western, and the other at Constantinople in the
Eastern part of it. And for this Reason the Roman Empire is now typified at
ver. 14, by two wings of a great Eagle (an Eagle being the Banner of the Roman
Empire.) And because the Enperors at this time were Christian, the Woman is
represented as being born up on their wings. And this is that which was also
observed out of the xviith Chapter, viz. That the other King of short
continuance, (who was to succeed the thenreigning King, the Heathen Emperors)
was to be no Head of the Blasphemous Beast; for accordingly we see him here
typed by two wings of a great Eagle.

3. That the Devil, who is still called the Dragon, though he could not
persecute the Woman as before with open violence, because the Emperors were now
Christian: yet he did it in another manner, by pouring out a flood of Heresies
after her, insomuch that she was in danger of being carried away with it. For
even Liberius, one of her Bishops, is generally acknowledged to have bin
infected with the Arrian Heresy. But yet it is observable,

4. That the Roman Bishops in general were not only the greatest Assistants of
that particular Church of Rome, in saving her from the violence of the Heresies
of those times, and drying up this flood that was intended for her ruin; but
also of all other Churches of the Roman Empire. For in the Council of Sardica
(some say of Nice) it was enacted, That Men unjustly condemned by the Arrians,
should have refuge to the Bishop of Rome, who at that time was Julius: to whom
therefore they gave Power anew again to judge their Cause. And whether this
were a personal honor conferred on Julius alone, or not, it is certain that
the Bishops of Rome in general had the greatest hand in quelling and appeasing
the Heresies of these times. For to them the Orthodox fled for refuge, the
Heretics for appeal. And from these times it is that our Romanists fetch some
of their chiefest Arguments for their Pope's Supreme Authority in deciding
matters of Religion. But yet,

5. It is observable in this Period, That the Bishops and Clergy of Rome
enjoying freedom from Persecution, together with large Incomes from the bounty
and devotion of their Emperors and of other holy persons, and making use of
those advantages of appeals, and refuge and addresses to them which were made
from other Churches: did manifestly appear to be in a declining state, by
grasping after worldly wealth, and endeavoring upon all occasions to advance
the honor of their See, and subjugate all other Churches to them. And hence it
was there arose so much contention between them and other Churches, and
specially the Bishops of Constantinople, about Preeminence. And that we may see
to what a degree of Avarice they were now arrived, we must know, that the
Emperor Valentinian the second, and Theodosius were fain to make a Law to
inhibit Widows, under pretense of Devotion, to leave their Treasures to the
Church (which it seems the Clergy of those times much thirsted after) to the
utter impoverishing and undoing of their Children.

To which we may add lastly, That the Woman her self did in this Period
manifestly decline also to those Idolatries, and Superstitions in which she
fried afterward, by growing fond of Relics, Pictures, Images, Monuments, and
introducing Heathen Rites, which though they did but now begin to show
themselves, did yet within a little space of time diffuse themselves over the
face of the whole Church, and found so good entertainment with this poor
deluded Woman, that she almost exchanged her Religion for them, and became more
zealous for these Fopperies, than for Faith or Holiness, and would persecute
the Opposers of them to the Death.

And now these things being premised in general concerning the state of the
Church, and particularly of the Church of Rome, in this second Period,
according as it is more at large described in the Histories of those times: I
now proceed to a further examination of the particulars of the Prophecy which
concern this Period; we have it in these words:

Verse. 12. -- Woe to the Inhabiters of the Earth, and of the Sea: for the Devil
is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knows that he has but
a short time.

13. And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the Earth, he persecuted the
Woman which brought forth the Man-Child.

14. And to the Woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly
into the Wilderness, into her place: where she is nourished for a time, and
times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent.

15. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth waters as a flood, after the Woman;
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

16. And the Earth helped the Woman, and the Earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth.

17. And the Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her Seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony
of Jesus Christ.

The Inhabiters of the Earth were in the former Period styled the Inhabiters of
Heaven, because all. passages of that Period are represented as if they had bin
done in Heaven. The Woman was clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her
feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve Stars. The Dragon (who is therefore
represented in Heaven, because he persecutes the Woman, who for her Purity of
Faith, and Heavenliness of Conversation for that time, is thought sit to be
represented there) drew in his Tail the third part of the Stars of Heaven. And
the Combatants (who were but mortal men, because the Scene was Heaven) are
typified by Angels.

But, now the Scene is changed to a lower Region, and the Woman not represented
in the Starry Firmament as before, but flying downward upon the Eagles wings.
Her place therefore as yet is in the Air, though the most grave and ponderous
(shall I call it? or most earthy, gross, and feculent) part of her, to wit, her
Helpers (by which I fear are meant her earthly-minded, covetous, and ambitious
Clergy) are represented as on Earth, while yet the Woman is on Eagle's wings.
But of this more anon.

In the mean time let us examine what is meant by the Earth, and who by the
Inhabiters of it. For the Earth is now opposed both to Heaven, as to a more
pure state of things that was before it; and to the Sea, as signifying another
state of things coordinate with it. The Earth therefore being here set in
opposition to the Sea, and not (as it was before) in opposition to the Heaven
only: as it must signify an Earthly state of things succeeding to that
Heavenly; so it must also signify something, as it stands opposed to the Sea.
But that the Earthly signifies a corrupted state of things, as it stands in
opposition to the Heavenly state, will easily appear from the descriptions that
are given us of these two states; of the Heavenly, Rev. xii. 1, etc. of the
Earthly, Rev. xiii. where the Eagles wings are no more heard of, and
consequently the Woman is arrived at her Earthly-Wilderness-condition. And in
token thereof, we there find one Beast, or Kingdom, arising out of the Sea,
ver. 1. and another coming up out of the Earth, ver. 11. and this is the first
time we find the Earth and Sea inhabited, after the Woman's flight into the
Wilderness. To this state of things it is therefore, that the Woe is chiefly to
be referred, which is denounced at the first shifting of the Scene, or first
appearance of declining, in these words, Woe to the Inhabiters of the Earth, and
of the Sea, etc. But what is meant by the Earth as it stands opposed to the Sea?

In order to this let it be observed, That the Inhabiters of the Earth, and the
Inhabiters of the Sea are two several sorts of People: and the Earth and Sea
are to be looked upon as two distinct places. Which manifestly appears from
Rev. xiii, where one Beast is said to have risen out of the Sea, and another
out of the Earth. And indeed we find the Earth and the Sea so often opposed in
this Book, that there must needs be some notable difference between them: See
Rev. vii. 1, 2, 3. and viii. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and x. 2. and xi. 6. and xiv. 2,
3, etc.

And what the meaning of both is, will easily be perceived, if we call to mind
what has bin already See Part 1. cap. 4.
said concerning the Disposition of the Scheme of the Vision, exhibited Rev.
xvii. For there the Woman (the Church of Rome) is represented situate upon
seven Heads or Mountains, as on an Island over-topping the main Ocean, with the
Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues that were subject to her
Jurisdiction, as so many Waters compassing her on every side. From whence we
may conclude, that by the Inhabiters of the Earth, are meant the Inhabiters of
the City or Church of Rome; and by the Inhabiters of the Sea, are designed the
Peoples, Nations, Multitudes, and Tongues that were diffused as Waters round
about her. And in this manner the condition of the Roman Empire being
represented to St. John in Vision, in the time of the last Head, he is said to
have seen one Beast (to wit, the ten-horned) rising out of the Sea, and another
out of the Earth, Rev. xiii. 1, 2. That is, he saw ten Kings arising in the
Roman Territories, and another out of Rome it self. But of this more hereafter
in the xiiith Chapter.

Thus then we are to understand the Inhabiters of the Earth, when they are
opposed to the Inhabiters of the Sea; or to any Waters; or to that which is
typified by Waters, to wit, Peoples, and Nations, and Multitudes, and Tongues.
But otherwise it may well enough admit its proper literal signification. But
this Notion of these Inhabitants is not so fully applicable to the Woman's
Airystate, while she is flying on the Eagle's wings; as afterward, when she is
come into the Wilderness, to her earthly state. Although it has its use here
too, as we shall show anon.

The Woe then at ver. 12, is denounced against the Woman, and the Nations whom
she shall seduce, with reference to that Earthly state, to which she is
declining. And the meaning of it is this, Woe to the Inhabiters of the Church of
Rome, and to the Nations subject to the Roman Jurisdiction, for the Devil being
overcome by the Primitive Christians, in the War which he waged against them by
Rome's Heathen Emperors, is now come to deceive you as he did them, and
substitute you to be his Instruments of Persecution and Idolatry in their
stead; and this design he means to prosecute upon you with all his might, being
very angry at the Defeat he has received, and sensible withal that he has but
a short time remaining to deceive the World in, in comparison of those many
Years he has spent already in that Work.

And to this purpose it is very observable at ver. 17, that the Woman being
fled into the Wilderness, the Dragon is no longer said to have made War with
Her, but only with a Remnant (that is, a few selected Persons) of her Seed,
which keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.
From thenceforth therefore the Woman is not persecuted, but deceived (as you
may see Rev. xvii;) and the War is made only against a Remnant of her Seed, she
being then become the chief Instrument of the Dragon in promoting Idol-Worship,
and persecuting that pious Remnant of her Children that refuse Communion with
her in it, and reprove he^ Superstitions and Corruptions. But of this more anon.

In the mean time, let us hear an account of the second Persecution which the
Dragon is now projecting against the Woman, as she is flying into the
Wilderness. It begins with these words: And when the Dragon saw that he w^^
cast unto the Earth, he persecuted the Woman which brought forth the Man-Child.
These last words point out to us the time when the second Persecution was
begun, as well as the occasion whereupon it happened. For hence it follows, that
the Dragon had not done any Exploit against the Woman since her bringing forth
the Man-Child, which was caught up to the Throne of God, ver. 5, till now that
he is preparing this new Stratagem against her, to overwhelm her with a flood
of waters, as she is flying into the Wilderness. For so soon as ever the
Woman's Man-Child was caught up to the Throne of God, it is said at ver. 6,
that she fled into the Wilderness. And as she was flying into the Wilderness
(for then it was, as appears by the following verses) the Dragon rallies up his
Forces, and begins to persecute her a second time. So that the War, which is
described at the seventh, eighth, and ninth verses, wherein the Dragon is said
to have bin cast down to the Earth, though it be set after the first mention of
the Woman's flying into the Wilderness, yet is to be understood to have bin
waged against her before her Man-Child was caught up to the Throne of God. For
when the Dragon saw that he was cast down to the Earth (which was done by
Michael and his Angels in the War before described) he went and persecuted the
Woman, which had brought forth the Man-Child, as she was flying into the
Wilderness.

The War therefore wherein the Dragon was cast down to the Earth, was
contemporary with his first Persecution of the Woman, before she had brought
forth her Man-Child. For therefore it is so precisely noted here, that the
Dragon persecuted the Woman which had brought forth the Man-Child: that we
might take notice that the Dragon had not persecuted her, nor made War against
her, since her bringing forth the Man-Child, till now that he being cast down
to the Earth, and her Man-Child assumed to the Throne of God, he persecutes her
as she is slying into the Wilderness.

Now as to the meaning of the Types that are used in this 13th verse, they
having all relation to the former Period, where the Scene was Heaven, must be
interpreted in the same sense as there they have bin used in. Only the Dragon
since he was cast down to the Earth, and in his stead the Woman's Man-Child
caught up to the Imperial Throne, is not to be understood as having seven Heads
and ten Horns (according as he is described, ver. 3.) that is, as persecuting
by the means of the Roman Emperors: but as he is described at ver. 9, where he
is called that old Serpent, the Devil and Satan; to intimate to us, that the
prime Author of this second Persecution is the same with that of the first;
only he being now dethroned, is forced to make use of meaner instruments, and
another sort of Persecution. Thus then we may express the meaning of this
thirteenth verse: And when the Devil saw that he was worsted and dethroned in
his first Attempt, he sought by other means to persecute the Church of Rome,
now she had gotten a Christian Emperor.

Which preparation and intention of the Dragon being thus declared, there
follows in the 14th verse, a description of the Woman's second state, to wit,
the state of her declension from her Primitive Purity, to which the Dragon now
accommodates this second Persecution: it is described in these words; And to
the Woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the
Wilderness, into her place: where she is nourished for a time, and times, and
half a time, from the face of the Serpent. Here then we have the Woman in her
Airy state, upon the Eagle's wings, as flying down from Heaven to Earth, and
hasting from the face of her Egyptian Persecutors, to that unhappy (though too
much desired) state of Ease and Peace, and Worldly Wealth, and secular Pomp,
and rest from Persecution, which is prepared for her in the Wilderness.

And let it be observed here, That as the Woman (or the Church of Rome) is now
changing her condition: so the Politic state of the Roman Empire receives a
very notable Mutation with her. For whereas the Roman Emperors were before
typified by the Dragon, (whereby is signified that they were professed Enemies
of the Church of Christ) without any intimation of a Division of the Empire:
they are here contrariwise represented to us under the Type of two wings of a
great Eagle; to intimate the Division of the Roman Empire, (whose Banner was an
Eagle) into two parts or wings, administered by a pair of Emperors in this
second Period. And because these Emperors were the Woman's Friends, they are
not only represented by a pair of wings, but are also said to have bin given to
the Woman, to wit, to bear her gently to the place, or state, that she was
hasting to.

And further, let us here observe the parallel of this description of the state
of the Roman Empire, with that which the Angel gives Rev. xvii. 10, 11. where
he tells us of seven Kings typisied by seven Heads; and between the sixth and
and seventh of them puts in another King, not typified by any Head. A King he
was to be, of the same dignity with the other seven, but not of the same nature
with them, not any member of the blasphemous Beast, nor of the number of those
Kings that are represented by his Heads. So that in the time of this King, the
Blasphemots Beast might seem to have received a mortal wound, as being deprived
of his Head. But it was not long after when by the artifice of the Dragon, upon
the failing of the Eagles Wings, this deadly wound was healed by the
substitution of another Head, Chap. xiii. 1, 3. Here then let us compare this
History, with what the Angel tells us of the seven Heads of the Beast, and of
the other King of short continuance, that was to interpose between the sixth
and seventh Heads, Rev. xvii. 10, 11.

He tells us therefore that five of those Kings were fallen, and so there is of
them no further mention, neither are they represented, as the others are, by
their respective and peculiar Types. But he adds, that one is; and he is
represented in this xiith Chapter we are now upon, by a great red Dragon with
seven Heads crowned, but ten Horns uncrowned. Because the Heads had bin, and
were at that present in possession of their Kingdom, but the Horns were not.
This Dragon therefore is the one that is, to wit, that in St. John's time
reigned. The other (says the Angel) is not yet ^^m^, and when he comes he must
continue a sho^t space; to wit, the Christian Emperors; who because they were
Christian, and not Idolaters, are not thought fit to be typified by any of the
Heads, which, for their worshipping of Idols, are said to have had upon them
the name of Blasphemy, ( Rev. xiii. 1.) and the Beast to whom those Heads
belonged, to have bin full of names of Biasphemy, (Rev. xvii. 3.) The Christian
Emperors therefore are not thought fit to be represented by any Beast or Head,
but the Angel vouchsafes them a peculiar mention by themselves, as being none
of that Blasphemous Crew; and accordingly they are here typified in the xiith
Chapter, not by any Beast or Head, as the Heathen Emperors are by the Dragon,
ver. 3. and the ten Kingdoms under the Headship and Supremacy of the Idolatrous
Bishops, by the Leopard, Rev. xiii. 2; but by two wings of a great Eagle. And
whereas the Angel tells us of these Christian Emperors, that they should
continue but a short space: his words are here exactly answered by what is said
of these two wings of the great Eagle, which served only for the Woman's flight
into the Wilderness, (which was as quick a way of passing thither as possible)
and then they vanished.

These two wings then of the great Eagle were given to the Woman, that she
might fly into the Wilderness into her place. What is meant by the Wilderness
has been before explained at ver. 6, where it is said, that in the Wilderness
God has prepared for the Woman a place. And agreeably thereunto it is here
said at ver. 14, that she fled into the Wilderness into her place. But what
place is this that she fled to in the Wilderness? Here it must be observed,
that those three States of the Woman, viz. That of her Egyptian Servitude under
the Heathen Emperors; That of her ^light out of it under Christian Emperors;
and that of her rest and quiet in the Wilderness under her own Bishops: may
(from a different consideration of the Types by which these three States are
otherwise represented) be expressed by her Heavenly, her Aerie, and her Earthly
State. So that her flying into the Wilderness, answers to her flying to the
Earth. Hence it is that in the Wilderness, Rev. xvii, we find her sitting upon
many Waters, and upon the ten-horned Beast that rose out of the Sea; in token
of her arrival at this Sublunary and Terrestrial Globe. Wherefore by her place
in the Wilderness, is meant her place in the Earth; and that is no other but
the place where the City of Rome on Earth is situated. In this place ( viz.
upon the seven Mountains) we must conceive that the two wings of the great
Eagle set the Woman down, when they had brought her gently to the Earth. By
which is signified, That the Church of Rome was now degenerated from her
primitive Heavenly Purity, and coming into the Wilderness of this World, a Maze
or Labyrinth of Secular Businesses; and that at such a time, when the Roman
Empire through the Incursions of the Barbarous Nations, was nothing else but a
desolate Wilderness, as the Prophets often phrase it.

In this place then she is nourished (to wit, with such things as she, like the
Church of Israel in the Wilderness, lusts after) for a time, and times, and
half a time, from the face of the Serpent. This duration of the Woman's in the
Wilderness, is otherwise expressed at ver. 6. by One thousand, two hundred, and
sixty days, which makes just three Years and an half, if we allow to every Year
twelve Months, and to every Month thirty Days. Since therefore this Woman is
said at ver. 6, to have a place in the Wilderness prepared of God for her, that
they should feed her there One thousand two hundred and sixty days. And here
again it is said of her, that she fled into the Wilderness, where she is
nourished for (...) time, and times, and half a time; it is evident that by a
time, and times, and half a time, must be meant One thousand, two hundred, and
threescore days; and therefore we cannot better understand a time than of a
Year, or Three hundred and sixty days; by which reckoning, three Years and a
half will make just One thousand, two hundred, and threescore days. And because
those days are put for Years (as shall be proved hereafter in the xiiith
Chapter) the three Years and half, which answer to those one thousand, two
hundred, and threescore days, must be understood not of common Years,
consisting of three hundred and sixty days, but of as many Years as days.

And as for that which is added, viz. That the Woman is to be nourished in the
Wilderness so long a time from the face of the Serpent; the meaning is, that
she should be preserved there from Persecution: as appears both from the former
part of this Prophecy, where she is described in her Heavenly state; and also
from the xviith Chapter, where her Eremitical Condition is set forth to us. For
these words, from the face of the Serpent, have a manifest relation to that
Type, which is used in the description of the first Persecution at ver. 4,
where the Dragon is represented as standing before the Woman; so that the Woman
at that time was just before the face of the Serpent. Now therefore she makes
the more haste to get away into the Wilderness, from the face of the Serpent,
as desiring by all means to be out of the reach of those Afflictions, which she
suffered when he stood before her.

And to this agrees that description of the Woman's Eremitical Condition, which
we have Rev. xiii, and xvii. For from thence it plainly appears, that neither
the Woman her self, nor the Kingdoms and Churches subject to the Woman's
Jurisdiction, are any longer persecuted, but that on the contrary, the Dragon
flatters them, and takes upon him to be very friendly to them, giving to the
ten-horned Beast his Power, and Seat, and great Authority (Rev. xiii. 2.) which
in effect was to give it to the Woman. For those ten Kings did give it to her,
as appears in that she is represented sitting on them ( Rev. xvii.) that is,
commanding them, and exercising Power and Jurisdiction over them. And to that
seventh Head or King, who is called the Beast that was, and is not, and who (as
has bin proved) was to have his residence in the Church of Rome, those ten
Kings to whom the Dragon gave his Power, and Seat, and great Authority, are
said to give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom. So that the Dragon now
pretends to be the Woman's Benefactor, not showing his face as formerly, to
afright her; but covering it with some disguise, or putting on another shape,
that she not knowing him but by his face, nor having any jealousy of his fair
offers and pretenses, might the more easily be deceived by him. And this is
that which I had occasion to observe a little before, viz. That the Woman after
her coming into the Wilderness, is no longer persecuted by the Serpent, but
deceived. This therefore is the reason that she makes such haste to get into
the Wilderness, where she is not to be persecuted, but fed and nourished, and
so far preserved from the face and fury of the Serpent, as to be flattered and
indulged, and caressed by him.

But now though she be flying into that so much desired state, where she and
the Serpent shall accord so well together: yet, as she is passing thither, he
endeavors what he can to overwhelm her. For so it follows at ver. 15. That the
Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood, after the Woman: that he might
cause her to be carried away of the flood. This he did, as appears from the
Context, while the Woman was upon the Eagle's wings, as she was flying into the
Wilderness to her Earthly state.

Now as in her Earthly state the Nations subject to the Roman Jurisdiction are
represented by the Waters of the Sea, as has been showed already: so reason
would that in her Airy state, they should be represented by the Clouds. For the
Clouds have the same proportion to the Woman in the Air, which the Sea has to
her on the Earth. And we know that Clouds are the proper fountains, from whence
Floods descend upon the Earth.

Whereas then the Serpent is here said to have cast out of his mouth Water as a
Flood, after the Woman, etc. we must not think that the Serpent did this by
himself without the help of his Ministers, any more than in the former
Persecution, which he managed by the Heathen Emperors; or in that other
afterward described, which he carried on by the assistance of another Beast,
nay, of the Woman her own self, who is said to have bin drunken with the blood
of Saints. We must not therefore think that the Serpent himself poured this
flood of waters out of his own mouth, but it is to be understood that he made
the Clouds to pour it out. Since therefore by the Clouds which are the Waters
of the Airy Region, are typified the Peoples subject to the Roman Jurisdiction;
what can their pouring out of their mouth, a flood of waters, by the impulse of
the Dragon, signisie, but their pouring out a flood of Heretical Teachers, and
Doctrines, whereby the Woman was in great danger to have bin oppressed, and
born away with the violence of it?

And this Allegory of the Serpent's p^^ring out of his mouth a flood of waters
aft^^ the Woman, to cause her to be carried away with it, is so fit a
representation of that superfetation of Heretics and Heresies, which arose in
this Period, out of the Churches in Communion with the Church of Rome, but
spread themselves to her, and did well-near endanger the subversion of her
Faith: That I believe it is impossible to express it either by a fitter or
clearer Type, if any one would study purposely to do it. For, because the Woman
is represented in the Air is a declining state, the Serpent is represented also
with a suitable design of causing her to be carried away with a violent pouring
out of water after her. Those Heretics therefore whereby the Serpent did so
much endanger the Church of Rome in this Period, are very fitly compared to the
waters of a slood, which was the likeliest means to cause the Woman in those
circumstances which she then was in, to be carried hastily to her ruin with the
violence of it. And because these Heretics arose out of the Churches in
Communion with the Chuch of Rome and so out of those Peoples, Nations,
Multitudes and Tongues, which are typified by Waters (Rev. xvii. 1, 15.) these
Heretics also coming out of those Waters, are yet more fitly represented by
Waters. And because they are supposed to descend out of the Air, as being
poured out after the Woman, who was there as yet upon the Eagles wings, they
are as fitly typified by the waters of a flood; for floods come down from
thence. And because they were designed for the carrying away of the Woman, they
are fitly said to have bin poured out, that is, not dropped or distilled down
like common Rain, but violently descending from above; as if the Windows of the
Heavens which once were opened to the Deluge of the World, were now once more
set open to the overflowing of the Church. And lastly, because these Heretics
were the Serpent's Instruments, and did his work, by framing, preaching, and
maintaining of erroneous Doctrines, which are the product of the Mouth; they
are most appositely represented as proceeding ont of the Serpent's mouth, whose
work they did, whose Ministers they were, whose Doctrines they divulged and
maintained.

Now by what means the Woman escaped safe out of this Heretical persecution in
the Wilderness, we are told in ver. 16. where it is said, That the Earth helped
the Woman, and the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the
Dragon cast out of his mouth. By the Earth no doubt are typified some
inhabiters of the Earth; for it is not reasonable to imagine, that in this so
dangerous a persecution, by the overflowing of Heretical Doctrines, the Church
of Rome should have had the chief of her Assistance from some senseless Element,
or unreasonable Creature. Who then were the main Helpers of the Church of Rome
in this Heretical Persecution? Her Emperors being Christian Persons, and her
Friends, were certainly not the least of her Assistants. But these are
represented by the Eagles Wings, and help the Woman in her flight, by bearing
her upon their Wings. Who then are they that are compared to the Earth, and
helped her by opening of their mouths to swallow up that flood of Waters, which
the Serpent had cast out of his? And because we speak not now of the Catholic
Church, but of that particular Church of Rome, which alone is typisied by the
Woman, we must not seek for any Helpers, but such as did peculiarly belong to
that particular Church: no other Helpers being here directly typified by the
Earth, as neither any other Churches by the Woman.

How can it then be thought that the Roman Clergy, that did the Woman so much
service in her former persecution in her Heavenly State, where they are
typified by Michael and his Angels, should be here unconcerned in this second
Persecution, where the Woman is assaulted with such kind of Enemies, as are
most fit to be encountered by her Clergy? It is therefore certain that her
Clergy had the greatest hand in bringing of her off at this time also. And who
but they should here be typified by the Earth, it is not easy to conceive. Nay
we cannot reasonably suspect the truth of it, if we admit of that Hypothesis,
which has been proved from the Angels interpretation of the Vision, Rev. xvii,
where we are told, that by the Woman is meant the City of Rome, etc. According
to which Hypothesis the great red Dragon with seven Heads crowned, will typify
(as has been shown already) the Heathen Roman Emperors: and the two Wings of
the great Eagle the Christian Emperors. Whence it will follow of necessity sity
that the Woman born upon those Wings, must signify the Church of Rome in the
time of her Christian Emperors, before those Wings were broken, and the ten
Horns, together with the Beast, received Power as Kings.

And if so, let us but consult the Histories of those times, and we shall find,
that as they speak of nothing that can be more lively represented by the Waters
poured out of the Serpent's mouth, than that mighty Inundation of Heretics,
which were the most remarkable Pest of this Period: so we shall find the
Clergy of Rome, (and nothing else but them, so far as that particular Church
is here concerned) to answer punctually to every thing that is here spoken of
the Earth.

As, 1. it is here said, That the Earth helped the Woman: so did they the
Church of Rome. 2. It is said, That the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
up the stood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth. And so did they, by
opening of their mouths, and judging and determining the Controversies of
Religion, which were started in those Times, and by maintaining the Cause, and
defending the Persons of the Orthodox, appease those Tumults, and confound
those Heresies, and were the most observable and renowned Helpers, not only of
their own particular, but of the Universal Church. These therefore helped the
Woman by suchlike means as the Heretics persecuted her. For as they
persecuted her, by pouring out of their mouth a flood of Water: so these helped
her, by opening of their mouths, and swallowing up the flood. And it is but fit
that what Heretical Teachers labor to destroy with their mouths, the Orthodox
should as earnestly endeavor to preserve with theirs.

There remains then but one thing more to be accounted for concerning this
Type, viz. Why the Roman Clergy though they still continue Orthodox in the
Faith, and faithful Helpers of the Woman in her Persecutions and Afflictions
for the Gospel's sake, should yet be typified by the Earth? Especially since
the Woman herself is hitherto upon the Eagle's wings. For, as has been proved
before, the Earth is used in this Prophecy as a most dishonorable Type, to
represent the most depraved and corrupted state of things. And therefore it may
seem a very improper representation of the Roman Clergy who at this time were
Orthodox. Neither can it, be thought that this Type is given them without some
reason: or that it fell to them by chance, or that because the Heretics are
represented by a flood, the Orthodox are typified by the Earth of course, and
for the due proportion of the Allegory.

But let us not be so vain as to imagine that the Spirit of Prophecy could not
have invented five hundred other Allegories to express these passages by, most
punctually and exactly, if this had failed in any circumstance. Since therefore
it is observable that the Earth does always signify a degenerate state of
things, it is not to be doubted but the Roman Clergy, who are here typified by
the Earth, though they were orthodox in the Faith, yet were sufficiently
degenerate in some other matter. And what that matter was is very manifest from
the Histories of those times, who jointly tell us that the Roman Clergy being
mightily enriched under their Christian Emperors, did withal degenerate to
Earthly-mindedness, and are very observable in all Histories for their covetous
and ambitious practices.

And yet there may another reason be given, why the Roman Clergy in this signal
service which they did the Woman, are here typified by the Earth. For hereby
they are conveniently represented under the Wings (as it were) of those
Christian Emperors, by whose favor protection, and encouragement, they were
so succesful in this undertaking.

And thus we have the Woman's Airy state, or, the description of her flight
into the Wilderness. For that which follows in the 17th verse, is but a Preface
to her Earthly-Wilderness-condition. But here it is well worthy to be observed,
that upon the supposition of the truth of this Exposition, we have an
undeniable Argument for the Orthodox Faith professed by the Church of Rome
throughout this Period, against the Heretics that opposed it; and particularly
against the Arrians, who of all others were the busiest at this time. For it is
manifest, that those prevailing Doctrines, by whose Abettors the Church of Rome
was persecuted, and which were swallowed up by the Earth (that is, which were
condemned and silenced) in this Period, so that afterward they were little
heard of in the Church, were Heresies, or (in the language of this Prophecy)
the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth. And it is observable
peculiarly of the Arrian Heresy, that although in this Period it made so great
a bustle in the Church, and prevailed almost to the subversion of the true
Faith: Yet in a little time it was so far baffled by the Zeal and Vigor of the
Orthodox, and deserted by its own Professors, that about the beginning of the
next Period (when the Roman Empire came to be destroyed, and the Church arrived
at her Earthly state) we find in History very little of it; and soon after,
nothing. For indeed almost all Sects and Heresies of the former times were
swallowed up in that third Period, in the Antichristian Pride and Greatness,
and Idolatries of the Church of Rome. And it is yet far more evident, that the
Orthodox Faith concerning the ever blessed Trinity cannot be interpreted to be
any of that flood, which the Dragon cast out of his mouth: because this was so
far from being swallowed up in this Period, that it has ever since continued
for above these thousand years most zealously and universally professed in the
Roman Church.

But here also let us observe, that that Woe which at the first shifting of the
Scene we find denounced against the Inhabiters of the Earth, and of the Sea, is
now in part already come upon them. For though the Woman be yet persecuted, and
her Clergy Orthodox: yet is she herself declining, and her Clergy waxen Earthy,
and the Waters round about her dangerously infected with the poison of
Heretical Opinions.

But from henceforth expect no more to see the Woman persecuted. For the Dragon
having in these two attempts perceived himself unable to effect his ends upon
her by any sort of Persecution, is now about to try his artifice in deceiving
her; and so prevails by this device that of a persecuted and afflicted Woman,
he makes her drunken with the blood of Saints, and those, her own children too,
a few, a remnant of her righteous Seed. For so it follows ver. 17. That the
Dragon (upon this second unsuccesfulness of this attempt upon the Woman) was
wroth with her, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep
the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

The Dragon being wroth with the Woman, for having been too hard for him in
those two attempts that he had lately made upon her by way of persecution, is
now about to try another course, intending to deceive her; and to make war, not
any more with her, but with the remnant of her seed. For of this I must desire
the Reader to take special notice, That so soon as the Woman is fled into the
Wilderness upon the Eagles Wings, (that is, so soon as the Roman Empire ceased
to be governed by a pair of Christian Emperors, and the ten Horns came to
receive power as Kings, as we see in the very beginning of the next
Persecution, described Chap. xiii, it being that war for which the Dragon is
now preparing) the Woman, that is, the Roman Catholic Church, (as that word
Catholic signifies the Generality of her Professors) cease to be
persecuted, as she had been all along before, and becomes the Dragon's friend:
who through his kindness to her in setting her upon the Roman Beast, Rev. xvii,
did easily persuade her to prevaricate in her Faith with God, to turn a great
Idolatress, and to drink largely of the blood of Saints.

Wherefore I must needs impute it to some fatal instinct, that they of the
Religion of the Church of Rome as it is generally professed among them, have
bin so very fond of this ill-boding name of Roman Catholic. For though this
name were very honorable in the primitive times, and gave place to none even in
the next declining Period, (for hitherto the Church of Rome had labored under
Persecutions) Yet when she once is come into the Wilderness, we find this Woman
so astonishingly altered, that the name of Heathen is not more abominable than
the name of Roman Catholic. We need not therefore envy our present Romanists
the honor which they challenge as peculiar to themselves, of being Catholic:
if, by our piety and sencere preaching of the Word of God, we can but approve
our selves to be of that holy remnant of her Offspring,whom she persecutes for
not consenting with her, but reproving her Idolatries; that is, for being true
Protestants in keeping the Commandments of God, and having the Testimony of
Jesus Christ.

This is so sad a story for poor Roman Catholics, that I profess I am
exceeding sorry for them. But yet I see not any possibility of finding out a
milder sense, or a more favorable construction of this Prophecy for them,
without making the most incoherent nonsense of it in the world. For in the
xvii Chapter of the Revelation we have the Woman described in her
Wilderness-condition. And there the Angel has so plainly told us, that by the
Woman is meant the City of Rome, that even Bellarmin himself, and many other
the most celebrated Champions of the Roman Church, are forced to own it. But
now that Woman in the Wilderness must be the same with this which fled into the
Wilderness; and she which fled into the Wilderness, is the same with her who
before was clothed with the Sun, and had the Moon under her feet, and upon her
head a crown of twelve Stars, who was persecuted by the Dragon both then, and
in the time of her flying into the Wilderness: so that it is impossible to
expound this Woman of the Heathen City of Rome, but only the Church of Christ
within that City.

Neither will any Romanist find fault with me for speaking so very honorably
of the Church of Rome, as I have done throughout the first Period, which
represents her Clergy, by the glorious Type of Michael and his Angels; nor
will they blame me for that singular commendation of their Orthodoxy in the
second Period, while the Woman was flying into the Wilderness upon those two
Wings of the great Eagle: now therefore they must bear with me, while I speak
no worse things, nor no other of her, after she is come into the Wilderness,
than what the Holy Spirit of Prophecy has in plain words declared and foretold
concerning her.

But it may be she is not yet arrived at her Wilderness-condition. And let them
then that are of this opinion show us who is meant by that great red Dragon
with seven Heads crowned, and ten Horns uncrowned. Let them show us plainly
when that persecution of the Woman ceased. Let them show us who that Man-child
was whom the Woman brought forth, and who was caught up to the Throne of God.
Let them us give a clear account of that War which was between Michael and his
Angels on the one side, and the Dragon and his Angels on the other side:
wherein the Dragon is said to have been cast out to the Earth, and Michael and
his Angels to have overcome him by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their Testimony, and because they loved not their lives unto the death. And let
them further make it plain to us, what is meant by those two wings of the great
Eagle, that were given to the Woman for the expediting of her flight into the
Wilderness: and let them clear those other circumstances of the second Period.

And whereas as the Church of Rome, after she is come into the Wilderness, is
represented there as sitting upon Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and
Tongues, or otherwise, as sitting upon the Romas Beast, or Kingdom under the
seventh Head, or eighth King of Rome, and is there said to have been given to
Idolatry, to have made all Nations drunk with her Idolatrous Cup, and her self
with the blood of Saints and Martys: Let them show us if they can, either that
the seventh and eighth King of Rome, and of the Roman Empire, is not yet come
(for it is manifest that the sixth was reigning in St. John's time;) or that
the Church of Rome has not yet obtained that universal Empire which is
attributed to her, Rev. xvii; that she does not yet sit upon those many Waters,
nor exercise authority over those ten Horns, amongst whom the Ranan Empire was
to be divided in the time of its seventh Head. Or that the Church of Rome is
not yet clothed with Purple and Scarlet color, nor decked with Gold, and
precious Stones, and Pearls. Or i^ that Church has not yet fallen to Idolatry,
and spread it far and near throughout the Roman Empire: or be not yet drunken
with the blood of Saints, who has been the cause of so much bloodshed in
defense of her Religion (which all the World besides herself proclaims to be
Idolatrous) we may well expect to hear of them when it is likely that she shall.

Or if the Roman Empire be not ye^ divided into ten Kingdoms, and if those
Kings have not yet given their power, and strength and kingdom to the seventh
Head or King of Rome, and of the Roman Empire, so that he now presides by a
precarious right, derived from the favor of those Princes, and liable to be
demanded when they please; it would be worth the hearing how these things can
ever be more punctually fullfilled, then they seem to have already been.

Or lastly, if they shall persist that the Church of Rome is not yet come into
the Wilderness; that is, arrived at her vast Empire, her Purple and her Scarlet
color, her Gold, and her Pearls, and her precious stones, but is still
persecuted by the great red Dragon, that has seven Heads and ten Horns, (that
is, by the Roman Empire, under some one or other of its Heads) and is yet
weltring in her blood, crying, and pained and in great affliction, and has been
so for more then sixteen Hundred years; and therefore is at present in her
heavenly state: or else that she is but declining yet upon the two wings of the
great Eagle, and that the present flood of those she pleases to call Heretics
are cast out after her by the Dragon, and are not rather of that c^nant of her
own children, that are ^ersecuted by her to the death, for keeping the
Commandments of God, and having the testimny of Jesus Christ: let them with^^t
any more ado, plainly and solidly, without fraud or guile, or any base
un^andsome artifice, give us a clear account ^f all particulars, as they are
related in this Prophecy, and applied to the Church of Rome; adding withal a
^unctual refutation of that Exposition we have given, and are giving of them;
and demonstrating the absurdity and ^nconsistence of it, not with their
prejudices, but with the text it self, which we have undertaken to expound; and
then, I shall have very little doubt, but that a Roman Catholic is a very
worthy name, and such as every Christian ought to be ambitious of, and to
endeavor after, as he tenders Truth, and Unity, and his own Salvation.

For let me add, that we who have departed from the Communion of the Church of
Rome, (or, if you please, are driven out from her Communion) are not so
unconcerned in this Prophecy, as we generally would make our selves believe we
are. Insomuch that many good and learned Men amongst us have seemed a little to
discourage all attempts of looking into these mysterious secrets of the
Revelation, and even to take a little pride in owning that they are not wise
enough to comprehend them. From whence this mischief has ensued, that the
unfolding of them has bin mostly left either to factious, or to injudicious
persons, who being carried away with violent prejudices, or not having
abilities answerable to their Zeal of finding out the Truth, have made but very
little progress in the work.

But, I say, the Protestant Churches are not altogether unconcerned in this
Prophecy. For as we have a great advantage of the Church of Rome, if she be
come into the Wilderness: so if she still continue in her Heavenly state, or be
as yet but on the Eagle's wings, I cannot see how we that separate from her
Communion, can be justified in so doing. For if this Woman be the Church of
Rome (which I take to be one of the most demonstrable Truths that are contained
in this, or any other Prophecy) let us but read those passages that concern
either her Heavenly or her declining state, and we must needs perceive even
from the letter of the Text, without the light of any Exposition, that ^^e has
throughout those Periods the special condemnation of the Spirit of God. For she
is not only persecuted by the Dragon, who is that old Serpent, called the Devil
and Satan; but is also victorious over him in both those Periods.

But if we could plainly show that both those Periods are absolved, and the
Church of Rome arrived at her Wilderness-condition; we should produce the
clearest justification of our Cause imaginable, and of our departure from
communion with her. For then we have the Spirit evidently bearing witness
together with us, that she is a great Idolatress, and a most detestable
Persecutrix of the Saints, that is, of that small remnant of her Seed, whom God
has reserved to himself out of that general Defection and Apostasy, which at
that time was to befil the Roman Church.

But that we may not seem to give a slight account of this term, The Rennant of
her Seed, the clearing where of (...) of so much importance to the the right
understanding of this Prophecy: let it be considered, that the Woman, and her
See^ in general, and the Rest or Remnant of her Seed, are three distinct and
several things. Now in both the former Periock, the Dragon had persecuted the
Woman's her self, and all her Seed in general, that persisted in communion with
her. But now that she is come into the Wildeness, to be fed and nourished from
the face of the Serpent, though for that reason he be wroth with her; yet he
intends no^ to revenge himself upon her by making War with her, but only with
the Remnant of her Seed.

Who then can be this Reminant of her Seed? First, it is evident that by the
Remnant of her Seed, cannot be meant the Woman herself, for she must
necessarily be distinguished from her Seed, much rather from the Remnant of her
seed. Besides, we find the Woman, after she is come into the Wilderness, not
persecuted, but so far from that, that she is ^aking War herself against the
Saints, and drunken with the blood of them.

Neither can we understand by this remnant of her Seed, her Seed in general,
namely those her Younger Children, which she was to be delivered of in the
Wilderness, in opposition of that elder Offstring which she had brought forth
in the two former Periods. For, as for the generality of her Children, after
she is come into the Wilderness, they are manifestly declared to have run with
her to the same excess of riot and impiety. For how can a more Catholic
Apostasy be described, than that whereof this Woman was to be the Author in the
Wilderness, with whom it is said, That the Rev. xvii. 2. and xviii. 3.
Kings of the Earth have committed fornication, and the Inhabiters of the Earth
have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication; and that all nations had
drunk of it. Wherefore this Remnant of her Seed, cannot be spoken of the
Generality of her Seed that she was to bring forth in the Wilderness, because
they generally took part with her in her Impieties: Whereas it is said of this
Remnant of her Seed, with whom the Dragon is now preparing to make War, that
they are such as keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus
Christ.

It remains therefore, that by this Remnant of the Woman's Seed, should be a
few of her Children, that she should bring forth in the Wilderness, who through
the special Grace of God should be preserved pure from her corruptions; in
opposition to those many, or if you please, that Catholic party of her
Offspring, who should hold Communion with her.

And this is the constant sense of this word Remnant throughout the Scripture,
where it very frequently occurrs. See 2 King. xix. 4, 31. Nehem. i. 3. And
there are many other Texts to like purpose.
For there, when any general Defection or Calamity is described, those whom it
pleases God to save out of it, are very seldom otherwise expressed, than by a
Remnant, or a Residue, or some word of like importance.

When therefore it is said that the Dragon was wroth with the Woman, etc. The
meaning is, that he was wroth with her, as having mist his design upon her in
two several Persecutions of two several sorts; the one by making War with her,
when he had the State his friend, as in the time of the Heathen Emperors: the
other by a flood of Hecesies, in the next succeeding Period, when the State was
turned to the Churches side, and therefore would not help the Dragon to make
War against her. But the Woman makes a shift to escape safe into the Wilderness
out of both these Persecutions: and this is that which makes the Dragon angry
with her. But how does he revenge himself upon her? He does not make War
against Her, because the State continues friendly to her still. Neither does he
persecute her by Heresy: for he had found the unsuccesfulness of that but just
before. He therefore now intends to cozen her with a false Religion: not such
as shall be manifestly impious, like the Heresies of the former Period: but
such as shall have in it a great show of Piety and Devotion.

And finding the inclinations of her Clergy, that they were set on worldly
things, he feeds their covetous and ambitious humor, and thereby betraies them
into those mischiefs and impieties, for which we find the Woman so severely
reprehended in the following Period. So the Dragon having thus deceived her
with a show of Piety, and ingratiated himself with her by promoting her worldly
interest and advantage, renews his first attempt of making War even by the
means of this deluded Woman herself, against that pious Remnaut of her Seed,
who keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. And
thus he makes the Woman much more miserable by his flatteries and delusions,
than 'ere he could have done by violence and an open enmity.

Hence we may gather, that in the next Period, to wit, that of the Woman's
Earthy state, or abode in the Wilderness, we shall meet with two sorts of
Churches, an Apostatical or Idolatrous, and an Apostolical or pure Church. The
Catholic Church is the Apostatically Idolatrous, the Remnant of her Seed
Apostolically pure. And of this latter Church the Saints in general are
described to be such as keep the Commandments of God: and the Clergy such as
have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

First, of the Saints in general, who are said to keep the Commandments of God:
which phrase of keeping the Commadments of God, is to be understood with a
peculiar respect to the second Commandment, which forbids Idolatry. And the
meaning is, that whereas the Roman Catholic Church, should Apostatize to
Idolatry: this Remuant of her Seed should continue in the pure and incorrupt
Worship of the only living and true God, according to the Rule of his
Commandments. To this purpose, it is observable that in the second Commandment,
the reason annexed to the prohibition of Idolatry, is the Jealousy of God, who
will punish the iniquities of them that hate him; but will show mercy to them
that love him and keep his Commandments. Which reasons being annexed peculiarly
to the second Commandment, there is no doubt but God thereby intended to
declare what a great account he makes of the observance, or the non-observance
of it. Insomuch that he makes this Commandment a kind of test of our affection
toward him; but esteeming of the Breakers of it, as if they hated him, but of
the Observers of it, as of those that love him, and keep his Commandments. As
if those that violated this one Commandment, had quite shaken off all duty and
obedience toward God: but the Observers of it were his faithful Servants,
though possible in some other matters they might have their failings.

And it may not be unworthy to be observed, that the Spirit of Prophecy
describing the Saints here with respect to the state of Christ's Church in the
Wilderness, may very well be thought to allude to that particular notion of
keeping the Commandments of God, wherein Moses uses it to the Church of Israel
in the Wilderness. And that not only in the second Commandment, (but agreeable
thereunto) in many other passages of his Writings. As may be seen in Deuteronomy. vii,
viii, etc. And in all those Places, not a few, where the Keeping and Breaking
the Covenant of God, (which Covenant are his Commnadments) are used with a
particular Respect to the second Commandment. It being very rarely found that
any Commandment is particularly mentioned, and singled out from among the rest,
but either it is the second Commandment only, or the second Commandment is one
of them.

And this is the more observable, because that as the Church of Israel in the
Wilderness turned to Idolatry, so was the Christian Church to do also. And
therefore it is very likely, that as God in pressing his Commandments upon the
Israelites, lays a Special Charge upon them for the Observation of the second
Commandment: so in commending this holy Remnant of the Christian Churches Seed
in the Wilderness for keeping his Commandments, he has a particular Respect to
that Commandment, in breaking whereof the grand Apostasy of the Catholic
Church should be most visible and notorious.

2ly. As for the Clergy of this small, contemptible, and persecuted, but yet
pure Church of Christ, they are said to be such as have the Testimony of Jesus
Christ; that is, who testify the Gospel of the Grace of God, exhorting to keep
the Commandments of God, and denounceing his Judgments against the Despisers of
them. And here also there seems to be an allusion to Moses's testifying in the
Wilderness against the Church of Israel; as you may see Deuteronomy. viii. 19. And it
shall be (says Moses to them) if thou do at all forget the Lord thy God, ^^d
walk after other Gods, and serve them, and worship them, I Testify against you
this day, that ye shall surely perish. And again, to leave them a lasting
Testimony to endure to future ages, Moses gives them a Song from God, Deuteronomy.
xxxi. 20, 21. which when they turned to other Gods, to serve them and to
pro^oke God, and break his Covenant, etc. was to testify against them as a
Witness.

And it is further more observable that these persons, who are here said to
have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, are the same that in the foregoing Chapter
( Rev. xi. 3, 6, 7, 10.) are called Witnesses, and their office is described to
be prophesying, and reproving the corruptious of the times they lived in, and
bearing Testimony against those Gentile Worshipen that profaned the Holy City;
which Holy City is a Type that answers to the state of Christ's Church in the
Wilderness. For whereas the Dragon is said to have gone to make War with the
Re^nant of the Woman's Seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the
Testimony of Jesus Christ; we must take notice that to this end the Dragon
presently goes and gives his Power, and Seat, and great Authority to the Beast,
who at that time was very opportunely rising out of the Sea, Rev. xiii. 1, 2.
By this Beast therefore, who is now rising out of the Sea, he intends to make
War with the Saints and Witnesses of that desolate Remnant of the Woman's Seed
And accordingly it is said of this Beast, at ver. 7, that Power was given him
to make War with the Saints, etc. Which answers to the Dragon's going to make
War with those that keep the Commandments of God. And in Chap. xi. we have a
relation both of the Office of the Witnesses, and of the War which the Dragon
by the means of this Beast was to take against them. They are called we
Witnesses, to denote their paucity in respect of those Idolaters, whom they
^^tified against, who were the far greatest number; and withal to denote ^^e
validity of their Testimony, because (...) Witnesses are sufficient. Of these
therefore it is said at ver. 7. that (...).
when they shell be about to finish their Testimony, the ^east that (...).
ascends at of the Abyss (or Sea) shall make War against them, etc.

Now that these two Witnesses are the same with those that have the Testimony
of Jesus Christ, and consequently some of the Remnant of the Woman's Seed that
we are speaking of, may appear; 1. In that the Dragon is said to have gone to
make War with them, Rev. xii. 17; and we find he does so, Rev. xi. 7, by that
Beast which ascends out of the Abyss, to whom for that end the Dragon had
given his Power, and Seat, and great Authority.

2. In that these Witnesses are called Prophets, and their Office said to be
Prophesying. Which answers directly to their having the Testimony of Jesus
Christ. For the Testimony of Jesus Christ is the Spirit of Prophecy, Rev. xix.
10.

3. The time agrees exactly to this interpretation. For the Dragon went to make
War with those that have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, at the time of the
Woman's getting into the Wilderness; that is, at the beginning of the
Apostatical and Idolatrous Times of the Church, when the Church, which is the
City of God, began to be profaned with False Worship. And in this Time also it
was that the two Witnesses began to prophecy, Rev. xi, about the beginning.

4. It is manifest that the pure Church of God was to be preserved in this
Remnant of the Woman's Seed throughout the whole duration of her Apostasy in
the Wilderness, (or else there would be none for the Dragon to make War with,
neither would God have any true Church at all in the Ro^an Empire, which is the
subject of this Prophecy.) Wherefore they that have the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, are to continue bearing witness, during all the time of the Woman's
Apostasy in the Wilderness (for neither can we think that Jesus Christ would
leave himself at any time without Witness against these Apostates). Now the
time of the Woman's continuing in the Wilderness, was to be one thousand two
hundred ^^d threescore prophetical days; which also answers expressly to the
time that ^^e two Witnesses were to prophecy, Rev. xiii. 3. As also the time
of the Beast's continuance, and of the Woman's Apo^lacy, to the time of the
treading down of the holy City by the Gentiles, Rev. ^^. 2.

5. They that have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, are typified by those Angels
to whom the ministerial Works of showing and executing, or bringing God's
Judgments upon the World, are constantly assigned throughout this Prophecy. And
those Angels are the the two Witnesses, Rev. xi. Therefore they that have the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, are these two Witnesses. The former part of this
Assertion I prove thus: When St. John went to fall at the Feet of one of those
Angels, Rev. xix. 10. the Angel told him that he was St. John's Fellow Servants,
and one of his Brethren, that have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, (that is, not
a real incorporial Angel, but a Brother of St. John's, as well as a fellow
Servant;) for the Testimony (...) Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy. All which
things exactly agree to the two Witnesses, who were Prophets too. Now such as
that Angel was, such were the rest; there being no difference at all insinuated
between them. They therefore were that Angel's Fellow Servants, and Brethren,
as he was St. John's. And they had the Testimony of Jesus too, for they also
are Prophetical and Ministerial Angels.

Now that these Angels are the two Witnesses, I prove by fourteen of them Seven
that sound the seven Trumpets, Rev. viii, ix, xi; and seven that pour out the
seven Vials, Rev. xvi. For of the two Witnesses it is said (Rev. xi. 6.) that
they have Power over Waters, to turn them into Blood, and to smite the Earth
with all Plagues as often as they will. Which agrees most exactly with the
office of those Angels that sound the Trumpets, and pour out the Vials: for
they do nothing else with their Vials, and their Trumpets, but smite the Earth
with Plagues, and turn the Waters into Blood. These Angels then having the
Testimony of Jesus, and being the two Witnesses: it follows that they which
have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, are the two Witnesses. And that they are
all of them Ministers of the Gospel, appears, not only from their Testifying,
which is the proper Act of the Ministerial Function; but in that it was the
Priest's Office to blow with the Trumpet, Josh. vi. 4, to which the seven
Angels with seven Trumpets are a plain Allusion; and in that those seven
Angels, which pour out the Vials of God's wrath, (to turn the Waters into Blood
and smite the Earth with Plagues) are described Chap. xv. 6. as coming out of
the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony (whither none but the Priests
might enter) clothed with pure and white Linen (which was the Priestly
Clothing,) and having their Breasts girded with Golden Girdles (the Priestly
Ornament.)

Hence therefore we may certainly conclude, so far as any light can be had from
comparing the Circumstances of this Prophecy, That the two Witnesses Rev. xi,
are the same with these that are of the Remnant of the Woman's Seed, and have
the Testimony of Jesus Christ. It is therefore a mere fancy of Bellarmin's, and
without any solid foundation in this Prophecy, that the two Witnesses are Enoch
and Elias, who shall come in their Bodies to prophecy against Antichrist. For
how can these be said to be of the Remnant of the Christian Churches seed? And
thus much of the Exposition of the second Period.

Now according to this Exposition, I shall subjoyn this following Paraphrase.

REV. XII.

Verse 12. -- Woe to the Inhabiters of Rome, and to the Nations subject to the
Roman Jurisdiction, (which from henceforth for your degeneracy may well be
likened to the Inhabiters of the Earth, and of the Sea, in comparison of that
Heavenly purity of your Fathers of the first Period:) for the Devil being
vanquished by those Primitive Heavenly Christians, is come down to you, having
great Wrath, as being sensible that he has but a short time to deceive the
World in, in respect of those thousands of years which he has spent in that
work already.

13. And when Satan saw that he was overcome by those Primitive Christians, he
persecuted the Church of Rome, that had gotten a Christian Emperor.

14. And in this Period the Roman Empire (whose Banner is an Eagle) came to be
divided into two Empires, and to be governed by a pair of Christian Emperors;
whose Favor proved prejudicial to the Church of Rome: For in their time,
enjoying Rest from Heathen Persecutions, and great affluence of worldly Wealth
and Honor, She began to decline to Superstition; and those good Emperors
served her only as two Wings of a great Eagle to bear Her down from Her
Primitive state of Heavenly Purity, to a Degenerate, and Earthly state; or
(which is all one) to expedite her Flight from Her Egyptian Persecutors, under
whom she lived a most pure and Heavenly Life, into such a state of Ease, and
Safety, free and quiet Exercise of Religion, as the Children of Israel enjoyed
in the Wilderness: for this is that State of things to which she is now
hasting, and in which she is to be nourished with such things as her Soul
lusts after, for the space of three years (of years) and an half, that is,
one thousand two hundred and threescore years, from the open violence and
persecution of the Devil

15. And that old Serpent, seeing that the Church of Rome was so well guarded
by the Power and favor of her Christian Emperous, could not make War against
her as before, but raised up a great abundance of Heretics against her on
every side, which for their abundance, their Impetuousness, and the Poison, and
Malignity of their Doctrines, may be compared to a Flood of Water cast out of
the Serpent's mouth after her, that he might cause her to be carried away with
it.

16. But this Flood being poured out after the Church of Rome, who was as yet
upon the Eagles Wings, did naturally descend unto the Earth, that is, the
Clergy of the Roman Church, who were fallen sooner to the Earth then the Church
her self; who being Earthlyminded, Covetous, and Ambitious, but yet continuing
Orthodox in the Faith, did help the Church, and by their wise, Judicious
management of those Controversies in Religion, and Authoritative Decision and
Condemnation of them, did (as it were) swallow up this Flood, that the Serpent
had cast out of his Mouth, and quell the Tumults he had stirred up against
their Church.

17. And the Serpent being thus a second time defeated in his Project, was
wroth with the Church of Rome, and intending to make another Experiment upon
her, by deceiving her, and her Children into Superstition and Idolatry, under a
fair show of Kindness, and pretense of Piety, went to make War with the Remnant
of her Seed, whom God should mercifully preserve from that Catholic Defection,
who keep the Commandments of God, persisting in his Pure Worship, and have the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, teaching all men to observe the Commandmens of God,
and warning those Apostate-Gentile-Christians to abstain from Idols.

And thus much of the second Period, which gives us an account of the Woman's
Aerie or declining state. We come now to the third and last Period, which
concerns her Earthly, Eremitical, or Degenerate State.

CHAP. III.
An Exposition of Rev. xiii, to verse. 11; And therein of the Earthy and
degenerate state of the Roman Catholic Church under the ten Horns, which were
to receive Power as Kings, together with that Eighth King of Rome (viz. the
Roman Bishops,) and to give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom to him for
the persecuting o the Saints. And because those Bishops came hereby to be
possessed of a twofold Power, viz. a Secular Power, as the Favorites of those ten
Kings; and an Ecclesiastical, as the pretended Vicars of Christ, and Successors
of St. Peter. This thirteenth Chapter begins with their Secular Power, and to
the Exposition of it is subjoyned a Paraphrase.

WE have followed the Woman into the Wilderness, let us now see what becomes of
her there; what becomes of her Clergy, who in the first Period were typified by
Michael and his Angels; in the second, by the Earth: what becomes of the Civil
State of the Roman Empire, whose Emperors in the first Period were typified by
the Dragon, an Adversary; and in the second by two Wings of a great Eygle, and
represented as a Friend to the Woman, being said to have bin given to her: and
lastly, how, and by what means the Dragon manages that War, which, upon his
defeat in the second Period, he went to make with that holy Remnant of the
Woman's Seed, which keep the Commandments of God. and have ths Testimony of
Jesus Christ.

Of all these things we have an exact account in the xviith and xiiith
Chapters. Where the Woman is represented as a great Idolatress and a cruel
Persecutrix of the Saints; her Clergy sitting at the Helm of the Roman Empire,
and having supreme Authority therein, by the favor of those ten Kings among
whom that Empire came to be divided at the Woman's entering into the
Wilderness; and by the means of these ten Kings, headed by the Roman Bishops,
the Dragon went to make that War against that Remnant of the Woman's Seed. For
of these ten Kings the Angel tells us, Rev. xvii. 14. that they should make War
with the Lamb Christ Jesus; that is, that they should make War with him in his
Saints.

And this is expressed more clearly of these ten Kings, who being united under
the Headship of the Roman Bishops, are called the Beast that rose up out of the
Sea, Rev. xiii. 1. of whom it is said at ver. 7. that it was given unto him to
make War with the Saints, that is, with those that keep the Commandments of
God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. And that this War was made with
them by the Dragon, as the principal Author of it, appears from ver. 2. where
it is said of this Beast, the more immediate instrument of it, that the Dragon
gave him his Power and Seat and great Authority. Now therefore come we to the
particular Explication of this xiii. Chapter.

Which xiiith Chapter contains a Description of two Beasts; the one tenhorned;
the other two-horned. Of the ten-horned Beast, we have an account from Ver. 1.
to Ver. 11. in these words.

Rev. xiii.

1. And I stood upon the Sand of the Sea, and saw a Beast rise up out of the
Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and upon his Horns ten Crowns, and upon
his Heads the name of Blasphemy.

2. And the Beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his Feet were as the
Feet of a Bear, and his Mouth as the Mouth of a Lion: and the Dragon gave him
his Power, and his Seat, and great Authority.

3. And I saw one of his Heads, as it were wounded to Death; and his deadly
Wound was healed: and all the World wondered after the Beast.

4. And they worshipped the Dragon which gave Power unto the Beast: and they
worshipped the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make
War with him?

5. And there was given unto him a Mouth speaking great things, and
Blasphemies; and Power was given unto him to continue forty and two Months.

6. And he opened his Mouth in Blasphenty against God, to blaspheme his Name,
and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven.

7. And it was given unto Him to make War with the Saints, and to overcome
them: and Power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations.

8. And all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship Him, whose names are not
written in the Book of Life of the Lat^^ slain from the foundation of the World.

9. If any man have an Ear, let him hear.

10. He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity: He that kills
with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword. Here is the Patience and Faith
of the Saints.

This ten-horned Beast which is here described in these ten Verses, is the same
with that whereof the Angel tells us in the seventeenth Chapter. For there (as
has bin said) he is foretold of under his last Head, together with whom the
ten Horns were to receive Power as Kings. In token of which they are here
represented with ten Crowns upon them. Which evidently shows that the Beast is
here set forth under his last Head; there being no Reason to be given, why the
ten Horns were seen without Crowns, Chap. xii. 3, and here with Crowns; but
only that in the Dragons time, (i. e. the Heathen Roman Emperors, who were the
sixth Head) these ten Horns had received no Kingdom, as the Angel tells us of
them Rev. xvii, 12. but together with the seventh Head they were to receive
Power as Kings; and therefore under this seventh Head (i. e. the Roman Bishop)
is this sevenheaded and ten-horned Beast exhibited in the Chapter we have now
to deal ^ith.

And here it is to be observed, that so soon as ever the two Wings of the great
Eagle are gone off the Stage, the ten^^rned Beast comes on again, having as
Horns now crowned. Which should ^^timate to us, that from the Dissolution of
the Roman Empire, (the Roman Emperors being one of the Wings, which when
broken off, the other is unserviceable) We are to compute the Reign of the last
King or Head of the blasphemous Beast. And that is, from about the Year four
Hundred fifty six, as I conceive, but let the Reader use his own Judgment.

Thus then one Wing being broken off; and consequently the other not being able
of it self to bear the Woman up above the ground, we must imagine that the great
Eagle, which received her out of Heaven, has fairly now by this time set her
down upon the Earth. And in this Posture, the Woman sitting on the Earth upon
seven Mountains; and the Peoples, Nations, Multitudes, and Tongues belonging to
the Roman Jurisdiction, being circumfus'd like Waters round about her, we must
conceive the Vision to be now presented to St. John. And thus we have those
Inhabiters of the Earth and of the Sea completed, against whom that Woe was
predenounced, Chap. xii. 12, as has been showed before upon the Place: for the
inhabitants of the Woman herself sitting upon seven Mountains, are the
Inhabiters of the Earth; and the Nations subject to the Roman Jurisdiction, the
Inhabiters of the Sea.

St. John then, standing upon the Sand (or shore) of the Sea, in a place of
convenient Prospect to behold the Rise of these two Beasts described in this
xiiith Chapter, observes one of them ( viz. the ten-horned) to arise up out of
the Sea. Ver. 1. and the other ( Viz. the twohorned) to come up out of the
Earth, ver. 11. The meaning of which is plainly this; That he saw the Roman
Empire, which before was governed by a pair of Emperors, divided now into ten
Kingdoms, ten Kings arising in the Roman Territories, and that he saw another
King arising out of Rome it self. Of which other King it is said, ver. 11, 12.
that he had two Horns like the Lamb's, but that he spoke like the Dragon; and
also that be exercises all the Power of the first (tenlorned) Beast before
him. By which words, as it is plainly signified, that this latter King should
reign altogether with the former; so it is not obscurely hinted to us, that
though he carried on the Dragon's work, yet should he hold some near
Resemblance outwardly to the Lamb Christ Jesus. Which exactly agrees with that
which has bin showed before out of the xviith Chapter, where the Bishops of
Rome have the ill hap to fall out to be the last Head and King of that
sevenleaded and ten-horned Beast. To whom also the ten Horns were to give their
Power, and Strength and Kingdom, Rev. xvii. 13, 17. according as it is here
upluckily said of this two-horned Beast to like purpose, That he exercises all
the Power of the first (ten-horned) Beast. By which is signified that this
two-horned Beast should be the Head and Prim^^ mobile of the first ten-horned.
So that now each Horn or King of the ten-horned Beast, is supreme Lord in his
respective Kingdom: and the two-horned Beast (by the Benevolence of those ten
King) Lord Paramount, extending his Dominion over all.

In this third Period then there wat to be two Supreme Lords in each Kingdom of
the Roman Empire: the Bishops of Rome in all; and each of the ten Kings in his
respective Kingdom. And though this might seem strange to those that have not
seen the things that we have seen: yet now the Romanists have made it out so
clearly to us, that there are few but can unriddle it. For each of the ten
Kings within his own Territories, is Supreme in merely Temporal Affairs: and
the King that has two Horns like the Lamb, in Spirituals; yea, and in Temporals
too, in ordine ad Spiritualia, so far as Spirituals things are interwoven, and
concerned in Temporals. And this is the Reason that we have now two Beasts or
Kings described in this Period: the first whereof ( viz. the ten-horned) we may
call the Secular least; and the other (if you please) the Ecclesiastical. And
yet notwithstanding, as to the business of Religion, (which is the principal
concern of this Prophecy) there is in effect but one Beast: since it is said of
the two-horned Beast, that be exercises all the Power (and consequently is the
Head) of the ten-horned Secular Beast.

But if the xiiith and xviith Chapters, set forth the same Beast to us (as was
said before) how comes it to pass, that we find a Woman sitting upon the Beast
in Chap. xviith, but none in the xiiith? I answer; that the Woman or City,
Chap. xvii, (out of which the seven Heads were partly risen, and partly
afterward to arise,) is answerable to the Earth in the xiiith Chapter, which
is the place where the Woman was set down by the Roman Eagle, that had wafted
her from Heaven. And since the Woman's sitting on the Beast, is nothing but an
Indication of her being the Imperial Seat: it is exactly answered in the xiiith
Chapter, ver. 11, 12, where it is said that out of the Earth arose that Beast
with two Horns like the Lamb's, who exercised all the Po^er of the first (i. e.
presided over the ten-horned) Beast.

And to this purpose it is further yet observable, that St. John had seen the
Vision of the xviith Chapter before. For the Angel calls him there ( ver. 1,
2.) as to a sight which he was very well acquainted with, Come hither (says
he) and I will show thee the Judgment, (...), of the great Whore that sits
upon many Waters. Where the so often Repetition of the Prepositive Article,
shows that great Whore, and those many Waters to have been exhibited before in
some of the precedent Visions to the Prophet. And where can that more probably
be thought to have bin done than in this thirteenth Chapter? And we shall make
but little Question of it, if we consider, That the Angel in Chap. xvii, having
called St. John to see the Judgment of the great Whore that sits upon many
Waters, shows him a Woman sitting on a seven-headed and ten-horned Beast, viz.
the Beast described in this xiii Chapter, which he had seen to have risen out
of the Sea. This Vision therefore of the xiiith Chapter is in effect the same
with that of the xvii. And as it is there said, at ver. 3, that the Beast was
full of names of Blasphemy: so here at ver. 1, he is said to have had upon his
Heads a Name of Blasphemy, and a little after, to have opened his Mouth in
Blasphemy against God.

But the great question here will be, what Kind of Blasphemy is here spoken of?
I answer; It is Idolatry. For no other Sort of Blasphemy has bin common to all
the Heads of the Beast, but this. To which we may add, That the great fault of
these ten Kings is said, in several Places of the Revelation, to be Idolatry.
As Rev. xvii. 2. With whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication,
etc. And Rev. xviii. 3. For all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of
Her Fornication, and the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication with
Her, etc. And the same again at ver. 9. The Kings of the Earth, who have
committed Fornication with her, etc. So also Chap. xiv. 8. Babyton is fallen,
because she made all Nations drink of the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication.
Nor can I find any other Blasphemy laid to the Charge of these Kings, or these
Nations, throughout the Revelation, but only that of Spiritual Fornication, or
Idolatry. Certainly, if they had bin guilty of any other Blasphemy, we should
have had some mention of it, in some or one of those many Places, where the
Spirit seems on purpose to draw up his Indictment against that Great Babylon,
and the Nations that were in League with Her, to show the equity of the
Judgments which God had purposed to inflict upon them. And on the other side,
if by this their Blasphemy in this xiiith Chapter, were not meant Idolatry, how
should it come to pass that we should have no mention here of their Idolatry,
where the Spirit seems on purpose to characterize their Apostasy. For it is
evident from this xiiith Chapter, that the great Apostasy of these Nations
should consist in Blasphemy: whereas in all the other passages of this
Prophecy, it is expressed by Fornication or Idolatry. Till therefore it can
manifestly be proved, that the Spirit has any where charged them with some
other sort of Blasphemy, we must expound this Blasphemy of the xiiith Chapter
to be meant of their Idolatry. And it is most unquestionable, that the Notion
of Blasphemy is generally taken in so large a sense in Scripture that it will
easily admit of this Interpretation we have given of it.

Lastly, it will be no hard Matter to demonstrate what were the very Words and
Syllables of that Name of Blasphemy which were written on the last Head of this
Blasphemous Beast. For under his last Head He is set forth to us both in this
xiiith Chapter, and in the xviith also. Now in the xviith- Chapter, the Woman
sitting upon the Beast under his last Head, is said to have had upon Her
Forehead a Name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, etc. This is the Name
which was seen upon the last Head of this ten-horned Beast. For the Head of the
Woman and the Head of the Beast are all one: The same King being supreme both
in the Woman, and the Beast; that is, both in the Imperial City, the
Territories of the Empire. But now if this were the Name of Blasphemy, that was
seen upon the Beast's Head, it is certain that his Blasphemy was Idolatry.

And further from this Name of Blasphemy may partly be demonstrated what kind
of Idol-Worship this Beast should Patronize. For since the first Word of his
Name is MYSTERY, methinks here should be some thing more intended by it, than
only to let us know that his Metropolis should be not the Literal, but a
Mystical Babylon; and his Fornication, Spiritual: for there are many other
Circumstances of the Prophecy which evince this clearly. I suppose therefore
that by this MYSTERY, is chiefly meant, that the Blasphemy and Idolatry, which
this Beast should introduce and propagate, should be no common, downright,
wilful, or affected Blasphemy, but such as is consistent with a show of Piety
toward God; Such as requires no little Artifice to contrive, and is not easy
to detect; no gross but subtle Blasphemy, and not unworthy of the Roman Name.
All which methinks may very fitly be comprised, in that one Word the Prophet
uses, if we should call it a Kind of Blasphemy or Idolatry in a Mystery. But
of this Blasphemy, something more hereafter at ver. 6. where it is said of him,
That he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, his
Tabernacle, and they that dwell in Heaven.

In the mean time let us hear the description of him, as to shape, and
lineaments, which we have in ver. 2. where he is likened to a Leopard, that is,
(as I conceive) the Grecian Monarchy, Dan. vii. 6, which of an entire Kingdom
under Alexander the Great, became afterward divided into four Kingdoms, under
four several Heads or Kings. For so the Roman Kingdom also, which had been
entire before, was now divided into ten smaller Kingdoms, under ten several
Kings.

But as the Body of this Kingdom was like the Leopard, or the Grecian Kingdom,
shattered in pieces as that Kingdom was: so in the Feet (the Instruments of
Motion and Activity, and, in Bears, of preying and spoiling) it is said to have
bin like a Bear, that is, the Persian Monarchy, Dan. vii. 5. For as the Persian
Kings would not engage in War, nor enter upon any Action of great Moment,
without consulting of their Magi: so neither would these ten Kings that
constitute the Roman Beast, under its seventh or last Head the Popes, without
consulting of their Priests and Bishops. To which Purpose it is said of the
Ecclesiastical Beast, that had two Horns like the Lamb; that he exercises all
the Power of the first Beast (viz. the secular tenhorned Beast) before Him,
ver. 12. Which shows the great influence that the Churchmen were to have upon
the Civil State. Insomuch that the Angel tells us of these Ten Kings, Rev.
xvii. 13, 17, That they should give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom to
the Beast; that is, to the seventh or last head of Rome and of the Roman
Empire, which we have plainly shown before to be the Roman Bishops. And if we
look upon these Kings as to their making War against the Saints, and setting up
Idolatrous Worship, (which are the only things for which they are considerable
in this place) it cannot be denied but that the Civil State is wholly
influenced by the Churchmen in them.

Lastly, the Mouth of this ten-horned Beast, was like the Mouth of a Lion, that
is, in speaking, giving Commandments, making Laws, and the like, it resembled
the Assyrian or Babylonish Monarchy, likened to a Lion, Dan. vii. 4. For as the
Kings of Babylon, and particularly King Nebuchadnezzar, are infamous in holy
Scripture for setting up Idolatrous Worship, and commanding those that refused
to fall down before their Idols, to be burnt alive (as may be seen Dan. iii, in
the case of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.) So this ten-horned Beast with a
like brutish rage and cruelty should instantly command all Heretics, that is,
all opposers of his Idolatrous Edicts, to the fire and faggot. And therefore it
is remarkably said of Rome, (the Metropolis of that Ecclesiastic Beast, who
exercises all the Power of this ten-horned secular Beast, Chap. xiii. ver.
12;) that she was not only like Babylon in being the Mother of Harlots, but
also that she was drunken with the Blood of Saints, Rev. xvii. And of this
ten-horned secular Beast himself it is said in this xiii Chap. ver. 7, That it
was given to him to wake War with the Saints, and to overcame them.

To this Beast who was like the Leopard, and his Feet like the Bear's, and his
Mouth like the Lion's, the Dragon gave his Power, and his Seat, and great
Authority, (as is said at ver. 2.) that is, be gave this Beast such Power and
Authority of making War against the Saints, (for this is the Power that is said
to have been given him, at ver. 7.) as the Roman Heathen Emperors, typified by
a great red Dragon, Chap. xii. 3. had before him, together with their Seat
Imperial too, the City of Rome. And thus the Dragon missing of his design in
persecuting the Woman in his own shape before by Heathen Emperors, and
afterward in casting out a flood of waters after her under the Christian
Emperors; is now about to try the utmost of his Skill, and persecute the
Remnant of the Woman's Seed by this ten-horned Beast of gentler aspect, but no
less impious and cruel qualities. For it is observed of the (...) dicius, quod
omnium animalium amicus, excepto Dracone.
Leopard, (whom this Beast resembled in all things but his feet and mouth) that
he is a friend to all the Beasts, save only to the Dragon. And therefore the
Dragon could not have found a sitter instument than this Beast to place upon
his Throne, and with a feigned show of friendship to abuse the Christian World.
But hence we may perceive whose Deputy the head of this Beast is, (though he
pretends a much more noble dep^tation, and is said at ver. 11, to have two
horns like the Lamb) since we are here assured, that it was the Dragon, who
gave him his Power, and Seat, and grea Authority. But to proceed.

In ver. 3 of this xiiith Chapter, St. John describes the manner how the sixth
Head of the Roman Beast fell off, and the seventh succeeded in his stead. I
saw, says he, one of his heads as it were wounded to death, (which wound was
given can by a Sword, ver. 14.) that is, I saw ^e sixth Head of the Beast, to
wit, the Roman Heathen Emperors, (for the first five were fallen off before) as
it were ^^nded to death by the Sword of the ^^irit of God. For it is said, Rev.
xii. 11. that Michael and his Angels overcame the Dragon, by the Word of their
Testimony, ^^ch Word is the Sword of the Spirit, (...). vi. 17. And thereupon
succeeded ^e Christian Emperors, who are typed ^y no Head, (because the Heads
were all ^sphemous;) but have a Type peculi^ to themselves, viz. two Wings of a
^reat Eagle. Of whom we have the fistory, in the latter end of Chap. xii. When
therefore the Prophet comes in Chap. xiii, to describe the Eighth King, who is
the seventh or last Head of the ^lasphemous Beast, he tells us, that he saw ^e
of his Heads, (...), (...) it were wounded to death, meaning thereby that the
Beast had before received a mortal wound in one of his Heads, viz. the sixth.
According as it is said of the Lamb, Rev. v. 6. I saw the Lamb (Christ Jesus)
(...), as if he had been slain. For the Lamb had really been slain before St.
John saw him in that Vision; and so had this Beast received a mortal wound in
one of his Heads, before St. John is here said to have seen it as it were
wounded to death. For it had been wounded to death at the time when the
Christian Emperors, those two Wings of the great Eagle, came upon the stage:
and so it continued during their short reign, to wit, until the ten horns
arose, and the Empire came to be divided into ten Kingdoms. So that the
blasphemous Roman Kingdom was like to have been utterly ruined, but that the
wound was healed, by the Dragon's substituting another head, in whom the
several Members of that blasphemous Kingdom should be once more united.

And hereupon it is said, that all the World wondered after the Beast. Agreeably
to that which is said Rev. xvii. 8, that they whose names were not written in
the Book of Life, should wonder at him. This wondering therefore was to be a
^onder of approbation. And the meaning is, that they whose names were not
written ^^ the Book of Life should wonderfully ap^rove the Power and Practices
of this ^east. And so indeed it follows ( Chap. ^iii. 4.) That they worshipped
the Dragon, which gave Power unto the Beast, that is, ^hey not only submitted
to the Beast's Power (which they both might and ^ought to do) but they complied
with him, and obeyed him in his Impious E^icts, which proceeded from the
Dragen. And thus with wonderful applause they worshipped the Beast, saying,
Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make War with him? (that is, Who of
the Saints is able to make War with him?) for the War here spoken of is a War
against the Saints, it being said of this Beast at ver. 7. that It was given to
him to ^ake War with the Saints, and to overcome them; and Power was given him
over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations. Which is, as if it had been said,
that Pow^^ was given him to persecute the Saints over all the Nations of the
Roman Empire, which was now subject to this ten^ horned Beast. And these
Victories o^ the Beast over the Saints are here admired by his Worshippers ver.
4, wh^ cry him up as if none were like to him nor any able to make War with him.

At ver. 5, it is said, That there w^ given unto him a Mouth speaking great
things, and Blasphemies, (the chief of w^ Blasphemies and great things, amongst
m^ ny others, were the commanding of I^dol-worship, (which is the most real
Blas^ phemy in the World) and of the extirpation of all opposers, whether
private Persons, Kings, or Emperors, by Fire or Sword, or Deposition, or any
other cruel, bloody, insolent and Antichristian way;) and Power was given unto
him t^ continue forty and two Months.

Concerning which forty and tw^ Months these two particulars must b^ cleared,
First, that they are put to signify a certain time; and 2ly, that thereby is
meant not Months of Days, but Month^ of Years. By which reckoning forty and two
Months will make One thousand two ^undred and sixty Years, allowing for every
Month according to the usual estimate of thirty Days, as many Years. For so
two and forty times thirty Years, will make One thousand two hundred and sixty.

1. That by this term of forty and two Months, is meant a certain definite
time, may appear from these two Considerations. First, because this time of
forty and two Months is expressed so many several ways, all of them amounting
to the very precise and definite time. For as here it is expressed by forty two
Months: So Rev. xi. 2, 3. these forty two Months are varied by One thousand two
hundred and sixty Days. And again, these One thousand two hundred and sixty
Days, are varied by a time, and times, and half ^ time; (that is, three Years
and an half, allowing to every year twelve months, and to every month thirty
days) Rev. xii. 6, 14. Now if by forty two months were meant a time uncertain
and indefinite, it would not be so variously expressed. For when St. Peter is
said to have asked our Savior whether he should forgive his Brother until
seven times, and our Savior answered him, until seventy times seven, Mat.
xviii. 21, 22: as any man considering the circumstances of this Text, would
think that by seven were meant a small uncertain number; and by seventy times
seven, a great one: So if seven had been varied by five and two, by four and
three, or by six and one, no man would have imagined, but that the precise and
definite septenary number had been meant by it. So likewise, if seventy times
seven had been otherwise expressed by Four hundred and ninety, and otherwise
again by ten times forty nine; no man would have believed, but that the certain
definite number of seventy times seven had been intended by it. If then we
apply the same to our present case, where forty two Months are expressed by One
thousand two hundred and sixty Days, and otherwise again by Three Years and a
half, we may justly wonder if any man of but common reason should after to
expound them of an uncertain time. But.

2ly. Those certain numbers which in any language are put for uncertain, are
usually round numbers, as ten, a hundred, a thousand, and the like; or else
catching and retorting numbers, like that of our Savior's seventy times seven,
catching up and retorting upon St. Peter's seven; or else they are some certain
numbers which by the peculiar use of any Language are uncertainly understood.
But as for these numbers of forty two, One thousand two hundred and sixty, and
three and an half, they are neither round numbers nor retorting numbers,
neither are they any where used in the Greek or Hebrew, or any other Language
that I know of, for uncertain numbers. But

3ly. If we consider that one of these numbers is a mixed number, ( viz. three
and an half) compounded of a whole number and a fraction, we shall perceive a
further reason yet, why they cannot be expounded in an uncertain sense. For
there is no reason to be given why any fraction should be added to a whole
number, but only for the limiting and ascertaining of its signification. Surely
no language in uncertain numbers is so exact and punctual to a fraction. We
conclude therefore, that by this number of forty two months, the time allotted
for the continuance of this ten-horned Beast under the headship and supremacy
of the Roman Bishops, is the certain, definite, and limited term of forty and
two months, One thousand two hundred and sixty Days, or three Years and an
half.

And now there will remain but this Question more to be decided, Whether these
months, and years, and days, be meant of common months, and years, and days, or
of Prophetical, that is, as Prophets sometimes mean in holy Scripture; with
whom it is no unusual thing to speak of days instead of years. For the
resolution of which Question, I shall lay down this as an undoubted Truth, That
in any difficulties arising concerning this ten-horned Beast here spoken of, if
they be capable of more good, allowable, Scripture senses than one, we are to
guide our selves by the authority of the Angel, Rev. xvii, and to choose that
which is most agreeable to the interpretation of the Beast, which he has there
given us. Now that days in Scripture Prophecy are sometimes put to typify
years, is evident from two remarkable Prophecies which we have to that purpose.

One is Ezekiel. iv. 4, 5, where the Prophet is commanded of God to lie upon his
left side, and to lay the iniquities of the house of Israel upon it three
hundred and ninety days, and God tells him, that he has laid upon him the
years of their iniquity, according to the number of the days; that is, that he
should bear the iniquity of the house of Israel as many days, as they should
bear them years, or, that his bearing them three hundred and ninety days,
should signify to the house of Israel that they should bear their own iniquity
as many years.

And so again at ver. 6, the Prophet is commanded, that when he has
accomplished the three hundred and ninety days upon his left side, he should
lie again upon his right side, and bear the iniquity of the house of Judah
forty days, and God tells him again, that he has appointed him each day for a
year, that is, that each day of his bearing the iniquity of the house of Judah,
should signify to the house of Judah, that they should bear their own iniquity
a year; and so the Prophets forty days should signify to them as many years.
From whence we would infer no more then this, which any one may perceive to be
the natural result of it, viz. That years in Prophecy may be typified by
days, or, that each day of the continuance of the Type, may stand to signify a
year in the accomplishment. So that in our present case the forty two months,
three years and an half, or One thousand two hundred and sixty days of the
continuance of the Type, may signify as many days of years, and months of
years, and years of years in the accomplishment.

Another like instance we have in Dan. ix. 24. where seventy weeks in the
Prophecy, are confessedly put for seventy weeks of years, (or seventy times
seven years) in the accomplishment, each day of the week representing a Year,
And though Bellarmin De Romans Pont. Lib. 3. Chap. 8.
tells us that Days are not here put for Years, because in Hebrew the word
Schabuahh signifying a Week, is derived from Schebahh signifying seven, and
therefore may signify seven Years as well as seven Days, so that Days are not
here put for Years, nor Weeks of Days for Weeks of Years, but only Schabuahh a
Week derived from Schebahh seven, is set to signify seven Years.

But to this we reply, that the signification of Words, is not wholly to be
determined from their Etymology or derivation, but from their use; as might be
shown, if need were, from many hundreds of instances. We shall therefore
content our selves with only one at present, which is the most apposite that I
can think of to this purpose. For in the Greek Language the word, (...), not
only comes from a word that signifies seven, but does it self also signify the
septenary number, as (...) signifies an unite, and (...) the number ten. But
when this word (...) is applied to time, it never signifies seven Hours, or
seven Weeks, or seven Months, or seven Years, but always seven Days, as if it
were constantly written out at length (...), or seven Days.

The like we say therefore of the Hebrew word Shabuahh, which though it comes
from a word which signifies seven, yet being put absolutely (as here it is)
without any other word to determine its signification otherwise, is constantly
throughout the Bible understood of seven Days. And therefore when Daniel's
seventy Weeks, are put to signify seventy Weeks of Years, we may certainly
conclude from the constant and perpetual use of the Hebrew word, that Weeks of
Days (for so the word put absolutely does always signify) are put for Weeks
of Years, and consequently that Days are put for Years.

And whereas the Cardinal to strengthen his argument, observes that in Lev.
xxv. there is mention of Weeks of Years, but no where of Days of Years, or
Months of Years; because the Hebrew word for Week being derived from a word
that signifies seven, may be applied to seven Years as well as seven Days; but
there is not the same reason why the other words for Days and Months should be
so used.

But to this we answer, that if the Cardinal could have produced any place of
Scripture, where the Hebrew word for Week, put absolutely, had signified a Week
of Years, he had then done his business. For thence it would have followed,
that the word put absolutely might have signified either a Week of Days, or a
Week of Years, according to the circumstances of the place wherein it were
used. But instead of that he has produced a place, not where a Week put
absolutely does signify a Week of Years, (which is the case in Daniel's Weeks)
but where a Week of Years does signify a Week of Years. Whence we return his
argument from Lev. xxv, upon himself; for if the Hebrew word for Week does
always signify a Week of Days, but only where the signfication of it is
determined by the addition of Years, or some such other word, then must the
Weeks of Daniel also, since they are set absolutely without any such addition,
be put to signify Weeks of Days.

Which also may be further cleared from this consideration, viz. That a Week in
Hebrew is never expressed by a Week of days, although a Week of days be
always meant by it, but when they would express a Week of Years, they speak it
out at length a Week of Years. Whence it appears, that by a week put
absolutely they mean a week of days, as certainly as if it were expressed at
length a week of days. Hence therefore we conclude from the constant and
perpetual use of the word in holy Scripture without any exception, that by
Daniels seventy weeks are meant ad literam, seventy weeks of days. But since
this Prophecy cannot ^e expounded but of weeks of Years, we thence conclude,
that literal or common reeks are used for another fort of Weeks, which we may
call Prophetical, or, that ^eeks of days, are used in Prophecy for ^eeks of
years, and consequently that days are put for years.

And for all that Ibidem.
Bellarmin says concerning a month, that we never read of a month of years,
because a month in Hebrew is not derived from a word of number, but is
denominated from the course of the Moon, which she absolves in thirty Days,
yet by his favor, as a Month put absolutely does (as himself confesses)
signify the space of thirty days, so with the addition of years, a Month of
years would signify thirty years, as well as a week of years would signify
seven years. So that, as weeks in Prophecy are put for weeks of years, which
otherwhere do never signify but weeks of days. So Months, which otherwhere are
never used but for Months of days, may yet in Prophecy be interpreted of
Months of years. And as for what Ibidem.
he adds concerning a day, that in Ezekiel. iv, where it is said, I have
appointed thee a day for a year, etc. by Days ad literam are not meant years,
because then the Prophet being commanded to sleep (so Bellarmin expounds the
word, though I cannot see what he should do with meat and drink, which he was
commanded to take to him, ver. 9, if he had been to sleep all the time, but let
that pass.) The Prophet (says he) being commanded to sleep upon his left side
three hundred and ninety days, must have slept three hundred and ninety years.
This seems to me a very senseless Observation. For we do not say, that by these
days ad literam, are meant years, but that by days in the Type, are meant
years in the accomplishment, or, that by Ezekiel's three hundred and ninety
days, are meant the house of Isreal's three hundred and ninety years. And even
the Cardinal himself confesses as much as we would have, and as much as we
need desire, viz, that days are there taken for very days, but (...) said to
be appointed for years, be^^se those three hundred and ninety days ^f Ezekiel's
sleeping, were a sign of God's ^^eping three hundred and ninety years, (...)
which he bare with the sins of the Is^dites. And so we say, that those three
^^ndred and ninety days, were a Type ^f three hundred and ninety years.

And we need no more for our pur^^se; for from hence it will follow, that (...)
one thousand two hundred and six^^ days may be set to typify as many ^^es; and
consequently, that our two ^^d forty months, which are made of ^^ose days, may
be set to typify months of years; and lastly, that the three years ^^^d an
half, which are made of the same (...) and days, may be set to typify ^^^^s of
years. For our inference herein ^very clear and obvious, viz. That if (...)
word that properly signifies the space ^f one day, may in Prophecy be used to
^ypify a year; and the word that pro^erly signifies the space of seven days,
^eay be put to typify the space of seven years; then may the word that properly
signifies the space of thirty days, be used in like case to typifie thirty
years; and that which properly signifies the space of three hundred and sixty
days, to typifie as many years. Such as the days may be, such also may be the
Weeks, and months, and years that are compounded of them. If therefore a day
may typifie a year, a week may typifie seven years, a month thirty years, and a
year 360 years.

The Cardinal therefore, is a mere trifler, when he dissembles his own
knowledge, and makes as though he could not tell how Daniel's time, times, and
half a time (Chap. vii. 25.) can be accommodated to one thousand two hundred
and sixty years Ibidem.
For (says he) by a time must doubtless be meant some one number; as one day,
one week, one month, one year, one Lustrum, one Jubilee, one Age, one
Millenarium: b^^ if we take one Millenarium, then will Antichrist be to reign
three thousand and five hundred years; if we take one Age, the time of
Antichrist will be three hundred and fifty years; and the same appears
concerning (...) Jubilee, etc. Thus he breaks off his discourse abruptly,
meaning that neither ^^e Jubilee, nor one Year, nor any other ^f the ones he
mentions, if we take three ^ed an half of them, will make that sum ^f one
thousand two hundred and sixty ^urs, which we contend for.

But he might have remembered what ^e had told us a little before, viz. That
^ree years and an half, make just two and ^^ty months, and that one thousand
two ^andred and sixty days will make the same ^ime. Since therefore he has so
liberally ^iven us our choice of Days or Weeks or ^onths, or Years, or
Lustrum's, or Ju^l^es, or Ages, or Millenarium's, we say that by a time, times
and half a time, are ^eant three years and a half, making by as own confession
the just sum of one ^^ousand two hundred and sixty days. ^f then (as we have
proved already, and himself has acknowledged) by a day may ^e typified a year,
then by three years lord an half, or, one thousand two hundred ^^nd sixty days,
may be typified one thousand two hundred and sixty years. And thus may that
great Mystery be unfolded, which Bellarmin pretends he could not understand,
and so has put us to this trouble of demonstrating so plain a thing, viz. How
the sum of one thousand two hundred and sixty years may be accommodated to
Daniel's time, times, and half a time.

But he further urges concerning these three years and an half, forty two
months; or one thousand two hundred and sixty days, that thereby can be meant
no more than common years, months, and days, because it is said with respect to
them, Rev. xii. 12, that the Devil is come down having great wrath, as knowing
that he has but a short time. If then by three years and an half be meant but
a short time, they cannot be expounded to typifie one thousand two hundred and
sixty years, (which is a very long time) but one thousand two hundred and sixty
common days. But here also the Cardinal should have put on his considering cap
again. For all quantities of time, or of any other thing, are small or great,
short or long respectively, according to the greater or smaller quantities that
they are compared with, and for many other considerations. For even three Years
and an half may be accounted a long time in comparison of half a Year; and
again, even half a Year would be thought a long time by him that should be
afflicted all that time with continual pains of the Gout, or any other extreme
torture. And if a man were to travel Six thousand Miles, and condemned to lose
his life, so soon as he arrived at his journeys end; I believe he would esteem
his whole journey but a very short one, especially if he were to be caressed
all along with satisfactions and delights: But when he should have accomplished
almost five thousand miles, then doubtless he might well be born with, if
considering how far he had already traveled, and how little in comparison he
had remaining, together with the miseries that attend him at his journeys end,
he should complain that the remaining twelve or thirteen hundred miles were
very short.

Now this applied to our present case, will fully answer what the Cardinal has
objected. For Satan having deceived the World already, (which was his chief
delight,) for near five thousand Years, and knowing to what endless miseries he
stood condemned at the end of twelve or thirteen hundred Years then next
ensuing, might well both in comparison of that much longer time already passed,
and also in consideration of his future miseries, when the whole should be
expired, esteem the time remaining very short. And for this reason it is, that
St. Paul (2. Cor. iv. 17.) calls the heaviest afflictions of the Saints in this
life but light, and the longest but for a moment, in comparison of that far
more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, which their light and momentany
affliction works for them.

And now if notwithstanding all that has been said to prove these Months, and
Days, and Years that we are speaking of, to be Prophetical, Typical, or
Angelical, or by whatever other Name Divines are wont to call them, any man
shall yet contend that they are to be understood of common months, and days,
and years: let him consider, 1st, That where there is one Phrase, or Passage,
or Expression in the Revelation Literal, there are an hundred Figurative and
Typical. And in this part of it that we are now upon, it is manifest that an
Empire is designed by a Beast, seven Kings by seven Heads, ten Kings by ten
Horns, the Place that one King arises out of, by the Earth; that which another
comes out of, by the Sea; the Metropolis of the Beast, by a Woman; the Peoples
subject to her Jurisdiction, by Waters; and I believe there is hardly any one
Word or Passage in this Prophecy, which can in any tolerable sense be
Figuratively understood, but so it ought to be interpreted. Since therefore it
appears most evidently, (from that place of Ezekiel before quoted) that days in
Scripture-Prophecy have been set to typifie years; and since all other things
belonging to the Beast we spoke of, are expressed by Types; Why should not the
Time of his continuance be expressed so too? Why should not his one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, three Years and an half, or forty and two Months, be
understood of days of Years, and consequently of Years and Months, compounded
of such Annual days? But

2ly. Let him consider, that this Beast is said at ver. 7, 8. to have had Power
given him over every Tribe, and Tongue, and Nation. viz. of the Roman Empire;
and that all that dwell upon the Earth should worship him, whose Names are not
written in the Book of Life, etc. Now how short a time is forty and two Months
for the Continuance of so vast a Power?

I know there are some Expositors that interpret this Time not barely of the
Beast's Continuance, but of his making War with the Saints. As if it had been
said that Power was given him (...); that is, To make War forty and two months.
But the best Copies have only (...) that is, to continue forty and two Months.
And to what purpose should we interpret this passage here, concerning his
making War; when it is afterward said so plainly at ver. 7. That it was given
to him (...) to make War with the Saints.

3ly, and lastly. It is not to be doubted but that by this Beast with ten
Crowned Horns, to whom it is here said that Power was given him to continue
forty and two Months, are meant those ten Kings (Rev. xvii.) of whom the Angel
says, they had as then received no Kingd^m, but were to receive Power as Kings
one hour with the Beast, that is, with the last King of Rome and of the Roman
Empire. Either therefore let the Exposition which has been given of that
Chapter be confuted, and let it clearly be shown, either that those ten Kings
have not yet received their Kingly Power, or that they have reigned but forty
^^d two common Months, or that these ^n crowned Horns are not to be interpreted
of those ten Kings spoken of in the xviith Chapter; or lastly, let it be
granted (as it ought to be) that these forty and two Months are to be
understood of Months of Years, and not of common Months.

And now to close up this point, I shall let the Reader see what great
absurdities the Eminent Dr. Hammond, who understands these Months of common
Months, and interprets the Beast to be Domitian, has run himself upon in the
Explication of them. This worthy Author then (many of whose failings in the
Explicating of the xiith and xiiith Chapters I have purposely omitted, merely
out of that honor I bear to his Pious memory, and his other learned Writings,)
in his Annotations upon this Place, confessing that the best and ancientest
Copies read this Place, (...) (without (...)) (which he interprets to spend or
stay forty and two Months,) adds these Words: And then (says he) to stay so
many Months, is to live so long; which was punctually true of Domitian, who
began his Persecution in the thirteenth, and died in the sixteenth year of his
Reign. Where observe,

1st, That Domitian might have begun his Persecution in the thirteenth, and
died in the sixteenth year of his reign, and yet not have persecuted one Month,
much less forty and two.

2ly, That he might have begun his Persecution in the thirteenth Year of his
Reign, and not ended it till the sixteenth, and yet not have persecuted five
and twenty Months.

3ly. It does not follow that Domitian lived but forty and two Months, because
he began his persecution in the 13th and died in the 16th Year of his Reign.
But this the Doctor affirms of him, and it was necessary that he should
according to his explication of these words (...). For, to stay so many months
(says he) is to live so long; which was punctually true of Domitian, who began
his Persecution in the thirteenth, and died in the sixteenth Year of his Reign.
Let the Reader see whether this were punctually true, or not, but I am
confident he will hardly say that the Doctor has made it punctually out, and we
may as confidently believe he would have proved it punctually, as well as said
it, if it had been easy to be done.

But it may be the Doctor has better explained himself touching this point, in
some other Place. Let us see therefore what he says of this matter in his
Premonition. For there, disputing against Baronius, who affirms St. John to
have been banished by Domitian in the tenth Year of his Reign, and speaking of
the same Emperor's banishing his Cousin Flaccia Domitilla, that (says he) was
five Years after this Time of John's supposed Banishment, in the fifteenth or
last Year of Domitian 's Reign. These are the Doctor's own Words in his
Premonition, though in his Annotations he affirms D^mitian to have died in the
sixteenth Year of his Reign.

But still Domitian might persecute Christians forty and two Months. Hear
therefore what the Doctor himself quotes out of Tertullian in the Place before
cited, and makes use of against Baronius. Domitian (says he) went about to do
as Nero had done, etc. sed facile caeptum repressit, etc. but he ceased from it
presently, and recalled those whom he had banished. But now if Domitian
persecuted Christians forty two Months, how comes Tertullian (comparing
Domitian's Persecution with Nero's) to say that he ceased presently. Nero
himself did not persecute Christians by public Edict, above thirty and six
Months, and therefore if Domitian persecuted them forty and two Months, how can
he be said in comparison with Nero to have ceased presently.

See therefore, Reader, how altogether unapplicable these forty and two Months
are to Domitian, (or indeed to any other) in a literal sense, and therefore
till a better can be found, let us embrace the Typical, which appears to be the
only sense that they are capable of.

I might further add concerning this typifying of Years by days, that which
Mr. Mede has learnedly proved touching those Days in Daniel, whereof there is
mention in the xiith Chap. ver. 11, 12; viz. that neither his one thousand two
hundred and ninety days, nor his one thousand three hundred and thirty five
days, can in any wise be understood of common Days but of prophetical, such
as whereof every day does represent a year. And he observes further, that where
at any time in Daniel's Prophecy we meet with days that must be understood of
common days, they are not called in the Hebrew days, but Evenings, Mornings.
An instance of which we have Dan. viii. 14. But I need say no more in so clear
a case, having said enough already to prove what I intend, which is no more
then this, to wit, that by days in Prophecy may be typified years, without any
absurdity in reason, or incongruity to Scripture-usage.

Now therefore let us see from the circumstances of the Prophecy we were
speaking of, whether the two and forty Months allotted for the continuance of
the Beast, ought rather to be understood each Month for thirty common, or for
the same number of Prophetic Days; that is, as set to typify thirty days, or
thirty Years; that so forty and two Months may typify two and forty times
thirty, or One thousand two hundred and sixty Years.

But this matter is very easily decided. For we see plainly that these two and
forty Months are all the time that is allotted for the Continuance of those
ten-crowned Horns, ver. 1. which upon the Destruction of the seventh King (the
Christian Roman Emperors) were to be united into one Kingdom under the
Headship and Supremacy of the Roman Bishops. And since we have cleared this
Point from the interpretation which the Angel gives us of that Vision, Rev.
xvii, where he tells us, the ten Horns are ten Kings, which have received no
Kingdom as yet, but receive Power as Kings one Hour with the seventh or last
Head of the Roman Empire, viz. the Roman Bishops; and that these Kings should
give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom to them: Experience it self has
abundantly confirmed to us, that these ten Kingdoms have continued so united,
and the Headship and Supremacy of the Roman Bishops, to give their Power,
Strength, and Kingdom to them more or less, for above these thousand Years, and
therefore that their continuing two and forty Months cannot be understood of
two and forty common Months, but of as many Years as in the common acceptance
of them, they would signify days, that is, One thousand two hundred and sixty
years.

And this may be also further confirmed from our Experience of the Woman's
continuing in the Wilderness. For from Rev. xii, it plainly appears that she
was to continue in the Wilderness One thousand two hundred and sixty days; and
that her Wilderness-state is to be reckoned from the time of her being fled
thither upon the two Wings of that great Eagle, the Roman Empire, viz. the
Western and the Eastern Parts of it, as it stood divided under the Christian
Emperors. Now these two Wings were broken asunder upon the incursion of the
barbarous Nations, when the Roman Emperors were utterly destroyed, and the ten
Horns arose together with that last Head of the blasphemous Beast, to whom they
were to give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom. And therefore we may
observe, that presently upon the Woman's flying into the Wilderness upon those
two Wings of the great Eagle, Rev. xii. the next thing presented at the
beginning of Chap. xiii. is the Beast with ten Horns crowned. From this time
therefore we are to reckon the Woman's continuing in the Wilderness. But from
the Analogy of the Type it self, nothing can be plainer, than that she was to
continue in the Wilderness, till she arrived at the Land of Canaan, whither she
was and still is traveling, and therefore her continuance in the Wilderness
must have been much longer than One thousand two hundred and sixty common days,
and consequently they must be put to typify as many Years.

If therefore we reckon One thousand two hundred and sixty Years from the
Woman's being fled into the Wilderness; or, which comes all to one, from the
ten Horns appearing with Crowns on their Heads, that is, from about the Year
four hundred and fifty six, we shall find them to expire about the Year one
thousand seven hundred and sixteen. And there abouts we may expect the
expiration of the Beast's Supremacy. Not as if we could certainly determine of
that Point of time, when these one thousand two hundred and sixty Years should
end precisely (for we must leave that to his Wisdom in whose only hand the
Times and Seasons are,) but this we say, that by that term of Days, and Months,
and Years, is meant a definite, not uncertain Time, and that they must be
understood not literally, but in the sense of Prophecy for Annual Days, and
Months, and Years, viz. for Days, and Months, and Years of Years. And further,
that we can see no other likelihood but that they will expire within some
reasonable Latitude of that Time that we have said.

But yet I must confess I am of the Opinion that no mortal Man, from the most
accurate Inspection of this Prophecy, can certainly define the time, no, not
within the Compass of one hundred Years or more, which in so great a number as
one thousand two hundred and sixty, are not much considerable. And thus much of
the two and forty Months allotted for the Continuance of this Beast. Let us now
proceed to those other Characters and Descriptions which are given of him.

As it is said of him at ver. 5. that there was given to him a Mouth speaking
great things, and Blasphemies: so accordingly it is said in the next Verse,
that he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, and
his Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven. Now although, I suppose, it
neither can, nor will be denied that the Bishops of Rome, since they came to be
the Head of this ten-horned secular Kingdom, have spoken things exceeding great
and monstrous, such as no Potentate ever spoke besides them; as, that they are
the sole Vicars of Christ on Earth, the Head of the universal Church, to whom
all mortal Men must needs be subject, if they would be saved; that they are
infallible in determining of Religious Matters, be their Life and Conversation
never so detestable; that they are appointed over the Kingdoms of the World, to
build and to plant, to root them up, and overthrow them, as they see expedient;
with many other such like Claims, and great Prerogatives, which they challenge
to themselves. Yet possible it may not seem so clear, how they who own
themselves the Servants of the Servants of God, and who adore his Saints, and
even their very Shrines and Relics with Religious Honor, can be said to
blaspheme the Name of God, and his Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven.

But since these things have been foretold concerning them, they must have been
fulfilled in them; and how that has been done is no hard matter to declare. For
by this Blasphemy here is meant Idolatry. And so this Description of the
Blasphemy of the Beast, Chap. xiii, is exactly parallel to the Idolatry of his
Metropolis, Chap. xvii; where she is called the Mother of Harlots, and is said
to have made the Kings of the Earth (to wit, these ten Horns or Kings here
spoken of, acknowledging the Headship and Supremacy of her Bishops) drunk with
the Cup of her Fornications.

To blaspheme the Name of God therefore, is to dishonor him, by giving of his
Name, his Worship, or his Attributes to any other, which whether the Church of
Rome, in their worshipping of Images, and Relics, Saints, and Sacrament, be
guilty of, or not, is not my Business to determine. For I have sufficiently
proved from all the Characters, and Descriptions which the Angel gives us of
the Body, the Metropolis, the Heads and Horns of this Beast, that he is set to
typifie the Roman Bishops. If so, it follows upon supposition of the Truth of
this Prophecy, that they blaspheme the Name of God, etc. And therefore let the
Romanists themselves see to it, for all the World besides are made too sensible
of this their Blasphemy and Idolatry, and would stand amazed to see this
Prophecy thus fulfilled in them.

But besides this Beast's blaspheming of the Name of God, it is further added,
that he blasphemed God's Tabernacle also. Now by the Tabernacle of God cannot
be meant Heaven, for that is the Place of God's eternal Residence; whereas a
Tabernacle in Scripture Phrase does always signify a Place of sojourning, or
of transitory abode. And I believe we shall find but two things that can in any
good-approved Scripture-sense be called the Tabernacles of God, and can
tolerably be accommodated to our present purpose: One is the Body of Christ;
the other the Virgin Mary, in both which God sojourned as in Tabernacles.

Now that the Body of Christ may in a Scripture-sence be fitly called the
Yabernacle of God, appears from those Places of Scripture, where the Body of
Man is called his Tabernacle. For if the Body of Man be Man's Tabernacle: then
the Body of Christ, in whom all the fullness of the Godhead dwelled bodily, is
the Tabernacle of God. The Places of Scripture then to this purpose are, 2 Cor.
v. 1. and 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. In the first of these Places, St. Paul, speaking of
the Happiness of the Saints after this life, has these Words; We know, (says
he) that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. And a
little after at ver. 4. he adds, For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan,
being burdened, etc. And the same Metaphor is used also by St. Peter, in the
Places cited out of his Epistle, where, speaking of his own Death, he has these
Words; I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by
putting you in remembrance, knowing that shortly I must put off this my
Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. From which Places it
appears evidently that in Scripture Language the Body is a Tabernacle. And so
by consequence, the Body of Christ, is the Tabernacle of God. And for the same
Reason the Virgin Mary also, in whose most blessed Womb Christ sojourned for a
time, as in a Tabernacle, may here in Prophecy be represented by the same Type.

But for the Tabernacle of the Body of Christ, we have yet a more particular
and express Place of Scripture, Heb. ix. 11. Where the Apostle comparing the
Priesthood of Christ, with that of Aaron, calls the Body of Christ a greater
and more perfect Tabernacle than the Jewish was. For by that greater and more
perfect Tabernacle, it is evident that the Apostle means the Body of Christ.

Now that the Body of Christ, and the Virgin Mary, are both sufficiently
blasphemed, and dishonored by the Idolatries of the Church of Rome, is too
notorious to be here insisted on: For as for the Body of Christ, we know they
own the very Sacrament of it to be God, the very God and great Creator of the
World, the very true substantial Body and Blood, together with the Godhead of
our Savior Christ. And therefore through this Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of Christ they manifestly blaspheme the Tabernacle of God, yea, and his Name,
and Godhead also, in that they make an Idol of it. For whilst they own it to be
God, which of it self is no light Blasphemy, they say, and are not able to deny
but that it may be eaten and devoured by Man, nay, even by wicked Men, nay,
even by Rats and Mice, and further, that it may be stolen, or pawned, or carried
on Men's Shoulders, with many other such like Blasphemies and Reproaches, as
great as any of those most opprobrious [Sarcasms] wherewith the Spirit of God
in Holy Scripture does worthily deride the Heathen Idols. And by this means,
they not only have dishonored the Name and Tabernacle of God themselves, but
have also given great Offenses, and Occasions to their Neighbors the
Mahometans, and in general to all that are professed Enemies of the Gospel, to
vilify and despise the Christian's God.

And as to their blaspheming of the Virgin Mary, we may justly reckon, that
greater Blasphemy cannot be committed against that glorious Saint, than whilst
with impudent Violation of her Virgin-Modesty, and most profound Humility, she
is exalted by her Idolatrous Zealots to the throne of her Creator, and made a
kind of Rival and Competitrix with him, if not (which I abhor to think) in many
things superior to him. Witness the Psalter of the Virgin Mary, (as they call
it) publicly owned, and licensed by the Authority of the Roman Church, the
business of which Psalter is, in imitation of the Prophet David's praising God,
to magnify the Glories of the Virgin Mary. And in pursuit of this Design, her
Name is put instead of God's. As for Example, we have there such Addresses as
these, Blessed are they whose Hearts do love thee, O Virgin Mary, their Sins by
thee shall be mercifully washed away. Have Mercy upon me, O Lady, who art
called the Mother of Mercy, and according to the Bowels of thy Mercy, cleanse
me from all mine Iniquities. Save me, Lady, by thy Name, and deliver me from
mine unrighteousness. Give the King thy Judgment, O God, and thy Mercy to the
Queen his Mother. O come let us sing unto our Lady, let us make a joyful Noise
to Mary our Queen, that brings Salvation. O our Omnipotent Lady! thou art my
Salvation, thou have freed me, condemned to Death; thou art the beginning, and
the finisher of my Salvation.

Now I believe all Protestants are so far convinced of the Blasphemy of these
and other like Expressions, not only against God, but also against the blessed
Virgin, that they would think that the very Stones and Stocks the Papists
worship, if they had Ears to hear, and Eyes to see, and Mouths to speak, would
even complain that they themselves by their Adorers were blasphemed. For though
they be composed of Wood and Stone, yet have they not so hard a Forehead, as
knowingly to admit the Honors of their great Creator. And certainly they would
with much more Modesty refer the Worship that is given them to their God, than
it is performed, or perhaps pretended by the Zeal and Ignorance of their
Relative Worshipers.

And lastly, as for their blaspheming of the Saints which dwell in Heaven: we
must apply this also to the like Idolatrous Practices and Addresses to them.
For unless we think that these most holy Persons have together with their
Bodies left their Graces also here behind them, how can it be imagined that
they should not blush (if they have any knowledge or perception of the things
below) to hear and see those Prayers, Praises and Devotions which are paid them
at their Shrines and Temples. Whereby although they are pretended to be
honored, yet indeed they are blasphemed in a double Sense: one way, by being
put in place of God, who is the only object of religious Prayer; and on the
other side, by being brought in the Place of Heathen Demons, as having just
such Services performed, and such Offices assigned to them. And as the one is
too great an Honor for created beings: so the other is too vile an Office for
those glorious Spirits; and so both ways they are most shamefully blasphemed.

And I must add, that I believe, (for here I do not pretend to Arguments
against the Roman Superstitions, but only to give a hint of such, wherein, as I
conceive, this Prophecy is fullfilled) that those blessed Spirits would think
it a great Honor to them, to be put in Place of Heathen Demons, (if they
could so escape religious Honor;) in comparison of that much more detestable
Reproach of being put in Place of God. For so St. Paul for one, has as good as
told us, Romans ix. 3. where he professes himself to be so intent upon the Glory
of God, that for the furtherance of his Glory in the Conversion of the Jews, he
could even wish himself Anathema.

And what we have here said concerning their blaspheming of the Saints which
dwell in Heaven, is every whit as applicable to the Angels, who being
worshipped with like Honors and Addresses, are alike blasphemed. And indeed
since all Honor, Glory, Power, Praise, and whatsoever other Attribute of like
nature, does belong originally to God alone, by the most absolute and
inviolable right, whoever shall presume to give these Attributes in any sort to
any Creature whatsoever, without the Warrant of God's holy Word, does give
God's Honor to another. And he that does give more Honor than is warrantable
by the same, is guilty of the same Idolatry. This I say, because the Romanists
depend so much upon that weak distinction of Latria and Dulia. For, All Honor
is divine; and the giving of any to a forbidden Object, or to a lawful Object
more Honor than is due, is to be guilty of Idolatry. And thus we have given a
brief account of that which was foretold of this Beast, that he opened his
Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, his Tabernacle, and them
that dwell in Heaven.

In the next Verse we have the Description of the Power of this Beast, and of
the Extent of his Dominion. As for his Power, it is said that it was given him
to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them. This Beast therefore was to
be but a cowardly Beast, in that the chief of his Power consisted not in making
War with other Beasts, but only with the Saints, which of themselves are the
most gentle and defenseless sort of People in the World. But this is not to be
understood, as if these ten Horns, or Kings, each one considered severally and
apart, should have no other Power, for they are secular Princes, and have the
same Power as any other Princes have, to war with any Beast or Kingdom that
offends them: But that these Kings considered as the secular Kingdom of the
Roman Bishops, and united under his Headship and Supremacy, should have no
other Power but to make War against the Saints, that is, against such as
opposed themselves to their Corruptions, Superstitions and Idolatries; at
least, that this should be the main and most notorious instance of their Power.

And therefore it is remarkably spoken of them, Rev. xvii. 13, 14. First, that
they should have one mind, and give their Power and Strength unto the Beast,
(that is, that they should be united into one Kingdom under the Headship and
Supremacy of the Roman Bishops, by giving them their Power and Strength) And
then it follows immediately after, that they should make War with the Lamb,
which is the same War in effect with that which they were to make against the
Saints, with this only difference, That considered as a War against the Saints,
these Kings should overcome them; but considered as a War against the Lamb, the
Lamb should in the end prevail against those cruel Enemies, and malicious
Persecutors of his Saints.

But then as to the extent of this Beast's Dominion, it is said, that Power was
given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations; that is, over all the
Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations that were subject to these Kings. Not as if the
Ro^^n Bishops should have Dominion o^^^ all and every one of these Kingdoms
^^^oughout that whole Duration of (...) and forty Months before specified;
(...) that they should have such Domi^^on over them in general all that while,
(...) should be sufficient to denominate ^^em their Supreme Head or King.

For there is all the reason in the world ^^at we should allow to this Beast,
ac^^ding as we see it happen in all other ^^easts and Kingdoms of the World, a
^^^e to grow, a time to come to his ^erfection, and a time to be destroyed;
together with the usual fates of all other Kingdoms, which are sometimes
larger, sometimes narrower, according to the ^^fferent state of things, the
variableness ^f their Strength and Fortune, or success (...) War, with many
other Casualties ^^at are incident to the greatest Kingdoms. Especially since
this Kingdom was to be a new unheard of sort of Kingdom, the Power of its Head
preca^ious, and depending wholly on the gift of his subordinate Princes (whose
minds a^ are various:) and therefore we may (...) well allow this Kingdom to be
a longer (...) time in coming to perfection, and obnoxious to more
uncertainties and mutabilities than any other.

And if it be the only Obstacle of the accomplishment of this Prophecy, that
the Popes have not enjoyed so long, or large a Power in the Roman Empire, as
the Scripture seems to attribute to this Antichristian Beast, it cannot be
denied but if they might have had their will, and that which they were
vigorously aspiring after from the very first, they had undoubtedly been the
Antichrist we are treating of, and this Prophecy would have been fulfilled in
them. But then it is to be considered (as was said but now) that since the
Kingdom of this Antichrist was to be precarious, it is no wonder if it rose
from small beginnings, and by slow degrees; or if the Kings that were to be his
Benefactors dealt their Power and Strength and Kingdom to him (specially at
their first acquaintance) with a sparing Hand.

And whereas it is added in the next Verse, That all that dwell upon the Earth
^ell worship (or obey) him, whose Names ^e^ not written in the Book of Life, of
the ^amb slain from the foundation of the World: it has the same restrained
sense with the former; the Earth being taken for that part of the Earth, which
is the subject of this Prophecy, as it is also very often taken in the holy
Scriptures for (...) much narrower Compass. But it is ^sed here not in a
natural but a typical sense, for the Inhabiters of the Woman, the Church of
Rome, in her Wilderness^ute, that is, for the Earthy and degenerate
Roman Catholic Church.

In the last place, let us hear what Exhortation, and what Comfort the Spirit
gives us under these Afflictions. If a^y Man (says he) have an Ear to hear,
(...) him hear, that is, let him take good ^eed to this Prophecy. I am afraid
therefore, that it has been too much neglected (not to say, despised) by us.
But of that I shall say no more, being heartly sorry for the Occasion of giving
so much as this hint of it. For the Revelation indeed has had the Honor to be
reckoned amongst the Books of Canonical Scripture by us: but we have hardly
shown in that Respect, and bestowed that Labor on it, which the Word of God
may justly seem to challenge from us.

In the next place then, let us hear the Comfort that is given us in the
following Verse, where we are assured, that God will plead our Cause, and will
avenge us of our Enemies. For he that leads into Captivity, shall go into
Captivity; He that kills with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword; Here
is the Patience, and the Faith of the Saints; that is, the Saints considering
that it is the Cause of God they suffer in, and steadfastly believing that he
will so own it in the end, by saving them, and by requiting the hard measure of
their Enemies into their own Bosom, are thereby heartened and encouraged to
take their sufferings for his Name and Gospel's sake with Patience.

And now let us see what sense the whole will make together, according to this
Exposition, in the ensuing Paraphrase.

Paraphrase on Rev. xiii.

1. And I stood in a Place of a convenient prospect to behold the rising of the
two Kingdoms hereafter described; and I saw a Beast, or Kingdom, which was the
Idolatrous Roman Empire, that had enjoied six several sorts of Heads, or
supreme Governments, before, arising now out of the Nations subject to the
Roman Jurisdiction, under its seventh Head the Roman Bishops; the Empire coming
now to be divided amongst ten Kings, acknowledging the Supremacy of those
Bishops, and so united into one Kingdom under them; and this last Head, as the
other six had been, was marked with a Name of Blasphemy, to denote his likeness
to them in Idolatrous Worship.

2. And the Kingdom which I saw, was divided into many Kingdoms, like the
Grecian Monarchy; and it was actuated by the Councils of its Religious Men,
like the Monarchy of the Persians; and it gave out Idolatrous Laws and Edicts,
under the penalty of fire and faggot, like that of the Babylonians. And the
Dragon, who had before employed the Heathen Roman Emperors in his Service, did
now bestow the same Power, and Seat, and great Authority, upon the Head of this
ten-horned Kingdom, (to wit, upon the Roman Bishops) to make War against the
Saints (by the Assistance of these ten Kings, who give their Power, and
Strength, and Kingdom, to them for this purpose) as the Heathen Roman Emperors
had done before.

3. And this Beast (the Blasphemous Roman Empire) appeared to me to have
received a mortal wound, by the Sword of the Spirit of God, in his sixth Head
the Heathen Emperors; but this wound upon the division of the Roman Empire
amongst ten Kings, was healed by the Dragon's Artifice in substituting another
Head (the Roman Bishops,) to whom those ten Kings did give their Power, and
Strength, and Kingdom, for the restoring of Idolatrous Worship, and persecuting
the Opposers of it. And all the Roman World applauded the Contrivance
wonderfully.

4. And they obeyed the Idolatrous Laws and Constitutions of this their new
Supreme Head and Governor, though indeed the Dragon was the chief Author of
them: and they devoted themselves to him with a cheerful submission,
applauding his unparralleld Power and greatness, saying, What King may be
compared to him? Which of the puny Enemies of our Religion are able to stand
out against him?

5. And there was given unto him a Mouth speaking great things, and
Blasphemies. For he enacted Idolatrous worship, and would have all men
whatsoever to obey him under the severest penalties both of temporal and
eternal Flames. And his Reign was to continue forty and two Months of Years, or
one thousand two hundred and sixty Years.

6. So he set up Idolatrous Worship, which is no better than Blasphemy against
God; commanding men to worship Images, the Sacrament of the Body of Christ, the
Virgin Mary, and the Saints and Angels which dwell in Heaven.

7. And it was given unto him to make War with the Saints, that keep the
Commandments of God, (abstaining from Idolatry) and have the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, (reproving the abominable Corruptions and Degeneracies of these
wretched times:) and not only to make War against them, but to overcome them:
and his Power extended over all the Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations of the
Roman World.

8. Yea, and all that dwell in the Roman Church shall submit themselves to him,
as many of them as have not their Names written in the Book of Life of the Lamb
slain from the Foundation of the World.

9. If any Man have an Ear, let him hear, and give good heed to this Prophecy.

10. But let not any Man think that for all this great and long Apostasy of the
Roman Catholic Church, and the heavy pressure and persecution of God's
faithful Servants; that he has abandoned his own Cause, or the Cause of those
that suffer for his fake. For the time will certainly come, when he will take
vengeance of his Enemies, though he bear long with them: When he that leads
into Captivity, shall go into Captivity; and he that kills with the Sword,
shall be killed with the Sword. And in this firm Faith, and Confidence of God's
special Care and Providence over his afflicted Servants, they are enabled to
take all their sufferings for his sake with Patience.

And thus much of the Pope's Secular Kingdom: We come now to speak of him as an
Ecclesiastical Beast or King.

CHAP. IV. An Exposition of Rev. xiii, from ver. 11, to the end. And therein,
Of the Ecclesiastical Power of the Roman Bishops, considered as the pretended
Vicars of Christ, Successors of St. Peter, and Head of the Roman Catholic
Church. To the exposition of which part of the Chapter is subjoined a
Paraphrase; and to that, the Conclusion of the whole Treatise.
IN the xviith Chapter, the Angel in his Interpretation makes mention of no
Power as appertaining to the last Head of the Beast, but only that which he
enjoys by the Favor of those ten Kings which were to share the Roman Empire
amongst them, and to arise together with him. But as there it was observed that
this seventh Head and King fell out to be the Roman Bishops: so here (to
justify that Interpretation to the highest Degree of certainty that a
Mysterious Prophecy can be capable of) we have a plain description both of
their secular Power, as Kings; and of their Power in the Church as Bishops: And
I beheld (says St. John at ver. 11.) another Beast coming up out of the Earth,
and he had two Horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon. 12. And he
exercises all the Power of the first Beast before him, and causes the Earth,
and them which dwell therein, to worship the first Beast, whose deadly Wound
was healed. 13. And he does great Wonders, so that he makes fire come down
from Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of Men.

In which Words we have a very plain and evident Description, both of the
Fcclesiastical Power of the Bishops of Rome, and of that Secular Power, which
they claim by virtue of the other. I beheld (says St. John) another Beast, that
is, another sort of King or Kingdom than that which is before described; but
yet he exercises all the Power of that first Beast before him; that is, there
is no Power attributed to that other Beast consisting of ten Horns or Kingdoms,
but what is exercised or employed by this two-horned Beast. Which is as much as
to say, that this two-horned Beast is the Head of that ten-horned one: for that
which exercises all the Power and Faculties of the Members, is the Head.

This therefore is called another Beast from that which is before described,
not in respect of the Head of it, which is the same to both: but in respect of
its Horns, that is, the parts or Kingdoms it consists of. For if we look upon
the Popes as Secular Heads of the Roman Empire, in that respect their Kingdom
is said to consist of ten Kingdoms; because their Secular Power is originally
inherent in those ten Kings (and their Successors) amongst whom the Roman
Empire was divided. But if we look upon them as Bishops of Rome, as Successors
of St. Peter, as the Head of the universal Church, or (as they please to style
themselves) the Vicars of Christ, in that respect their Kingdom consists but
of two Horns or Kingdoms, like the Horns or Kingdoms of the Lamb Christ JESUS.

For by the Lamb (a Type, which is so often used in this Book of the
Revelatio^) is always meant Christ Josus. And (as has been before proved) when
any Beast is represented with more than one Horn, it generally, if not
constantly, signifies that Kingdom to consist of so many Kingdoms as the Beast
has Horns.

Now what those two Horns or Kingdoms, over which the Lamb presideth, are, is
manifest from this Book of the Revelation. For in Chap. xv. 3. he is called the
King of SAINTS, that is, of his Church and faithful People, and in Chap. xvii.
14. he is called King of KINGS, that is, of the Secular Kings and Kingdoms of
this World. And of two Horns or Kingdoms, like these Horns or Kingdoms of the
Lamb, the Kingdom of the Roman Bishops (his pretended Vicars) does consist. For
these are also the Head or King of the Roman Catholic Church, which answers to
Christ's Kingdom of the Saints: and withal, they are the Head or King of those
ten Secular Kings (with their Successors) who were to give their Power, and
Strength, and Kingdom to them. And this is the meaning of that which is said of
this other. Beast coming up out of the Earth, that he had two Horns like the
Lamb.

I am not ignorant that the generality of Interpreters expound these two Horns,
of the Popes two Powers of binding and loosing. But besides, that these are in
effect but one and the same Power, they do not answer to that most usual
Acceptance of the Type of Horns, wherever they are represented upon any
Beast. But let the Reader use his Judgment.

Now of this Ecclesiastical Beast, considered as having two Horns like the
Lamb, that is, as pretending to represent the Person, and to bear the Office of
Christ Jesus upon Earth, by an Authority derived from him, it is said, that he
came up out of the Earth, that is, (as has bin showed before) out of the
Church of Rome. For by the Earth, whence this Beast is said to have come up,
must be meant some kind of People: as by the Sea is meant those Peoples out of
which the former Beast arose. But there are no People concerned in this
Prophecy, but only the Woman, and the Peoples, Nations, Multitudes, and
Tongues, on which she sits, and over which she rules or presideth. Since
then those Peoples, Nations, Multitudes, and Tongues, on which the Woman
sits, are typified by the Waters; there remains no People to be typified by
the Earth, but only the Woman her self, that is, the People of the Church of
Rome.

Out of this People therefore did this other Beast arise, who is said to have
come up out of the Earth, and to exercise all the Power of the first Beast,
which arose out of the Sea. And we may thus understand the Mystery of these two
Beasts; that the Head arose out of the People of Rome; and the ten Horns or
Kings, from whom the Secular Power of this their Head is derived to him, arose
out of the Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues, on which, as upon many
Waters Beast that was, and is not, and to the subject to her Jurisdiction the
Church of Rome was seen to sit: and that this Head, besides his Secular Power
over those ten Kingdoms, has also an Ecclesiastical Supremacy in the Catholic
Church.

Now of this Ecclesiastical Beast which came up out of the Earth, it is said,
that he had two Horns like the Lamb. And whatever the meaning of that be, I am
sure that the Romanists neither will nor can deny, but that the Kingdom of
their Pontifs has a most near and intimate Resemblance to the Kingdom of Christ
in all respects, as any Antichristian Beast can have. But, as I suppose, I have
given a sufficient and clear account of these two Horns already: so I have
nothing more to add, before I proceed to the further Description of this
Ecclesiastical Beast, but only to observe that he came up out of the same same
Place, where all the seven Heads or Kings (and consequently the seventh or last
of them, who is called the Beast, that was, and is not, and has before been
proved to be the Bishops of Rome) were to arise and have their Residence. So
that there is no one thing of smallest Moment spoken of that Beast that was,
and is not; but the same is most exactly answered by the Description of this
Beast, that is said to have come up out of the Earth.

For as there it is said of the Beast that was, and is not, that he should
arise out of the City of Rome, or have his Residence among the seven Mountains:
so here, this Beast is said to have come up out of the Earth, whereby the same
Place and People are designed. And as there it is said of the ten Horns, that
they should give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom, to the Antichristian
King, or last Head of the Beast: so here it is said of this Ecclesiastical
Beast, that he exercises all the Power of the first Beast before him, that is,
of the ten Kings, which are typified by the ten crowned Horns in the beginning
of this Chapter.

And the like may be observed of all the other Particulars of the Angel's
Interpretation, relating to the ten Kings there spoken of. For there is nothing
mentioned of them by the Angel, but what is here contained in the Description
of these two Beasts, the Secular that arose out of the Sea, and the
Ecclesiastical (the Head of that Secul^^ Beast) that rose out of the Earth.
Only the Destruction of the Great Whore, (the Metropolis of this Beast) is set
forth by the Angel, Rev. xvii, which is not here spoken of. It being here only
said of the ten Kings, as headed by the Ecclesiastical Beast, that their
Kingdom should continue forty and two Months, without any mention how that
Whorish City that deceived them should be brought to Desolation.

To proceed therefore. As this Ecclesiastical Beast is said to have had two
Horn^ like the Lamb; so it is added, that he spoke like the Dragon; that is,
like the Dragon, who (at ver. 2.) is said to have given him his Power, and
Seat, and great Authority, to wit, the same Power, the same Seat, and the same
great Authority, as for the matter of setting up Idolatry, and persecuting the
Saints (which are the only things to be considered here) which he and before
given to the Heathen Roman Emperors, by whom with open Face, and in his own
Shape, without any Co^ur or Disguise, he persecuted, and opposed the Christian
Faith.

But being then overcome and vanquished by the Preachers of the Word, that Head
or Beast, the Heathen Roman Emperors, received a mortal Wound; and to them
succeeded that other King, who in St. John's time was not come, and when be
came was to continue but a short space, to wit, the Christian Emperors, not
typi^^ed by any Beast or Head, but by two Wings of a great Eagle. In the Days
of which Christian Emperors, the Bishops of Rome having an excellent
Opportunity to advance the Greatness of their See, did busy themselves with a
restless Diligence to subjugate all other Churches to their Jurisdiction. And
the Dragon, who had lately been dethroned in the Roman Heathen Emperors,
observing this Ambition of the Prelates of that City, and perceiving that they
were like to make fit Instruments of another War against the Saints, took an
Occasion from the Ruin of the Emperors, to exalt these Bishops to the Headship
and Supremacy of the Roman Empire. And therefore the Dragon is said to have
given them his Power, that is, his Host or Forces, consisting of all sorts of
Hypocrites and unsound Christians; and his Sea^ or Throne, which he had before
enjoyed in the Persons of the Heathen Emperors, and great authority for the
carrying on of that Design, wherein he now intended to employ them.

And by the Substitution of these Bishops in the Supreme Authority of the Roman
Empire, the Blashemous Beast, which had received a mortal Wound, revived and
acquired another Head. And though this Head appeared in an innocent shape, not
of a Dragon, but a Lamb: yet did it speak, that is, enact Idolatrous
Constitutions, and pursue them with like Violence, as the Dragon did: or, to
speak in the Language of this Prophecy, this Head or Beast, though it had two
Horns like the Lamb, yet had (...) also a Name of Blasphemy or Idolatry, as the
other Head or Beast (the Dragon) had, which was before it. And this I annceive
to be the meaning of that which is noted concerning this Ecclesiastical Beast
coming up out of the Earth, that he had two Horns like the Lamb, but be spoke
like the Dragon.

And in this speaking like the Dragon, the Head of this Ecclesiastical
two-hor^ed Beast (for the Organ of speech is in the Head) appears to be the
same with that of the Secular ten-horned Beast, described in the former part of
this Chapter. For of him also it is said, that he (...) great Things and
Blasphemies, ver. 5. and that he opened his Mouth in Blasphe^^ against God,
ver. 6. (all which Expressions have a manifest Reference to that Name of
Blasphemy, which is said at ver. 1. to have been seen in the Heads of the
seven-headed Beast, Chap. xiii. 1.) which evidently appears to be the Language
of the Dragon, as proceeding only from his Instigation and Suggestion.

But the identity of the Heads of these two Beasts appears yet further from
that which is said of this Ecclesiastical two-horned Beast at ver. 12. viz.
that he exercises all the Power of the first Beast before him, that is, in his
Sight or Presence. For there having been but two Beasts before described, to
wit, the great red Dragon ( Chap. xii. 3.) and the Leopard ( Chap. xiii. 2.) it
is manifest that the Beast, which is described in the shape of the Dragon, had
received his mortal Wound before this Ecclesiastical two-horned Beast arose. By
the first Beast therefore, all whose Power this two-horned Beast is said to
exercise in his Sight or Presence, can be meant no other but the Leopard, next
before described with ten crowned Horns. And therefore the Head of this
two-horned Beast, which exercises all the Power of that ten-horned Beast
before him, must needs be thought to be the Head, as well of that ten-horned,
as of this two horned Beast.

And since the Metropolis of this Head is the Church or City of Rome, this
gives us further to observe the parallel between the Prophecy of this xiiith,
and that of the xviith Chapter of this Book. For as there it is said of the
great Whore that sits upon many Waters, that the Kings of the Earth had
committed Fornica^ion with her, ver. 1, 2. so here it is noted of the Head of
that great Whore, that he is also the Head of those ten Kings designed by the
Crowned Horns, and therefore draws them into like Idolatrous Practices with
that great Babylon his Metropolis. Nay, it is expressly said of the ten-horned
Beast at ver. 6. That he blasphemed God, etc. by which (as has bin said
before) is signified his Idolatry.

I have observed before, that all the Power of that ten-horned Beast, which
this two-horned Beast is said to exercise before him, is nothing else but a
Power of setting up Idolatrous Worship, and of making War against the Saints,
and if there be any other Power appertaining thereunto. So that by his
exercising all the Power of that first Beast before him, there is nothing more
meant but only, that the ten Kings which constitute the Body of the first
ten-horned Secular Beast, are actuated in their Blasphemy or Idolatry, and in
their persecuting of the Saints, by the Instigation and Authority of this
Ecclesiastical two-horned Beast. Only let it be here observed, that this his
exercising all the Power of that ten-horned Beast, is directly answerable to
that which is said of the ten Horns or Kings, Rev. xvii. 13, 17. viz. that they
should give their Power, and Strength, and Kingdom to the seventh Head, or last
King of Rome, who is there called the Beast that was, and is not. That Beast, I
say, to whom they give their Power, is the same with this that exercises all
their Power. And as we have proved that Beast to be the Roman Bishops: so here
we have seen that he is described with two Horns like the Lamb, as his
pretended Vicar.

Of whom it is further said, that he causes the Earth, and them which dwell
therein, to worship the first Beast, whose deadly Wound was healed. By the
first Beast, whose Power this two-horned Beast is said to exercise before him,
is meant the Leopard; but by the first Beast, whose deadly Wound was healed, is
meant the Dragon. For though the Roman Empire in respect of its one Body, be
but one Beast; and so there is no difference or distinction of first and
second: yet in respect of its many Heads, it is to be considered as so many
Beasts. And so the Angel considers it in his Interpretation, as has been
before proved. Now by the Beast whose deadly Wound was healed, must be meant
that Beast which had received the deadly Wound. And that was the Dragon, or the
Beast under his sixth Head, the Roman Heathen Emperors. In respect of whom it
is said at ver. 3. that one of the Heads of the Beast looked as if it had been
wounded to death, and his deadly Wound was healed. Wherefore it must be the
Dragon; which is meant by the first Beast, whose deadly Wound was healed,
because it is no where said of the Leopard, (or the Beast under his seventh
Head) that he received any Wound at all.

But if the Dragon were destroyed ere this two-horned Beast arose; how could he
cause the Earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship or do homage to the
Dragon? I answer; the Dragon is the Devil, whose reigning Power in the Roman
Empire was destroyed in the Heathen Emperors, but received in the next
succeeding Head, to whom he gave like power as he had exercised before, when he
had the Emperors at his Devotion, Rev. xiii. 2. and therefore it is said of
the Subjects of the Leopard, (whose Head was this two-horned Beast) that they
worshipped not only the Beast, but the Dragon also, which gave Power unto the
Beast, ver. 4. The meaning whereof is, that they obeyed the Beast in those
Idolatrous Laws and Constitutions, which though they seemed to proceed from his
Ecclesiastical two-horned Head, yet in effect the Dragon, who had given him his
Power, was the prime Author and Contriver of them.

And as it is there said of the Subjects of the ten-horned Beast, that they
worshipped the Dragon which gave Power to him: so when it is here noted of the
twohorned Beast (the Head of that ten-horned one) that he causes the
Inhabiters of the Earth to worship the first Beast, whose deadly Wound was
healed, that is, the Dragon; the meaning is the same as before, only with an
Addition, which gives us to understand by what means the Inhabiters of the
Earth were thus seduced to the Worship of the Dragon. For they were moved to it
by the Instigation and Authority of a Beast, whom they had little Reason to
suspect, as having his Original from the Church of God, and looking like the
Lamb Christ Jesus. Yet this was he, who speaking like the Dragon, did cause the
Earth to worship or obey him, and in him the Dragon, or the Beast, whose deadly
Wound was healed.

So that the sense of these Words may be expressed in short to this effect: viz.
That this Ecclesiastical Beast, though he had two Horns like the Lamb, yet
acted he the Part of the Roman Heathen Emperors, (whose Power, and Seat, and
great Authority he enjoyed by the Gift and Favor of the Dragon,) causing the
Earth and them that dwell therein (that is, the Church of Rome) to worship
Idols, and to persecute the Opposers of that Superstition. And herein also the
Head of this Ecclesiastical two-horned Beast appears to be the same with the
Head of the Secular ten-horned Beast, in that the Subjects of both Kingdoms are
said not only to have worshipped or obeyed the Beast, but the Dragon also.

Hitherto have been declared the things which the Pope does as Head of the
Secular Power, wherein one of his Horns or Kingdoms does consist: As such, he
speaks like a Dragon; he exercises all the Power of the first Beast before
him; he causes the Roman Catholic Church to worship the Dragon. Which is no
more than what is said of the Head of the ten-horned Secular Beast: and
consequently it belongs to the Bishops of Rome as Head of that ten horned
Beast. For neither is it any other Power than what the Roman Heathen Emperors
had exercised before. But in ver. 13. we have a Description of the
Ecclesiastical Power of this two-horned Beast. For there it is added, that he
does great Wonders, so that he makes Fire come down from Heaven on the Earth,
in the sight of Men.

The Pope's Excommunications are here set forth under the Notion of great
Wonders: not that they are real and proper Miracles, but that they are very
strange and wonderful things. And such indeed as even without a Trope or
Metaphor may be called great Signs or Wonders: at least, there cannot be an
easier or less strained Metaphor to express the nature of them by.

For we must not look that any thing in this Prophecy should be set forth to us
in Words of plain and literal Acceptance; there being hardly any Verse, or
Clause of any Verse in all this Book, containing any thing of Prophecy in it,
which is not full of Metaphors, Types, and Figures. So that, of the two, the
Metaphorical Sense of any Word (if it does not seem affected, nor incongruous)
should rather be admitted than the literal. And therefore in my Judgment, we
ought rather to look upon these (...) great Signs or Wonders, as a figurative
Expression, than a literal. But I believe we shall find no figurative sense of
the Words, more naturally applicable to them, than that of very strange and
wonderful things.

But for a further Confirmation of this Exposition, let us look back to the
beginning of Chap. xii. where it cannot be denied, but that the Church of Rome,
in her Primitive Purity, is represented as (...), a great Sign or Wonder; and
at ver. 3. the Heathen Emperors persecuting the Church, are set forth as
(...), another Wonder. The Holy Ghost this signifying, that, as it would be a
real Wonder to see a Great Red Dragon in Heaven, etc. a Woman clothed with the
Sun, etc. persecuted by that Dragon, and overcoming him: so both the Emperors,
and the Church of Rome, were very much to be admired of all Men; the one for
their outrageous Cruelty, the other for her Innocence, and Purity, and patient
suffering. So here the Earthly Beast is said to do great Signs or Wonders: that
is, not real proper Miracles, but such kind of Wonders as the Woman and the
Dragon were, to wit, things very strange and wonderful.

But because these very strange and Wonderful things are thought fit to be
expressed by great Signs or Wonders; therefore to carry on the Metaphor, the
things themselves are represented and described, (as before in Chap. xii. so
here again) as if they were indeed true, real, proper Signs and Wonders. And we
have two Instances of the wonderful Works of this Beast, One is, his making
Fire come down from Heaven: the other is, his causing an Image to be made, and
giving life to it, that the Image could both speak, and vindicate its own
Worship.

As for his making Fire come down from Heaven, I know not what it can more
fitly be applied to then the Pope's Bulls of Excommunication. Nay I believe I
may challenge the greatest Wit in the World to express the wonderful Power of
the Bishops of Rome, with reference to their Excommunications, by a more
natural and significant Allegory, than that which is here used. Certainly
Erasmus, who was as great a Master of Eloquence, and as excellent in this very
way of figurative Expressions, as perhaps was ever any in the World; (which
appears both by his other Writings, and particularly by his Book of
Proverbs:) though he thought not in the least of this Prophecy, yet having
occasion to represent a Person excommunicated by the Pope, he could not think
of any neater Type or Metaphor, than this of Fire from Heaven. And because this
Metaphor seemed to him so sit and natural, he dwells upon it a long while
together. This is to be found in his Dialogue, entitled Inquisitio de Fide, at
the beginning; where he makes this Discourse between Aulus and Barbatius, which
I will here set down, that the Reader who has any opinion of Erasmus's
Eloquence, may see how properly the Pope's Excommunications are represented by
Fire from Heaven. His Words in English are to this Effect:

Au. It is the Children's song, Salute willingly: but I know not whether I may
lawfully say, Save you, or not, Bar. Truly I had rather one should give me
health, than say it to me. But why do thou say this, Aulus? Au. Why!
Because, if you would know, you smell of Brimstone, or the Thunderbolt of
Jupiter. Bar. There are rightaiming Thunderbolts, and there are Thunderbolts
that fly at all adventures, which differ much even in their Original from such
as are designed, and portend Mischief. For, as I suspect, you speak, of
Excommunication. Au. You say right, I do. Bar. Truly I heard horrid Thundering,
but I felt not the Stroke of the Thunderbolt. Au. How so? Bar. Because I have
as good a Stomach to my Meat, and sleep as quietly as before. Au. But that
Mischief which is not perceived, is wont to be the more dangerous. Yet surely
these brute random-Thunder-bolts, as you call them, strike the Mountains and
the Seas. Bar. They strike, but to no purpose. There is also Lightning sent out
of a Glass, or brazen Vessel. Au. Certainly even this were enough to frighten
one. Bar. To frighten Children. But there is none but God that has a
Thunderbolt to strike the Soul withal. Au. What if God be in his Vicar? Bar.
I would he were. Au. Truly there are many wonder that you are not long since
grown blacker then any coal. Bar. Suppose I were, you ought so much the rather
to wish Health to a lost Man; for so the Gospel teaches us. Au. It is to be
wished indeed, but not spoken. Bar. Why so? Au. That the Thunderstriken Person
might be ashamed, and repent.

And thus much Erasmus to this purpose. From whence I think it sufficiently
clear, (which is the only thing that I produced it for) that the Popes
Excommunications may very fitly be represented by Fire from Heaven. And
therefore, if there be nothing in the Scripture-use of this Metaphor to
contradict this Explication, I suppose I have given a reasonable Account of it.
But the Scripture is so far from contradicting this Explication, that it seems
rather to confirm it.

For this making Fire to come down from Heaven, what Scripture-passage can it
have relation to, if not to that of Elias (2 Kings 1.10.) and to that of James
and John, (Luke ix. 54.) who in a like Zeal to that of Elias, would have
commanded Fire to come down from Heaven, and consume their Adversaries? since
therefore the Pope thunders out his Bulls of Excommunication against his
Adversaries with like fervent Zeal, and in the cause of Religion too,
representing as near as can be the Spirit of Elias, and of these two Boanerges,
James and John, the Sons of Thunder, in that Action of commanding Fire from
Heaven, Mark iii. 17. (though in a cause as different from theirs, as Heaven
and Earth are distant) why may we not think, that what the Pope thus does in
Imitation, as it were, of that great Prophet, and the two Disciples, should be
expressed by an allusion to them? For when the Pope is angry, he would bring down
as real Fire from Heaven, as did the Prophet, or as the Disciples meant to do:
but wanting power to bring down real Fire, he must content himself with
Metaphorical. And thus much of the first of the great Signs and Wonders, that
this Ecclesiastical Beast is said to do, to wit, His making Fire to come down
from Heaven upon the Earth (the Roman Catholic Church) in the sight of Men.

The other great Sign or Wonder, to wit, that of the Image, follows in the next
two verses. 14. And he deceives them that dwell on the Earth, by the means of
those Miracles which he had Power to do in the sight of the Beast, saying to
them that dwell on the Earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast,
which had the Wound by a Sword, and did live; 15. And he had Power to give life
unto the Image of the Beast, that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and
cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be
killed. This is such a Miracle as the other was; I mean, a very strange and
wonderful thing. And being called a Miracle, it is described likewise as a
Miracle. But the Miracle is indeed no more but this* That the Pope had so much
Power and Influence both on Church and State, that he could make another Roman
Emperor.

This power and reputation he had gotten by deceiving the Church, by the means
of those great things which he pretended to. And it is observable, that as he
is said to have done the former Miracle in the sight of Men in general; So this
latter Miracle is set down as an instance of those great and wonderful things,
which he does in the sight of the Beast, (that is, of those the Kings before
described,) to gain himself the greater Honor, Reverence, and Observance from
them.

He says therefore to them that dwell on the Earth, (that is, to the Church of
Rome) that they should make an Image to the Beast, that had the Wound by a
Sword, and did live. Now the Beast which had the Wound by a Sword and did live,
was the Beast under his sixth Head, the Roman Heathen Emperors, of whom it is
said Chap. xii. 11. that Michael and his Angels overcame them by the Sword of
their Testimony. And this is the Wound which was given to that Beast by the
Sword, to wit, by the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Ephesians. vi.
17. And this Beast which is typified by the Dragon, and had the wound by the
Sword of God's Spirit, recovered of his deadly Wound, and revived under a
seventh Head, to whom the Dragon gave his Power, and Seat, and great Authority.
Neither is there any other Beast mentioned in this Prophecy, that had a wound
by any Sword, and lived, besides the Dragon, or Rome's Heathen Emperors.

To these Emperors therefore it is that this Ecclesiastical Beast gives order
to the Inhabiters of the Earth, to make an Image or Resemblance. Which in plam
words amounts to this, That the Bishop of Rome gave order to the Church of Rome
to choose another Roman Emperor, that should maintain the Roman Superstition,
and persecute all opposers of it, in like manner as the Heathen Emperors had
patronized the Religion of old Heathen Rome.

Now because the Bishops of Rome had not wherewithal to make this new elected
Emperor as considerable as the old, nor was there any Person to be chosen, that
for the vastness of his Power, and extent of Empire, could any ways deserve the
Name of Roman Emperor, (which is a Title and Expression of the most excellent
of all Secular Majesty:) therefore is this new Roman Emperor called here an
Image of the old, as being the Patron of Idolatry, like those Heathen
Emperors, and persecuting the true Servants of God, as they did; and as being
adorned with all their glorious Titles, Banner, Crown, and Robe Imperial, and
saluted by the Name of Roman Emperor, Caesar, and Augustus: but yet if we look
upon the thing wherein the Greatness of the Roman Emperors consisted, this
Roman Emperor of the Pope's creating, is nothing better than a Shadow, or an
Image of them.

Which is so natural and so obvious an Expression of the inconsiderableness of
the present Roman Emperors, that it has dropped from several Persons unawares,
without any respect at all to this Prophecy. For to this purpose Annal. lib. 7.
Aventinus relates these words of Everhardus: Romani Majestas populi, qua olim
orbis regebatur, sublata est (...) terris; Imperator vana appellatio est, et
sola, umbra est: that is, the Majesty of the People of Rome, by which of old
the World was swayed, is taken from the Earth, and the Name of Emperor is a
VAIN Appellation, and a mere SHADOW. And to like purpose speaks Salmeron the
Jesuit, Comment. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
who cannot be thought a party in this Interpretation of the Image of the
Beast: Imperium Romanum (says he) simdiu eve^s^^ est, nam qui nunc est
Imperator Romanus le^issina est umbra Imperii antiqui; usque adeo ut ne quidem
urbem Romae possideat, and jam per multos annos Romani imperatores defecerunt:
that is, the Roman Empire is long since overthrown, for be which now is Roman
Emperor, is a most inconsiderable SHADOW of the Ancient Empire, insomuch that
he does not possess even the City of Rome; and now for many Years the Roman
Emperors have failed. Now look what Difference there is between an Image and a
Shadow, so much there is, and no more, between the Metaphor, which this
Prophecy (as I conceive) accommodates to these Emperors of the Popes creating,
and that which Everhard and Salmeron themselves have used and applied to the
same Subject.

And this, I hope, is sufficient to justify the Application of this Metaphor to
the present Roman Emperors, if all other Circumstances of this Prophecy shall
be found to answer thereunto. For they were made by the Pope, elected by the
People of Rome; by the Pope's Authority they are saluted Caesar's, and the Pope
confers upon them the Imperial Crown, with other Ornaments and Appendages; and
yet when all is done, they are no better than a mere Image or a Shadow of that
mighty Name, A ROMAN EMPEROVR.

But possibly some may think that this Image was a kind of an enchanted Image,
because it is added, that he (that is, the two-horned Beast) had Power to give
Life to the Image of the Beast, that the Image of the Beast should both speak,
and cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be
killed. But if this Image had been made of Wood or Stone, or any other like
materials, I suppose it would have past the Power of Enchantment, to have given
it these Faculties that are here ascribed to it. For this Image is described,
not only like a living Man, but like a King: for the faculty of speaking, and
the Honor of being worshipped, are, as they are used in this Prophecy,
appropriated unto Beasts or Kings. But if this Image had been made of Wood and
Stone, and had received no greater Perfection from the Hands of the two-horned
Artificer, than only Life, and Speech, and answerable faculties like a living
Man; and had this Life, this Speech, and other faculties bin as real, as all
the other Passages of this Prophecy are metaphorical: I see not how we can
admit this Image of the Beast to have been made by virtue of Enchantment,
without ascribing to the Maker of it an incommunicable Attribute of the Great
Greatour.

I suppose therefore that we must of necessity understand these faculties of
Life, and Speech, etc. or else the Image of the Beast himself, in a
Metaphorical and Improper Sense. And so it will agree exactly to those Roman
Emperors, of whom I have interpreted this Image of the Beast. For these as Men
and Kings of God's appointment, had Life, and Speech, and Regal Power before.
But if we look upon them as the Image of the Beast, or as Roman Emperors
ordained by the Pope to those intents and purposes before recited; in that
respect it may be truly said, and almost properly; without a figure, that the
Pope, which made him Roman Emperor, did also give him Life, and Speech, and
Power Imperial.

And to this purpose it is very observable, that in this verse, tho the Image
of the Beast be the only subject of it, yet is he not left to be understood in
any relative (as he, or him, or it, or any other) but the Image of the Beast is
as often repeated, as there was occasion to speak of him. For it is said that he
(the two-horned Beast) gave life to the Image of the Beast, that the Image of
the Beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the
Image of the Beast, should bek^led. Whereby is plainly intimated, that this
Image of the Beast is here considered only as an Image of the Beast; or, that
the present Roman Emperors are said to have their Life, and Speech, and Power
from the Pope only, as Roman Emporors, or, as Persons of the Romish
Superstitions, and no otherwise. For, as Kings, they had the same before,
without any obligation to the Roman Bishops.

Now because this making of a Roman Emperor by the Bishop of Rome, who has no
greater honor than that of being Successor to St. Peter, who never did pretend
to any Worldly Dignity above a Fisherman, may well be thought a very strange
and wonderful attempt: it is therefore here prophetically represented as a
Miracle. And the rather, because this Beast, whose Kingdom is represented with
two Horns like the Lambs, might also seem to have some likeness to him in his
Works. Hence it is that his Excommunications are before described as a Miracle,
and here again his making of a Roman Emperor is set forth to us, as if he made
an Image of a Roman Emperor, and had Power to give the Image Life and Speech,
and Regal Majesty and Authority. But the plain meaning of it is no more but
this: That the present race of Roman Emperors, if we consider them as Roman
Emperors, as Elected, Crowned, Dignified, and Constituted by the Pope's
Authority, to be the Patrons of the Romish Superstition: is wholly influenced,
actuated and inspired by the Pope, and has no Life, nor Speech, nor Power
Imperial, but what it has received from him. And thus we have an account of the
two Horns or Kingdoms of this Ecclesiastical Beast, to wit, his Secular
Kingdom, and his Spiritual; as also of the Power he exercises in respect of
both.

Let us therefore see in the next place, what Persons this his Ecclesiastical
Kingdom does consist of. In respect of his Secular Kingdom, he is said at ver.
(...) to have Power given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations. But
in respect of his Ecclesiastical Kingdom, his Subjects are peculiarly
distinguished by a certain Mark or Character, which he causes them to receive.
For so it follows at ver. 16. that he causes all (to wit, all that dwell on
the Earth, whence he himself deriveth his Original, ver. 11. and who alone are
mentioned afterward, as the Subjects of his Ecclesiastical Kingdom; all these,
I say) both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a Mark in
their right Hand, or in their Foreheads. 17. And that no Man might buy or sell,
save he that had the Mark, or the Name of the Beast, or the Number of his Name.

It was an ancient custom amongst the Romans to set a Mark upon their Soldiers
and their Servants, that it might be known to what Master the Servants, and to
what General the Soldiers did belong. The Servants usually received this Mark
in their Foreheads, and the Soldiers in their Hands. To this Custom there is a
manifest Allusion, both here in the Description of the Subjects of this
Ecclesiastical Beast, and also in that of the Lamb's selected Company, Chap.
vii. at the beginning. By considering of which, as we shall easily understand
what the Mark, and Name, and Number of the Name, which that Company of the Lamb
received, are: so by comparing them with this Mark, and Name, and Number of the
Beast, and of the Subjects of his Kingdom, which is opposite to the Lamb's, we
shall as easily perceive the meaning of these also.

Now in that viith Chapter the Servants of God are said to have been sealed in
their Foreheads. And being there represented as Jews (a very usual thing in
this Prophecy for the Christian Church to be described by Types and Figures
borrowed from the Jewish) they are said to have been sealed twelve thousand of
each Tribe. So that the whole Company of them consisted of twelve times twelve
thousand, and were in all one hundred forty four thousand. Now it is manifest
that these were Christians, which are here said to have been sealed; because
they are affirmed afterward to have been followers of the Lamb, Chap. xiv. 1,
4.

And it is as manifest that by the twelve Tribes are meant the Christian
Churches, which were planted by the twelve Apostles. For if we understand the
twelve Tribes literally, we must understand the sealing and the numbers, and
all other things thereto relating, nay, and the whole Prophecy of the
Revelation, in a literal sense; unless there can be any special reason offered
from the Context, why these twelve Tribes alone must be expounded in a literal
sense. But till this special Reason be produced (for I know not any yet) I must
expound them figuratively, namely of twelve Christian Tribes, deducing their
original from the twelve Apostles.

And this as I conceive to be a very pertinent and most obvious Exposition: so
hence we may perceive what is the meaning of this number Twelve, which all
those seuled ones are said to have received; for they are sealed by Twelve
thousand of a Tribe. For hence it follows, that this number Twelve, which is so
visible and conspicuous in the Company of the Lamb, is only used as a Type of
their Original from the twelve Apostles, and the Churches of their founding,
which embraced and continued in the Truth and Purity of their Doctrine.

And we may further see that this number Twelve is properly the number of the
Lamb, in that it shines so illustriously in every thing belonging to him. For
so the New Jerusalem also is described, Chap. xxi. as having Twelve Gates,
Twelve Angels at the Gates, Twelve Names, Twelve Foundations, Twelve Apostles;
and as containing Twelve thousand furlongs of cubical measure; and the Wall of
it twelve times twelve Cub^^, or one hundred forty four Cubits. Which to me is
as evident a Demonstration, as the nature of the thing will permit, that Twelve
is the Lambs number; and that it is used typically in this Prophecy to denote
the Original of his Company and his holy City from the Twelve Apostles, as
consisting of such Persons, who continue in the Truth and Purity of their
Doctrine and Religion.

And from hence it will follow, that the Number of the Beast is a certain
Number answerable to this Number of the Lamb, a number which the Beast affects
above all other Numbers, which is most conspicuous in his Kingdom, and which
his Company is here said to have received as descending from him, namely, from
Great Babylon his Metropolis, who is called the Mother of Harlots. Which
Harlots, or Idolatrous Churches, descending from their Mother Babylon, are
typically represented by such as have received the number of the Beast, in
token of their vile and base Original. And what this Number is, and how it is
applicable to the Kingdom of the Beast, we shall hear anon.

In the mean time, let it only be observed, That this Number, which is here
called the Number of the Beast's Name, is in the very next verse called the
Number of the Beast. For it is a Number answerable to that of Twelve, whereby
the Kingdom of the Beast, or the Company of those who have received his Mark or
Name, are mystically represented, in like manner as the Company of the Lamb are
said to have bin sealed with his Fathers Name.

Now therefore let us enquire what this Name and Mark of the Beast is, For De
Rome, Pont, lib. 3. cap. 16. Sect. Ex his argunsntum insolubile po^est sunie,
etc.
Bellarmin seems to please himself very much, in that no Man can discover
what the Name of the Beast is. For thence he would infer that Antichrist is not
yet come, because his Name is undiscovered. But this Name of the Beast is not
so much in the dark, as he seems to make it. For the Name of the Beast is
written out at length, and that in characters of the largest size, Rev. xvii.
5. And his Name is this, which is written upon his Forehead, as he is the Head
of his Metropolis, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. This Name is said to have bin written on the
Forehead of the Woman, or the Church of Rome. And being written on her
Forehead, it must be on her Head, whereof the Forehead is a part. And since
this Ecclesiastical Beast is the Head of that Woman, this Name must have bin
written upon hint and consequently this Name is his; and certainly this is that
very Name of Blasphemy which was seen upon the seventh Head or King of Rome:
for the seven-headed Beast was full of Names of Blasphemy, Rev. xvii. 3. and
these Names were written on his Heads, Rev. xiii. 1. Wherefore that Name which
was written upon the Woman's Forehead, Rev. xvii. where she is described
sitting upon the Beast under his seventh Head, is the Name of the Beast under
his seventh Head, i. e. of the Antichristian Beast. And thus we have, as I
conceive, a plain discovery of the Name of this Beast.

Now as for his Mark, it is the same thing with his Name; that is, his Company
are marked with his Name. This Name, which is inscribed on his Forehead, he
makes his Subjects to receive. And therefore the Name that is written on his
Forehead, bears so manifest a relation to his Church or People, whom he causes
to receive the same. For it cannot be said of him alone, that he is Babylon the
Great, but only in relation to his Church. To which purpose it is observable,
that this Name is said to have been written not on his Forehead, but on the
Woman's. For though his Forehead, and the Woman's be the same (he being the
Woman's Head:) yet when it is said to have been written on the Woman's Forehead,
it gives us to understand that it is no otherwise his Name, than as the Head of
his Idolatrous Metropolis.

But yet we must not look upon this Name of him, or of his Church, as being the
proper Name whereby they should be usually known and called: but only as a Name
imposed on them, to denote their Superstition and Idolatry. And this in
Scripture is a very usual thing. For so it is foretold of Christ, Esaias ix. 6,
that he should be called Wonderful, Counselor, etc. And of Jerusalem, Isa.
1.26. That she should be called the City of Righteousness, the faithful City.
Which is directly opposite to this Name of the Antichristian City, Mystery,
Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. And as
the Company of the Beast are marked with his Name: so the selected Company of
the Lamb, are said to have had his Father's Name upon their Foreheads, Rev.
xiv. 1. they therefore were sealed or marked with the Father's Name: whereby no
more is to be understood, but that they were his Servants. But hence also it
appears, that the opposite Mark and Name of the Beast are all one; and that
they who had his Name had his Mark also; or, that they were marked with his
Name. And for a further Confirmation hereof, we may observe, by comparing the
9th and 11th verses of the xivth Chap. of this Book together, that the Mark of
the Beast is called the Mark of his Name.

Hence then it appears what Persons are peculiarly designed by those whom the
Beast causes to receive the Mark of his Name. For this Mark or Name was seen
upon the Forehead of the Woman. The Woman therefore, or the Church of Rome,
are here peculiarly designed by this Type. That Church therefore consists of
two sorts of Persons. The one, are such as have received this Mark in their
Foreheads, as the Servants of the Beast: the other, such as have received it in
there Hands, as being his Soldiers, and Propugners of his Superstition. The
first may be interpreted the Laity, who have received this Mark in their
Foreheads: the other the Clergy, who have received it in their Hands also.

And hence also it appears who they are that are said to have received the
Number of his Name. For they are such as hold with Rome in her Idolatry,
deriving the Original of their Superstition from her, and are designed by those
naughty Women called Harlots (or Idolatrous Churches) whose Mother that Great
Babylon is said to be. So that these Churches also have received the same Name
and Mark with Rome, as being guilty of the same Idolatry: but they are said
more properly to have received the Number of that Name, to signify withal from
whence they are descended, or that they have their Superstition from the Church
of Rome. For so the Company of the Lamb are sealed by twelves, and so receive
the Number of his Name, to show they are the genuine offspring of the 12
Apostles.

And whereas it is added of this Beast, that he causes, that no Man should buy
or sell, save he that had the Mark or Name of the Beast, or the Number of his
Name; the meaning is obvious, viz. that he interdicteth the faithful Servants
of God the commerce of the rest of the Citizens, forbidding any man to buy
ought of them, or sell ought to them. To this purpose is that Canon of the
Lateran Council, against the Waldenses and Albigenses, held under Pope
Alexander, remarkably prohibiting under the penalty of Anathema, Tom. 4.
Council. edit. Romans page 37.
Ne quis eos in domo vel in terra sua tenere vel fovere, vel NEGOTIATIONEM cum
iis exercere praesumat: that is, That no Man should keep or harbor them in his
House or Land, or presume to have any TRADING with them. And to the same
purpose another Synod in France held under the same Pope Alexander, forbids,
Apud Rev. Armachan. De Success. Eccles. page 239.
Ne ubi oogniti fuerint illius (ut vocant) Haereseos sectatores, receptaculum
quisquam eis in terra sua praebere aut praesidium impertiri praesumat; sed nec
in VENDITIONE et EMPTIONE aliqua cum iis communio habeatur: that is, That no
Man should knowingly give any Reception to the Followers of that Heresy (as
they call it) or presume to lend them any Help: and that in SELLING and BUYING
no Man should have any Commerce or Dealing with them. And thus much of the
Subjects of this Ecclesiastical Beast, his Mark, his Name, and the Number of
his Name.

But what is this Number? the Spirit tells us, that this Number is six hundred
sixty six; for the finding out the Mystery whereof we are bidden to count it,
ver. 18. Here is Wisdom; let him that has understanding count the Number of
the Beast, for it is the Number of a Man, and the Number is six hundred sixty
six. Here is a Number given us to be counted; and to encourage us thereunto, we
are told, that it is the Number of a Man, that is, not a Seraphick Number,
which possibly Men cannot count; but such a Number as is used by Man, and such
as Men are wont to count. Now if you give an Arithmetician a single Number to
count or calculate, he has no way of counting it but by extracting the Root of
it: and if no Root be mentioned, the Square Root is always meant. And if we
thus calculate the Number, six hundred sixty six, we shall find the Square Root
of it, (so near as it can be expressed in number) to be twenty five.

Which Number twenty five in the Kingdom of the Beast, is answerable to the
number twelve in the Kingdom of the Lamb: and is applicable to all those
opposite things in the City of Rome Papal, to which the number twelve is
actually applied by the Holy Spirit, (...) the new Jerusalem. For as the new
Jerusalem is said ( Rev. xxi.) to have had Twelve Gates, and at the Gates
Twelve Angels, and Names written thereon, which are the Names of the Twelve
Tribes of the Children of Israel; and the Wall of the City to have had Twelve
Foundations, and in them the Names of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb; and as
the Cubical Measure of the City is said to have bin Twelve thousand Furlongs;
the Length and the Breadth and the Height of it being equal, etc. So the Number
twenty five in these respects and many more is applicable to the City of Rome
Papal, as is admirably showed by Dr. Potter, in his excellent Treatise of the
Number six hundred sixty six. To which for brevity sake I must refer the
Reader: it being the only Subject of a just Volume to clear the Mystery of that
Number.

And he shows there, that the first established and decreed Number of
Cardinals (answerable to the twelve Apostles) was twenty five; and that they
had twenty five Parish Churches to officiat in, that Rome had twenty five
Gates, etc. with many other things wherein this number twenty five is most
notoriously observable in the City and Church of Rome, more than in any other
Church or City, and more than any other Number in that Church or City. His Book
is very well worth the reading to any one that is desirous of Satisfaction in
this Mystery. For in my Opinion he does not only give a solid and substantial,
but a wonderful Account of it: but I know not how another Man may be affected
with it. And now having done with what concerns this Ecclesiastical twohorned
Beast, I shall here subjoyn this short Paraphrase, according to my usual method.

Paraphrase on Rev. XIII.

11. And I beheld another Beast or King coming up out of the Church of Rome,
and his Kingdom consisted of two Kingdoms (a Secular and an Ecclesiastical
Kingdom) like the Kingdom of Christ Jesus: but he issued out Idolatrous Laws,
and cruel Edicts against the faithful Servants of God, like as the Roman
Heathen Emperors had done before him.

12. And this King, as the Head of the Kings that shared the Roman Empire
amongst them, exercises and employeth all their Power of persecuting the
Saints, they doing it by his Impulse and direction; and he does it in their
Sight, and with their Approbation, for they give their Power and Strength and
Kingdom to him for this end and purpose. And thus he acts the part of those
Roman Heathen Emperors, in causing the Church of Rome to obey him in his
Idolatrous Constitutions, and bloody Edicts for the persecuting of the Saints.

13. And he does very strange and wonderful things, in the open Face of the
Church, which cause great Astonishment in all beholders. For in his way he has
much of Elias, being as zealous for his Idolatry, as that good Prophet was in
the service of the true God: thundering out his Bulls of Excommunication, as if
he brought down Fire from Heaven, against all Persons whatsoever, (Kings and
Emperors not excepted) that oppose his Superstition.

14. And by the means of these great things that he pretends to, he deceives
the Church of Rome, and carries himself as Lord Paramount amongst them, in so
much that by Virtue of his own Authority he takes upon him to command the
Romans to elect another Roman Emperor, which, like the Heathen Emperors of
old, should patronize the Superstitions and Idolatries of the Roman Church.

15. And this Image of those ancient Emperors (for the new-elected Emperor is
no more, if we respect the Power and Majesty of that great Name) this King that
came up out of the Church of Rome inspired and gave Life to. For it spoke as he
directed, and caused all his Subjects under pain of death, to obey him as an
Image of the ancient Roman Emperors, and Protector of the modern Romish
Superstitions.

16. And further, this Ecclesiastical King, in token of his Supremacy in the
Roman Church, causes them all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to receive a Mark of Servitude and Subjection to him; that some should be
to propagate and maintain his Superstitions, and all should practice and
embrace them.

17. And that no Man should buy or sell, or should have any civil Commerce with
his Citizens, but only those that had received this Mark of Subjection to him
in the Church of Rome, or were at least of some other Church professing his
Religion, and deriving the Original of their Superstitious Worship from the
Church of Rome, as being of the Number of his Followers, and Disciples.

18. Here is Wisdom. Let him that has Understanding extract the Square Root of
the Number of this King, for it is such a Number as Men use to calculate, and
the Number is six hundred sixty six: which Number in the Church of Rome is
answerable to the Number, one hundred forty four, in the Church of Christ: and
the square Root of it, twenty five, is opposite to the Number twelve, and as
conspicuous in the Church of Rome, as twelve is in the New Jerusalem.

And thus much of the Ecclesiastical Beast, and of the third Period.

The Conclusion.
Thus, Reader, have I given an Experiment of that Hypothesis, which I had
before proved out of the Angel's Interpretation, Rev. xvii. And this was all
that I designed; and more perhaps than was absolutely necessary for my purpose,
which was only the Discovery of Antichrist. For it is certain, that the Beast
that was and is not, who is described by the Angel, Rev. xvii. is Antichrist:
for it is he to whom the ten Kings, that make War with the Lamb, are said to
give their Power and Strength and Kingdom. Since therefore the Angel tells us
that this Beast is the eighth King of Rome, and one of the seven Kings that are
typified by the seven blasphemous Heads, there was no more necessary to be done
in order to the Discovery of Antichrist, than to show the meaning of the
Angel's Words, and who that Eighth King is.

And this if I have not demonstrated from the Angel's Interpretation, before I
came to the xiith and xiiith Chapters, (which have no such Divine Expositor to
give light to them, but only what reflects from the xviith Chapter) I believe I
have not done it at all. Nay, I am further of Opinion, that it is impossible to
give a clear and undeniable Exposition of any Prophecy in the Revelation, till
first that Exposition which the Angel gives us in the xviith Chapter be
distinctly handled, and fully cleared, and rightly apprehended. And that
otherwise the best Interpretation that any Man can give us of these Mysteries,
can be no better than a Probable Conjecture, an Argument of the Author's Wit or
Learning, and may serve to please the Fancy, but not to edify the Judgment, or
to satisfy the Conscience of the understanding Reader. But having first well
grounded the design upon the Angel's Exposition in the xviith Chapter, and from
thence proceeding to such other Visions, as have the nearest Correspondence and
Affinity with that, and thence to others in like order. I am persuaded, that by
such a Method of interpreting, the Revelation may be made as easy and
intelligible, not only as any other Prophecy, but as any other Book of
Scripture.

But it was not my purpose to go through with the whole Prophecy of the
Revelation, it being sufficient for the Designation of Antichrist, to assert
and clear the meaning of the Angel's Exposition. And having done this to the
best of my Abilities, I hope that what I have well meant will be pardoned by
all, and what I have ill performed will be mended by some better hand. But had
I given never so clear an account of the Angel's Interpretation in the xvii
Chapter, yet I supposed it might be neither unpleasant nor unprofitable to the
Reader, to give a taste of that Hypothesis in the explicating of some other
Visions. For though a proof be never so direct and evident in it self, yet by
concurrent Circumstances it may be much confirmed and illustrated. And for this
Reason I have passed from the xviith Chapter to the xiith and xiiith Chapters,
expounding them by that Hypothesis which I deduced from the xviith Chapter. And
let the Reader judge how naturally and unforcedly the Exposition of those xiith
and xiiith Chapters has proceeded upon that Hypothesis.

I have nothing more to add upon this Subject, but only to give the Reader
notice, that as the fate of the Catholic Church is described to us in that of
the Church of Rome: so all other Churches in communion with her, must be
conceived as represented by like Types and Figures. My meaning is, that as the
Church of Rome is typified by a Woman; so we must understand all other Churches
in communion with her, to be typified by Women likewise. As where it is said of
the Company of the Lamb, Rev. xiv. 4. that they were not defiled with Women; we
are to understand by Women, such Women as the Church of Rome is, who is
therefore called the Mother of Harlots, that is, of Idolatrous Churches. And so
likewise as we find the Church of Rome is typified by the Earth, we must
conceive the same opprobrious Type to be accommodable to all other Churches in
communion with her, according as the Scope and Context of the place we find it
in, shall determine the Expositor's Judgment. For the Type of Earth is not a
proper Designation of any Place, but of the Catholic Churches Earthy and
Degenerate, in opposition to her Heavenly State. Wherefore all other Churches,
that are guilty of the like Apostasy with that of Rome, must be supposed to be
comprehended in the same Type, which sets out to us the Degeneracy of the
Church of Rome. So that in general speaking, the Roman Catholic Church is
represented to us by the Earth; and by the Sea, the Civil State; and by the
Kings of the Earth, are meant the Kings that held communion with the Church of
Rome; and by the Inhabiters of the Earth, are meant the People of the same
Communion. And because the Church and State of the Roman Empire have ever since
the Expiration of the first Period ( i. e. since the time of Constantine the
Great, the first Christian Emperor) been so united and confederated, that the
Common People seem to belong as much to one as to the other: therefore, as I
conceive, it will be most agreeable to right Reason, to understand the Earth of
Churchmen most especially, and such as are devoted to Religion; and the Sea,
of Civil Magistrates, and such as are in Office in the State. And let it be
remembered, that this Notion is not applicable, but only where the Earth and
Sea, (or Peoples, Nations, Tongues, etc. typified by the Sea) are set in
opposition one against the other.

To conclude. Let the Reader now judge from what has been said, whether or no
the Pope be Antichrist. If he be not, I confess I am mistaken. Which is no more
than what is very incident to me, and may befall even the best of those that
differ from me. I will therefore make this bargain with the Reader, if he
pleases; That, since the Error may be his, as well as mine, we will resolve to
put a charitable Construction upon one another Errors, not imputing them to
Malice, but to humane Frailty. However, whether I have erred, or not, in the
Premises; it is certain, that the Conclusion I have gone about to prove, is no
other thing in effect, than what (as has been said at first) was the
acknowledged Tradition of the Primitive Church, viz. That Antichrist should
rise upon the ruins of the Roman Empire. And if there be any Truth in my
Probations, we are to understand that Proposition thus: viz. That Antichrist
was next to succeed those two Wings of the Great Eagle, which were given to the
Woman to carry her into the Wilderness. So that upon the failing of either of
those Wings, (for then the other was not able to support her) we must conceive
the Woman to have come into the Wilderness, that is, to that degenerate
Antichristian State, which is set forth to us Rev. xvii. 3, 4, 5. But
certainly, if any thing that I have said be true, it is this: That by the Woman
there, is meant the Church (and not the Heathen City) of Rome. And if I were to
lay my life upon it, (which I hope that neither I, nor any other Protestant
shall have need to do) I dare almost be confident I should win. However if even
here I am mistaken also; I shall be very glad of any better Information from
them. And let it be decided, if they please, by proper, gentle, and convincing
Arguments. For I hope, they will not go about to prove by Fire and Faggot, Sword
and Slaughter, that they are not drunken with the Blood of Saints, and with the
Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

FINIS.
SOLI DEO GLORIA.
ERRATA.
Courteous Reader,
BEsides the Faults hereafter noted, there are some others in the Pointing and
Orthography, which being to great blemish to the Sense, I have left to thy
Judgment to amend, and thy Candor to pardon.

Page 26. Line 3. for eight, read eighth. P. 29. (...) dele the. P. 32. l. 15.
f. this, r. his. P. 40. l. 15. dele it. P. 48. l. 11. r. had represented. P.
60. l. 5. r it is. P. 61. l. 14. r. Monarchy it is true that. P. 74. l. 15.
(...) seventh, r. seven. P. 81. l. 9 f. yet r. it. P. 86. l. ^^ f. so that, r.
that so. P. 94. l. 21. f. Trisingencis, r. ^risnigensis. l. 25. f. his, r.
this. P. 95. l. 17. f. Valerius, r. Valesius. Ibid. dele (). l. 24. f.
Childeric, r. Chilperic. P. 96. l. 3. f. Childeric, r. Chilperic. l. 12. f.
such, r. other such. P. 97. l. 5. f. has r. had. P. 99. l. 22. f. Fiara, r.
Tiara. P. 102. l. 1. f. eighth King, r. eight Kings. l. 15. f. four Beasts, r.
fourth Beast. P. 112. l. 15. r. the other. P. 135. l. 18. r. till afterward.
P. 146. l. 9. f. otherwise r. otherwhere. P. 156. l. 19. f. Argument r.
Agreement. P. 158. l. 20. r. if we. P. 162. l. 24. f. the r. these. P. 205. l.
6. f. consent r. constant. P. 213. l. 13. r. our God. P. 219. l. 24. r.
Emperors only. P. 226. l. 2. f. fried r. fixed. P. 252. l. 19. f. in, r. into.
P. 257. l. 17. f. But r. For. P. 261. l. 17. f. this r. his. P. 268. l. 8. f.
demanded, r. remanded. P. 271. l. 15. f. condemnation, r. commendation. P. 278.
l. 24. dele But. P. 285 l. 16 f. Rev. xiii, r. Rev. xi. P. 308. l. 20. r. and
the. P. 319. l. 10. dele two. l. 14. r. very same. P. 321. l. 1. f. after, r.
offer. P. 322. l. 10. r. is signified. P. 325. l. 18. f. But, r. Yet. P. 327.
l. 13. dele But. P. 338. l. 9. f. Annual, r. Annal. P. 342. l. 17. f. Flaccia,
r. Flavia. P. 346. l. 3. f. and, r. under. P. 348. l. 21. f. Annual, r. Annal.
P. 378. blot out all the first line. P. 388. l. 9. f. received, r. revived. P.
399. l. 20. r. those ten. P. 406. l. 26. f. Persons, r. Patrons.

This that follows should have bin inserted Page 54, line 3.

Which evidently appears from Dan. viii. 20, 22. In which places it is confessed
on all hands, that by the Ram's two Hornt are meant the two Kingdoms of which
the Persian Monarchy consisted, viz. Media and Persia; And by the Goa^'s four
Horns, the four Kingdoms into which the Grecian Monarchy after Alexander's
Death came to be divided.

FINIS.

