Thomas Gataker B. D. HIS VINDICATION OF THE ANNOTATIONS by him published Upon
these words, Thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not
dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them.

Jer. 10.2.

AGAINST The Scurrilous Aspersions of that grand Imposter Mr. William Lilly;
AS ALSO Against the various Expositions of two of his Advocates, Mr. John Swan,
and another by him cited, but not named:

Together with the Annotations themselves.

Wherein the pretended Grounds of Judiciary Astrology, and the
Scripture-Proofes produced for it, are discussed and refuted.

Esaias 47.12, 13. Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of
thy sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy youth, if so be thou shall
be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail. Thou art wearied in the
multitude of thy counsels; let now the Astrologers, the Stargazers, the
monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these things that shall
come upon thee.

Imprimatur, Edm. Calamy. April 12. 1653.

London, Printed by J. L. for Richard Thrayle at the Crosse-Keyes at Paul's gate
entering into Cheapside, 1653.

Some few material Escapes may thus be amended.
Page 7. lin. 31. do not without. page 13. l. 21. as much. p. 16. l. 39. such
as are. p. 25. marg. Adag. 2460. p. 43. l. 6. of the Ancients. p. 56. l. 32.
Josh. 6. p. 60. l. 10. of that breed. p. 84. l. 3. reserved. p. 95. l. 15.
Analysis p. 101. l. 16. and be. p. 104. l. 32. have gained. p. 113. l. 12.
particle. p. 123. l. 17. Esaias 44.25. p. 128. l. 37. and its. l. 38. in the. l.
39. right p. 159. l. 16. Joel 2.10. p. 161. l. 17. Cocceius. p. 143. l. 30.
that, fight of p. 163. l. 15. witnesses. p. 173. l. 35. and not.

The principal Contents of this whole Discourse; In the former Part.
THe Occasion of undertaking this Task. Page 1 Lilies scurrilous aspersions of
the Annotations on Jerem, 10.2. and the Author of them, p. 2 Answer brief to all
his aspersions in general, and some of them in particular, p. 3 Of ignorance
charged on all that oppose him and his profession, p. 4. and further, p. 82 --
86 Of Presbytery and Independencie, how far they concur, and where they part,
p. 5 That those of either side, and others of neither, have unanimously agreed,
as well in ancient times, as in latter days, in opposing and condemning his
profession, p. 6.7.87. The Presbytery cleared from imputation of sedition, p.
8.9.21. Lilies spite not so much against the Presbytery, as against the
Ministry in general, p. 10.11, 19.21, 22 His cunning predictions of things
done, or in doing, p. 12. and compliance with the times, p. 13.14, 58 Calvine,
(tho not alone) grossly abused, and falsely charged, by him and others, p. 14.15,
16, 17 The Genevian Discipline, by a Popish writer of Note highly commended, p.
17.18 Calvines judgment of Divinatorie Astrology, p. 18 The grounds of the
late War by Lilie pretended, discussed and refuted, p. 19.20 Lilies
contradictions in his judgments, p. 22.23 His pretended grief for some pious
Priests unmasked, p. 24.25. and p. 74.75 His reqirie to be heard, and tried
according to his own principles examined, p. 26.27 His censures of stupiditie,
nonsense, dotage, crossing all antiqitie, reason, and genuine sense of the
Text, in the Annotations and their Author, discussed* p. 28.29.32.33 Envy
charged by him unjustly on the oppugners of his profession, p. 30.31 Lilies
predictions in some particulars concerning the last Solar Eclipse, controlled,
p. 33 -- 41 His consent with, and dissent from, an other of his profession,
with the grounds thereof debated, p 35 -- 37 Reasons, why Eclipses cannot
portend or produce such things as these men ascribe unto them, p. 41 -- 43
Ignorance and error the main causes that make Eclipses so dreadful, p. 44-52
The true reason of them discovered has freed people from fear, p. 45.46,
47.51. Which the Egyptian Astrologers therefore would not have imparted to the
people, p. 48 Two gross errors among the common sort of people concerning
Eclipses, p. 52 -- 54 Eclipses no prodigies, p. 52.53 How they should presage,
as Lilie says, much good to any, being deemed so dismal, p. 54 -- 59.71 Lilies
Pictures, with his explications and applications of them, contrary to himself,
and his own Autors, examined, p, 59 -- 64 His inabilitie to construe aright his
own Autors, p. 62 His various and self-contradicting assertions concerning the
efficacy of Eclipses, p. 65 Peucers impious assertion concerning the efficacy
of Stars in some genitures, P. 66 -- 68 Lilies Argument from the Rainbow
refuted, p. 68 -- 70 Lilie pressed to make good his Assertions concerning the
Original of his pretended Art, p. 70.71.91 92 His pretended experience debated
and refuted, p. 71 -- 82 Whether more dangerous for Statesmen to advise with
Gods Ministers, or with Wizards, p. 88.89 Lilies manner of refuting such as
write against him, and his pretended Art, p. 89 -- 91 Reasons rendered of the
later. yet not unseasonable, appearance of this piece in public. p. 92.93.
The Contents in the latter Part.
THe occasion of dealing with Master Swans Sermon on Jerem. 10.2. p. 94 Lilies
charge of Ignorance upon his opponents by Mr. Swan renewed, p. 94. and
satyrically pursued, p. 115.147.178.179 Mr. Swan grants the Text to speak,
not of Idolatry, but of Astrology, such as the Chaldeans professed and
practiced, p. 95.96. as also that the one often leads people to the other, p.
96 Ke^ers judgment herein, and of that whole practice, p. 97.98 The reasons
rendered by Lilies two Advocates, why the dreading of the signs of Heaven is
forbidden, discussed and rejected, p. 100 -- 110 Fatality and certainty in
their Pred^ctions maintained by our Prognosticators; yet condemned by both
their Advocates as presumptuous and magical, p. 103 -- 109 Astrology,
according to Mr. Swan, the Stars language, p. 104.127 Our Astromancers
pronounce one another palpable liers; which how it may well be deemed true of
them all, p. 109. -- 111 The right Reason of the inhibition of dreading the
Signs of Heaven, rendered from the Text, to wit, the Vanity of the Wizards
dictates concerning them, p. 111 -- 115 The Poets sayings concerning them by M.
Swan produced, sifted and showed to be contradictory either to other, and
unsound. p. 115 -- 118 The Stars set to rule persons and people, not by God,
but by arrogant men, p. 115.116 Signs in the Text what, and how said to be
Vanity, p. 118.122 -- 124 That it is not of the essence of a Sign to portend
ought, p. 119 -- 122 Christ's Words Matthew. 12.39.40. discussed and cleared, p.
121 M. Swans argument from experience examined, and rejected, p. 124 -- 126 His
Argument from Genesis 1.14. discussed and refuted, p. 126.127, 128.131 His
Argument from Psalm. 19.1.3. to back the former, of no force, p. 127.130 His
undeniable Axiom granted, concludes nothing for him, p. 130.131 His frivolous
distinction, to meet with an objection; and slight answer to as frivolous an
Objection of his own framing, p. 131.132 Psalm 50.4. Inconsiderately and
impertinently produced by him, p. 132.133. Judge. 5.20. To as little purpose
alleged, p. 133 -- 135 His long and lacinious discourse of the means whereby
the Planet Mars has power to subvert States unravelled, p. 135 -- 140. and
showed to be groundless, p. 136. impious, p. 136.137. Insufficient to his
intended Project, p. 138.139, 140. impertinent to his present purpose, p.
140.141 The Cognizance of Questions, what it is; and being a new invention, and
one of our Wizards their gainfullest engines, that it has much need of good
props, p. 141 -- 143 The judgment of Genitures how ridiculous; and whether M.
Swans Principles will reach it, p. 144.145 Pericles defended against M. Swans
harsh and groundless censure; and Thucydides cleared from Lilies misreports,
p. 147 -- 155 Job. 38.31, 32. by M. Swan alleged, discussed, and showed not to
say, what he should proov, p. 106. and p. 156 -- 158 Job 9.7. Cited to as
little purpose, p. 158 -- 160 making no more for Astromancie, then Job. 37.7.
for Chiromancie, or Revel. 2.17. for the Philosophers Stone, p. 160.161. Luke
21.25. Explained and showed to have no place here p. 161.162 Psalm. 111.2. and 1
King. 4.11. to no purpose here produced, p. 162.170 Wisdom. 7.17. Apocryphal,
of no weight, because of no credit; nor coming home to the point in qestion. p.
162 -- 166 Of Adams knowledge, and Salomons, p. 166 -- 168 Of Thales, p. 168
169. Of Solon, p. 169.170. Of Tares or Weeds rather, sown among the Wheat, and
how to be distinguished, p. 170.171.174 -- 176 Of Eccles. 3.1. the genuine
sense of the place; that it no way helps those for whom M. Swan pleads, p.
171 172 Of the men of Issakers skill, 1. Chr. 12.30. to this purpose as little,
p. 172.173 Of severing the dross from the gold, and chaff from the Corn, p.
176 177.180.181 The condemners of this Divinatory Astrology not guilty of
confounding and casting away the one with the other, p. 177.178 The Patrones of
it rather blend them, and would obtrude on us, the dross with the gold, and
the dregs with the liqor. p. 179 The vanity of M. Swans pretense, that the
discovery and opposition of such fanatical fancies and cheating practices,
should either proceed from ignorance, or endanger the inducing of it, p.
179.180 The Rule given by M. Swan, whereby to help us in discerning Christ's
Godhead by his Miracles, cutteth the throat of his Clients cause concerning the
stupendous efficacy of Eclipses, p. 181 What disservice our Astrologers have
done to God and Christ, by attributing the most miraculous works of either to
the natural Operation of Stars and Constellations, p. 182 -- 185 The close of
all with the L. Howards judgment, concerning the mischievousnesse of this
Fortune-telling Astrology, p. 186
The Contents in the Annotations.
Astronomy and Judiciarie Astrology distinguished, p. 187 That for the
Original of this latter, its Patrons and Practicers, wanting ground from the
light of Nature, or natural reason, are fain to fly as the Papists for their
Purgatory, to special revelation, some from good Angels, some from God
himself, both without any sound proof of either, p. 188.189 That they do falsely
and impiously fasten upon the Stars such vile affections and malignant
faculties as God never gave them, p. 188 That the Names given them, to import
such qalifications, taken from Heathenish Deities, in which the Devil was
worshipped, leads us to take notice of the first Author of it, p. 189 That if
it had been revealed by God or his Angels to any, it would have been to his
Prophets, who would in their writings have mentioned it, and not transmitted it
by Paynims to posterity, p. 190 That it has been ever in the Christian Church
liable to censure, p. 190 That it is in Gods Word derided, dissuaded, inhibited
as a course impious, vain and frivolous; unbeseeming Gods people, p. 190.192
Signs of two sorts; which to be dreaded, which not, p. 191
A VINDICATION of the Annotations on Jerem. Chap. 10. Verse. 2. against the
scurrilous Aspersions of that grand Imposter Mr. William Lilly, etc.
A Great man is reported to have sometime complained that it was his hard hap
to hear last of some things, Aug. Dio l. 55.
tho much talked of abroad, wherein himself was most concerned: And it had been
long (as I was afterward informed) in the mouths of many, and some great ones,
who in regard of my silence deemed me therefore decessed, ere it came to mine
ear, that M. Lilly, that grand Impostor, had in his Black Book of the Dark
Year, been nibbling at mine Annotations on Jerem. 10.2. and girding at me,
after his wonted scurrilous guise, as at many other of Gods faithful Ministers
and Messengers of far greater worth then my self. Now howsoever I have elsewhere
professed, how little I regard the sqibs and censures of such scoffing mates and
scurrilous scriblers; his especially, whom I deem no better then an other
Lucian; for that as he, under pretense of deriding and traducing the
superstitious worships then commonly practiced, and fond conceits of their
fained Deities then generally received, did not obscurely endevor to root up
all religious worship of the true God out of men's lives, and all reverent fear
and regard of him out of their hearts: so this man under color of taxing and
inveighing against such, either worthless or scandalous persons, as either
formerly or in later times, have some closely crept in, and ben admitted into
the Ministry, some violently or cuningly by might or slight ben obtruded upon
the people, or have intruded themselves into ministerial functions and pastoral
charges, or have demeaned themselves otherwise then was meet in their places; he
takes occasion to aspers and traduce the whole profession, and to vent his
spleen and gall against the Ministry of Christ Jesus it self, as hereafter
shall be showed. Albeit therefore, I say, I little regarded, what should drop
from the pen of one so affected, yet was I desirous to see what the man had
said, and what satisfactory answer he had in this discourse so much talked of,
returned to mine Exceptions to his Relations concerning the grounds of his
pretended skill and professed practice, which in those Annotations were taken
thereunto. To which purpose not being able my self to stir far abroad, I
reqested a friend to procure me the book: but they were, it seems, as the manner
is of such Prognostications for the year ensuing, suddenly snatched up at their
first coming forth; this more especially, in regard of the principal subject
matter of it; peoples minds being generally prepossest and filled with
expectation of strange novelties, raised by the reports given out beforehand,
of the most dreadful Eclips, that this Black Year should produce, and the
direful Effects that should follow thereupon. Yet after some space of time
attained, when it came to my hands, whereas I expected, that he should have
made good, what he had with so much confidence formerly delivered, concerning
the first Original of his pretended Art, from some Authentical Records, and
have taken away mine Objections opposed thereunto; I found nothing les then
what I looked for: Only here and there scattred some expressions of his
spleen, and overflowings of his gall; wherein he is pleased to aspers and tax
me, as one of those his homebred Antagonists, that have lost their oil and
reputation, Page 18.
by endevoring a refutation, of what they understood not; having overlookt his
labors with uncircumcised affections and Presbyterial charity; most absurdly
abusing their better time in criticismes and fruitless Expositions on Texts of
Scripture, against the whole current of Antiqity, Reason, and the very genuine
sense of the words themselves; and, according to the Proverb, which in the
Margin he applies to me, Senes bis pueri, doting, and become through Old age
a Child again. And again afterward, complaining as if he had been condemned
unheard, and telling in what manner he desired to be tried, Page 47.
Let me be heard, says he, according to mine own principles, and not judged
without hearing, either by Thomas Wiseaker, or any of the Presbytery,
according to their unseemly Commentary, or stupid Annotations on Jerem. 10.2.
and then concludes he this his scurrilous passage, with a close of the like
nature, Qi Bavium non ^dit, Let him read that puddle of envy and nonsense.

Concerning all which in general, Aristor. hist. anim. l. 9. c. 43. Plin. hist.
not. l. 8. c. 15.
I might well say in few words, and so let it pass, that it is all at the most
and best no more, then with the Scythian beast Bonasus, to sqirt out his filth
in the face of his pursuers, hoping thereby to escape.

But a little yet further more particularly, to lay open the rather his vain
folly and insolent arrogance herein.

And first, concerning what he jabbers of his Homebred Antagonists, that have
lost their oil and reputation by endevoring to confute what thy understood not;
that is, by discovering the vanity and impiety of those frivolous fictions,
delusorie devices and hellish designs of himself and such as himself wherewith
they endevor to amaze the minds of the simpler sort of people, thereby to bring
themselves into repute with them, and to pick the purses of those that repair to
them for advice, the main matter whereby this their Art of Imposture is
supported and maintained.

1. I neither know, nor have heard of any one, that have lost any jot of repute
amongst the wise or learned, by dealing against them. But that it fared in this
case so with himself and his accomplices, that they have lost much of their
reputation, as well with the simpler, as the wiser sort, by their late
predictions, the meanest of the people and boys in the streets ar able to give
him notice more then sufficient.

2. There needs not much skill in his pretended Art, to discover the vanity of
it; no more then it is reqisite for one to be overmuch seen in geomancie,
palmistrie, sortiarie, auspicie, or aruspicie, to discry and discover the folly
of these courses, which by the unanimous votes and agreement of all sound
Christians ar now generally not disclaimed only, but detested, as practices
merely diabolical; howsoever M. Lilie and some of his Accomplices, See of
Chiromancie, M. L. p. 84.
in these times of licentiousnes, endevor to cry up some of them again. There
needs no deep diving into these (...), as the Evangelist speaks, such depths of
Satan, Rev. 2.14. to discry them to be none of those, that the Apostle terms
(...), the depths, or deep things, of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. yea or of nature.

3. His style is overlavish in taxing all his homebred Artagonists, all those
among us, that have dealt in this Argument against their fanatical and
fantastical profession, as men not understanding what it was that they dealt
with. Some of them peradventure have been able to discover his want of exact
skill in the justifiable part of his professed Art; whereof more anon. But why
should it be deemed want of understanding in these men, that of late among us
have attempted to lay open the loosnes and sandines of the grounds which they
build upon, that should moov them to undertake that task, more then in those of
former times, either among us, or abroad, of whom he shall hear somewhat
further hereafter? No reason, I suppose, he can give for it, but this, that
they are his Antagonists, and by opposing such practices he misdoubts they may
mar, or in part at least impair, his market.

Secondly, for his double jeer, of uncircumcised affection, and Presbyterian
Charity. 1. The former term will best fit himself and his Accomplices: of whose
Profession the first known Patriarks, were not Adam, or Abraham, as they would
make men beleiv, but people uncircumcised as well in flesh as in spirit, the
Egyptians, Chaldeans, Philistines, and Syrians, from whom by tradition through
the hands of idolatrous Pagans, and superstitious Mahometans, whose disciples
and folowers these men (...). Chrysostom. in Babyl aperto Capite. Plavt. Capt. 3.1.
with open face and bare forehead profess themselves, it was conveyed unto
those of this latter age of the world, and by Satan's subtilty has crept into
Christ's field, wherein partly through discontinuance of wonted Church censures,
and partly through connivence of the Civil Powers, it has taken to much
footing and to deep rooting, and as ill weeds are wont soon to grow rife and
rank, has spread it self far and near, to the utter stifeling of piety in the
hearts and minds of many, and the great blemish and scandal of Christian
profession.

2. As for the Presbytery and Presbyterian party, that he is so often girding at,
endevoring thereby to cast a further odium upon them, because he conceivs them
to be already at present under a cloud; that I may in part also obiter insert
something in Vindication of those, who under that Title ar by this Imposter and
others of the same coat freqently in like manner taxed and traduced: Howsoever
this fellow in his Preface tell his readers, that Presbytery and Independencie
are not twins in union more then Esau and Jacob. Yet in the main point of
Presbyterian Government in general, to wit, the allowance of the oversight of
Christ's flock, not by teaching Presbyters alone, but by other also adjoined to
them, unto whom the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments is not committed;
herein, I say, there is no disagreement, between those, who by the name of
Presbyterians ar commonly distingvished as a different party from those who ar
as commonly termed Independents, having, as by some of their own writings
appeers, taken that Title up themselves, and these from whom they are wont by
that term to be distingvished. Yea it may truly be averred, that this other
party may the more justly of the twain be termed Presbyteriars, being more
rigid in maintaining a necessity of this form of Government, then many of those
that go under that name; as may appeer from the Votes passed by the major part
of those lately employed in the Assembly at Westminster, and transmitted by
them to the Houses, that then sat: which those of the other party then took
notice of, and have since made use of in some of their writings. The main
difference between those two Twins, as he terms them, is not concerning the
Subject of the Government, or Presbytery, simply considered, but concerning
the Extent of it, and matter of Appeal; the one side including the entire and
absolute power of a Presbytery so composed, within the lists and limits of a
particular Congregation, without admittance of Appeal unto any other
Jurisdiction, in case of pretended grievance or male administration; in regard
whereof also themselves term it an Independent Government; the other allowing in
such and the like cases Appeals to a Classis, or Convent consisting of Elders
or Presbyters of either kind abovementioned, selected out of the Particular
Congregations to that purpose combined: and the Title of the Presbyterians does
therefore as fitly, and as fully competere, that is, agree (if it do not rather
propendere, that is, weigh down, this latter way) unto the one as to the other.
And we may justly say here, as that Ancient writer sometime of the name of a
Christian; Tertul. apolog. c. 2.
Christianus, si nullius criminis nomen est, ineptum est, si nominis solius
crimen est; so of the name of a Presbyterian; If the name argue no crime, it is
a fond thing to object it as a crime unto any: if it import ought criminal, the
crime is common to either party, that being so, that the title imports, as
already has been showed.

But whatsoever the difference otherwise may be between these two Twins, sure
it is, that they do both unanimously concur and accord in opposition to Mr. L.
and his Accomplices, and in discovery and detestation of their diabolical
practices. And it is a most ridiculous thing therefore for him to complain of
Presbyterian Charity; as if none but Presbyterians forsooth were out of Charity
with them, and their divelish devices and hellish designs; and to refuse to be
judged by any of the Presbytery; as if such alone were the persons that had
past their verdict upon the courses professed and practiced by them: wherein
albeit he may seem to deal somewhat wisely, not unlike Lucians Imposter,
Lucian. Pseudomant.
who would have no Christian present at the showing of his tricks, because he
knew they would soon discry his Impostures; yet has he not dealt so warily as
he, who reqired others also, tho to Christians most opposite as well as
Christians, to be excluded, because he misdoubted discovery as well by the one
as by the other. For ar they Presbyterians alone that have past their censures
upon the trade that Mr. L. follows and professes? Nothing les. To pas by all
other, that have from time to time appeered in this qarel; Biblioth. l. 6.
annot. 10.
Was Sixtus Senensis a Presbyterian? who in plain terms affirms this their
pretended Art of Judiciary Astrology, to be no Art, but a mere fallacy, and a
detestable Imposture: and being by one Savarallius taxed for this his Censure,
as my self am now by this Imposter, does not only averr constantly what before
he had delivered, but further at large confirms it against his selie and
groundles eavils. Or was Benedictus Pererius a Presbyterian? who in a long
discourse of it, at large evidently proves, and at length peremptorily
concludes, that this Astrological Divination is contrary to the Authority of
Scripture to the grounds of Philosophy, to Theological Doctrine, In Genes.
1.14. et de Mag. l. 3. Vid. Crespe^. sum. Discipl. Eccles.
and to Ecclesiastical Discipline. Or were the Fathers of the first Council of
Carthage, and the first of Toledo all Presbyterians, who both anathematize all
those, that give any credit to Astrologers. Or is the Pope himself, think We,
with his whole train at Trent, all on a sudden turned Presbyterians? Iudic.
lib. prohit. reg. 9.
that they have by general consent expressly prohibited all books written of
Judiciary Astrology, enjoining all Bishops within their several precincts to
suppres them.

But not to enter upon a list of such, either Ancient Fathers of high esteem in
their times, or others of later ages, and modern Writers of note, as well
Papists as Protestants, whose very names would fill up many whole Pages, and
testimonies make up many large Volumes; among us in this Land of late, since
this course and practice of deluding selie people has grown into reqest, not
Presbyterians only, but more then one or two, no favorers sure of those,
whom alone he is pleased under the Title of Presbyterians to reject, have in
this busienes freely showed themselves, and with much variety of lerning and
strength of Argument laid open its nakedness to the veiw of the World, as
himself well knows; whom yet I cannot much blame him, that he takes no notice
of, because he cannot but be conscious to himself of his own inabilitie by
force of reason or Logical disceptation to answer their Arguments, remoov their
exceptions, refel their objections and maintain his own broken cause. And
indeed so gros and palpable, to the wiser sort at least, do their sorry shifts
and transparent devices appeer, that they do without just cause, with that
understanding Roman wonder, Cato Cens. Cic. de Divin. l. 2.
how they can without smiling look one an other in the face, to think with what
wind and smoke they entertain selie people, and cheat men of their moneys, by
emptieng their purses, to fill their own cofers. Concerning which practices, I
shall refer him and his Accomplices to Mr. John Miltons Figure-caster published
by Mr. William Rowland in his Judicial Astrology Judicially condemned, and
Defense of Dr. Homes his Demonologie: all which yet, I suppose, ar none of that
Presbyterial party, whom Mr. L. would by no means have to be of his Judges or
Jurie, as seeming at least to deem himself safe enough, when he should be
brought to trial, if such only were excluded.

Nor, I hope, will he have the face, tho bold and shameless enough, to bring
within that verge, those two whom himself names in his Preface, Dean Owen, and
subtle Mr. Nie, as he is pleased to style him, and acknowledges to have
condemned this his Art as Diabolical: who how far forth they have dealt in
detection thereof, I know not: he tells his reader, that the one of them has
but Ipse dixit; but I am to well acqainted with his wonted slight turning of
such discourses as he has little list or courage to cope with, and as little
regard therefore what in such cases he says.

Howsoever it be, it hereby appeers, that it stands him upon, if ever he come
to trial, to enlarge his Exceptions against Judges and Jurers, and exclude
Independents as well as Presbyterians, (that which doubtless also he would have
done, had he thought he might have been as bold with the one party as he is
with the other) if he look or hope to be acqit. But give the good man leav to
pack a Jurie, and pick out Judges of his own choice, and then he is sure to
speed well enough.

Page 11.
Yea but those of the Presbytery, says Mr. Lilie, ar seditious, such as no
premonition will incline to subjection: nor can a treason be managed without a
Priest: and a Presbyterian also sure he must be: for, hoc certum and probatum
est, says he, per Kit Love, and his deer brethren and fellow petitioners.

To which I answer briefly. 1. If any of the party so styled, have gone beyond
their limits, and moved out of their own orb, by any il-advised and
unwarrantable course, they are to bear their own burden, and to answer for
themselves; but that their delinqencie is not any justification of him* or
abatement of the pleas and prescriptions of any of the party so termed against
him.

2. I demand, Does this judgment concerning such a Government in the Church, of
it self and in it own nature, involv any such crime, or produce any such
effect? if it should, the guilt of it would include either party of his two
Twins, as he terms them, both of them beng eqally engaged therein, or, if any
ineqality, the Independent the deeper.

3. For that his large and lavish assertion of No treason without a Priest; and
that it must be a Presbyterian to by his scope and instance may appeer. To pas
by his extreme malice and rancor, in endevoring to involv al petitioners for
favor and mercy to be extended to a delinqent, as partakers with him in that
crime wherewith he is charged, or whereof he stands convicted: a censure
arguing a most savage spirit, and a right divelish disposition. I never heard
before in all my Logic, of an Induction consisting of one particular, or
singular member. He should have done well, according to the wonted manner of
disputing by Induction, after an enumeration of sundry particular treasons and
rebellions, to have added, nec in caeteris contrarium est videre, nor in any
other does it otherwise appeer: which had he done, he might soon have been
convinced of a most notorious ly. For let him show, what Presbyterian Priest
there was in managing that late insurrection in Bedfordshire and the Counties
adjoining; or in that later rising in Essex and Kent: or what sedition and
treason any Presbyterian Priest among us had a hand in during the Reign of Qeen
Elisabeth? although the Ministers that then stood for the Presbyterian Government
against the Bishops, through the prevalent power of some of them in and with
the State, endured much hard measure, some suspended, some deprived, some
imprisoned, some exiled, some sentenced to death, and some put to death: or
what part did any such bear with us, under King James and King Charles, tho not
a few of them were very harshly and unmercifully handled under either, in the
plotting of any treason, or raising any rebellion against either? And here I
can not omit the speeches of two Bishops of London in Qeen Elisabeths time,
concerning the Puritans, as they were then commonly termed, such as desired a
reformation in some Church Affairs, and were for the Presbyterian Government.
The one of them B. Elmor, tho none of the best, when one preaching at Paul's
Cross, had inveighed bitterly against that party as a crew of seditious and
turbulent persons, and had affirmed the Puritans to be wors then the Papists;
No, qoth the Bishop, he said not therein aright: for the Puritans, if they had
me among them, would cut my rotchet only, but the Papists would cut my throat:
the other his successor B. Vaughan, a man more moderate then the former, when
another in the same place was no les eager in the same argument, (for the
manner in those days was with the Chaplins that there appeered to labor to
bring that party into disgrace and disfavour with the Judges and great men,
who in Term time especially used to repair thither as people prone to sedition)
the Bishop to a Gentleman of his inward acqaintance, who dined that day with
him, (as himself sometime related it to me) I wish, said he, I could have had
the preachers tongue to day for some space of time in my pocket: the way is not
to convert or convince that party by invectives and untruths: it is true they
affect not the present form of Government; they are for another: but they seek
it by petition, not by insurrection or sedition* Thus these two Bishops
themselves of that party in those times.

4. But the truth is, this man's malice, tho he do not every where so openly
manifest it, is as much against the one party of his two Twins as against the
other, howsoever he be more cantelous in dealing with the one, as deeming them
more acceptable to, and powrful with the State at present then the other* else
why does he complain more of Presbyterian, then of Independentian Charity, when
as yet himself takes notice of those on that side, who in expres terms condemn
his practice as Diabolical? Yea apparent enough it is, that his rancor is not
so much against the persons of either party, (tho he be the rather incensed
and enraged against both, because some of either side have netteled him, by
discrieng themselves and discovering to others, the wickedness of his wiles and
impiety of his practices) but his spite is not so much at the men, as at their
Ministry, Page 11.
the Clergy of England, as he there speaks, whom under the odious terms of
Priests, and Praters, and Black-coats, and those of the Long Robe, he does so
freqently traduce. Ibid.
No treason can be managed without a Priest* and, There is a people yet in
being, Page 14.
pretending unto godlienes and Religion, which men in our plain English call
Divines, Ministers, Preachers, Ecclesiastical men, or men conversant in holy
things; in forain parts they are called Bishops, Cardinals, Abbots, Moncks,
Friars, etc. men that step up sometime into Pulpits, and pretend to instruct
our souls, with the doctrine of Christianity, but indeed obedience to their own
Constitutions. And in his Preface to Astrolog. Predict. of 48. etc. Oh these
Priests! this sinful people of Levi do hunger and thirst after the fat
fleshpots of Episcopacie; if they were assured that Deans and Chapters Lands
should not be settled on the Church, God knows what Religion they would be of.
Woe unto you Priests. And to bring our Ministry in general, which you see with
whom he here rancks, into hatred and jealousy with the State, he gathers
forsooth from the former of the late Lunar Eclipses, Ibid.
that there is yet leaft a generation of such men, who ar now privately
designing some future trouble unto our State, and those Commonwealths where
otherwise they reside, which will again occasion drawing of blood, unto our
State and other Nations, and destruction unto themselves, viz. Ministry and
Munckerie, (for he would have them, you see, deemed both birds of the same
feather, as witches and wizards ar deservedly esteemed with good ground from
Gods Word) and to as many of their abused disciples and proselytes, as shall
suffer themselves to be overruled or deceived by their treasonable counsels, and
herein, he says, he erres not. But that you may the better understand, whom
his intent was to strike at, he closes all up with this scoffing jeer, that he
hops the world will clear him, Ibid.
that he does not abuse, or so much as once name or mention the Presbyterians
or their Proselytes: and yet so great is his spleen against those poor
Presbyterians and their Proselytes, that he could not forbear to vent it not
long after in expres terms against them; withal abusing most wickedly and
wretchedly the name of as worthy an Instrument and venerable a servant of God
as any that these later ages have produced, whose memory is to this day and
still shall be blessed, and his renowm remain, as a precious odor of fragrant
smell and sweet savor, in the minds of the godly; whereas the name of himself,
and of such as he is, shall stink above ground in the nostrils of those that
sincerely fear God, while they yet live, and their memory rot, as their
carcases in the grave under ground, when they be ded. For, This Eclips, says
this our Fortune Tellers, Page 16.
finds all Sacerdotes, which because it ever did shall pas for Priests, in much
sorrow and anguish of mind, the influence of it crossing their designs) now
fearing the downfall of their tithes, and a general ^^^giversation of the people
against them in many places: the people, who begin to see without spectacles
generally declining their spurious and seditious doctrines against Parliament
and State, whether derived from John Calvin, or the babbling of a silly
Scottish Presbytery: Page 17.
and again anon after, Much trouble and affliction will arise unto the whole
Hierarchy: this will generally fall upon them every where, wheresoever they
reside. And for my part, I make no doubt indeed, but that he would be right
glad, as well as his grand-Master the Devil, to see the Ministry rooted out,
it so crosses their designs, As Haman the whole Jewish race for Mordecays
neglect of him, in all places, where in any power it yet abides, either with
us, or elsewhere.

Lucian. ad dic. prom. etc.
Mean while you may here observe, how the old Proverb is verified in our modern
Prognosticators; (...).
Rebus peractis est Cleo Prometheus.
they can tell us what will be, when the thing is done already. This no more now
blind buzzard, as I sometime out of ignorance termed him, but, as herein he
has evinced himself to be, a marveilous sharpsighted Stargazer, and most
skilful Fortuneteller, can from the posture of the Stars at one of the late
Eclipses foretell us, what the people will do hereafter, when he sees what they are doing, and have in part done already. For when he perceivs apparently by
Petitions and Proposals in print and other the like addresses unto the
Parliament, diverse of them long before this his Black Book came abroad, he can
now, after long poring and staring upon the Stars, by the situation and aspects
of the celestial bodies foretell us, that which no man living, without help of
his skill, had ever ben able to make out, that People will have no mind to pay
their tithes to their Ministers.

Again the understanding Reader may hence take notice, how cunningly this man
can here comply with the people. For as those of the Levelling party, (for such
I suppose they were, that were the chief Ringleaders in that Bedfordshire
insurrection beforementioned) to draw the multitude after them, promised a
freedom from tithes and taxes to all that would join with them: so these
cunning wizards, to insinuate themselves into the peoples affections, can
attemper their predictions unto their humors, and tell them such tales and
stories, as they think will take most with them, and best please them, and they
perceiv them, by their innate disposition expressed and appeering in their
practice, to be strongly bent unto* apparent enough it is, that it is not any
spurious or seditious doctrine in their Teachers, by this foulmouthed
Sycophant, so falsely fathered upon Calvin, (the splendent luster of whose
repute the snarlings of such Helhounds can no more impair, then the yalpings by
night of maungie whelps and mungrel curs, barking at the moon or the imaginary
man in the Moon, can in any sort impeach or impair her light) but their own
covetous disposition, and earthly-minded affection, (as falsely as frivolously
ascribed to the celestial aspects,) that makes people to grutch Gods Ministers
the means of their maintenance to the foul shame and scandal of their Christian
profession.

And this skilful Fortune Tellers, had he pleased to speak out, and had been
disposed so to say, might from his own principles have concluded, that people
would grumble as well at the payment of taxes, as at the payment of tithes,
which himself also long since greivously complained of, Pref. to his Prophecies
in 44.
as being much oppressed with taxes and assessements, as Bellantius was with
fear of the approach of his enemies, when he was writing against Picus. For
mark I beseech you, his argument, A Jove praelatura; Page 16.
Prelature is from Jove: (tho the sacred Oracles tell us, from the true, not the
fabulous, Jehovah and his Christ, Psalm. 75.6, 7. Prove. 8.15, 16. but God belike
has resigned his right to their Jove, or to the Devil, whom they deal with,
and who was adored in him, 1 Cor. 10.20. and laid claim thereunto sometime as
of right now belonging to him, Luke 4.6.) and sub Jove principes,
Ecclesiastici, Politici, Sacerdotes, Under Jove, or Jupiter, ar Princes,
Ecclesiastical, Political, Priests, etc. for so speaks the Author whom he
cites, and as in Latin he cites him: tho that he may not offend the State, and
yet might apply it to the poor Priests, whom he hates more then he does the
Devil, (see what juggling here is) he thus renders it; Under Jupiter we signify
Princes, Cardinals, all Ecclesiastical Potentates, Policy* but Sr, your Author
says, as Prelacie in general before, so here Princes, that is, chief Governors,
and those as well Political, or Civil, as Ecclesiastical: and it may well be
demanded, how the poor Priests come into the same rank with Princes, and such
as have relation to Jupiter, of whom I have read, that he was sometime a civil
Potentate, but never a Priest. And now make we up this wise man's subtle
argument: The Ecclesiastical Potentates and their affairs ar under Jupiter: but
in this Eclips we find him out of all strength and dignity: Ergo the people will
be loath to pay Ministers their Tithes, and would not the Argument follow as
forcibly: Al Civil Governors ar under Jupiter: But he was out of all strength
and dignity in the late Eclips: Ergo the common people will be unwilling to pay
the Taxes imposed upon them by their Superiors. And, I suppose, there can
hardly be found any man so simple, although he had but, as they use to say, his
guts in his head, and his brains in his belly, but could easily without help of
Mr. Lilies skill, or use of his spectacles, his curious calculations, and far
fetched observations, both see, and foresee, that people ar and will be unwilling
to pay as well taxes as tithes; save that they know they may be enforced to the
one, which they hope they shall not be for the other, and they are more regardful
of their worldly gain and advantage, then they are of a good conscience and of
their spiritual behoof. But the Eclips relates, I dare say, as much to the one
as to the other; that is, indeed (save in this man's adle brain, or in his idle,
but malevolent and impious discourse at least) unto neither.

And here by the way, I shall crave leav to digress a little, in behalf of that
never sufficiently commended servant of Christ Mr. Jo. Calvin, and this so much
spurnd* at Presbytery, to lay open a notorious piece of knaverie, intended as
against the Profession of the Protestant Religion in general, so more
especially against the Presbyterian party, the Reformed Churches in France and
the Netherlands, and particularly Mr. Calvin by name. One of my Congregation
being taken at Sea, when Spain and we were in terms of hostility, and carried
to Dunkirk, during his stay there, had some Popish Books bestowed on him to
make him a good Catholic, which upon his return home he brought unto me. Among
the rest, there was one of a Nameles Author, entitled Monarchoma^hia, or,
Jerusalem and Babel. Herein the Author thereof labors to maintain, that the
Protestant Religion, and the Presbyterian Discipline, were in all parts
introduced and upheld by Sedition and Rebellion. To make this good he deals
in part, as Mr. Lilie here does; he charge Calvin with such seditious
doctrine, as the Protestant Leaders built their rebellion upon* but he deals
not so warily as Mr. L. here has done. For Mr. L. shootes at rovers, and talks
in general of Calvin's seditious Doctrines, but tells us not, what they are, or
where they are to be found. Dolosus versatur in universalibus. Crafty men keep
aloof of, soar aloaft in generals: ar shie of descending to particulars, lest
they be taken with a ly in the manner. But this man, that you may not doubt of
his sincerity, nor make qestion of his fidelity, deals obsignatis tabulis,
gives you Calvin's own words, and those printed in a distinct character from his
own; and that you may assure your self, he qotes him aright, he directs you to
the Book, and Chapter, and Paragraph, whence he has them, that repairing
thither, you may be sure not to miss of them. For to proov, that Calvin by his
Doctrine discharged men of Oaths made to their Sovereigns; Calvin (says he)
Libro 4. c. 13.. 21. says, A man illuminate with the truth, simul vinculis
omnibus obediendi Legibus and Ecclesiae solutus est: he that once has perfect
knowledge of the Gosple, is absolved from Oaths, and all such snares. It is
true, by his translation of the latter part of the words, as himself gives them,
not agreeing so well with the Latin, a wary man might well begin to suspect some
falls play: otherwise, the place being so precisely pointed unto, a man (one
would think) could not in reason expect or suspect ought but very fair and
square dealing. But turn you to the place, and you shall soon descry palpable
knavery. For Calvin in all that whole Chapter has not one word of such Oaths
of Allegiance as Subjects take to their Sovereigns: he entreats only of
Monastical or Monkish Vows; Of these, not of those, his words only ar these;
Nunc postquam veritatis notitia sunt illuminati, simul Christi gratia liberos
esse di^o. Now they (to wit, who formerly had made such unwarrantable Vows, and
out of error and ignorance held themselves obliged therewith) after they are
illightned with notice of the truth, ar, I say, withal free by the grace of
God. What a gros falsification, where nothing les would have been looked for?

To this the same Author adds an other as gros and palpable as the former,
These seditious and popular Consistories (says he; the Presbyteries he means)
ar condemned by their half-brethern the Zwinglians. Hear the voice of Gualterus
a Minister of Zurik, how bitter a sentence he pronounces against them, in
Comment. in 1 Cor. cap. 5. says he, Galli habent sua Seniorum Consistoria,
penes qos est omnis potestas and jurisdictio Ecclesiastica; and in qibus omnium
bellorum contra Regem, and consilia acta, and subsidia collecta sunt. The
French Ministers have their Consistories of Elders, in whom rests the
supremacy of jurisdiction in all causes Ecclesiastical; and by these all
counsels and resolutions ar taken, and all impositions appointed to maintain
the wars against the King. Thus this nameles Varlet. But let any man sedulously
peruse (as my self have done) the whole Commentary of Gualter upon that
Chapter, consisting of and concluded in four Sermons; and he shall find not one
tittle there, either of the French King, or of the French Consistory, or of
ought consulted, enacted, or acted in the one against the other. He speaks
indeed in his second Sermon on that Chapter of the Popes Excommunications,
wherewith (says he) they cruelly vexed Kings and Emperors, and were Autors of
Civil Wars and seditions; deemeth the Presbyterian Government not so needful
under a Christian Magistracy; but leaves every Church free to that course of
Discipline, that they shall find to be for themselves most commodious, without
censuring of others who therein differ from them; and that is all he has there
of this Argument. But this obscure fellow, for the further confirmation of
these his fictions and falsehoods, sends us to Musculus in locis commun. cap.
10. tit. de Officiis Ministrorum. Where in likeliehood (for I have him not, and
he gives us none of his words) we may meet with as much as in Gualter we found:
which since lighting on the book, I find to be most true. For Musculus in his
Common Places, not Cap. 12. which entreats of an other subject, but loc. 22.
titul. 2. de Officiis Ministrorum, has much indeed of the pride, formalities,
either no preaching at all, or unprofitable discoursings of the Popish Prelates
and Priests; of the Presbytery not a word good or bad. At length this lieng
Varlet in these words concludes; Thus you see, (such ar led by him blindfold)
neither of them bow their knees to this Baal, nor magnify Calvin's Idol. This
by the way I rather insert, to show whom these men concur with in traducing
the Presbyterian Government, and by what manner of slights, to wit, notorious
lies and slanders, their guise is to oppugn it. And for my part, it is so far
from bringing me out of love with it; that it makes me rather the more
inclinable to that opinion of the Jus Divinum and necessarium, which those of
the Independent party pressed hard to have in the late Assembly passed of it;
wherein both the Dutch and French Reformed Churches seem to concur with them;
for that these Merlins and Mercuries, (for herein they accord) shaking hands
with such Romish railing and lieng Pamphleters, (whom yet they would seem to
defy and detest) ar so embittered against it. As he said sometime of the
Christian Profession; Tertul. apolog. c. 5.
Non potest esse nisi grande aliqod bonum a Nerone damnatum. It must needs be
some grand good, that such a one as Nero was, should condemn. So of the
Presbyterian Discipline say I, It can not be other then some very needful and
useful thing, that such creatures as these do so eagerly oppose. Mr. R. Hook.
And howsoever a man sometime of great note among us, in his Preface to his
elaborate Treatise of Ecclesiastical Polity, having first transcendently
extolled Mr. John Calvin, do afterward decipher him as a mere Politician
devising a new Church Government of his own, and by cunning slights both
introducing, establishing and continuating the same; and an other of les note
in a late Satirical Libel (for no other it is) entitled Fur praedestinatus,
F.G. apud Trinovant Ministr.
do therein both grossly abuse Calvin, and jeer the Presbyterian, or Genevian
Discipline, as such that any debauched person by an Hypocritical disguise of
contrition and dejection for his loose and lewd courses might easily both
delude and elude. Yet the Government of that City has received good
approbation and attestation even from some Popish Writers themselves. These ar
the words of John Bodine a Papist indeed, but an ingenuous and judicious
Writer, of great and good note, as well among Protestants as Papists, in his
Methodus Historica, cap. 6. page 245. faithfully rendered, That of the Genevians
is laudable, if ought in any Nation, and that which makes a Commonweal to
flourish, if not in riches and Majestical Empire, Yet certainly in piety and
virtu; to wit, the Pontificial censure; (so terms he in no ill meaning sense
their Ecclesiastical or Presbyterial Discipline) then which nothing could be
conceived greater or more divine, to restrain men's lusts and those vices, which
by humane Laws and Judicatories can in no wise be amended. Yet is this coertion
directed according to Christ's rule; first privately and amicably; then somewhat
more sharply: then unles one yield, an heavy and efficacious interdiction of
sacred things follows: after this interdiction the Magistrates animadversion.
So comes it to pas, that those things which are no where vindicated by Laws, ar
there without force or tumult restrained by those Censors, who have gained
themselves an high opinion of virtu, in that city therefore no harlotry, no
drunkenness, no dancings, no beggars, no idle persons ar found. A Testimony and
Verdict of one, against whom no exception can be taken as partial in this
point. And sure it is that this Presbyterian Government backed by the Civil
Magistrate among ours in New England, has rid that Plantation of many Monsters
that would have been nesting and rousting among them, and kept them free from
such prevailing disturbances as our Churches and Ministry ar overmuch
pestered with.

But to leav these by-matters, and bootles complaints, and return to Mr. Lilie,
whom we are chiefly to deal with. Will ye know what the reason is of his spite
against Jo. Calvin (for of the Romanists none need doubt it, its well enough
known to all, how courageously and successefully he has advanced against them)
but Mr. L. and his Accomplices have a special grudge to him, because he has in
his Commentary on Jer. 10.2. as large a discourse against the course of Judiciary
Astrology which these men profess, as the Annotator has in his Notes:
wherein he terms our Astrologers, who maintain a judgment to be made of man's
life by the Horoscope, as if either fortune good or bad did depend upon the
Stars, and by the postures of them take upon them to determine what shall befall
persons or people, in plain terms, improbos nebulones, qi praetexunt suis
imposturis nomen Astrologiae Judiciaria, and qibus studium est qaestum facere
ex meris fallaciis, that is in our plain English, arrant knaves, cloaking their
Impostures under the Title of Judiciarie Astrology, their main study being to
make a gain, or gainful trade, of mere fallacies, or cheating practices.
Besides that, he has apart written An Admonition to beware of them, printed
among his Opuscula; wherein he shows, that their predictions ar founded on no
ground of reason or sound skill: and withal relates the severe, but just, Edicts
of the ancient Christian Emperors for the utter suppressing of them. And do ye
marvail then if Mr. L. cannot endure Mr. Calvin that cuts the throat of his
gainful trade.

But leaving his spite in particular at John Calvin, lets rake a little further
into the dirt and mire of his malignant ravings, in his rambling excursions,
and ramping incursions upon the poor Presbyters, whom he ranked even now among
the great Potentates of this world, which Joves office is to protect. The
Scottish Nation, says he; (that is, the silly Scottish Presbytery, or, the
Presbyterians and their Proselytes, Page 16.
as ye heard him before speak, for they were not surely the Roialists, or the
Prelatical party) but this Scottish Nation raised an Army, and made for their
pretense of War only an obtrusion upon their Nation of a Semipopish Book of
Common Prayer. But the sad conseqences which after that happened, ended not so
soon as it began, but in a most woeful distemper of both England and Scotland in
much bloodshed and most fierce Wars: both Nations having sensibly now ben made
to understand, of how dangerous a conseqence it is, to embroil our selves into a
war, upon the prating and pretended Glosses of those we call Ministers, who
never care for the welfare of any sort of people, but of their own Hierarchy,
that so they might Lord it and domineer like petie Tyrants over the Commonalty
and Gentry.

In which Passage the Man's malice against, not the Presbytery alone, as he
terms it, but the Ministry in general, does notoriously discover it self. for
he cares not (as hereby appeers) whom with his foul pen he asperseth, so he
may bedaub them.

The Scottish Nation, he says, began first the late War, and that only upon
pretense of a Semipopish Common Prayer Book imposed upon them. Concerning which
busienes, being neither Statesman, nor desirous to deal in State Affairs, I
shall say nothing, but refer my Reader, if he desire to be acqainted
therewith, unto the writings of those, who seem to have faithfully and
accurately related the original, progres and issu of the affairs concerning
that war with Scotland* which who so is it to read, may find at large recorded in
the History of the late affairs in Scotland, set forth under the name of
Irenaeus Philalethes.

As for the Original of the War here with us, by whom was it on the defensive
part begun? was it by the Ministry, or the Magistracy? by the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, or by the Civil Authority? was it not by the joint Vote and
concurrence of both Houses of Parliament? or was it by them undertaken (as this
vain pratler speaks) upon the prating and pretended Glosses of those we call
Ministers? See what aspersions this fellow sticks not to cast upon the whole
body of the State, so that some of his gall and venom may withal light upon
the Ministry; as if in this late War, wherein so large an expense of blood
has been spilt, they had taken up arms, upon the mere motion only of the
Ministry by some prating and pretending Glosses inciting them thereunto. It
is true indeed, that an Assembly of Divines was called to meet: but to what end?
to debate of military matters? nothing les. but to consider of Ecclesiastical
affairs, and the settling of matters concerning Doctrine and Discipline
according to the rule of Gods Word. Its true likewise, that while the Assembly
sat, the War being now not begun only, but pursued with much heat, and grown
on either side to a great height, some of the Ministry were with some other
Commissioners sent into Scotland, to treat with the Scots, about conjoyning
with our State, and entering into a joint League for mutual defense with us: nor
were they of the Presbyterian party alone (as they are commonly termed) that
were employed in that busienes. But that the Parliament took up arms, and
embroiled themselves in such a bloody war, upon the motion of the Ministry, by
their prating and pretending glosses encited thereunto, as this has prooved,
it is a notorious calumny in regard of the Ministry, and a foul imputation
laid upon the State, as having raised a War of that importance on so weak and
unwarrantable a ground, and a charging of the guilt of so much blood, as has
in that intestine and unnatural War ben shed, upon both.

Yea but what was it, that moved those prating Ministers to stir up the State
to embroil it self in such a War? forsooth, says this babbling makebate, that
they might Lord it and domineer like petty Tyrants over the Commonalty and
Gentry* and why did he not add over the Nobility too? Its indeed not untru,
that under the Episcopacie, some of their favorites supported and backed by
some great ones among them so did as is here said. Yea they had begun by virtue
of the High Commission Court and the power thereunto annexed, to be tampering
with some of the Nobility, that complied not in all things with them. But what
hope or likelihood was there, or could there be, for the Ministry so to
domineer as this man tells you, that they intended to do, when that power and
authority was taken away, by means whereof much abused some had formerly so
done?

As for his most uncharitable and Satanical censure of Gods Ministers in
general, that they care not for the good of any people but themselves, it may
well claim a place among the hideous croakings of those filthy frogs, that
issued out of the mouth of the Dragon and the Beast, Rev. 16.13. the Devil
himself could hardly have vented or invented a fouler or falser slander against
them.

I am not ignorant that diverse both with us and abroad, have not spared to tax
the Presbyterian Government, as transcending its du bounds, and encroaching
upon the Civil Power; as appeers by the writings of the Erastian party, whom
the Arminians also in part seem to side with against the Contra Remonstrants,
or Netherland Presbyterians. But that they are justly so charged, will not
easily be made good, so long as they keep within compass of Ecclesiastical
Censures, which with good warrant from Gods Word, were in those times also
exercised, wherein no Civil Power embraced the Christian Profession. Whereunto
may be added, that when some not long since among us, thinking thereby to
ingratiate themselves with the State, had broached some things bending and
tending to the Erastian way, its well known, that they were as eagerly opposed
by the Independent party, as by any of those that go under the title of
Presbyterians. But this man's main end, his malice being eqally against either,
is, as plainly appeers, to disgrace the whole body of the Ministry, and to
bring them, as much as in him lies, into hatred with the people, as regarding
nothing at all of their spiritual good, but aiming only at their own pride and
profit, to make a gain of them, and to tyrannize over them at their pleasure.
But let him take heed, lest by withstanding Gods faithful Ministers, as Jannes
and Jambres did Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8. and by opposing himself against them in this
base scoffing manner, as Elymas the Sorcerer did to Paul's preaching, Act. 13.8.
he procure to himself from God that heavy doom that Paul passed then upon
Elymas, and that dismal judgment, or the like, if not a wors and more dreadful,
that was thereupon presently inflicted on him, Verse. 10, 11.

But let us hear yet a little more, tho it reqire some patience, of his raving
and ranting rhetorik, that either he must be ever and anon venting, or else he
shall burst with it, his heart and stomak is so full and over-fraught with gall
and rancor against this so extremely hated Ministry. Having done with the
Moon, he comes to the great Eclips of the Sun, and here again he goes on to
foretell, what without need of spectacles or prospective he saw full before his
face already. Page 28.
How far forth, says he, this Eclips shall exasperate men's spirits against the
Clergy of our own and other Nations, or how far it shall torment the poor
Husbandman, to depart with the tenth part of his labor unto his unsufficient or
factious Minister, or prating Priest, I am not able clearly to determine. great
affliction one way or other it does generally manifest to happen unto all those
of the long Robe. viz. Lawyers, Civilians, Clergy men, and unto those we
falsely for the most part call Divines, when God knows many of them have as
little knowledge of Divinity, as my self of Presbyter John, and as little
affection for the Parliament* as my self zeal for Antichrist. I might here
peradventure not without some just cause reqest Mr. Lilie to show us, how we
may reconcile him to himself, and make his sentences concerning this great
Eclipse and the Effects of it agree the one with the other. For in this place
he tells us, Ibid.
that this Eclips being in the sign of Aries, has dominion and operation on
the state and condition of Laws, Preisthoods, Papacy, Prelacie; and, (to show
where his spite was most) he says, he may very well add, Presbytery, etc.
Independencie, it may be, was within the verge of that, et caetera, and stuck
between his teeth, but he was loath to spit it out. Now hence, as you have
heard, Page 37.
he infers and concludes, that great affliction will happen generally, unto all
those of the long Robe, Lawyers, Civilians, Clergy men and Divines. And yet
afterward, where he is pleased further to expatiate his mind (for I give you
his own terms: and where, think we, did ever any man read such either English
or Latin before?) concerning the greatness of the Effects of this great Eclips,
he says, it is in the last degree of the Decanate of Aries, which second
Decanate, is Nobilitatis, Altitudinis, Regni, and magni Dominii imago, the
image of Nobility, Greatness, Dominion, extraordinary Rule; (for Kingdom, or
Reign, he had no mind to expres) the shape and form whereof the Ancients (some
old Wizards he means) represented under the ensuing Image* Page 38.
which Image is the portraiture of a man in a long Robe; and presents (as he
says) the English Commonwealth, as it will be for three years or thereabout
(that is, for so long as the Effect of this Eclips lasts, as we shall afterward
hear) in great Majesty and Glory. Now how he can reconcile these two so cross
Judgments drawn from one and the same aspect, and raised from one and the same
ground as you see, tho other Ignoramusses and dull pates ar too shalow to
conceiv; yet I doubt not but he is as well able to bring together, as to make
the two members of a Contradiction to accord: for these wizards in cunning and
juggling do far surpas your common Gypsies, and ar able at once to make one and
the self same thing fast and loose, good and bad in the very same instant. Mean
while you see, how he can make the Aspects represent what he pleases, and
Images speak what he lists; when the long Robe represents the Common Wealth of
England, to speak much Peace and Honor to it; when it denotes the Clergy and
the Divines of England, to speak great Affliction and Trouble. Whereof further
hereafter, when we arrive at his Pictures.

But one thing further is here worthy our Observation. Mr. Lilie in all these
dreadful Eclipses and malignant Aspects, finds much matter of bad, dismal and
disastrous concernment, to Princes, Potentates, Priests, Lawyers, Husbandmen,
Grasiers, etc. but none at all ever to Wizards, Witches, Conjurers,
Fortune Tellers, Sorcerers, Stargazers, Astrologers, etc. No malignity of any
Aspect belike is able to reach them: or as the knavish fellow in the Comedy,
Plavt. Mostel.
that to fright his Master returning home after long absence, from entering into
his own house, told him, that his house in his absence was become haunted with
Sprites; and when he was asked, how he durst go in then himself, made answer,
Pax mihi cum mortuis, that the Sprites and he were at one^ So, it seems these
men and their coined Aspects ar agreed; so that tho they portend never so much
mischief and misery to these prating Priests, or any other sort of men, high or
low, great or small, whom these men disaffect, yet they will not so much as once
touch them, nor do ever portend any evil at all to them.

Page 17.
Yea but, may some say, he professes to write this of the Ministry with sorrow
of heart rather then any joy or delight, to see the downfall of so many men, who
had they improoved their talents in lerning and divinity conscientiously for
the education of those flocks God had committed unto them, might have expected
another manner of reward from heaven, and a more benign acceptance of their
labors from men. The great God of Heaven (says he) protect the pious and
godly Divines of our Nation; for some we have; and let them never want
encouragement, or a most bountiful allowance from this Common Wealth: but for
the mere Prater, or State enemy, let it be with him as he does merit: the ruin
or impoverishing of many of them is at hand.

Where in the first place I might demand of him, whether the Effect of this
Eclips, according to his fancies and his Autors Principles, do not
indifferently reach, and promiscuously include, as well those other few and
pious ones, as those Praters and State enemies, as he terms them.

And in the next place, in whether rank he is pleased to range those, that have
written against him, or condemned his practices as detestable and diabolical.
for I doubt much, whether his Charity be boiled up to such an height, as to
wish so well to them, or to afford them any part in his prayers, more then he
has in their Creed; which I suppose yet they do not greatly affect, nor have
much cause to desire, considering whom they deem him addicted unto. But whom
he and such as he is esteem pious and godly Divines, is not much to be
regarded. And howsoever those Ministers of God, that deal faithfully in
discharge of their duty, might justly expect better and more loving acceptance
from their people* then most such usually meet with, yet experience of all ages
shows, that the faithful dispensers of Gods truth, have usually found ^es favor
with the most, then such as have soothed them up in their sins.. The best is,
they are as Taylers that make apparel for children, who whether the suites they
make them do either for stuf or fashion please the Children or no, expect their
pay from the parents, having done their work faithfully according to their
direction, and given them content therein. Nor is it in the power of any
Imposter, or of any malevolent Aspect, (if those celestial creatures had any
such, which is impious to aver) to debar or defraud them of that reward, which
from heaven they are sure to receiv, for that their work, which being performed
by them in Gods name, and for God, shall never pas unregarded or unrewarded with
God: howsoever he do often suffer them, as his Prophets often and Apostles of old,
Matthew. 5.12. and 23.34 -- 37. 1 Cor. 4.9 -- 13. 2 Cor. 6.4, 5.
for their trial and exercise of their patience, as also for the just
punishment of peoples unthankfulnes, to meet with hard measure at the hands of
those, from whom they have deserved far better, and who (worst enemies therein
to themselves) do thereby attract much more evil to themselves, then they either
do or can do unto those, whom so unworthily they reqite.

As for all his fained profession of sorrow of heart and prayer for protection
in behalf of the pious some, I esteem them no other then as Crocodiles tears
commonly spoken of, Erasm. Adag. 24.60.
if their guise be at least as the saying is, to weep over those, whom they
desire to devour: Or not unlike those that that bloudy-minded, but
deep-dissembling traitor Ismael shed over those poor pilgrims whom he intended
to destroy. Jer. 41.6, 7.

For his little knowledge of Presbyter John, Vid. Scal. emend. Temp. l. 7. and
Codign. hist. Abass. l. 1. c. 5. See Miltons Figure-Caster.
if there be a King so called in the world, or the King at least that is
abusively so termed; he wants belike his fellow Figure-flingers glass in Finsbury
feilds, wherein he professed he could see what was done all the world over. But
if he know nothing of Presbyter John and his Country, as he would seem here to
intimate, how comes he to know what is done in the East Indies, in places far
more remote then those parts of Africa, where his regiment and residence is
said to be? Or if he be as ignorant of the one as of the other, does he not
apparently cheat people by taking their money to tell them in what condition
their friends or husbands ar in some parts of the East Indies, and at what time
they shall from thence return. No body belike repaires to him for inqirie
concerning ought or any in Prester Jean, or Prestegians Country; and therefore
he regards not to take notice of ought there: otherwise, I doubt not, but that
the tender of a little yelow, some small pitance of that yolk of the egg, See
Tullie de Divinat. l. 1.
that the Diviner demanded of his Client; or not much of the White, would so
clear his ey-sight, or his glass, or both* that he could soon come to know as
well what were done in the inner parts of Ethiopia, as how matters went with men
in the gulf of Bengala; alike, without the Devils help, I beleiv, in either.

And for his zeal to Antichrist; apparent enough it is, that he has no small
measure of that (...), that bitter zeal, the Apostle James speaks of, Chap.
3.14. against those, that have been Gods principal Instruments both among us and
elsewhere, in helping to demolish the power and Kingdom of Antichrist. And if
the Devil be the grand Antichrist, as there is no doubt but he is, and the
other on earth but his Deputy, sure he and his Accomplices ar no les zealous for
the support of Antichrists Kingdom, when they so eagerly band and bend
themselves against those servants of God, that discover and lay open their
diabolical practices, then was Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen for the
worship of Diana, in stirring up, and striving to enrage the people against
Paul Christ's Apostle, and that for the same cause, for which they set the
multitude then in an uproar, because thereby comes in their gain, Act. 19.24,
27, 28.

Yea but the man reqires to be heard. Let me be heard, says he, Page 47.
and not judged unheard* and what more eqal? but has he not ben heard? or are not his own allegations for himself and in defense of his Art, related by the
Annotater out of his own works, and delivered in his own words? and such
Exceptions taken thereunto, and given in against him, as he has no list to
take notice of?

But how would the man be heard and tried? forsooth, according to his own
principles. Let me be heard, says he, according to mine own principles. a very
fair course indeed, and a very reasonable reqest; can ye blame him, if he desire
so to be heard and tried? For what cheater, or imposter? what malefactor,
felon, traitor, or murderer, would not right willingly be heard, tried and
sentenced according to his own principles? And what, think we, would their
principles be? such, no doubt, as were those of Brennus and his Galls, and
their plea against the Romans, whose dominions they had invaded; as Plutarch
relates it, that they did nothing evil or unjust, Plut. in Camil.
but kept to the ancientest, and most generally received and allowed Law in the
World, that gives the stronger right to what the weaker held: or, as Livie
more succinctly, that their right consisted in their arms, Live. lib. 6.
and to hardy persons all things appertained. and such, I beleiv, would their
principles be, that all was of right theirs, that either by fraud or force,
slight or might, they could wrest from any other, that were either way, or in
either kind weaker then themselves. By which their Tenets and Maxims might they
but obtain to be tried and sentenced, they would be sure, they knew, to do well
enough. And the like course of Judicature does this man plead for. Let me be
heard, says he, according to mine own principles. grant him but his own
grounds (a most reasonable reqest) and he will soon be able sufficiently to
clear himself, neither shall he need to except against any uncharitable either
Presbyterian or Independent, from being of his Judges, or of his Jurie.

But, Sir, your principles must first be prooved, which by other then those of
the Presbytery have been so razed, that it seems you despair of ever raising
them again, and therefore refuse to meddle with their ruins. And this is that
which the Annotater reqires of you, and puts you upon, to make good your
Assertions concerning the ground of your Principles: that which you ar as
unwilling to come to, being conscious to your self of your utter inability of
sound confirming what so confidently, but groundlesly you have thereof
affirmed, as is any bear to be brought to the stake. else why take you no notice
of it, when it is pressed upon you, but let it sleep, or slip away in silence,
as a thing that nothing concerned you?

Yea but those stupid Annotations, Page 8. and 47.
are but an unseemly Commentary, consisting of criticisms and fruitless
expositions on Texts of Scripture, against the whole current of antiqity,
reason, and the very genuine sense of the words themselves; the fruits of a
brain doting with age, and of one become a child again; in a word no better
then a puddle of envy and nonsense.

Good Sir, be pleased, I beseech you, to tell us, who told you all this* for, I
beleiv, you never read any great part of the whole Commentary; it may be
scarce had the patience to run over the whole Annotation to an end: for you
complain elsewhere of the length of it; and say as little to that concerns you in
it, as if you had never read word of it. Besides, be it that you had turned
over the whole Commentary from the first Note to the last; yet I suppose, you
will hardly make many, if any at all, beleiv, that you ar so well acqainted with
all Antiqitie, or so well versed and skilled in the Original Language and
genuine sense of the Text, as to pas out of your own knowledge such a censure
as this upon any man's work. and he were indeed a very selie man, and well worthy
of much pity, that would deem your censures of much worth or weight in a
business of this nature. As for the Annotater and his work such as it is: albeit
he doubts not, but that many wants and weaknesses, defects and defaults may by
a qick and peircing ey be descried in it, Sophocles. Vid. Cic. de Sen. Plut. de
sen. Polit. Aristoph. Schol. Ran. Fabr. gymn l. 2. c. 12.
yet he dares be so bold, as (with that aged Tragedian sometime upon occasion
of the like-accusation) to appeal and refer himself to the sentence of any
ingenuous and judicious learned, whether his labors therein may deservedly be
deemed the birth of one doting and so crackt-brained with age, that he is
become a child again; or his expositions therein delivered such as this man's
verdict (if I may at least so term it) here passed upon them affirms them to
be. And this yet I shall make bold to adjoin, that they have so far forth
attained approbation both at home and abroad, that the Annotater has been
importuned, both by diverse of his reverend brethren here, and some also from
forain parts, to undertake the like pains on some other parts of Scripture:
unto whom his answer has been, that neither his age or ability will bear it,
nor is it so needful for him to undertake ought further therein, since that
some of the other parts have been more exqisitely, tho with les prolixity, dealt
in by others (it being not every ones faculty, not his he is sure, to write
succinctlie, and comprise much matter in few words) by whom such an employment,
having fewer years and larger abilities may much better be performed. But, Sir,
whatsoever the Annotater may have done els-where, sure he is, that what he has
on Jerem. 10.2. concerning the vanity and impiety of your trade, is neither
contrary to the current of Antiqitie, nor to reason, nor to the genuine sense
of the words of the Text; but consonant to the doctrine of the Ancient Fathers,
the sounder and greater number of learned writers, both of former times and
later days, as well Papists, as Protestants, the settled discipline in the
Christian Churches, the Decrees and Sanctions of Christian Emperors, and the
Canons and Constitutions of whole Councels not a few, even to that of Trent it
self, as has formerly ben showed. And for this puddle of nonsense, as you ar
pleased to style it, (from whence you should have done well to have related some
few at least particular passages or sentences of nonsense, picked out of the
whole puddle) it has* it seems, so puzzeld you and disturbed all your senses,
that you have not so much as one wise word to return in way of defense unto any
piece of the Exceptions therein taken to your own Assertions related out of
your own writings; only the very sight of it seems so to have troubled your
stomach, that it has made you bring up much gall, and spit out a great deal of
venom, which being unaccustomed to such scurrilous language, I shall pas by,
and leav to you, to resume, if you please, as dogs sometime do their vomit, and
to reserv it by you, until you have further use of it. Mean while, that the
Author of that Annotation, which you ar pleased so to bespatter, is not ashamed
of his work, but is willing to have it pas the more general trial, whether it
be such a puddle of nonsense or no; in regard that the whole work, whereof his
labors ar but a parcel, consists of two great volumes, and the price
conseqently correspondent, not every man's money, and in fewer hands therefore;
in consideration hereof he has caused that Annotation, excerpted from the rest
to be printed apart* together with this, that the more eyes of all sorts may
readily see what it is, whether it, be such as you say, and how nothing (a few
scurrilous terms only excepted) you have in your own defense returned
thereunto.

One thing I had overpast, which I deem not amiss to give some touch of before
I conclude. Besides the aspersions of nonsense, incapacity and ignorance,
wherewith Mr. L. charge our English Priests, Vid. Aug. Epist. 48. de Discipl.
Christ. c. 2. cont. Julian. l. 6. c. 1.
and the Annotater among the rest; there is another Imputation and charge of a
more heinous nature, to wit, Envy, the Devils most peculiar sin* for of the
Annotation on Jer. 10.2. he says, it is a puddle of Envy and Nonsense. Of
which former branch, I had said nothing, because I understood not the Mystery,
wanting some Delian Diver to unfold it to me, that I might know what the Man's
meaning should be; which now Mr. L. himself has done for me. For in an Epistle
prefixed to his Worlds Catastrophe, which came lately to my hands, he tells his
Reader that the Fraternity of the Clergy ar an Envious generation, and this
disease of envy is with them hereditarie. And what is the ground, think we, of
this grievous charge, which he enters upon with such a passionate Exclamation?
Oh men of Envy! forsooth, they have for so many ages envied mankind the
knowledge of lerning, that have cloistered up books, and suffered them to
perish in their closets unopened, because all should be ignorant but themselves.
and had not some Gentlemen of divine Souls, and many worthy and gallant
Physicians preserved Arts and published their admirable conceptions, he is
confident to this very day, the Fraternity of Clergymen would have kept us at
a distance, and without the knowledge of many lernings we now know; for which
at sometimes these malevolent churlish and envious Clergiemen snarl at the
Autors. But what ar the Books, that these men made of envy, have thus mured
up, of set purpose to keep men in ignorance? Is it Gods Word, think we, and the
Divine Oracles, or the Law and the Gospel, or the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles? these indeed under the Papacy were locked up and sealed up: and men
inhibited from looking into them. But these are not the Books Mr. L. speaks of:
these rather he could be content should be concealed: they speak no good of him
and his trade; tho the Planets and Aspects of them (as we have elsewhere
observed) portend no ill at all to Wizards, whatsoever to others they do: yet
these denounce much evil both to them, and to those that are deluded by them.
But what ar they then? such as treat of Mr. Ls. trade; such as the professors
and practisers of such arts, when they turned true Christians, burnt at Ephesus,
Act. 19.19. Ah what an envious man was Paul, that would suffer them so to do?
But more particularly, that by some instances we may know what books he means,
There are books (says he from the Lord of Marchistone writing on the
Revelation) among the Jews, containing doctrines, as they allege, proceeding
from the mouths of the Patriarks, affirming every great Angel of seven to rule
the world 490 years. and in particular, a Book of the Government of the World
by Angels; which M. L. himself has Englished: whereof he purposes to write a
special Treatise; wherein from the beginning of the World to these times, and
some hundreds of years succeeding; he shall endevor to manifest such Mysteries
involved in this lerning, as yet have not appeered; wherein he shall go near to
give every Common Wealth of Europe a smart conjecture of the continuance or
destruction of their State and Government. having gotten, forsooth, the true
Key, or Ca^ala, as elsewhere he terms it, to unlock these Mysteries, which
others for want thereof understand not. he should have done well to have added
Mother Shiptons Prophesies, which he says were never qestioned for antiqitie
and verity: And the rest of the rabble of old wives tales as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Timothy 4.7. whereof he tells us, there are many more in the North. And
what is all this, but to do as Satan did with God to our first Parents, who
charged him with envieng man divine knowledge, because he inhibited him the
forbidden fruit? For therefore, says. Mr. L. these Clergy men keep these
Books out of men's sight; because out of envy they would keep people in
ignorance, and withhold them from attaining such deep and profound knowledge as
himself by reading of them has attained unto. As for the Lord Napeir, and his
Countryman Robert Ponts, their Calculations by Jubilees from the Worlds
beginning to the Worlds end, the time whereof both of them, contrary to our
Saviors avouchment take upon them to determine, the one Propos. 15. the other
Cap. 19. they are so groundles, that few or none that I have seen do accord with
either. and for Tritemius his Treatise of the seven Planetary Angels that
should in course govern the whole World by those seven Planets, which Mr. L. to
make our people wise unto such fancies and fooleries, has done into English,
Mr. L. himself grants that neither upon the order of their Courses, Page 56.
nor of the the term of their Regencies are our Wizards agreed among themselves;
which is sufficient to show that they had it not by Revelation from any good
Angels, as Mr. L. pretends, no more then the Teutonik Wizard, what was done so
many ages before this World was* and those supposed books of the Patriarks may
well go among the rank of those Jewish Fables, that the Apostle forbids
Christians to give heed unto, Tit. 1.14. Nor ar either the Apostle Paul or our
Priests, as Mr. L. styles them, more guilty of Envy in dissuading people from
harkening to such groundles and impious fopperies, then should any holy Angel
of God have been, in dissuading our first Parents from meddling with the
forbidden fruit. Nor can any sound Wisdom be gained from any science falsely
so termed, 1 Timothy 6.20. that neither from religion nor reason it self by
necessary conseqence has any good ground.

Preface.
But for the Exposition of the place, Mr. L. tells Mr. G. that he shall ere long
have the judgments of abler Divines then himself and to better purpose on that
of Jerem. 10.2. and mean while tells his Readers, they shall have the
Exposition of a Reverend Minister on the place, eqal in years to Mr. G. and in
true Divinity and Knowledge of the Oriental toungs far surmounting him.

What those Judgments ar of abler Divines, when we see, we shall know what to
say to them. And for that others Exposition, whose words he relates, but names
not the Author, nor the Title of his work, leaving the Annotater as well as his
Readers, to seek after a needle in a bottle of hay, it was long ere any of my
friends could find out any of them, nor could I by their help hitherto attain
the revew of more then one that has lately published ought on that Scripture;
which one indeed concurs with the party, whose words he relates for the
Exposition of the place, tho he have not the very same terms, and resolved I
was not to meddle with Mr. Lilie, until I could see what some of these his
Advocates had to say in his behalf; which we shall (God assisting) consider of,
ere we finish this discourse. Mean while, not to make comparisons, which is
generally deemed odious, and with one utterly unknown, would be, not
over-presumptuous only, but even ridiculous: much skill in the Oriental toungs
I never did, nor do profess; a little smattering only in the Hebrew of the
Bible I acknowledge. neither needs there any great depth of skill in those
Oriental languages, for the expounding of that Text of Jeremie, that strikes at
Mr. Lilies trade.

And if that his other Advocate, whom he qotes and so highly extols, do for
years eqal the Annotater, why may not he so aged fall under his Clients censure
of Senes bis pueri, as well as his Antagonist? for how Mr. L. should come to be
inspired with such a faculty as whereby to judge of true Divinity, is a point, I
confess, beyond my skill to conceiv. But what ever the man be for skill in
languages, or knowledge in Divinity, (for I know not who or what he is) I
would fain know of M. Lilie, supposing that this his Advocate had seen farther
into the Text, being far more skilful in the Language, then the Annotater has
done; what is all that to the justifieng of Mr. Lilies Assertions in the
Annotation related, and the Exceptions therein taken thereunto? which it
concerned him to have answered, and not put it off to another, who in all that
he relates out of him, speaks not a word at all for him, but leaves him in
regard of defense therein, as naked and bare, as if he had never so much as
once opened his mouth, or put pen to paper in his behalf.

But leaving his Advocates til we come to deal with them, we shall presume a
little to cope with this grand Master in the matter of Eclipses, because they are
the main subject of this his Black Book. And here I might a little qestion the
skill of Mr. L. himself, and some of his fellow Prognostics, in that part of the
Sideral Science, which on all sides is acknowledged to be as warrantable and
lawful as beneficial and useful. That which a man better versed in these things
then my self, might the rather adventure to do; for that Kepler a great
Mathematician sticks not to affirm, De nova Stell. Serpent. c. 11.
that Astrologi Astronomiam sinceriorem ut plurimum ignorant, our great
Astrologers ar for the most part not so well skild in the sincerer part of
Astronomy.

Now here, in the first place* we have been told by some of them, the more to
amaze the selie multitude, that this late Eclips of the Sun would be greater
and more terrible then any that had been many ages before, Yea Mr. L. himself
tells us, that it is the greatest this age has beheld; Page 24.
from whence therefore we may expect accidents or events to follow suitable to
the greatness of it. And yet Leovitius a great Author with him enforms us, as
Mr. Page 11.
L. himself relates, that in the year 1567. April. 9. (and there ar, I hope, yet
living that might see that) there was such a terrible and horrid Eclips of the
Sun, as had not ben since 1544. nec etiam multis futuris seculis, nor for many
ensuing ages should be. And yet there has not one entire seculum, or age, as
himself renders it, who yet thus says, much les many, as some other, past over
our heds between this and that: unles they will make shorter secula, or ages, as
did the Emperor Claudius for his Ludi seculares, or Secular Interludes, but
was laughed at for his labor, Suet. lib. 5. c. 21.
by many of those that had seen them, some that had acted in them, yet
surviving, when the Common Crier proclaimd such Disports to be exhibited, qos
nec qisqam spectasset, nec spectaturus esset, as no man then alive had seen, or
should survive to see again: or as the Popes do their Jubilees, which they have
drawn down from 50. years to 25. to draw the more money from poor people, whom
they laugh at the whilst for their lightness of belief. But whether Mr. Lilie
or Leovitius were here in the Error, let others decide, and let him for me lay
it on whether of their two shoulders he lists.

Secondly, as concerning the site of the light continued during the conjunction
of those two Luminaries in the late Eclips; M. L. with diverse other of his
fellow Prognostiks, were manifestly mistaken. for in his delineation thereof, as
diverse other also of them, he places the light part, such glimmerings at least
of it, as he is pleased to afford us, below; whereas it was apparent to any ey
sedulously observing the apparition, that the light part was above: which I
hope, he himself will not have the face to deny.

Thirdly, for the summing up of the parts (as to us) obscured; Page 7.
calling in Captain George Wharton an excellent Calculator, he determines from
him, who (he says) had accurately and lernedly delivered it, that the body of
the Sun would be eleven digits and fifty five minutes eclipsed. Where I wonder
why Mr. Lilie so great an Artist, as he professes himself to be, should be so
diffident of his own skill, that he should not dare to venture or hazard it upon
any Calculation of his own, but refer himself to Capt. G. W. his calculation
herein, whom howsoever he pronounces in his calculation exact; and does not
les, I hope, conspire with in his Prognostiks for the effects or events of it,
yet as misdoubting the success and issu of the busienes, he seems so
cautelously to have thus delivered it, that if any error came to be discovered
in it, it might rather reflect upon his friend the Calculator, from whom he had
taken it upon trust, then be charged upon himself. But that the Calculations,
whether the ones, or the others, or agreed upon by both, is not so exact, is by
others not a few, deemed in these points very skilful, agreed, and by M. L.
himself in part also, but covertly, confessed. For some here at London, as I am
informed, do affirm, that the obscuration in some digits fell short of that
their account; and that by the observation of those at Oxford, and of a prime
man among the rest in M. L. his own account, it missed much at least in the
minutes; for by their Calculation it was but eleven digits, and one fourth,
which I conceiv to be fifteen minutes, the fourth part of a digit, consisting
of sixty minutes; which why M. L. Ephemer. ann. 53.
is pleased to call fifteen seconds, I wot not. but by that calculation, which
M. L. himself in his late new Ephemeris would seem to accord with, it came as
far short for minutes in the former account, as fifteen and fifty five ar
asunder. But I will not take upon me to decide the difference between them; I
content my self with M. L. his own grant here.

Only by the way, I should, if I might be so bold, demand of Mr. L. whether
this excellent Calculator, Capt. G. Wharton, be not anagrammatised the same
with Naworth of Oxford. I shrewdly gues them to be one and the same. and some
friends assure me, that he himself in some of his writings has acknowledged as
much. Which if it so be; I should then further demand, (for I am in these
matters but a Qestionist) how it is come about, that Naworth that ABC fellow of
Oxford, (for so M. L. styles him in the very entry to his Ephemeris for the
year 47.) is now so suddenly become Capt. G. Wharton that excellent
Calculator? Surely there must needs be some grand mystery in it. Is the
transposition of a few letters, think we, so efficacious in this their new
Magik, that the change of the name should suddenly produce such a strange
change in the man? Or may we not deem rather that his reconcilement to Mr.
Lilie has effected the alteration, and made the Abce Scholar such an accurate
calculator? and then the Annotater may not be wholly out of hope, but that if
he would recant and claw Mr. Lilie a little, M. L. as the Proverb is, would claw
him again, and so he might of Thomas Wiseaker, that old doting Duns, become
suddenly Mr. T. G. an excellent Divine, or, as Marcilius Ficinus, because he
writes for those of his coat (for no other lerning is M. L. privy to in him)
an excellent learned Priest. Yea what might not those poor Snakes the silie
sneaking Presbyterians, whether English or Scottish hope to prove, if they
could be so happy, as to make their peace with M. L. and be admitted to kiss
the hand of this Great Mogul? But neither is the Annotater, nor ar the
Presbyerians, he hopes, so base minded, to stoop so low, as to bear a taper
before the Devil, to gain a degree in his Academie, and to attain a new Title
in M. L. his books. Again, I should be glad to know how it came to pas, when
time was, that Mr. N^. if not calculations, yet observations and judgments at
Oxford, and M. Lilies here at London, were so diverse one from another, or so
advers rather either to other; or whence it is, that they do now so exactly
agree. Did so small a distance of place, think we, alter the face of the sky?
or has the variation of the Scene on the earth here below, produced a
variation of the Scheme above in the heavens? But I make little doubt, had they
then ben both together, when they wrote such different Prognostiks, eitheir M.
L. with M. N. at Oxford, or M. N. with M. L. at London, but that their
observations and predictions, whether they had laid their heds together, or had
studied upon the matter apart in their several cells, as the tale goes of the
secluded Septuagints, Hi^^on. Prolog. in Pentat.
they would have agreed well enough, well knowing either others mind to an hair,
and what it behooved them to write. nor is it unlikely, but that, when they
came to shake hands here, they laughed, as we use to say, in the sleev at
least; bethinking themselves, how handsomely they had acted their parts on
either scene, deluding not selie people alone, but whole States in a manner, by
predictions and promises of good successes, the one to the King and the Roial
party there, the other to the Parliament and their adherents here. But at these
men's discrepances I mervail not at all, when I call to mind that, which I have
heard reported of that reverend man of God, whom this miscreant above
traduced* the Reader, I hope, will excuse me, if I be telling of stories now and
then, when I shall have minded him of the old saying, Longin. de sublim.
(...), that it is the property, not of children only, but of old men too,
especially when they grow children again, that they love to be telling of
stories and tales. Mr. Calvin preaching in his Church at Geneva, when in the
midst of his matter through the Sextons knavery he heard the Clock strike, and
saw the people look back to the hand on the dial, as wondering that the hour
should be so soon at an end, Ye need not look back or wonder at all, said he,
at the shortness of the hour: for God makes the days; but Martin (the
Clock-keeper) makes the hours, as he pleases, and the Day goes not by his
Clock. It is just so here. God has assigned the Stars their site and their
course, which no power of man or Angel is able to alter: but man's fancy has
built us imaginary Houses in the Heavens, and assigned them such qalifications,
affections and effections as the framers of them pleased to give them. and why
should they not then dispose of their fanatical fabrics according to their own
fancy that produced them at first?

[Since I wrote this, lighting upon another of M.L. his worthy works, I am now
thereby fully confirmed in my former conjectures concerning Capt. G. Wharton,
by Mr. L. here so much extolled: first that Naworth and Wharton ar one and the
same man; and secondly, that it is not the change of his name, but his
reconcilement to M. L. that has procured him such a change in M. L. his
repute. For I find him after the change of his name, before M. L. and he came
to accord, to be styled by M. L. the silliest of all Astrologers, Preface to
his Worlds Catastrophe.
a vagabond Asinego, having the curs of Cain hanging upon him, a viperous
Renegado, one that having two names, incurs the censure of Ignoramus, Duplex
nomen, duplex Nebulo, a double Name, a double knave. and withal publishes a
Discourse (whether his own or no, I know not) but under the person of a third
party, entitled, A Whip for Wharton. What the man is, I know not, nor did I
ever see ought of his. But thus M. L. was pleased to decipher him: and that, it
seems principally for his writing against M. Lilie and M. Booker, and
discovering some errors and mistakes in their calculations; which because M.L.
and his Advocate, (who ever he be) it seems, cannot deny, they both return in
way of Answer such language, and M. L. seems to turn his error over to
Regiomantanus, as here its likely he will the miscalculation to M. G. W. who is
now, ye see, since the agreement made, a great man in his books.]

But in the last place, be the number of digits and minutes in the Suns late
defection (as they term it) obscured more or les then these two great
Calculators, in their Calculations and predictions now agreeing as good friends,
whatsoever differences might have been between them in times past, ar now
jointly and unanimously agreed upon: M. Lilie, howsoever he control those that
possessed peoples minds with fear concerning the darkness that this Eclips
should portend* (you have his own wise terms) as if it threatened danger unto
those, that should be about their labors, or other like affairs abroad: and
there wanted not indeed of his fellow wizards, that advised people by any means
to keep their families, young children especially within doors, and prescribed
cordials to be given them, as preservatives against the harm and disasters,
that from this dreadful occurrent might accrue to them. but M. L. assures us
the contrary on his word; I say, says he, it threatens no man or cattle with
danger in that consideration, to wit, of their being abroad; nor will the
darkness be of so great or long a continuance as many imagine. and yet what
matter is it how long it last, if there be no danger at all in it? or what is
the meaning of the darkness, that this Eclips (what is that but the darkning it
self of the light?) should portend? or if it threaten nothing to any that are
under it abroad, why should it threaten ought at all unto any? But leaving
these qeries to his further consideration; and him and his fellow wizards to jar
or agree among themselves, as they please, Mr. L. yet tells us upon his own
account, and out of his own belief, that although the greatest obscurity will
not last long, yet such and so great for the time it shall be, that if the air
be serene and clear, which in some measure he misdoubted by the arising of
Saturn at that time, and the Moon her application unto his qadratures, (which
with us here at London prooved but a false fear) we should behold the fixed
Stars, as also Mars and Venus.

But tho neither Melancholy Saturns malevolent aspect prevailed any whit to
the darkning of the day, and the air was as serene and clear as could be
desired in the place of mine abode; yet for want, it seems, of Mr. Lilies
spectacles, none among us were able to discern any one Star fixed or free,
those two great Luminaries then in conjunction, the Sun and the Moon only
excepted; nor can I hear of any one, tho having made enqiry of many in places
remote, and far distant one from an other, at that time residing, that had so
piercing an ey as to attain any such sight. and yet had it ben no such great
matter, had any such thing ben, had a Star or two ben seen, my self can
remember twice to have seen a Star near about noontide; the former time in the
Borough of Southwark, about one of the Clock after noon; the latter time in
Cheapside London, about eleven in the forenoon; it being at neither time,
either a very clear or dark day, which many at both times stood gazing upon,
(besides such as came out of their shops and houses to behold it) as they
passed along in the street.

Yea but our English Merline tells us in his late New Ephemeris for the year
1653, to salv his credit in this particular, that thousands in London did then
behold the Planet of Venus and many fixed Stars as clearly as in the darkest
night.

He told us awhile ago, that he doubted we might not see them for the darkness
of the day, Page 49.
which Saturns melancholy and malevolent look might produce: now he tells us
they were seen by many as clearly as in the darkest night* the darkness of the
day belike would hinder the sight of that, which the darkness of the night would
help to improov. Or does the man, trow we, mean, and so with an Eqivocation
(such as the Wizards Oracles much abounded in of old) delude us? that as he who
presenting one for a degree in the Universitie, on his word averred him to be,
tam doctrina, qam moribus idoneum, as well for lerning as for life and carriage
fit to have that degree conferred on him; that is, as he after expounded
himself, alike fit for either, in plain truth for neither. So our Merlines
meaning may be, that those his thousands saw those Stars as clearly as in the
darkest night, wherein there is no Star at all to be seen. and then we shall as
easily beleiv him herein, as those did the Master presenting concerning the
Scholar presented by him, who know well enough what he was. Otherwise how those
thousands in London attained to such an eminent degree of perspicacitie above
so many other thousands in and about the City, that could descry no such
matter, the air and sky being alike affected unto either party in those
parts, it is not easy to apprehend, unles they should all borow and make use
of Mr. Lilies spectacles, which he should be very free of to lend to so many.
Yet, it may be some two or three of our Merlines clients, to cheer the man up,
perceiving how he was in his dumps, upon notice taken that his predictions
concerning this dreadful Eclips had not in all points accordingly fallen out; and
sore vexed, that the Mercuries and ballat-singers, whom he greivously
complains of, had been so bold with him; might come to him and tell him, that
they had seen some such matter, (for, it seems, he dares not, does not at
least, say, that he saw them himself) whom by the help of some multiplieng
glass he might raise up to that hyperbolical number of thousands: unles it were
rather, (as may not unjustly be suspected) by the figure of figmentum or
mendacium, a couple of tropes too freqent with those of his trade.

But to let these unwonted sights pas; for the greatness of the obscurity, many
thousands, I doubt not, will avow, and my self among the rest, that they have
full often known the sky, through the thicknes of clouds overspreading the
places of their abode, much darker, upon some approaching storm especially,
then they found it at the highest or deepest degree (choose whether you please
to term it) of this dreadful Eclips.

Yea but, howsoever it was with the Eclips here about London, our Merline
enforms us, that by letters from Scotland and Ireland, and some of ours on
shipboard, it appeers, that the darkness was far more dreadful in those parts
where they then were, so as they could not see to write or to barb without
candle; and no man ever saw the like in those qarters: insomuch that in some
places all the poor people cast themselves down on their backs (they might have
done better to have lien grovelling on their bellies) with their eyes toward
heaven, most passionately praying, that Christ would let them see the Sun
again. They were some belike of the progeny of that people, that were wont to
howl hideously, and make grievous lamentation at the daily setting of the Sun,
as misdoubting that he would never rise again with them. But, it seems, that
spiteful Planet Saturn, whose malevolent aspect Mr. L. misdoubted might by
clouding the day, hinder the sight of the Stars with us, did on the other side
produce that hideous and dreadful darkness with them; and we may hope therefore,
that those direful and disastrous effects, which this darkning of our
daylight, either does presage, or is to produce, will light upon those of
Scotland and Ireland, or at the most and worst, on our shipping at Sea, where
the darkness was so exceeding deep and dismal; not upon us in these parts, where
it was nothing so dreadful. I might well add, that its to well known to be a
common slight of our Mercuries (and why not of our Merlines?) to date and
divulge letters from forain parts and remote regions, that have indeed ben as
well coined and endited, as printed and published here at London.

But leaving these things, as by-matters to my main intendment at present
(mentioned only to retund a little this man's insolent vauntings of his
transcendent skill in the Sideral affairs) to be made out, and made good by him
as he shall deem himself able; I shall proceed unto that, which I formerly
propounded to deal in a while with him, concerning the nature of these Eclipses
the main matter of his Book. And here in the first place, I would gladly know,
for my better lerning, from him and his Accomplices what reason in Nature they
can give us (for in his late Ephemeris he tells us they go in a natural way) of
those dreadful effects or events, that to these Eclipses they ascribe. For to
pres that Argument against them* that any the meanest capacity may be able to
apprehend. The interception of the light of the Sun from our sight in these
Eclipses, arises from the interposition of the body of the Moon between us and
the Sun: now the like interception of the light of the Sun from our sight
arises in the night time from the interposition of the body of the Earth
between the Sun and us, and so makes every nght, not a partial of so many
digits and minutes more or les, but a total Eclips of the Sun to us and the
whole hemisphere wherein we are situate. I demand then of these men, what reason
they can give, why these nightly Eclipses should not justly be deemed as
dreadful and as dismal as those. why should not the total want of the Sun-light
for diverse hours together, having no Moonlight at all to supply the want of
it, either the night next before this Eclips, or the night next after it,
portend as dreadful matter, or produce as direful Effects, as the greatest
darkness that to us it sustained, lasting (Mr. L. himself says it) not above a
quarter of an hour?

But that, which indeed surmounts all reason, and may not unjustly be termed
the very qintessence of folly and vanity is, that, as this grand Master-Wizard
from other his forerunners informs us, those dreadful events and effects
ensuing each Eclips, must continu in the Lunar, or that of the Moon, for as
many months, Page 20.
as the Moon in her obscuration passed hours; in the Solar, Page 42, 43.
or that of the Sun, for as many years as the Sun in his conjunction with the
Moon; (tho, the truth is, far enough asunder either from other) from his first
meeting with her to his utmost leaving of her; and that for the effects
thereof, it may be eight or nine months ere they begin to take place, and will
be most fierce about twenty months after their beginning to work; Ibid.
but then begin to abate, and can not last therefore above three years and an
half. For what an absurd thing is it to imagine, that the palpable darkness of
some present night, and of every night that passes over our heds much more,
should have some dismal effect on us, not while it is present with us, but some
month or two, yea or some twelv month after? and as little reason have we to
beleiv or conceiv, that the withdrawing of the Sun-light in part this day from
us, should many months after begin to do mischief, and cause many mischances
to befall us for a year or two after. One would in reason rather imagine, that
all the dismalnes of it (if any such matter were in it) should be over, as soon
as the interruption of those radiant rays were remooved, and the wonted light
restored: as is all the dreadfulnesse of the nightly darkness, unto those that
travel or wander in the dark by night, when the daylight once appeers: and the
man might justly be deemed not unworthy to be taken into Bedlem, who should
imagine, that the darkness, which surprised him the night before in his way,
would shrewdly endanger him, either sitting in his house, or being abroad
without doors the day following, or do him some shrewd turn, if he were not
very wary, about a fortnight or three weeks after. And I would fain hear what
color of reason can be given for the one more then for the other.

It will, it may be, be said, the one comes every day, the other but rarely,
scarce once in some years.

This is that indeed that some of Ancients have well observed, that Miracula
assiduitate vilescunt; such things, Aug. de Trinit. l. 3. c. 5, 6. and in Joan.
tr. 8.9. Greg. mer. l. 6. c. 6. and in Evang. hom. 36.
as were they duly considered, would justly be deemed to be as strange and
admirable as any miracle whatsoever; yet in regard of the freqencie of them ar
little regarded and lightly past over. It was not without just cause and good
ground deemed a strange matter and a miracle, that the Sun at one time for some
hours should stand still, Josh. 10.12, 13. and again that at another time for
some degrees it should go back, Esaias 38.8. yet if it be well weighed and duly
considered, it is a far greater and much more admirable thing, that the same
Sun should for so many thousand years together keep a constant course and
certain tenor of continued and unwaried motion, save when by a superior
overruling power it was for some short space of time a piece of a day only,
once or twice interrupted. Yea it is much more admirable, that within the space
of twenty four hours it should every day make up its diurnal circuit, then
that for a few hours it should sometime either go back or stand still: the one
is in its own nature simply considered of more difficulty then the other, tho
the other seem the stranger, because it so seldom came to pas. It was in its
own nature, as we said before of the Eclips, a work admirable, that the Sun did
rise and set, at his du set and wonted time, either the day before, or the day
after his stay at the one time, his retrograde motion at the others, then that
for so small an interval he stopped and stayed his usual progres in either. But
the difference is between the case there and here, that there both the stay and
the regres were contrary to the natural course by God established in the
creature, and reqired therefore an extraordinary power and work for the
effecting of either, the daily circuit being according to the constant set
course by God in nature established: whereas in the present case, the
interception of the Sun-light in whole by night, in part more or les by day in
the Eclips, as we usually term the one, and may as well and as truly term the
other, tho not so properly either, come both alike according to a constant
course by God in nature established, Vid. Senec. qaest. not. l. 7. c. 1.
tho the one more freqently the other more rarely, which makes us regard the
one more then the other. And yet we read not, tho the work there was at either
time extraordinary and supernatural, that the Suns either standing still or
going back, did produce any remarkable effect, either the year ensuing or the
next after it. Only for the present, the one gave Gods people opportunity for
pursuit of their adversaries, the other sealed to Ezekias the certainty of the
performance of Gods promise concerning his recovery; that which any other sign
he had made choice of, and God had pleased to give way to, might as well as
that have done. But here nothing comes to pas but by an ordinary course in
nature established: and it is therefore on all hands confessed and agreed, that
by rules of art built upon natural grounds, it may as certainly be foreknown
and foretold at what time or times such and such Eclipses will fall out for many
years ensuing, as it may be known and told at what time the Sun will rise and
set the next day: and why the one then being of the like nature with the other,
should have any stranger effects then the other, we desire to hear or see some
sound reason rendered.

Nor let this profound Artist think we will be put off here as ignorant
animals, Page 23.
with telling us, that we blame Astrology, because it is beyond our capacity;
whose error he therefore pitieth, because grounded rather on malice and
ignorance, then on any sound enqirie. But we shall entreat him, tho we come
never so far short of him for matter of skill in this his profound Art, not to
repute us mere bruits or irrational creatures. So much reason yet we have, as
to reqire a reason of him and his Accomplices, before we engage our belief to his
or their dictates.

And whereas he says, it is out of mere malice and ignorance that men oppose
him and his felow-wizards herein; we shall, I hope, all things being well
weighed, make it to appeer, that it is out of mere ignorance of the true nature
of these Eclipses, that makes people so much admire them, and give credit to
their predictions of them, and that some of those men themselves that delude men
with vain conceits and frighting fancies about them, have in effect themselves
acknowledged as much. Some instances from ancient Story will sufficiently show
that to be true which I say. About the time that Socrates lived at Athens was
Archelaus King of Macedonie; who upon an Eclips of the Sun, that fell out in
his reign, caused his Courtgates to be shut, and his sons head to be shaven; as
in great dangers and distresses, or greifs and calamities was wont to be done.
and whence, says Seneca, who relates it, proceeded all this dread, but from
his gros ignorance of the nature of the creatures? Sen. de benef. l. 5. c. 6.
for had he had Socrates with him, whom he invited to repair to him, but for
some considerations refused so to do, he would, says my Author, have drawn him
out of that corner or covert, wherein for fear he had hid himself, and bad him
be of good cheer, informing him that it was no defection of the Sun, but a
passage of the Moon, that keeping a lower way, came between it and the earth,
and so hid the body of the Sun from our sight; that those two celestial bodies
would by the swifter motion of the one be soon severed again, and that light of
the Sun restored to the Earth, which the intervention of the Moon, in manner of
a cloud, had suspended for a time. Which last clause of his, does well intimate
that which is indeed most true; to wit, that as great darkness for sun-light is
often produced by thick clouds and misty fogs as by any Eclips, and as much
dismalnes and danger conseqently in the one as in the other.

But because some may moov qestion, whether Socrates his skill would have
prevailed so far with Archelaus, as to reduce him so perplexed and amazed to a
settled posture of mind again, tho it be apparent that his ignorance had cast
him into that fit of fear, we will pas on to another instance. Plut. in Pericl.
Pericles that brave, both valiant and prudent, Commander at Athens, was a
disciple of Anaxagoras, by those of his times styled (...), the Mind-man; and
that, either (says Plutarch) for his singular perspicacitie in enqirie into
the secrets of Nature; or for that he asscribed the disposition of the Universe,
neither to fa^e, nor to fortune, as some others, but to a pure and sincere or
single Mind, that is, to a Deity. Now by this his Teachers instruction, was
Pericles his Scholar, thoroughly furnished (you hear Plutarchs report still)
with the Science of the sublime and celestial creatures. for being naturally of
an excellent piercing wit, he improoved it exceedingly in the study of natural
Philosophy by the help of his Master Anaxagoras; whose Physical reasons, being
as of a nimble wit, so of a qeint and ready tongue also, he was wont on every
occasion to be opening unto others, to free them from such superstitious
conceits, as concerning those celestial creatures they were usually possessed
with. This Pericles then going out sometime upon a military expedition, just as
he was setting foot into his Galley, the rest of the Fleet being also ready to
set forth, there fell out a Solar Eclips; whereat when he perceived the Pilote
of his Galley to be astonished, and the whole company frighted with the darkness
ensuing, he cast his cloak over the Pilots face and eyes, and then demanded of
him, Whether any hard matter had befallen him so muffled, or such as might
presage some grievous disaster, that were like to betide him. Which the Pilot
denying* And what difference, qoth he, is there between this and that, save
that there that which intercepts the light and makes it so dark, is a body
larger then my cloak? Thus the ignorance of the true natural cause of the Eclips
cast the Pilot and his company into that fear; from which the right
understanding thereof kept Pericles free, and by him also freed them. Yet such
is the fury and obstinacy of superstition backed with error and ignorance, that
the rude multitude at Athens, being a popular State, would have had Anaxagoras
condemned as an Atheist, for discovering the true nature of such occurrents unto
them, and were like to have carried it against him, had not Pericles opposed
it, and protected his Teacher.

To this of Pericles we shall add from the same Author two other instances, in
two likewise military Commanders, near about the same times, but men of diverse
dispositions, and accordingly of diverse carriages, with no les diverse event.
The one of them was Nicias, Plut. in Nic. Thucyd. l. 7.
who being sent from Athens with some Forces into Sicilie to assist one party
of the Ilanders (for the Island was divided into factions) against the other, at
first prevailed much and was very successeful in his designs; but after the
access of some Spartan forces, those of the Island deserting him, and timely
supplies failing, he and his were both by Sea and Land so beset, that there
seemed no way to escape but by a clancular flight* this when they were now
addressing themselves unto and had fitted all things for it, Thucyd. and Plut.
ibid. Plin. l. 2. c. 12.
a Lunar Eclips came in the way: Whereupon Nicias a man of himself timorous and
superstitious, being misled by such wizards as he had then about him, who
(contrary to the wonted opinion of others of that profession, that, as
Autoclides reports of them, confined the dismal effects of such occurrents but
to two or three days at most) enlarged the danger and disastrous events of
them to a months time at least, would not be persuaded so much as to entertain
any deliberation concerning stay or flight, until the full Moon came about
again; but in a fond manner sat still so long idling and trifling out the time
in superstitious rites, until the enemy having gotten further head and strength
by new supplies, had so closely environed and overpowred him and his forces,
that no way or means were now left for escape, and prooved the utter
destruction both of him and them. all which mischief and misery had with no
great difficulty (says mine Author) ben prevented, Plut. Nic.
had Anaxagoras his doctrine of the nature of such Eclipses ben then commonly
known, or had Stilbides an inward acqaintance of Nicias, and one well seen in
those sciences, that died not long before that accident, ben then surviving,
who by enforming him aright of the nature of the matter, might both have freed
him from his superstitious fear, and advised him better then his fond Wizards
did, to make use of the darkness by the Eclips produced for a speedy and more
advantageous departure by stelth, wherein (says Philochorus) he might by that
event have been furthered.

The other Instance is of Dio, who setting out from Zant with forces against
the Tyranne Dionysius, Plut. in Dion.
was nothing at all troubled, either he or his company with a like Lunar
Eclipse that then fell out; but launched out undauntedly, put over into
Sicilie, there landed his forces, surprised Syracusa, and drove out the
Tyranne. and what was it, think ye, that kept Dio and his folowers from that
terror and dread that surprised Nicias and his associates upon the self same
occasion? Plutark tells you. It was, says he, Dices familiarity with Plato, who
had aright informed him of the true cause of such occurrents, whose fame and
note also, having received it from Socrates, gained generally more credit to
his doctrine in such matters, then Anaxagoras before him could attain; who
therefore durst not open his judgment therein save to some special friends,
such as Pericles was. yet true it is withal, that to stay the minds of such
among them as might not be wholly free from such frivolous superstitions, one
Miltas, that took upon him to be no mean Wisard, calling the company together,
told them, that that defection of the Moon did portend the deficiency of some
great illustrious person, such an one as Dionysius.

Nor were either Cornelius Scipio created General of all the Roman Forces, or
Aemylius Regillus made Commander of their Fleet, Live. l. 37.
discouraged or disheartened at all by a Solar Eclips, that fell out just at the
time of their setting out against that great Antiochus the Asian King, but went
on cheerfully, esteeming it as in truth it was, and had as good success
against Antiochus, Polyb. l. 5.
as had Dio against Dionysius: whereas the Galls entertained by Attalus King
of Pergamus against Acheus, by a Lunar Eclips, because they deemed it
prodigious, were so frighted, when they were now on their way, that they would
not stir a foot further, but would needs return home.

To these of Dio and Miltas, we shall subjoyn another Story, that does yet more
fully lay open the wicked slight of these Wizards, against their own conscience
concealing the truth, and devising fables and fictions to delude people withal
at their pleasure, as in that Miltas in part appeered. The very night before
Alexander was to join battle with Darius, about the first watch fell out a Lunar
Eclips* this struck a great terror into Alexanders Soldiers. Hereupon he sends
for those of his Egyptian Wizards, whom he deemed most skilful in the Sideral
science. Curt. l. 4. c. 10.
Now they, says Curtius mine Author, tho they knew well enough, that the
celestial orbs and bodies kept constantly their set courses, and that the Moon
fails of her light, when she is surprised with the shadow of the Earth
lightning full upon her from the Sun being in direct opposition unto her; Yet
the reason hereof so well known unto them, they would not have the common people
made acqainted with; that would make them, understanding that it came in a
natural course only, to have their art in less repute of foretelling future
events by it; but as the Persian Magitians had before told Xerxes marching
against Greece upon a Solar Eclips, Herodot. l. 7.
that the Persians were under the Moon, the Greeks under the Sun; and the
Eclips of the Sun therefore did foreshew the defection of the Greeks Cities and
States to him; so these Egyptian Wizards tell Alexander, that the Sun was the
Greeks, and the Moon the Persians Star; and the Moon eclipsed therefore did
foreshew some great overthrow and slaughter of that Nation; withal telling many
Stories of great defeats that had befaln the Persian forces upon such Eclipses*
and this being divulged abroad in the Camp, put a great deal of life and
courage again into Alexanders Soldiers, that were before much dampt and even
ded on the nest. And tho Alexander himself, as having learned it from his Master
Aristotle, might understand as much concerning the general nature of Eclipses,
as those Egyptian Wizards knew; yet was he as willing to entertain these their
frivolous fancies so well fitted to his affairs, as the tale of Jupiters
companying with his mother Olympias in the similitude of a Serpent; Plut. Alex.
Curt. l. 4. c. 7.
and the Sorceresses flatteries at the Libyan Oracle, whether by an unskilful
slip or a wilful mistake, styling him (...), Joves Son, and refusing to
acknowledge Philip his Father, which tho he knew right well to be no other then
mere fictions, and among the Grecians a people of better apprehension, and his
own countrymen, that were better acqainted with his breeding, he were more
sparing of venting ought concerning his divine Offspring, and made but a jest
of it, when he showed his friends and favorites the blood that came from him in
fight, and asked Plut. idem apophth. and de fort. Alex. Vid. Laert. Anaxarch.
whether it were such as the Gods shed; and told them an other time of (...).
Plut. Sympos. l. 8. c. 1.
two things that gave in evidence against his Deity; yet with those barbarous
Nations whom he desired to subdu, he was willing to have such frivolous
fictions and groundles conceits go for current. But as these Gypsy Wizards
fitted their presages of this Eclipse unto Alexanders designs and desires; so
the Persian Magitians might as well with a wet finger, have framed the very self
same accident to Darius his affairs, as those other to Xerxes his intentions
and enterprises, and it may be that some of them so did, by telling him, that
the Persians were under the tutelage of the Sun, whom they adored as their
chief God, by the name of Mithras or Mitras; (for both come to one) and that
the Greeks and Macedonians were under the Moon, on the face whereof coming in
opposition to it the Sun darted the shadow of the Earth, that produced that
darkness; whereby was portended, that the Persians should darken the luster of
the Macedonians that came to invade them, by giving them some great and
remarkable defeat, and as good ground might Darius and his forces have to
beleiv the one, as Alexander and his folowers, or Xerxes before him, to give
credit to the other. But thus ye may see, that it is peoples ignorance of the
natural cause and course of such occurrents, (which those cunning Gypsies
therefore were so careful to keep from them) that makes men entertain such fond
conceits of these Eclipses, and to give heed to such tales as our Stargazers
and Figure-casters tell them concerning the same.

Dio lib. 60.
That which Claudius the Roman Emperor, tho a man otherwise of no deep reach,
yet not unwisely foreseeing; having understood from some Mathematicians, that
in the fifth year of his reign there would an Eclips of the Sun fall out on the
first of August, which was his birthday; lest the people prone to superstitious
conceits should make some misconstruction of it, and persons il-affected take
occasion thereby to raise some tumults, and cause some disturbance in the
State, he caused the same by a public instrument to be foreshewed, together
with a declaration of the natural cause of it, and by that means qieted the
peoples minds, and prevented such mischief as might otherwise have ensued. And
this piece of policy, if not prompted and put upon by some other of better
brains then his own, he might well have learned from the prudent and provident
practice of Sulpitius Gallus; Live. lib. 44.
who being Captain of a troop under Paulus Aemylius in the Roman expedition
against Perseus King of Macedonie, by the skill he had in Astronomy
foreknowing, that the Moon would be eclipsed the night before the battle was to
be fought, at such an hour, and for such a space of time, acqainted his
General first with it, and by his appointment the whole army called together
for that purpose, withal enforming them of the true cause of it, that they might
not deem it as a prodigy, no more then the full, or the wane, or the change of
the Moon, or the rising and setting, either of it or the Sun, coming in a
constant course of nature, as well the one as the other, and being such therefore
as might no les certainly be both foreknown and foretold. This thus disclosed
to them before hand, nothing troubled them, when it came, but made them much
admire the man (as he justly deserved) for his skill* and he is noted indeed to
have been the first man, Plin. l. 2. c. 12.
that divulged this mystery among the Romans; and as Pliny reports of him,
afterward wrote a large volume, wherein he gave a just account of all the
Eclipses, that should ensu for six hundred years, particularly and precisely
designing in each year, the month, day and hour in which they should fall
out; the occurrences of the several succeeding years and ages from time to time
giving attestation thereunto. The Roman Soldiery therefore aright
understanding the matter, were not moved at all with the sight of that which
they had warning of before, but undauntedly and cheerfully addressed themselves
to encounter with the enemy the day following; Live. ibid. Plut. Aemyl.
whereas the Macedonian Souldierie reputing it a prodigy of il-presage, filled
their whole camp with scrichings and howlings all the while that the Moon was
in her defection, until she recovered her light again. Perseus sure wanted
some of Alexanders Magitians to tell his Soldiers, that the Macedonians were
under the tutelage of the Sun, and the Romans of the Moon, because those of
their Gentry did wear the figure of the Moon on their rich shoes; Plut.
problem. Romans qaest. 76.
and the Macedonian forces therefore should have the better of the Romans. But
the event would have disproved them: for Perseus his forces were the next day
totally routed, and the King himself captived.

Yea but, says Mr. Lilie, from Peucer, certain it is, Page 23.
that people in all ages have accounted these Eclipses very unluckie things,
and men's minds have been much therewith terrified; that which by these very
relations, may some say, does also evidently appeer.

I answer; No mervail. for inusitata perturbant* M. Sen. contr. l. 4.
any strange thing, tho coming in a natural and ordinary way, yet to people
ignorant thereof, because unusual and uncouth, is wont to occasion much trouble
and misdoubt. these Eclipses more especially, in regard of a twofold Error,
wherewith concerning such occurrents the minds of the multitude mostly were
mightily prepossessed.

First they held, as our Wizards bear selie people in hand, that they were
prodigious, and portended therefore much evil, as murders and massacres, and
seditions and insurrections, and deaths of great Potentates, and the like
mischeifs and miseries. Whereas it is apparent they are nothing les, have
nothing prodigious at all in them. For what is a prodigy, but some thing that
comes to pass besides, beyond, above, or against the course of nature? as it
was a prodigy, that the Sun was so darkened at our Savior Christ's passion, the
Moon being then not in the change, but at the full, not in conjunction with the
Sun, but in opposition to it: such a darkning of the Sun, as some deem that to
have been, Calvis. Chronol.
that Herodote reports to have fallen out at Xerxes his passing over into Europe;
since that the time, say they, will not admit such an obscuration by any
ordinary Eclips, as that seems to have been; or such as the Egyptian los of
daylight was for three days together, Exodus 10.22, 23. neither is it likely,
that that constant for three whole hours darkness or defection of Sun-light,
extended any further then than the land of Judea, as that Egyptian three entire
days deprivation of daylight, reached not unto Goshen where the Hebrews
inhabited: and our last Version therefore well renders it, over the whole land,
Math. 27.45. For as for that Story of Denise the Areopagites seeing it at
Athens, the Author has been branded long since for a counterfeit; and Eusebius
his relation of an Eclips about that time out of one Phlegon that lived in the
Emperor Adrians days, is ambiguous. But these were indeed prodigies, neither of
them according to the ordinary course of nature. Whereas these Eclipses, as
Sulpitius well reasoned* cannot be prodigious, because they come just according
to the natural and ordinary course of those creatures. Yea it might very justly
be deemed prodigious, should it fall out otherwise, that either those two
Luminaries should not meet in their set times, or that the Sun-light should not
at all be intercepted, Macrob. in Somn. Scip. l. 1. ^. 20.
when the opacous body of the Moon in its du course should come between the Sun
and us; or that the shadow of the Earth should not darken the Moon, when the
Sun and it come in direct opposition, the main bulk of the Earth being then
interposed between them.

Again Prodigies cannot without special Revelation by any grounds of Reason or
rules of Art be certainly foretold* whereas these Eclipses, as ye heard before,
even for hundreds of years may. It was therefore a gros, tho a common, error,
in ignorant people, to deem these things prodigies, when as indeed they an
nothing less.

Moreover they were possessed with a most absurd and ridiculous, or stupendous
conceit, that the Luminaries themselves were in pain, and with grievous pangs
much vexed and troubled: and that either from evil spirits that haunted and
held them for the time, or by the powrful spells of professed witches, Plin. l.
2. c. 12. L^v. l. 26. Plut. Aemyl. Ovid. fab. l. 7. Macrob. Somn. Scip. l. 1.
c. 15.
and pretended wizards: and to help and releiv them therefore in their present
disturbance and distress, they were wont all the time that the Eclips lasted,
to keep a whooping and halowing, howting and showting, and blowing of horns,
and ringing of bells, tinckling of pans, and beating on basins, to scare away
those evil sprites that did in such manner disturb and molest them. Whence that
of the Satyrist, Juven. Sat. 6.
concerning a talkative woman, full of tongue and loud language, that she alone
without all that ado was able to succor the Moon in her laboring condition,
as if she were in such cases as a woman, that had hard labor, in travel. And so
far ar superstitious conceits prevalent, when they have once taken in this
kind, and practices accordingly continued and confirmed by custom, that the
Roman Souldierie under Paulus Aemylius, tho by Sulpitius aright informed of
the nature of the Eclips, as was before related, did not now dread it, as
ominous, yet says Plutarch, after the wonted guise, they kept a tinckling with
such bras as they had in their armor and utensils, (...), to fetch the Moon
again, as if she had been in a swoon. Yea there wanted not among the number of
professed Christians those, of the weaker sex especially, that were taken and
tainted with these fooleries. Whereas the truth is, to speak properly, in the
one of these, to wit, the Solar, there is no Eclips, Sen. ep 92.
that is, defection, or deficiency of light at all in the Sun it self; it is as
full of light every whit then, as when it shines forth brightest without let at
noonday; the light is only restrained in part for a short time from our
sight; as the Moon in the change, has never a whit the less light, tho it
appeer not to us, then when she is at the full; or as a candle enclosed in a
dark Lanthorn, has as much light in it self, and burns as clear, as it does,
when it is shifted into one* that is every way* transparent: in the other, to
wit, the Lunar, which may more truly and properly be termed an Eclips, the
light of the Moon indeed, which it receivs from the Sun, is either in part or
whole for the time impaired: Plin. l. 2. c. 9.
but the body of the Moon is no more the wors for that want of Light for a
while, then is the one half of the Earth for the utter want of it all the night
long. for there is the same reason and cause of either. the night is nothing
else but the shadow of the Earth; Macrob. in Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 10.
and the Lunar Eclips nothing else but the same shadow lighting at length upon
the body of the Moon. for whether it reach higher to the next Star above, may
be some doubt; Kepler de Mere. in Sol. Ambr. hom. 82.
tho that also have been observed coming between the Sun and us to cause a
seeming spot in it. And Ambrose therefore at Milain, when upon the hearing of
such an hideous noise upon such an occasion by the women there made, and
demanding what the matter was, it was told him, that by their showtings they
eased the Moon being in labor, and helped to heal her with their outcries; he
returned them this censure, that the globe of the Moon was then troubled with
sprites and spel's, when their brains were disturbed, and their eyes dazeled
either with dotage or with drink. It is not out of ignorance therefore that men
renounce and oppose these frivolous conceits concerning the dismal events and
effects of such Eclipses. but it is rather out of ignorance and want of du
consideration of the true causes and grounds of them, that men entertain such
groundles, frivolous and superstitious conceits of them, and do hearken to and
heed those that delude them with such fictions and fancies: which people
therefore have the less regarded, the better they came to be acqainted with
the du course of the creature, and attained a right understanding of the true
state of those celestial bodies at such times, as they seemed to suffer such
strange things, as they suffered, not in themselves, but in their adle brains
only.

But I should desire to have mine ignorance a little yet further informed, how
it should come to pas, that so dreadful and direful a prodigy as they make
these Eclipses to be, should portend and presage much good unto any. For Mr.
Lilie tells us concerning the former Lunar Eclips, that because the Moon and
Mercury ar in aerie signs, Page 19.
and in a trine aspect, he hopes it will not displease the Presbytery, (for at
them he is still girding, and they are the only enemies to the present State)
if he say, that our State ar promised to be Victors against the Dutch, French,
Swede, or Dane or any people of Germany, from whom we may have cause to fear
any hostility or action of war by sea or land. and therefore says he, Let no
man's heart fail him: Page 18.
for so far as God does manifest himself in this natural way of Judicature by
his creatures the Stars, we need not to fear the Dutch. and again, Page 19.
We constitute Venus ruler of the place eclipsed (ye see what power these men
have to constitute regiments and rulers in heaven: such presumptuous and
blasphemous mouths God in his du time will stop, and that with fire and
brimstone, if by timely repentance it be not prevented* but, We constitute
(says M. L.) Venus ruler, and Venus in Taurus (a fit place for her) applying
to a trine of Jupiter; (another wanton deity like her self: and what of all
this?) therefore were not the murder of our English cryeng unto God for
vengeance, the Irish might begin to be happy: but thrice happy will all those
English be, who shall adventure their estates and persons into Ireland; (Oh,
Sir, why do not you then so your self, with all speed and without delay, that
you may be thrice happy with one of the first? if you beleiv at least your own
words to be true) this Eclips promising the English all happiness, under so
prudent and vigilant a Lord Deputy, and such provident Commissioners. these,
it seems, he found in the Signs too; tho in which of them he tells us not: but
he can tell us what shall be done by the site of the Stars, in the heavens,
when he sees but what is done with us here upon earth. Again, of the Solar
Eclipse; Page 25.
The English Nation have Aries the Ascendent of England: and therefore as often
as any memorable Eclips does therein happen, God does thereby acqaint us (for
this holy man, ye may be sure, and the Magitians his Masters, as holy, I hope,
as himself, ar men of Gods privy Counsel) what he entendeth toward us near
upon those times for good or for evil. and this assuredly, and grounded upon
the experience of twenty generations of men. Oh but, Sir, this is a very
slippery prediction; and such as leaves us in great ambiguity; since that by it
as well much evil, as much good may betide us: as also it leaves your self a
very wide gap or starting hole, whereat you may easily wind your self out as
you list, as the matter shall fall out, either the one way or the other. no
Delphik Oracle, or Delian Wizard, or Pythian demoniak, or Dodonean Sorceres,
could ever have given a wiser and warier answer, or a more certain and
undoubted resolution; it shall either go well or ill with the English Nation.
Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Sat. 5.
Just like that of the Satyrists Tiresias, qicqid dicam avt erit, avt non.
whatsoever I say, shall either be or not be; shall proov either true, or false;
shall either fall out well or ill. and no mervail if such predictions as these
have the undeniable, yea the unqestionable experience of not twen^y alone, but
of twenty times twenty generations of men, yea of as many ages as have passed
since Horace his days, or Tiresias his time, or Noah's flood, or from the
beginning of the World.

But notwithstanding all this ambiguity, M. L. can resolv you, (by what other
Art I know not: for the Signs by his own confession, which he confirms also
afterward, by the dictate of Hermes, Page 31.
a very authentical counterfeit, Author I should have said, are mutable and
convertible either to good or evil) that it shall fall out to our State, not for
evil, but for good. For better bethinking himself, Page 51.
he tells us; He is confident (he has consulted belike with some familiars
since he wrote so unadvisedly in that ambiguous dialect) the Sun in this Eclips
being in the 19. degree and 15. of Aries, that our present Common Wealth of
England shall have such honor and succes in all their agitations and
undertakings of as great concernment for the utility, benefit and happiness of
this Nation, at that sad accident of the Earl of Essex his routing, upon that
Eclips then, wherein Saturn was in the 19 degree 45. of Aries, was of sorrow
unto them who then sat at the stern, and unto all the meaner people. It seems
the Ram, who then with his horns pushed at us* now fights for us. But it may
well be doubted, or rather justly deemed, that unles our State-affaires be
managed by sage and prudent Counsels of those that should give direction at
home, and by faithful and discreet courses of those that should follow their
directions and put them in execution abroad, and both seconded and accompanied
with Gods blessing from above both at home and abroad, it is not all the
imaginary Rams horns in the heavens, nor yet the Rams horns, that blew down the
walls of Jericho, Judge. 6.4, 20. could the very same be now also had here upon
earth, that will proov any whit more available to make our proceedings succesful
and prosperous, then were the iron horns, that Zedekias made for Achab to push
the Aramites withal, 1 King. 22.11. I remember when I made abode sometime in
Essex, in house with a religious Gentlewoman Mrs. Katharine Aylof, whose
Husband had invited me over from Cambridge, to further him in his studies of
the Hebrew tongue, while the College, whereof I was to be fellow, was in
building, some wandering Gypsies came to the house, whom the servants, as the
manner of young people is, were forward and busy about, to know from them
their fortunes. which the pious Gentlewoman understanding, both rebuked them
for so doing, and was very careful to have her children kept out of the sight
of those vagrants, Not, said she, that I regard any whit what they say, whom I
deem no other then cheaters and counterfaits; but lest what they, seeing them,
should say of them, might run in my mind, and God should cause somewhat spoken
by them, to befall them, thereby to punish me in my children, for giving so far
forth heed unto them. So say I, if our State-Governers shall give heed to such
VVizards as these, and upon their sandy grounds and il-botomed predictions,
promise great matters to themselves, it may be just with God, to cross and
blast their designs, thereby to chastise them for harkening to and presuming
upon the flattering fictions and fables of such as he has forbidden his people
to seek to, or to be advised by in cases of this kind.

Yet if it be so, as he tells us elsewhere, Page 26.
that the Sun is the significator of Princes, Emperors and men of great
Authority, and from the Eclipses of it therefore we can expect no less then
great changes in Kingdoms, Common Wealths and great Families; what reason can
it be, why the obscuring of this Stately Planet should stoop so low, as by Mr.
Lilies reports it should, to vent all its malignity against the poor prattling
Priests, affording mean while all honorable issu and glorious successes to our
Common Wealth affairs, Page 28.
or why his deficiency should proov so prejudicial to those that have no
reference to him, rather then to those that are signified by him. But as King
James said sometime, the Laws were his, and who should expound his Laws but
himself? so the Text being their own, they deem, it seems, they may do with
their own what they will, make explications of it, and raise observations from
it, as they list, and form applications from either so framed, when they have
so done, at their own pleasure. The best is, their Text and their Glosses being
both of one stamp, we may justly credit as well the one as the other, and have
as little cause to regard or fear, as to beleiv either.

Mean while we may observe, how as the Pythian Prophetess could comply with
such Kings, States and Commanders, as repaired by her to the Devil under the
Title of Apollo for Oracles, by returning them such answers, as she knew would
well please them, and give them content; as to Philodemus a Commander, that her
God gave him leave to do what he liked; Diodor. l. 16. c. 92.
and her returns to King Philip the Macedonians demands, were so palpably and
constantly such, as might seem to conduce much to his designs, what ever they
were, that it was grown to a common byword in those times, that Pythia did
(...), or Philippise; and Zedekias with the whole troop of Baals Prophets could
prophecy to Achab, what he would have them to say, 1 King. 22. and those
counterfaits, Ananias at Jerusalem, and Achab the upstart, with another
Zedekias of the same stamp with the former, and Semajas the dream-teller at
Babylon, could sing such songs, as would please King Zedekias in the one place,
and the Jewish Captives in the other, and the people, either bond or free, in
either, Jer. 28.4. and 29.15, 21, 23, 31. so these men as apt Scholars of such
Masters, have thoroughly learned and taken out the same lesson, to comply with
State, and people, to tell what they suppose will be acceptable to either; and
from Eclipses, which they affirm to be of so direful a nature and dismal
conseqence, yet to extract matter of much felicity and succesful designation to
such States, Peoples and Persons, as they please, and whom their desire and
ambition is to please, and to work themselves into grace and favor with.

But to give further assurance, that the Effects of this Eclips shall be very
benign and favorable to the present State with us; Page 27.
howsoever he had told us before, that the Effects of the Eclipses falling in
the midheaven are more vehement, as occupieng a great part of the Sphere; and
those most wonderful, when they are in a fiery and regal sign, as this also is;
and therefore also the more vigorous, because its greatest obscurity is very
near the heart and Center of the tenth house, of all the Houses (that these
cunning Architects have erected in the Heavens) the most valide; from whence
also he infers for a certainty, that qestionles those people that are intended
to be made most sensible of this Eclipses influence, are Magistrates of the
highest rank and qalitie in every Nation of Europe, and the alterations
therefore thence proceeding, shall be so great; so glorious, so conspicuous and
apparent, that there is no Nation or people of Europe, Asia, or Africa, but
they shall stand amazed, and wonder at the eminency of them. Yet to free us
and our State from those fears, that he would affright the whole world with,
(save that America was forgotten, and so escaped his Black Book) as if England
were no member of Europe, or any part of the world formerly known, Virg. e^log.
1.
as some anciently esteemed us, he does by certain Magical Pictures and
Symbolical Images ascertain us of the truth of that, which from the influence
of this Eclips, tho so hideous to all other, yet to us very favorable, he had
formerly promised. For in the next place he tells us, Page 37.
the Ancients did represent the shape and form of the effect of an Eclips
falling out as this did, under such an ensuing Image. and then further enforms
us, Page 38.
that this Image presents (represents, I suppose he meant) the English
Commonwealth, as it will be for three years, or thereabouts (for so long and no
longer, as you heard from him before, the Effects of the Eclips last) in great
Majesty and Glory.

But let us crave leav of him, to parlie a little with him about his Pictures.
He says, The Ancients* but what Ancients he tells ut not. and I mervail not a
little, in what Antiquity he stumbled upon that Long Robe, that he presents us
with in this his Magical Imagerie. for it is observed by that learned Noble man
the Lord Howard, who has long since dealt elaborately and accurately in this
Argument, that the pretended Antiqitie of such kind of Imagerie does often bewray
its Noveltie, by those garments and garnishments, wherewith it is set out. Nor
can I find such a Vest, as we are here encountered with by Mr. L. in any of the
Greek or Latin ancient Monuments, or mention thereof in the writings of any of
our Critiks or Antiqaries, that have made diligent search into the wonted garb
of either.

And I have, as I conceiv, very just cause to doubt, whether such a Garment, as
his picture here gives us, were in fashion among the old Britons in the time of
his great grandfather Merlin, whose name he so much affects, and bears, by
himself assumed, as one either of his natural or adopted sons (which honor and
title, whither way of the two he lay claim to it, none, that I know, need or
will envy him) or in the days before him of the Incubus, of whom they say he
was begotten, and endued him, it seems, with such prophetical skill, as from
the Satyrist ye heard Tiresias of old had, and M. L. succeeds him in, as his
rightful heir, and a genuine bird of that kind. But it may well be, as some
other would have it, that that Incubus, of which his Ancester Merlin was bred,
was no other then such an one, as our old Poet Chaucer in his Canterbury Tales
says in his days were so rise and ready at hand in most places, that for loose
creatures, such as belike Merlins mother was, no other Incubus then such then
needed. Whether of the two it were, our new Merlin, if he fetch his pedigree
from him, in whose name, it seems, he glories, will thereby proov himself no
better then a brat descended of a spurious issu and a bastardly brood. And
howsoever these businesses were then carried concerning his Progeniters
breeding or birth, Mr. L. will hardly enduce any man to beleiv, that those
British Ancients, used to go in our Lawyers or Judges gowns, such as this Long
Robe comes nearest to, or did wear Roses upon their shoes. These his Ancients
therefore must of necessity be of a lower date, of a later Edition, some old
Magitians of some younger times. But we know the true, and truly ancient byword
of Poets and Painters, Horat. art. poet.
that they have always had the privilege and liberty, or leave and license at
least, to pen and paint what themselves pleased. and herein we may well unto them
adjoyn Witches and VVizards, that take liberty to themselves, to tell people
what tales and lies they list, and what they think will please and content them
for the present*

But methinks, Mr. L. here much forgot himself, and did not remember the old
rule, that says, Oportet mendacem esse memorem. It behooves a lier to have a
good memory; that his relations may not jar. Page 28.
For not long before he told us, that this Eclipse does manifest great
affliction, that shall happen unto all those of the Long Robe. that which there
also to make the more remarkable, he put, the Long Robe, in a different
character from the rest, and to manifest his mind more fully and plainly, that
no man might mistake him, he adds, viz. Lawyers, Civilians, Clergy men, or
Divines. Whereas here he presents us with the picture of a Man in a Long Robe,
in the posture or gesture of one that stands pleading at the bar: which he is
pleased to make an Emblem of the great Majesty and Glory, that this Eclipse
for this three years day has entailed upon our State: at the expiration of
which term of time it may chance to wait until such another Eclipse come
again. But how Mr. Lilies fancies came thus to alter, unles it were that he
took a nap between the one and the other, and in his second sleep had a new
dream; or that his head was so full of his imaginary rams horns, (for on the ram
ascendent, or rampant, if you will, it is still that he runs) that it caused his
wild notions, arietare, as the Latins speak, that is, to run full but, as rams,
or tups, use to do, one against another in his brains.

But leaving him to part these his repugnant fancies, and to make them agree as
he shall see good, let us pas to his next picture; (for with pictures it is no
new thing with him to plie us) of that he tells us, Page 38.
that Joannes Angelus (a Bavarian Wizard, of as good credit in this kind as
himself) represents the tenth degree of Aries (the Ram, that so variously
affects his thoughts) wherein this Eclipse falls out to be, by a Soldier riding
a Bull, with its horn in his one hand, and his spur on its side, and a spare
horse led by him with his other hand* for so he deciphers it. And tho his
VVizard by his Motto added to expres the meaning of his thus riding, say, Homo
malitiosus erit. This man so riding will be a malicious man. which yet to
mitigate, Mr. L. in his marginal Gloss expounds, Some will account him so. and
may he not well be so accounted, that by fraud, deceit, war and what not? (ye
have Mr. Lilies own words) attains Dominion and Sovereignty? for such an one
himself acknowledges to be specified. Notwithstanding all this, M. L. tells us,
(and ye may observe how he and his Autors agree like Harp and harow, as they
say; or rather, how they can turn their Tables and their Tales which way they
please) that this picture presents the State of England after a few years. (how
many, think we, can it possibly be, when the force and efficacy of this
ramming and ramping Eclipse can not extend it self beyond the term of three
years?) but in, or after those few, or very few years, what shall it be? viz.
the Soldier tilling the ground, his arms laid aside: a peaceable time: yet
the Soldier ever prepared.

I hope I may be so bold here, as to qestion Mr. L. his skill a little in
Latin. I will not presume to tell Mr. L. as a Divine of good note sometime
told a Bishops Chanceller, twiting him with want of skill in the Law, that he
had in his time forgotten more Law then his Worship ever had. but this I shall
say, that tho I have lost much Latin through long disuse and short memory, yet
I have so much of it still leaft, that I may make bold to tell M. L. that he
understood not his own Autors Latin, when he translated those words, Homo
coopertus capite galea, cum penna strutii, tavrum eqitans, etc. A Soldier have
his head covered with an helmet; riding a Bull, with the Pen or qil of an
he-sparow. Should I, think ye, do amiss* if I should give Mr. L. here his own
words, Qi Bavium non odit, let him read, or rake in, this puddle of nonsense?
But letting pass his dismembring and dislocation of his felow-Wizards words; I
shall only demand of him in what Dictionarie he ever found Strutius to be
Latin for a Cock-sparow, or an he-sparow, as he renders it. or where ever he
saw the pen or qil of a sparow, he or she, cock or hen, on a Soldiers helmet,
or in a Soldiers hat or head. His Rider, or Thomas, had he consulted them,
could have informed him, that not strutius indeed, as his Author the Bavarian,
after Isidore, barbarously writes it, but Struthius, or Struthio rather, in
Latin was an Estridge or an Ostridge. Pers. 2.2.
for I will not charge Mr. L. as guilty of so much lerning, as to mind or
understand, what passer marinus in Plautus means. and tho he had advised with
neither, yet the picture it self might have sufficiently informed him, that
penna strutii was not by his Author intended to signify an he Sparowes pen or
qil, but an Estridges feather such as soldiers and Cavaliers use to furnish
and garnish their Crests with.

But to let his Latin lerning pass, till we come to compile some new
Glossarie, and touch a little upon his Emblematical skill: I remember, when I was
a Schoolboy, after the affront and defeat given Monsieur Francis Alanson the
French Kings brother at Antwerp, which he attempted to surprise, that there was
a Picture drawn by some shrewd unhappy head, wherein the Netherlands were
represented as a Cow, because abounding in milk and butter, which King Philip
rid and spurd, as the Cavalier does here the Bull, the Prince of Orange milked,
an old woman Qeen Elisabeth fed with a lock of hay, so much as might keep her
in life, and the French Monsieur pulling by the tail, she all to bespattred
with her filth. Now whether this Soldier, or Cavalier riding an ox or a bull,
with his spur on its side, might not rather intimate, that the Cavalier or
Trooper, the war continuing, should necessarily vex the poor husbandman,
resembled by the Ox that helps to til the ground, by qartering upon him, and
with his horse treading down his gras and his corn; fit as well, at least, with
the type, as that far fetched explication and application that this our Wizard
makes of it, so many miles wide of his Autors acknowledged exposition, I dare
permit to the judgment of any one, that has not captived his senses to assent
unto and assert whatsoever our Wizard shall say.

But, that he may not wholly desert his fellow Wizard, and yet put us in hope of
much good hereafter, I know not when, toward us, he tells us, that tho
according to the right intention of his Author, this Malicious Man, or Malignant
Cavalier, Man or State be it, shall acqire Dominion and Sovereignty by fraud and
blood, as before* yet, Page 39, 40.
because the third face of the Ram is Venus hers, which represents subtlety,
mildness, plays, (a very comfortable prophecy for the poor Players, that
they shall come to be in reqest again) joyfulnesse, cleernesse; therefore the
government, albeit so gotten as before, shall be ordered with sweetness, by
subtlety, mercy, affability, etc. and this, he says, you may observe in the
Type en^uing. whether one of his own framing, or fitted to his hand by some
other, he says not. but it is of a Gentlewoman, sitting crosse-legd, barefoot
and barelegd, strumpet-wise, fingring a lute, as the manner is, they say, in
some places, where such are allowed, to invite customers to them. now he tells
us withal, that this picture seems to promise a cessation of all taxes, (as
those of the levelling party promised, when they were up in arms) and all
things governed by love. You see what a luckie presage it is, when Aries and
Venus meet, when a beautiful harlot is lodged in the sign of the Ram. and from
what manner of Deities we must expect the peace and prosperity of our present
Government, by the doctrine of these figure-casters and figure-drawers. Oh but
when, trow we, may some loose people say, will these Halcyon, or Venerean days
rather appeer? for there is good hope given us by the moral of the type, or the
tale, that Stage Plays and Stews may then come in again: for Venus sure is as
well president and patronnesse of the one as of the other. Or others better
affected; When shall all things be settled in peace and love with us? Herein he
gives us but cold comfort, such as my self especially, that are going out of the
world, and can not look or hope to live long in it. for he tells us, that this
new Sovereignty or manner of Government (so gotten as ye heard before) shall
continu in somewhat a rigid posture, but in much Majesty and austeritie, until
almost 1663. at which time all sharpnes and bitterness will be laid aside, and
matters ruled mildly. the Levellers with Mr. Lilies help, whereof more
hereafter, will then have freed us from all payments, as well of Taxes as
Tithes, and laid us all alike eaven, as corn cut down, and eqalised by the
harvest man's hand.

He had told us, as you heard before, that the efficacy of no Eclipse could
last above three years. and yet the harsh effects of this Eclips are like to
hold out thrice three year and upward, ten year at least. But to what end do we
make wast of precious time in survey of this man's fantastical imagerie, and
discovery of his gross and palpable contradictions? De Consens. Evang. l. 1.
c. 10.
As Augustine said sometime, that they deserved to be deceived, that sought to
learn Christ, not by reading of written books, but by gazing on painted walls:
so say I of Mr. Lilies images, they well deserve to be deluded, that think to
find truth in such figments and fancies as these.

One qestion yet more I would propound to Mr. L. whether these Eclipses do
foreshew only, or effect also such things as he is pleased to ascribe to them.
For in this point he seems somewhat various. One while telling us, Page 22, 23.
that when Astrolologers speak of the virtu and influence of the heavenly
bodies, they rarely, I say, never, (says he) affirm, they act or do such a
thing, but freqently that they signify such or such a thing: and Ficinus that
excellent learned Priest says, that many things are foretold by means of the
heavenly bodies, as signs, not as causes; whose opinion (he says) he esteems
more of then a thousand of our own Priests, who blame Astrology because it is
above their capacity. and in his New come out Ephemeris; We say not, Page 4, 5.
(as some ridiculous Divines affirm) the Configurations to be the only
immediate causes (here is another manner of qalification then was in the former
assertion: for an efficient may act or do, tho neither immediately, nor alone)
but we say, that they only in a natural way signify, or are the forerunners
of such and such things: as by a distempered pulse, or irregular diet the
Physician does safely and infallibly conclude, that the party must needs be
near to a sickness. And yet a little after, What tumults and seditions all over
the world did the effects of this Eclipse stir up? Page 24.
how great qarrels did these Eclipses sow the seeds of? what horrid wars did
they produce? and again, The Eclipses of the Luminaries operate by their
influences upon Cities, Provinces and Kingdoms: and, Page 26.
Page 27.
Those Eclipses do most terribly manifest their effects, which fall to be in
the heart of heaven. and, The greatest Eclipses produce the greatest Effects.
Page 28.


And do we not need some Oedipus to arreed and assoil us these riddles? They do
not act or do ought, but signify only, and yet they operate and effect. not
unlike some old Wives verdict of pepper, that it is hot in the mouth, but cold
in the stomach, hot in operation, but cold in working. Yea they signify only
in a natural way, as irregular diet does a disease at hand and is not that the
procuring or producing cause of the disease? whereas these he says are signs
and no causes. or as a distempered pulse argues an approaching sickness: so
the distempers belike of the Stars in the sky, argu some distempers in men's
minds here on earth: and all this they do in a natural way, and yet have no
power to act or do ought at all: And whether of the two is now ridiculous, the
Divines that relate what he and his accomplices avow, tho not it may be in those
very terms that he reports them, or this our Wizard, that being ashamed of, and
loath to own his own tenants, because he is unable to defend them, shuffels and
cuts, as you see, and lisps and jabbers, and says and unsays in a most selie,
pitiful, ridiculous, stupide and self-contradicting manner.

Page 23, 24.
But his Peucer, whom he cites and relieth much upon, yea more (it seems) then
upon his learned Priest, (for he insists much more upon him) is clear enough and
downright in the point. Out of him I shall only allege one assertion,
peremptory enough, profane and impious more then enough, whereby you may take
a taste of the rest of his discourse. his words are these, de Astrolog. fol.
396. fac. 1. Tam certum est, Martis cum Venere congressum gignere natural
salaces, qam certum est ciere Venerem pharmaca (...) aut (...). It is, says
he, as certain that Mars coupling with Venus does beget lascivious or
leacherous natures, as it is certain, that such medicines as either increase or
provoke seed, do stir up lust. A most unsavourie and unworthy speech to come
out of any professed Christian man's mouth. Mars and Venus, what are they? what
were they? the one a lascivious, tho warlike, gallant; the other, a beautiful,
but most notorious, strumpet. and how crept, or climbed these two up into
heaven; that they are come to have, De Consens. Evang. l. 1. c. 23.
or to be Stars there? Augustine shall tell you, as many other of the
counterfeit Deities did. Historica Veritas falsorum Deorum sepulcra ostendit in
terra; poetica vanitas sidera eorum non figit sed fingit in coelo. Historical
verity, says he, shows the sepulkers of their false Gods here on earth;
Poetical vanity fixes not indeed, but faineth their Stars in heaven. The Poets
fictions coined them deities; and the Idolatrous Wizards to please the people
that worshipped them, assigned them such Stars wherein they might be
worshipped, as they pleased. Now because these Stars are by our Star-masters
assigned to such worthy wanton Deities, therefore when they two meet, (tho
being many thousand miles asunder, and had they never come nearer the one to
the other, while they lived here on earth, the lame Blacksmith should not have
needed to be jealous of his fair wife in regard of this lusty yonker, nor to
beat his brains about contriving and forging of snares to entangle and take
them together) but yet when they do now meet and couple, tho at such a
distance, they breed. tho I do not remember to have read of any issu they had,
albeit, it seems, they met full often, and lived loosely together, while they
abode here upon earth. but in heaven belike they breed. and whom or what do
they breed? forsooth they breed those, that were before bred by their parents,
but are then born, when they are in such a conjunction, so many miles asunder
as was before said; and by that their new breeding of them, make them wanton
creatures like themselves. And this, says Peucer, they do as certainly as some
medicines will make men lustful. But I demand here, who endued those Stars with
this lascivious qalification, or gave them this lustful efficacy? For I
suppose no good Christian will say, that wicked paynims, people or poets, by
assigning of a Star to any idolized creature, can impart any power or efficacy
unto it. And I might well say here, with that Noble Lord; Lord H. Howard of
pretend. Prophecies.
Would not the Heathen smile, might they suddenly revive, to see their Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury not only marshalled in Heaven, but also made
Autors of health and sickness, wealth and poverty, with diverse other such like
accidents as it pleases God to send either for reward or punishment. But to
say, that God at the creation conferred such faculties upon any Stars, that
some of them should breed men and women lascivious, as this which they call
Venus, some other of them theevish, as that which they term Mercury, because
Mercury was a cunning knave and a sly theif, is very impious and blasphemous,
and is not far from making God the Author of man's sin, by enduing the Stars with
such an efficacious power, as cannot be avoided by them, to work them into a
sinful disposition and strong inclination unto the perpetrating of such
wickedness. for, as for such medicines, as he speaks of, that may so work upon
the body as to provoke lust, no man need to take, unless he list himself; nor
do men take them to that end, but such as are lasciviously minded and lustfully
affected already; whereas here, according to these men's grounds, it being not
in any man's choice under what Sign he will be bred or born, he is by that Planet
necessitated by an unavoidable force unto such a sinful disposition of spirit.
And I would gladly demand of Peucer, whether there be any such medicines, or
simples, that will make a man theevish, as well as lascivious. For according to
his principles there must be the like reason of the rest, that one Star should
make men theevish, another women whorish, a third joined with that second make
men and women lascivious and lecherous. and God of purpose must needs create
them so to do, since that in the creating of them, he endowed them with a
faculty thus to work necessarily and unavoidably upon the Sons and Daughters
of Adam, that should be bred and born under them. that which, as it is most
impious and blasphemous; so no les absurd and ridiculous is that which in the
same discourse not far before he affirms, Fol. 384 fac. 1.
that there is no doubt (for he is very peremptory in what he asserts) but that
which is said in Genesis, they shall be for Signs to you, does principally
belong to Eclipses. that is, according to these men's meaning, in a senseless
and with it self inconsistent sense, God made those two great Lights, the Sun
and the Moon by their Eclipses coming by a natural work in an ordinary set
course, to be prodigies or signs above and beyond the natural and ordinary
course of the creature; and created them on purpose, even in the time of man's
innocence, for this end especially and principally to be presages of direful
events. Nor is that of any other nature, Ibid. fac. 2.
which there he subjoyns, that we have now a days far oftener and more direful
Eclipses, then in ancient times were seen. as if the Heavens were in another
course now, then they held in times past: like the tale that the Egyptian
Priests told Herodote, In Euterp.
that within the compass of time, whereof they had records, the Sun had altered
his course, I remember not how often, from West to East, and from East to West
again.

But to leav Peucer, and return to Mr. Lilie again, whether of the two he shall
please to pitch upon, I shall demand of him, who told him, or whence he knows,
that God has appointed these Eclipses, being such occurrents as come in a
constant natural course, to have such significations, or operations, as he
would bear us in hand.

Neither let him think here to stop our mouths with the instance of the
Rainbow, which yet in his margin he fathers on one Causinus a Jesuit, and in
his context he makes way too with an Introduction of nonsense in these words;
Page 22.
Shall we then say, or be so innocent of the heavenly ordinances, as to deny
this great Luminarie some influence upon humane and mundane affairs, or to be
so stupid, as to think when this light is obscured from us, (if he mean,
withdrawn from us, is it not so every night?) that there is nothing thereby
signified unto mortal men? Sint in signa and tempora. God created the two
Lights, or Sun and Moon for signs and seasons. And what is that at all to your
purpose? But let us hear him out, tho we know not well, nor he himself* it may
be* neither, what it is that he would say, when he ch^rges us with innocence, a
grievous either defect, or default; unless his meaning be that we are no
better then such selie creatures, as men commonly call Innocents. Ibid.
Who doubts (says he, and Mr. Causine, it seems, with him) that the Rainbow is
natural? and yet God has appointed it the presage or forerunner of fair
weather to be at hand. so an Eclipse, without qestion, (for it is these men's
guise to be very peremptory) the world being troubled by the defect of the
Luminaries, Sun or Moon, (how more then in every cloudie day, or every dark
night?) is ever attended, as by experience we know, with diseases, sad
accidents, as concomitants of it.

Sir, all this blustering wind shakes no corn at all with us: it is our
stupidity, it may be, that makes us like stones.

1. Your Rainbow instance nothing availes you.

1. Its natural indeed, but comes not in any constant course, as Eclipses do,
and cannot therefore be certainly foretold, as they may.

2. That God has appointed it to be a sign of fair weather at hand; is most
untru, in plain English, a gros ly, and a charging of God to have assigned it
to be a sign of that which usually it is not. it is a sign rather of rain and
storms not seldom at hand; which being sometime forewarned of by it, tho I have
put spurs to my horse, and mended my pace to prevent, I have not ben able to
escape, but ben wet to the skin, ere I could get shelter. It is therefore
reckoned up by Vid. Ara^um in Phaenom. and Theon. Schol. Virgil. Georg. l. 1.
Plin. hist. not. l. 2. c. 59. and l. 18. c. 35. Sen. qaest. not. l. 1. c. 6.
Plaut. Curcul. 1.2.
Autors, who entreat of that subject, among such signs as usually give warning
of rain and showers approaching, a double one especially. whence also the
epithets given it of arcus Horat. art. poet.
pluvius, the rainie, and Tibul. l. ^. c. 4.
imbrifer* the showrie, or shower bringing bow. And you wrong your Author the
Jesuit, as you did an other of them before, him but for want of understanding
his Latin, this to make him speak what you please. Your Author says
serenitatis rediturae, that serenitie shall returm, but he tells you not when;
much les does he say, of fair weather at hand.

3. God made the Rainbow a sign and a solemn one of the Promise or Covenant,
that with Noa he made in behalf of the whole world, that he would never drown
the whole world again. And yet, Plin. l. 2. c. 59.
says Pliny well, Arcus vocamus extra miraculum freq^^^s, and extra ostentum.
nam ne pluvios qidem aut serenos dies, cum fide portendunt. Rainbows as we call
them, ar freqent, without miracle, without presage, for they do not certainly
foreshew so much as either serene or rainie days. But Sr. show the like
record, where God assigned Eclipses to foreshew or effect such sad matters as
you say, as we know and can show, that he has designed the Rainbow to
ascertain of no second Deluge, and we will lay our hands on our mouths, as
having no ground herein to gainsay you: which unles you can do, your reason
from the Rainbow is not worth a rotten Raisin.

Mean while, Sr. do not conceiv us to be such selie animals, as to be born down
with the bare names, of Hermes, Hali Rodoan* Baranzanus, Ptolomie, Plotinus,
Proclus, Rigel, Origan, Cardan, etc. the whole rabble of them, that say thus
and thus. their authority is in these matters with us of as much weight as your
own, both as light as a feather, or a little dry thistle down. this is all but
as we use to say, Ask my fellow, whether I be a theif. We expect other records
to assure us of Gods appointments and designments in matters of this nature.
And here Sr. I shall be so bold as to mind you again of your former assertion,
which you had no list to take notice of, when you were raking in that puddle
(as you are pleased to entitle it) of nonsense; to wit, where to justify the
warrantablenesse of your practice, you affirm, that The good Angels in former
ages at first by personal conference acqainted the sons of Men with this
learning of the Stars, which you profes and practice: which Holy men, living
many years, in a purer air, where they curiously observed the Planets and
their motions, brought this art (to wit, of fortune telling, such as in these
your rapsodies and rabblements you maintain) to some maturitie, without the
least hint of superstition. These are your own words out of your own works
which you cannot deny. And now I renew my challenge again. Either make these
your words good out of some Authentic Record; or let the World hereby know and
take notice, that you are a manifest Imposter, a palpable Lier, a fraudulent
coiner and broacher of fictions and fables, to procure credit to your cheating
practices; one that fills peoples heds with frivolous tales, to make them
beleiv, that your fortune-telling by the Stars, was at first taught men by good
Angels, when you are not able to produce any sound proof for what herein you
assert, but put it off only (after your wonted manner of dealing with others,
when they deal with your freehold, and touch you to the qick) that the Author is
a Wiseaker, and his Annotation a puddle of nonsense.

2. In the next place you appeal to Observation and Experience. We know, say
you, by experience, that Eclipses are ever attended with diseases, sad
accidents, as concomitants of them.

But, 1. What year almost passes over our heds without some one Eclips or
other? Or what year goes away without diseases and sad accidents? and must the
Eclipses therefore bring them?

2. If these sad accidents be the concomitants of them, how is it that you tell
us elsewhere, that this great Eclipse threatens no danger to men or cattle that
be abroad in it? Page 49.
yea that it may effect nothing at all til many months after? Page 43.
directly contrary to what out of Peucer you before also told us, Page 23.
that they presage miseries to be near at hand, or to follow presently after
these Eclipses. tho it is true, that not Peucer, but your self so speak; for you
put in, as your manner is, more then he says.

3. If sad accidents ever attend Eclipses, Page 24.
how comes it to pass that this terrible Eclipse, the like whereunto has not
ben in this age, Page 51.
should portend so much honor and success to our present Commonwealth, in all
their undertakings, as shall make them most glorious; as this our Wizard ye
heard before told us, and says he is confident of it. and again where he gives
us in his Imagerie work of it, such as was before showed, he says, Page 37.
If he shall further expatiate his mind concerning the greatness of this
Eclipse, he beleives he shall go very near to hit the mark aright in what he
shall there deliver. And yet compare what concerning the present State in
relation to this Eclipse, the man says in these places, with what in his New
Ephemeris for the next year, Page 9, 10.
he speaks at large as confidently the other way, and that with threatening
terms too; If after this opposition of Saturn and Jupiter (who, think we,
Christened those two Stars thus?) this Authority, under which we groan, the
body of its fabrik standing upon a very tottering foundation, shall enforce us
to some new or illegal Assesment, or by way of raising money (the coherence of
his context here is beyond my skill) upon any pretense whatsoever, except
against the slovenly Dutch; I am confident, we of the Commonaltie, joining with
the Souldierie, shall assume so much liberty to our selves, as to choose and
elect such Members hereafter, etc. and we shall endevor so strictly to call unto
account each Member of this Parliament, who have fingred out Treasure, that we
shall leav many of them as naked as when they came out of their Mothers womb.
If any, I say, shall collate these his former and latter predictions together,
he will, I suppose, easily guess, tho he be no Wizard, that the man, since he
writ the former, is (for some cause, whatsoever it be) fallen out with the
State; and genus irritabile vatum; ^lac. l. 2. ep. 2.
these cole-Prophets are a very waspish generation, they have as well shrewd
stings in their tails, to strike those that displease them, as honey of
glossings and flatteries in their mouths, to sooth up and stroke those, whom
they desire to fawn upon and to please: Adv. Marc. l. 4. c. 51.
for, habent and vespae favos suos; wasps have their honey-combs as well as
bees, says Tertullian. But it may justly be suspected, there is a pad in the
straw, there is some mystery in it, which shalow capacities, such as he says
our poor Priests are, are not able to understand, that this terra filius, this
son of the earth, dare prate in so high a strain, like brag in the byword, the
little parlor puppie, that he and the hounds would pull down the deer. I will
not stand to dispute with him, whether the Celestial Edicts, or the Oracles
that he tells us he reads in the Book of Heaven, go with such Ifs and Ands,
or no. But suppose some poor Presbyterian, or some prick-eard Priest, as he
scoffingly styles them, had writ ought in this manner; We the Presbytery, or
Ministry, calling into us the Communalty, and joining with the Souldierie will
call you Parliament men to an account, unless you take better courses then some
of you have done: would not this man, think ye, have set up his bristles, and
ben ready to cry out, that here these seditious Priests and Presbyterians show
themselves in their colors, and seek to domineer, not over Gentry and Commonalty
only, but over the Parliament it self? But these Wizards it seems, are
privileged persons: it is safer for them to lay all level before tnem, then
for some poor Presbyter but to peep over the fence. In his Preface to his spik
and span New Ephemeris, he makes his Entrance with a grievous complaint of a
multitude of scandalous libels, two dozen of vinegar Pamphlets, and two dozen
and an half, thirty at least of thumping Presbyterian Priests, that belcht out
somewhat of nonsense against Anglicus and Astrology. (for they write and
speak all nonsense, that offer to deal with him and his freehold) and to
encite the Parliament to pass an Act for the suppressing of such irregular
Libellers, he tells them, he holds it no dishonor for himself to be abused in
print, having seen the worthy Members of Parliament served in the same kind.
(the base cheater, that makes Fortune-telling his trade, would fain go in
eqipage with those of the highest rank in the present State) and that unless
they do so (that is, unless they stop men's mouths, and stay men's pens from
further preaching or printing ought against him and his trade) if the State
suffer more in this kind, they may thank themselves for it. Surely the Man
accounts himself a privileged person; he has belike gotten a patent; not ad
imprimendum, but ad traducendum and conviciandum solum; he may by virtu of his
privilege, in the basest satirical and sarcastical terms tax and traduce whom
he list, the main body of Christ's Ministry among us, under the style of
Prick-eard Priests, Pulpit-Praters, Black-coats, and the like, and yet no man
may presume to give him a cross word, or to return him his own again. and the
truth is, his Merlins are not so much Astrological predictions, as Satyrs and
Pasqils, to play upon whom he pleases; the Ministry especially, which in the
most of them he makes ever and anon the main burden of his song, because his
hate and spite is most against them. But may not some other indifferent and
wel-minded make qestion, (tho with such puzzeling qestions Mr. L. professes
that he desires not to be troubled) whether it may not be with as good ground
said; M. L. with a full and foul mouth belcheth out much base language at large
against the main body of Christ's Ministry among us, such as in no Christian
State would be endured, and is so bold as to present his scurrilous and
satirical rabblements of this nature to the Body of the State; wherein to
incite the people to refuse to pay Tithes to their Ministers, to which by the
Laws of the Land unrepealed, they have as good right, as any in the State to
any just debt or rents whatsoever; withal enforming them, that God himself tells
them by the late Eclipse and other aspects, that it is his will, and he has so
disposed of it, that they be inclined thereunto: and this since that the State
has seemed to connive at, if he shall proceed in like manner to be as bold and
saucie with them, and to encite people likewise to refuse to pay any more
taxes, and shall read them a lesson out of the same Book of God, that he has in
his providence so disposed it, and by Mr. L. one of his Prophets, who is well
read in this Book, which few of those that are falsely called Divines,
understand ought at all in, does acqaint them with it, that if such taxes be
continued, they shall join with the Souldierie, and make head against those that
do impose them; if, I say, he shall so deal also with them, or rather, for that
he has already so dealt with them, they may thank themselves, that have hitherto
suffered him in this manner to rant and rail upon those, whom they ought by
their power and place to protect against such professed enemies and traducers
of those, whom God has taken so near to himself.

But here Mr. L. forsooth thinks he can easily salve all that he has said in
his base and scurrilous language against the Ministry. for in his Preface to
his late Merlin, he desires his Reader to be so civil (so sottish, he should
have said) as when he finds his pen somewhat sharp against the Priests, to
understand, that he owes unto the modest and learned Divine, all love, all
reverence; (a debt indeed, that whether he will or no, he shall ever ow, tho he
never intend to pay) nor in the least measure intends the whole Ministry,
(tho he yoke Monkerie and Ministry in express terms together) but only such
as rant daily against Astrology, (that is the noli me tangere, the subject
that must not be dealt with) disturb our Parliament, (so they must all needs do,
that discover the mysteries of his conie-catching trade) unjustly oppress the
Countryman with Tithes, (as Landlords do by reqiring their rent) and molest all
Parishes, where they come, with pride and Lordlinesse. (Lord Bishops belike all
the poor Presbyters ar now become) A very fair and specious Gloss; wherein yet
this Merlins brat (for I hope he will not refuse to own him as his Ancester,
whose name he bears) writes after a far more eminent Copy. King James a Prince
of more policy then puissance, while he was yet King of Scotland, penned, or
owned, at least, a Book entitled (...); which whosoever shall advisedly read, tho
of no very sharp eyesight or deep reach, yet may easily discry a Design carried
all along in it, to ingratiate himself, with the Popish side, by commending the
fidelity of his Mothers servants, as to her, so to himself, with the Prelatical
party, by giving them hope of continuing that government that he should find
here established, with the Common people, by allowing them their May-games and
the like sports: only he had bitterly expressed himself in high terms against
the poor Puritans, whom he least feared, and deemed generally disaffected by
those other three parties. Howbeit, when the time drew near of Qeen Elisabeths
departure, that his qiet coming in might not meet with any disturbance from
that party, he prefixed a Preface to his Book then reprinted, wherein on his
Honor he protests, that by the name of Puritans he meant, not all Preachers
in general, or others, that misliked the Ceremonies as badges of Popery, and
the Episcopacie as smelling of a Papal Supremacy, but did eqally love the
learned and grave on either side; intended only such brainsick and heddy
Preachers, that leaned too much to their own d^eams, contemned all authority,
counted all profane that would not swear to all their fantasies, etc. but
whether his carriage toward such of that side, who went under that name, when
he came to the Crown here, argued such an eqal affection and love to them, I
had rather any other should consider, then my self say. And this our Wizard may
as well hope to walk abroad stark naked, or with a net only cast over him,
unseen, as with such a sorry disguise as this is, to cast such a mist before
men's eyes, to keep them from taking notice, whom he intends and strikes at, his
own expressions and professions, as has formerly been manifested, making it to
appeer as clearly and conspicuously as the light at Noon day.

5. What he tells us so peremptorily, We know, I say, by experience* that
Eclipses are ever so attended. by what experience I would fain know, can this
man come to know, that they are ever so attended? He tells us elsewhere indeed,
Page 25.
that for any memorable Eclipse that falls out in the Ram, the event either for
good or bad (of which clause before) is assuredly grounded upon the experience
of twenty generations of men. which, tho it come far short of his Ever here,
yet is far more then he by his own knowledge and experience is able to reach
unto. And does not Pliny tell us, Plin. l. 28. c. 2.
that the Heathen Wizards did as confidently avow the constant experience of
800 years and upward for their divinations by the flight of fowls, and bowels
of beasts, and the efficacy of their magical spells and charms? and we may well
beleiv, that Mr. L. can as well proov the one, as they the other, and give as
much credit therefore to the one as to the other. But his Ever here goes far
beyond either, and may well come home to that tempus immensum, that immensitie
of time, that time before all time, Diodor. l. 2. c. 31.
that reckoning of 472000 years before Alexanders days, that the Chaldee
Wisards affirmed their observations of the course of the Stars to have been
continued; yea or that account, tho falling far short of that, of 40000 years,
Cic. de Divinat. l. 2.
that the pleader for the Chaldeans, that is the Astrologers, their judgment of
genitures in Tullie, would raise up their experience unto, affirming it to be
reported, that the Babylonians had constantly made observation thereof in the
birth of all children born with them for so many thousands of years, before any
indeed were bred or born. Unto which vain and hyperbolical assertion Tullie
wisely makes answer, (tho he had not that notice of the time of the worlds
creation that we have) that that report was not possible to be justified and
made good by any sound proof. and to the Argument in general concerning their
Astrologers taken from the constant experience of Events, he returns them a
flat denial. Perspicuum est multa vera evadere. qid qod multo plura falsa? qota
enim qaeque res evenit praedicta ab istis? Cic. ibid.
It is apparent, says he, you will say, that many of their predictions have
prooved true. but how many more false? for how small a number of things by these
men foretold has fallen out accordingly as they foretold? And Favorine a great
Philosopher is so bold as to say, Gell. N. A. l. 14. c. 1.
Prae eis qae mentiuntur, pars ea non fit millesima; that not one of a thousand
things they foretell, prooves true. That which also one Weidner a learned
Physician says of the VVisards of these times, that take upon them to foretell
future events by the conjunctions of the Planets, as Kepler reports him, De
nov. Stel. serp. c. 27.
not dissenting therein from him, Vera loqi casu, mendacia mill locu^os. that
they light by hap-hazard upon a few truths now and then, amongst a thousand
lies they tell. Contr. Astrol. l. 2. c. 2. and
And as that Noble Earl of Mirandula has left upon record, a particular
Register of not a few of his near kindred, allies, and familiar acquaintance,
in whom these predictions, tho grounded upon such calculations and
applications, had of his knowledge failed: Cic. ubi sup.
So Tullie likewise gives many instances hereof, out of his own observation in
these words, Qid plura? qotidie refelluntur: What needs many words? they are by
experience daily refuted. How many things do I remember to have been told by
them to Pompey? how many to Crassus? how many to Caesar? among other things,
that no one of them, but should live til he were old; should die at home in his
own house, and that with much honor. none of all which fell out accordingly. Vt
mihi permirum videatur, qenqam extare, qi etiamnunc credat eis, qorum edicta
videat re and eventis refelli. Insomuch, says he, that to me it seems very
wonderful, that there should any be extant, that would still beleiv those, whom
by the things themselves and the events he may see daily refuted. Hence the
Tragik -- (...); Evrip. Iph. Avl.

(...).
He defines a Wizard, one that tells a few truths among many lies. and by Seneca
it appeers, In Apocoloc.
that in his time it was grown to a common byword, Patere Mathematicos
aliqando verum dicere. Give Mathematicians leav sometime to tell true. Yea
concerning this particular of Eclipses which directly crosses Mr. Lilies ever,
Alstedius observes, Experientiam testari, Encyclopaed. uranos: cop. par. 2. c.
12.
visis Eclipsibus, saepe fertilissimos, saluberrimos, and exoptatissimos
subsecutos annos. that Experience testifies (and gives in evidence against him)
that after such Eclipses seen, have ensued most fertile, most wholesome, most
desirable years.

But will ye know the reason, why so many cross events, and such as these men
have foretold, came to be upon record? Diodore the Sicilian Historiographer will
tell you, Diod. l. 32. Phot. Cod. 24.
as by Photius he is related, who speaking of one Eunus, deemed in his days a
great Wizard, Among many things, says he, that he gave out, some few fell out
accordingly, and, dum vera qisque sedulo notat, falsa nemo coarguit, while
every one observed sedulously what prooved true, no man regarded to convince him
of those things that proved false, the man in short time grew into great
credit. In fewer words take it from the Lord Verulame, Essay 35.
Men mark how they hit, mark not how they miss. that which that judicious
Statesman notes to be a principal cause, that has procured to their
predictions some grace and credit. but his Verdict of them he passes in these
terms, My judgment is, that they ought all to be despised, and to serve but for
winter talk by the fire side. Tho, when I say despised, I mean it as for
belief. for otherwise the spreading or publishing of them is in no sort to be
despised. for they have done much mischief. (that which Agrippa a great
Statesman also minded Augustus of) and I see many severe Laws made to
suppress them, Dio lib. 54.
that which Mr. Calvin also has observed.

Admon de Astrol.
Lastly when diseases and sad accidents come after Eclipses, must it needs
follow that they are produced by them? That we have had after this last Solar
Eclips a scorching summer and a sickly Autumn, must this great Eclips therefore
needs be the cause of it? how many hot summers and sickly Autumns, yea
pestilential both, without any such remarkable Eclips ushering them in? have
we not almost every year toward the fall of the leaf, new diseases, as they
call them? yea, if as this our Wisard enformes us, Page 43.
the effect of an Eclips may not begin to take place, or the Eclips to produce
its work until eight months after, how can it be certainly said, that ought
which since that hitherto has fallen out, (to wit) from March to November)
has from this Eclipse proceeded, Page 9.
and yet we must beleiv him, that the Eclipse of the Sun, that was on the
second of October 1605. did produce that hellish Powder plot, that had been so
long before in design, and should have been put in execution the fifth of
November next following. But these men are the drivers at the plough or harrow
of their own contrivances, and can qicken or slacken the drift at their
pleasure. Mean while their sophisms are very frequent for the most part in
that fallacy of non caussa ut caussa. And their arguing from the events
ensuing after Eclipses, to prove them to be effects of those Eclipses after
which they ensued, and the Eclipses the Efficients or producers of them may well
be paralleled with the Judgment of that grave snowie-white hayred and goodly
long bearded Old man, who being demanded by Sir Thomas More sent down into
Kent, and then sitting in Commission, to make inqirie concerning the
Obstructions of Sandwich Haven, what he deemed might be the cause thereof, and
whence he deemed the thing might proceed; as conceiving by his years, and long
time of observation and experience, he might be able to say more in that matter
then most of them then there present, did to that his demand very solemnly and
seriously return this answer, that in his remembrance Tenderden parish Church
had no Steeple, neither had it had any time out of mind before, and the
passage into the haven at Sandwich was then very fair and clear; But after
the building of Tenterden Church Steeple the Haven began to be obstructed and
Choked; as then it was. Whence arose that byword of Tenterden Steeple and
goodwins sands: not unfitlie appliable to these terrible Eclipses and the
pretended Effects of them. for the Argument, will be, as valide and vigorous in
the one as in the other. Or we may well yoke our Wizards herein with our Empirik
qacksalvers, who having a set number of medicines, when they come to a Patient,
of whose malady they are ignorant, give him first one medicine, and after that
another, and then it may be a third; and if it so come to pass, that by the
strength of nature over-mastering the disease, or the matter that fed it being
wasted and spent, or by some occurrent intervening, the party come to recover,
the cure is by them ascribed to the medicine last given, and that is pricked
down with a probatum est upon it, albeit it effected nothing at all in it. and
howsoever by this course they kill more then they cure; Heraclit. ep. 2.
and where any chance to be cured, (...), as he speaks, they are cured rather
by hap hazard then by any their skill. Yet there is a register made of those
that recover, but no record kept usually of such as miscarry, and the less
regard had, or notice taken, of the one then of the other, because as one
sometime said, (...), Nicocles. Anton. melis. l. 1. c. 56.
their luckie haps the Sun shows, their mishaps the grave covers. In like
manner is it with these Wizards, whatsoever distemper in the air, or
unseasonable weather, or bad harvest, or strange malady, or great mortality,
or war, or seditions, or sad accident whatsoever falls out in a land, all is
set upon the score of the Eclipse last past, tho it cannot be showed to have
had any hand in it, and by other courses it were both procured and produced*
and when such things are by gues foretold of them, (according to the old
saying, Evrip. apud. Arrian. Alex. l. 7.

Appian. bell. civil. 2. Plut. de Pyth. Orac. and de Orac. desit. Cic. divin. l.
2.


(...).
He is the best Wisard, that gives the best gues.)
tho their predictions fail oftener, then fall out aright, and what falls out
aright, does in regard of them come to pass rather, by mere conjecture and
casualtie, then by any certain fore knowledge, or wel-grounded rules of art;
yet being observed to have fallen out so in some Eclipses that have been regarded,
that is reckoned to have proceeded from the Eclipse, that was no more thereof
guilty, then the Man in the Moon, or the thorns at his back; whereas tho never
so often it fall out otherwise, there is little notice thereof taken, and a
multitude of Eclipses pass away (as in this regard they all well may) without
any regard at all. If after this or the like Eclipse therefore, any strange
judgment should ensu, any unusual malady grow rife among us, or other dismal
event befall us, a vain thing twere to ascribe it to the Eclipses or defections
of the Lights in the sky, that cannot be showed in the nature thereof, to
portend any such event, or to produce any such effect. Well may we do rather to
call to mind and consider in such cases, what he sometime said, Sen. ep. 85.
Morbos novos novi peperere mores: and, Morbos multos fercula multa fecerunt.
that, New fangled devices bred many new diseases: and, Variety of diseases
sprang from variety of dishes. implying, that the excess and riot of the times
were the main cause of many unusual maladies, and strange diseases, that had
not formerly ben so much known, or so rife in those parts. And surely if we
shall in these days look into men's minds, or cast an ey upon men's lives and
consider, what variety of new and strange conceits, tending to impiety and
prophanenes, to loosnes and licentiousnes ar rife in the one, and what an
height of rancknes those wicked weeds springing up amain from such cursed seeds
are shot up unto in the other; and that accompanied with such a shameful degree
of shamelesnes that they do no more now, as in former times, skulk in the dark,
but dare open faced without mask or veil stalk in the streets, qasi pudeat non
esse impudentes, as he sometime said, Aug. confess. l. 2. c. 9.
as if people were grown ashamed of nothing save to seem ashamed of any thing:
we may with much better ground both from Reason and Religion, then any these
Wizards give for their assertions herein, deem the procuring and producing
cause of such evils, to consist not in defectibus and deliquiis, as they term
them, in the defect of the light in those glorious Luminaries above our heds in
the heavens, as this Fortune Tellers and his accomplices do, but in the abundance
of defection from God and goodness in men's hearts, and the boundles deluge of
delinqencie in all manner of impiety and impurity, and that joined with
impunity, (matter of dreadful and direful presage indeed) overflowing in men's
lives, that may justly seem to Extorqemus ut pereamus Sarum de provid. l. 6.
wrest and wring judgment out of Gods hand, lest Sua sibi patientia de trahit.
Tertul. de pat. c. 1.
by his longer forbearance he should wrong himself, and give wicked wretches
occasion to Psalm. 50.21. esse sui similes Deos putat. Plavt. Amph.
think, him to be like themselves, and to Mal. 3.17.
like well enugh of their detestable practices and abominable designs.

But to what purpose does this man talk to us of Antiqitie, and of Hali, and
Ptolomee, and Plotinus, and Proclus, and Albumazar, and Baranzanus, or of
Rigel, Origan, Cardan, Leovitius, Dafypodius, etc. or of long experience of
former ages, when as he vaunts of himself, as Lucretius sometime, Lucret. de
rer. not. l. 4.
with alteration of a word, Avia Signorum peragro loca nullius ante
Trita Solo.
Amids the Signs of Heaven I trace a way,
That no foot trod before me to this day. Astrolog. Predict. for. 48.49.50.

So he professes and glories, that he walks in those uncouth paths, that no
former Author had trodden in. and makes his brags, that he has begun a new
manner of Astrology, either not known to the Ancients, or omitted in their
writings.

And how can any of those Autors, be they of never so great Authority, either
ancienter or of later times, attest unto him, or he receiv any confirmation of
his Assertions from them, that are wholly silent of, and not unjustly therefore
hence deemed by him, if it be so, as he affirms it to be, utterly unacqainted
with the way that he walks in? unless they should speak by way of Prophecy,
of his new manner of Astrology, Alab. in Appar. ad Apoc.
as Alabaster says that Solomon did of that new manner of Exposition of
Scripture, that should come to light in these latter days and was revealed
unto him. Or how could there be observations taken, and experiments made by
other before him of that which before him no man (that appeers) was privy to,
until either it was of late revealed unto him, or else he stumbled into
unawares?

Howbeit to stop all our mouths as he thinks, and make us keep our wind and
pens for other purposes hereafter, he tells us he has Ficinus that excellent
learned Priest (so he styles him; and so they must needs all be, that write
ought in defense or favor of him or his art) on his side; one belike that had
dreamed somewhat of his way before; and the opinion of this man (which what it
is, and how far forth M. L. therein either closes with him or swarves for him,
has already ben showed) he says, he esteems more, then a thousand of our own
Priests, who blame Astrology because it is above their capacity.

We will not stand to qestion Ficinus his excellent lerning; he was no doubt of
much lerning for the times he lived in. Howbeit the learned of these later times
have esteemed his translations of Plato but barbarous pieces; Jul. Scal.
and some of them have pronounced them to be no other then Plato turned out of
his choice purple robes into course beggarly rags. Nor does M. L. speak much
out of him, which before ye heard: and I forbear to speak what by others he is
reported to affirm of the uncertainty of their predictions, not having his
books by me. But let Ficinus be what Mr. L. pleases. M. L. his Art, it seems,
is a very profound Mystery, such an one, as our English Priests shalow
capacity is not able to comprehend. and he closes up therefore his Discourse,
concerning the Effects of this Solar Eclipse and his predictions thereof, Page
56.
with this Motto, Qi potest capere, capiat. nor is it marvel, that his
Astrology should so far transcend their scanty comprehension, when, as you
have heard before, it consists of such new notions and strange conceptions, as
the former Masters and Professers of this Mysterious Art were altogether
unacqainted withal. And a Mystery be it. but sure enough not that Mysterium
pietatis; that Mystery of piety or godliness, that the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 3.16. rather Mysterium impietatis, a Mystery of impiety or ungodliness;
or Mysterium iniqitatis; a Mystery of iniqitie and wickedness, as the same
Apostle elsewhere, consisting of lying signs and wonders, tending to deceiv and
delude people, and by strong delusions to seduce them from the truth, and
induce them to beleiv lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 9 -- 11. Such a Mystery, as the
scarlet whore carried in her forehed, the Mother of fornications, and
witcheries, wherewith she bewitched and infatuated the inhabitants of the
earth, Rev. 17.5. Or such a Mystery, as those were, the Gentiles used in the
sacrilegious services of their counterfeit Gods* which Clemens of Alexandria in
derision of them said, In protrept.
might well be termed (...), qasi (...).i. (...), muscipulae, moustraps,
invented to take and hold fast selie people, like mice. nor indeed are these
men's mysteries any other then mere decipulae, cheating gins, contrived and set
on purpose, by cunning men, as people commonly call them, thereby to coniecatch,
selie souls, simple creatures, such as Solomon's harlot invites to her, Prove.
9.16. and by making their purses lighter to make their own pockets the heavier.

But, Sir, suppose that our English Priests were all of such shalow capacity*
were all of them such Wiseakers in regard of you Wizards, that not one of them
were able to conceiv or comprehend the abstruse secrets of your Science, is
that the only reason why they blame Astrology? Or were all those such
blockheds and du^pated Dunces, who not blamed it only, but rejected, refuted,
arraigned, and condemned it long before them? Or are they all such as in like
manner condemn it at this day? Or was it their ignorance in the fideral science
that enduced them all so to do? To look back to Antiqity, another manner of
Antiqitie then M. L. can show for his Magical Imagerie. And here not to repeat
again what was before said of Anaxagoras: we shall ad of Socrates, Memorab. l. 4^
in whose steps Plato precisely trod, only what Xenophon reports, that
concerning Astrology or Astronomy (for he uses those terms promiscuously) being
demanded his judgment, he gave his advice, that men should so far forth
exercise themselves in the study of the Stars, as to attain thereby to an exact
account of day and night, months and years; and as use might be made thereof
for journey by land, or voyage by Sea; but for further curiosities for men to
spend much time therein, he deemed not so profitable, (albeit, says Xenophon,
he were in such things not unskilful himself) partly, because it might withdraw
a man from the study of things more useful, and partly because it would not be
pleasing to the Gods, for men to be enqiring into those things, the knowledge
whereof they had concealed, De Divin. l. 2.
and reserv to themselves. And as for those that out of Platoes School succeeded
him. Eudoxus, says Tullie, one of Platoes auditors, and one for his skill in
Astrology by the judgment of the most learned without difficulty deemed the
chief in those days, was of this opinion, which he leaft also in writing, that
unto Chaldeans in their predictions and designments of men's lives from the time
of their birth there is no credit to be given. Ibid.
Panetius also (says he) a prime man among the Stoiks reports that
Archelaus, and Cassander the chiefest Astrologers of the age wherein he lived,
tho in the other parts of Astrology they excelled; yet this kind of prediction
or foretelling by the Stars they used not; and these Astrological Predictions
he himself also rejects. Ibid.
Scylax also of Halicarnasse, a familiar friend of Panetius, an excellent
Astrologer, and a chief man in the government of that City, repudiated all this
Chaldaiacal kind of prediction. Was it out of mere ignorance then that these
men gave in their verdict thus against such kind of predictions? or was it out
of any inability and incapacity to attain unto any secrets in Nature, that
these our late upstart Wizards, who profess to proceed in a natural way, have
now attained, but were then beyond those men's reach? or is it since their
times, that those good Angels, Mr. L. speaks of, have revealed these mysteries,
to such holy men as Mr. L. and the like? of their rare skill in the genuine part
of Astrology, you hear what ample testimony and by whom it is given them. and
if there be any other Eleusinian rites, or Magitian Mysteries, that these our
Wizards exercise, dealing with the Devil in the dark, I suppose had they ben
acqainted with them, being judicious men and genuine Artists, they would never
a whit have liked the better of their concealed, covert, and counterfeit art.

But come we down to lower and later times. Was Joannes Picus, that Illustrious
Count of Mirandula, such a dull pate? or was it out of mere ignorance of their
profound mysteries, that he blamed Astrology? he was for his piercing wit and
depth of judgment in most Sciences, styled in those times the Miracle of the
age he lived in. and he wrote twelve books, yet extant, against this Judicial
Astrology. of which Jerome Savanarola, (how acute and judicious a man, his
works show) gives this censure; Qi Pici Mirandulani libros de Astrologia
legerit and intellexerit, De triump. cru^ l. 4.
neque Astrologiam irriserit, dignus ipse est, qi ab omnibus derideatur. He
that having with understanding read Picus his books of Astrology, derides not
Astrology, deserves of all men to be derided himself. Or is Claudius
Salmasius, one who in these times, for his extraordinary variety of lerning, as
well deserves the Title given Picus, as either of the two Scaligers, Joseph his
Predecessor, or Julius his Father, either of whom some learned men have so
entitled, such another ignoramus in this Wizards esteem? who in his late
elaborate discourse of the Critical Days, and his Preface thereunto prefixed,
has shrewdly shaken the main foundations of their Supposititious Science; and
it may justly be hoped, will so utterly raze them, as that not only no coin,
but no rag will be leaft toward the raising and reedifying of it, when he shall
go on with his promised work in that Argument.

Mean while he has sufficiently discovered the vanity and loosnesse of their
grounds and principles, and evidently showed, how deep he has dived into these
their so much vaunted of, and highly esteemed Mysteries. Or was John Kepler,
the Emperor Rodolphs Mathematician, such a selie fellow, and of so shalow a
capacity, De Nov. Stel^ Serpent. c. 11
that he could not reach their Mysteries? who charges them as ignorant and
unskilful for the most part in regard of any exactness in the genuine part of
Astronomy, lays open at large the deepest of their Mysteries, discovers their
errors and mistakes in their own principles, that which Salmasius also often
does; yea writes as bitterly and tartly against them, as any other whosoever,
as hereafter shall be showed: and freely professes, that being urged and
importuned to write somewhat in that way, Praefat. ad li ^und.
his mind enured to Geometrical Demonstrations, considering the unsoundnesse
and qagginesse of their grounds, it fared with it as with a restive jade, or
hed-strong horse, that coming to a slow, hangs back, and cannot by any beating
or rating of his rider, be brought, to set foot into it. But to come home to
our selves; and here to pass by all other; Vid. Dr. Staughton in Felic. Novis.
Sec.
nor to recall the Lord Verulame, whom some learned have conceived to be one
specially raised up to help to bring Arts and Sciences on in this latter age
toward their perfection: and what his judgment was of these fopperies and
fooleries, ye heard before. That Noble Lord Henry Howard, after Earl of
Northhampton, was he also a mere Wiseaker, as well as all our Priests are? He
treading in the same steps which that renowned Italian Count before him had,
tho undertaking a larger subject, in his Defensative against the Poison of
supposed Prophecies, grounded either upon the Warrant and Authority, of old
painted Books, (one of Mr. Lilies engines, or gins) Expositions of Dreams,
Oracles, Revelations, Invocation of damned spirits, Judicials of Astrology, or
any pretended knowledge de futuris contingentibus, that have been the causes of
great disorder, and chiefly among the simple and unlerned people, etc. He, I
say, in that worthy Work of his, for elegancie of phrase and fluencie of
speech* mixed with great variety of lerning and reading, very delightful to any
learned reader, as he has evidently manifested how well seen and versed he was
in the writings of the grand-Masters of that Mystery, and how well acqainted
with their abstrusest Doctrines, as also Picus before him was; so he has with
that eagerness and vehemency of spirit, together with such sinewie strength
and force of reason, pursued this pretended Art of Judiciarie Astrology, that
none of its Professors or Patrones that ever I could yet hear of, have had the
heart, by any just Reply to turn face again upon him, Preface to Worlds
Catastr.
or to make head against him. And it is but a sorry Exception, for Mr. L. to tell
us, that the Gentleman was learned, but never made it less appeer then in that
discourse, intending to confute that subject, of which he knew very little, and
his book therefore was never thought worthy of answer. a very handsome and
easy put off. but any impartial learned, that shall read the discourse, will, I
doubt not, conclude, that Mr. L. for this his censure deserves, as one of his
Antagonists faith of him, to ride blind Bayard.

Hereby then it may appeer, that it is not our dull English Priests or
Presbyterians only, that out of mere ignorance and incapacity find fault with
their Astrology; but that other then they, such as for skill as well as for
their rank otherwise would have scorned to have M L. one that lives by such
cheating, and makes a trade of it, sit on the same form with them, have as
vehemently opposed it, and as deeply damned it as any of those do.

For my self, I profes not to have any great insight into these depths of
darkness, nor do I desire to pry over far into them. De Stel. Serp. c. 2.
Kepler assures me if I wast much precious time that way, I shall but bonas
horas male collocare, spend good hours to ill purpose. and M. L. himself has
much discouraged me from attempting further in this kind, and made me utterly
despair of doing ought therein with success, when in the very first of his
worthy Astrological Aphorisms, he intimates, Page 60.
that a man shall not easily give any certain Judgment in these matters,
unless he be naturally well affected to Astrology. which to this of theirs I
confess I never was. Howbeit I was sometime an unprofitable hearer of M. Henry
Brigges, when he was Mathematical Lecturer in St. John's College Cambridge, and
continued acquaintance there begun afterward with him, when I was Preacher at
Lincolns Inn, and he Reader at Gresham College, during which time repairing
now and then occasionally to him, among other discourse that passed between us,
I desired him ingenuouslie to impart to me his judgment concerning this kind of
judicial Astrology, whereunto he returned a very round and ready answer,
that he conceived it to be a mere System of groundless conceits. and as M. L.
says of Ficinus, that excellent learned Priest in M. Ls. esteem, so shall I say
of M. Brigges, that excellent learned Mathematician, not in mine alone, but in
the unanimous repute and report of persons of Prime note for Skill in those
Sciences both at home with us and abroad, I esteem the opinion of M. Brigges
more then of a thousand Lilies, and Naworths, and Bookers, and the rest of that
rank and rabble.

I shall conclude with the Verdict of M. Henry Bullinger; the rather to show
that they are not the Presbyterians only, that have an ill opinion of
Astrology, or ar ill affected thereunto: He was a Minister of no small note in
the Helveti^^ Churches, who had not in his times admitted the Presbyterian
Government, nor do, for ought I can hear or learn, to this day. His verdict,
which you may find in his Commentary on Jer. 10.2. concerning this Kind of
creatures is as sharp as short, this in plain down right terms.

Astrologos Impostorum omnium maximos; that these Astrologers ar of all
Imposters the greatest: And we may indeed say well of the trade they profess
and practice, as Tullie of that of the Sortiaries, whom he yoaks together with
the Chaldees. Tota res est inventa fallaciis, De Divin. l. 2.
aut ad qaestum, aut ad superstitionem, aut ad errorem. It consists all of
fallacies, invented, either for gain, or for superstition, or for maintenance
of some error. Nor can it choose but much sad the Spirits of those that truly
love and Sincerely fear God, to see the professed Practisers of such
Impostures, who in former times had wont to lurk and skulk in corners, like
Bats and owls, night birds, shunning the light, for fear of being called in
question, and undergoing such publik civil censures, as some of them sometime
did, should in these pretended and professed times of reformation take that
boldness to themselves, not only, as some of them, to past up papers upon
posts, therein professing to help people to goods lost again, to tell if a
servant be run away from his Master, which way he is gone, those that intend
marriage, whether their matches will be succesful, such as are bound to Sea,
whether their Voyage will be advantageous, those that have friends at Sea, or
beyond Sea, where they are and in what condition, and when they will return,
etc. and all this by the Stars (that which I since find M. Preface to England.
Prophet Merlin.
L also to profess publickelie in print) but to dedicate to the State it self,
as this man presumes to do, writings stuffed with the like stuf for the nature of
them, but soaring aloaft in an higher strain, Fortelling the fortunes of whole
Countries and Kingdoms, and endeavoring thereby to enduce, if he may, those
that have the rains of Government in their hands to Patronize these his impious
impostures, and taking upon him to direct them what courses to take in the
managing of State affairs. Whereunto he may be thought to have been the rather
encouraged, because he saw his elder Brother M. Booker, whom yet he has now
got the start of, so far forth countenanced by the State, as to be inserted
into the list of the Licencers of somewhat the like books. and in some Verses
therefore prefixed to this his Black Book he makes his Brags, that they have
leav now nudis Verbis, in naked words, or plain terms, to say that which before
save in dark riddles they durst not. and elsewhere that the Land does now begin
to abound with Astrologers, as Judea did with Soothsayers, Esaias 2.6. which made
God to forsake his people. He tells us in his late Merlin, that this is Vox
populi all over the Nation, (has he that also by the Stars? if so. why is it
not rather, Vox coeli? if not so, he is out of his element) that no good can be
expected, while Priests meddle with State Affairs, or any of the Preisthood (ye
see whom his gal is most against, the Preisthood as he terms it, that is, the
Ministry, in general) are directing and counselling the Parliament or Council
of State. But I suppose, it may much more truly be said, that it is rather the
general sense of those that are truly religious throughout the whole land, and
that this their sense is Vox Dei, being grounded upon his will revealed in his
Word, that little good success can be expected in State Affairs, if the
Governers thereof shall patronize such as these are, whose courses are so
repugnant to the rules of Gods Word, or shall advise with them, as Saul did with
the she-wizard at Endor, making use of them as Pilots, to direct them what
course to take in the steering of State affairs, in these stormy and turbulent
times. I never heard, or found it before, either in Holy or Profane Story,
unles it were in some professed enemies of Christianity, that any Prince or
State were taxed for advising with Gods Ministers, in the settling of affairs
for the publik good; but for refusing to hearken to them, and consulting with
Witches and Wizards, and Stargazers, and Fortunetellers, and Magitians and
Prognosticaters, I find diverse both in Holy Writ and other Writings reproved
and condemned, and their giving heed to such noted, both as an occasion of
their misgovernment, and a main cause of their overthrow.

Now I make no doubt, if ever this Debate with him have the luck (good or bad,
I say not) to light into his hands, whether he shall have the patience to read
it or no, he will in some one of his next Rabblements tell his Reader, that it is
nothing but an other puddle of malice and nonsense, as the former was: or if
his last breath be once breathed out that sits on his lips, when ought of his
is got abroad, as he does of Mr. Chambers, that the old worm-eaten Canon of
Windsor was killed with very grief upon such a Lesson as was returned him in
answer of his folly. for that is his usual manner of Refutation, in dealing
with all that write ought against him; as ye may see in the Entry of his late
and last Birth. Wherein he says indeed, that the good hand of God (so little
regard has he to take that dreadful name up in vain) has vindicated him from
all the calumnies and aspersions cast upon him. which how, or what way the Lord
had done, when he wrote this, is such a mystery, as for my part I must
acknowledge my self ignorant of, as well as many more beside my self. But when
he shall make it appeer unto us, that God has so vindicated him from the charge
of such things, as have been objected against him and his cheating trade, as he
vindicated his sincere servant Job sometime from the wrongful censures of his
mistaken friends, Job 42.7, 8. Esaias 50.8, 9. Jer. 20.11. Romans 8.33. Psalm. 37.6.
and his renowned Prophets Esaias and Jeremie against their adversaries and
opposites, and will one day vindicate all his Elect, all his faithful folowers,
those his Ministers and Messengers among the rest, whom this wicked wretch has
so unworthily traduced, and so undeservedly calumniated; when, I say, he shall
be able to make it appeer unto us, that God in some such or the like manner
has vindicated and cleared him from the charges commenced against him, (which
I beleiv he will then be able to do, when he shall be able to prove that some
good Angel from God taught him and his great-great-grandfather Merlin, their
pretended skill and professed trade) we shall then freely profes our selves guilty
of impiety, unless we justify him whom God has so acqited. but unles he shall
so do, we shall justly take liberty to charge him with a further impiety, in
presuming to father such an act without ground upon God, and therein abusing
his dreadful name. Mean while, how he has there vindicated himself, is as soon
there seen, as by him roundly and readily, but frivolously and ridiculously
done; to wit, to give you a taste of it, (tho enough to turn a strong stomach)
by telling his Reader only, that thirty thumping Presbyterian Priests did all
in one day in so many several Sermons (belike he hard or read them all) belch
out somewhat of Nonsense against him and his trade; that the Ghoast of John
Vicars, the Vicar of Fools came tumbling out in print for Tom dunghill: that in
104. Verses of a codled Elders, who so shall find half a line of sense, shall be
to him great Apollo, etc. that one of his adversaries has stolen almost all his
book out of Agrippa de vanitate scientiarum: (almost, we say, saves many a lie;
but I much doubt it will not this) that another steals all he has from one
Melton: a most notorious untruth, only because he has adjoined to his own
work Mr. John Miltons Figure-caster, as he has done also M. Perkins his
Prognosticater. (and he might have done well to remember that that second fellow
has sufficiently confuted the main pith both of Sr. Chr. Heydons large
discourse, and Will. Ramsies reply in defense of Dr. Holms, both which forsooth
begin with Mr. L. to draw down their black Art, not from the good Angels alone,
but in a farther fetched frivolous and groundless descent by Adam, Seth, Enosh,
from God himself:) that a third is a Homely Sermon, (Dr. Homes is the man whom
he is pleased thus to play upon) a worthless sheet or two of paper, Pref. to
Eng. Proph. Merlin.
fit to be patronized by my Lord Mayors horse. Perkins a peevish piece;
Chambers (as you heard before) an old worm-eaten Canon. the Lord Howards a work
not worth an answer. And are not these, think we, very sound Vindications and
solid refutations? enough to stop any man's mouth from gaping any more over an
ovens mouth, or over an open grave rather, that contains nothing but filthy
Carrion, and sends out nothing but vile stench. But thus you see how like the
vapouring Soldier in the Scene, as a second Pyrgopolinices, the man can with
one blast of his noisome breath blow away a whole legion of Antagonists.
Howbeit, it is a very sorry and selie conceit for him to imagine, that a little
such rifraf, or a few such scurrilous sqibs will serve to vindicate his credit,
or wipe off any the least speck or spot of those foul aspersions, that have
deservedly taken hold of him, and stick still fast by him, in the minds and
dooms of any endued not with reason and religion only, but even with civility
and common sense. As for mine own, either this or the former; howsoever he shall
think good to deal with them otherwise; I shall advise him now as a friend, that
he take heed how he make any mention, or have any word, of the good Angels he
told us were the first Teachers of his Trade. For I can assure him, there are
not a few of the mind that he is as well able to eat a whole cart-load of logs,
as to make his word good concerning those good Angels, by any sound proof or
authentic record. But their shalow capacities, it may be, are not able to reach
the vast extent of Mr. L. his abilities, or to conceiv, what great matters,
especially by the help of such his good Angels, he is able to effect. And if he
can do it, and will be pleased so far to condescend to their weakness, as to do
us the favor, to make his power herein to appeer, I do assure him on mine
honest word, that when he shall have so done, I will both solemnly recant all
that I have written against him, and by this my present handwriting oblige my
self, never to open my mouth any more to speak an ill word of him. Mean while,
if he shall find, that either by his own skill, or by any such assistance, in a
work deemed so weighty, and in other men's eyes so difficult, he is of force
sufficient, to make that his assertion good, mine instant reqest then is to
him, that it may be one with the first of his next Herculean labors, to do it,
for the maintaining of his own credit, that avers it, and the repute of his
Art, which for want of better grounds, is by him founded upon it, and the
gaining of a Proselyte, yea of many an one, I doubt not, to his Profession, if
the thing be once atcheived.

Now if it shall by any be demanded, how it comes to pass, that this
Vindication of mine Annotations came no sooner abroad, and why like Homers
Litae it lags so long after M. Ls. Ate, that has so blasted it?

To this I answer; First, as in the Entrance into it I formerly intimated, it
was long, being confined and mured up, as I still am, ere I heard ought of Mr.
Ls. snarlings at my Notes; some space of time after that, ere the Book came to
my hands; and when upon view of it, I found that for Answer to it, I was put
off to some Nameles Author, or Autors that were to come out: and yet a longer
time, ere by enqiry of friends I could come to be informed of any of them that
had appeered in print, much less to gain the sight of their works. Mean while
those that know, what the state of my family then was, partly by a grievous and
tedious malady, that having long afflicted my deer consort and faithful
yoakfelow, was then grown to an height with her; and partly through her decease
ensuing thereupon, that filled my heart with much grief, and my head with many
cares, wherewith in times past, while she enjoyed life with health and
strength, and I her, I was altogether unacqainted, will easily guess, how little
mind, so affected and distracted, I might have to mind ought of this nature.
Besides that, I had other irons in the fire, that I was to look after. I had
some Works of better use, I hope, in the Pres, both here in the City, and
elsewhere, which are now abroad: the one whereof drawing then near to the birth,
a new task unexpected, but by others much desired, that it might more
completely came forth to the light, and be the more useful, when it came out, I
cannot say, interrrupted me, in the midst of my work, but enforced me to lay it
aside, having not as yet made any great progress in it, until that were
dispatched. These remoraes either keeping off at first, or breaking off
afterward, together with mine own weakness, slacking my pace, and the want of
a Scribe that might have furthered the dispatch, as also the work it self
growing under my hand, while one thing fetches in another have much retarded
the finishing of it. And yet may it well come abroad timely enough, in regard
of the Subject Matter that this man handles in this Book, wherein he falls foul
on me and my Notes; to free men's minds from such frivolous frights and
groundles fears, as he seeks to possess them with, from the several Eclipses
that have fallen out this year, and that especially of the Sun; since that he
withal informed us, that these Eclipses begin not usually to work these their
dismal effects till eight months after, and then continu for a two or three
years, or so long as these their designers list. So that the main matter of
those falls fears, which he would affright people with, being as yet most of it
come, according to his computation, the work comes seasonably enough, if it
shall prevail with any, by the discovery of the vanity of the pretended causes
thereof, either to preserv them from entertaining such fond conceits, or to
purge them out, where they have been entertained already. And so I shall pass
from Mr. W. Lilie, to Mr. John Swan, one, it seems, of his Advocates.

THis Sermon of Mr. John Swan (a man to me otherwise utterly unknown) on Jerem.
10.2. I had not so much as once looked after, much less meddled at all with;
had I not ben advertised by Mr. Lilie, in his Preface to his Black Book
dedicated to the Common Wealth of England, dated March 10. from his Corner
house over against Strand-bridge; as some other formerly, from the three Flower
deluces near Somerset house, in the Strand. (for it concerns those that drive
his Trade, to make it known where they dwell to tice Customers to them) that the
Annotater should have ere long the judgment of abler Divines then himself, and
to better purpose on that Text. nor could I by help of friends, and their
sedulous enqirie, gain the notice, or attain the sight of any, that had, since
that time of Mr. L. his menacing prediction, published ought to that purpose
upon that Scripture, save this of Mr. Swan, on which also it was long ere I
lighted. Him therefore I deemed to be one at least, if any more uncertain,
foretold should be Mr. Ls. Advocates or Patrons, unto whom as having undertaken
the defense of him and his cause committed to them by him, against mine
Annotations on that portion of Scripture, I found my self by him there
referred. That which the rather I had cause to beleiv, because I found his
discourse concurring with a passage concerning the same Scripture by Mr. L.
related out of a Nameles Author much magnified of him, whose work yet, be it
Sermon, or Commentary, or what ever else, whether it ever saw the public
light, is to me as uncertain as what is at this day done at Rome. And if it be
so, as may most probably be deemed, it may seem, that either M.L. about that
time did by the Stars foresee, that such a Sermon on such a Text should be
preached on the 28. of March, and should afterward come out in print; or else
that Mr. Swan before that time having penned it, and destinated it to that day,
did tender a Copy of it to M. Laert. l. 2.
L. his Client, (as Lysias did an Apology to Socrates penned for him, to make
use, if he thought good at his Trial) with a purpose to dispose of it, as he
should either like or mislike it. With this Sermon of Mr. Swans therefore, and
that parcel of that other party, whom M.L. so highly extols I shall deal in this
present Discourse, as with two of M.Ls. either Patrons or Advocates made choice
of by him, to maintain him and his cause, against whatsoever in that fruitles
and sensles Annotation (as Mr. L. styles it) which I yet am not ashamed to own,
may concern either. wherein how they have either acquitted their Client, or
acquighted themselves, the seqele shall show.

In Mr. Swans Frontispice, he entertains his Reader with this Lemma, Multi
reprehendunt, pavci intelligunt. Many reprehend; few understand. Wherein he
does but sing over again his Clients old Cuckows song, so often by him chaunted
and cackled, in the self same tune, tho in a diverse tongue, that many blame
Astrology for want of capacity; and meddle with what they understand not. and
in precise terms with Mr. Preface to Eng. Prophet Merlin.
S. an Art reproved by many; understood by few. Nor make I any doubt. but that
both M. L. the Client, and M.S. his Advocate, do both hold the Annotator
without the verge of those few, that understand their Art, and are capable of
their profound Mysteries. Howbeit this scar-crow set up in the Entry (which I
deem no other then as the picture of a mastive that one is by Varro reported to
have set up over the porch of his house, with a Cave Canem, Beware the Dog,
Var. Evmenid. vid. Popin. ad eund.
under it, to fright folks from offering to open the door, or daring to enter,
shall not a whit deter me from setting foot over the threshold, to see what is
in the house. the rather for that this being a Sermon (as may seem) prepared
for, and preached unto a popular Auditorie, it contains (I presume) such matter
as the Hearers might understand: otherwise to what end was it, to reqire their
presence, trouble their ears, and tire out their patience, with treating of
that to them, which they were unable to apprehend? and if it were such as they
might understand, I hope I may, as well as some at least of his Auditors, be
able to understand what he here says.

Where first, letting pass all curious debate, about the several versions, and
the more accurate Grammar Annalysis of the Text, whereof in the Annotation
hereunto annexed enough; we shall take at present what M. Swan gives us, and we
are both agreed upon. He says aright, (for he renders a good reason for what
he says from the words of the Text) that the Prophet in these words, Be not
dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, does speak, Page 5, 6.
not of an active fear, as fear is put often for Worship, or of the worshipping
of the Stars; whereof he entreats at large in the words ensuing; but of such
a passive fear and consternation, as might arise in, and seiz on, men's minds,
Page 15.
from the apprehension of such sad, disastrous and dismal events, as might be
presaged from the motions, configurations, risings, settings, aspects,
apparitions, occultations, Eclipses, conjunctions, and the like, of the Stars,
and of such direful effects, as from their malignant influences are threatened*
even unto the subversion of States and Kingdoms; Page 18.
all which as the Chaldeans in those days took upon them thereby to foretell,
so do our Wisards also at this day; that is, in plainer terms; of fears arising
from the dictates and predictions given out by such; and conseqently, that the
Prophet speaks here, not of Idolatry, but of Astronomy, or Judiciary
Astrology.

So that by Mr. Swans graunts, we have gained thus much ground against some
other Patrons of this profession and practice, Sr. Christopher Heydon, and
Caspar Sanctius a Jesuit, who to keep off the dint of this Text truly
interpreted, which they were altogether unable otherwise to avoid, would fain
turn it the other way; which M. S. has well showed that the words will not admit.

Mr. L. therefore was not so well advised in making use of this Advocate, he
might have done much better, to have consulted with his Brother Booker, Epist.
before Worlds Catastr.
who, he says, has for so many years maintained the reputation of his Art
almost then utterly decayed by his own virtue and abilities. (sic mutuo muli.)
he could have informed him, that the genuine sense of the place was, as in some
company not long since with much confidence he is reported to have avowed, that
by the Signs of the Heaven was here meant, such figures of the Stars, as the
Heathen used to draw or carve upon trees, and did thereby Worship them* that
which would have stood Mr. L. in a little better stead, then ought that either
of his two Advocates here say.

But to leav M. Booker with his novel Interpretation, to sleep a while longer
upon it, if so be he may dream some second fancy a little more probable then
this his frivolous conceit; and return to Mr. Swan. We deny not, but willingly
embrace, what he further subjoyns, that such passive fears here spoken of drive
superstitious persons often to an adoration of the creatures, Page 6.
from whom they fear and expect such dismal events and disastrous effects* and
so Nicias, Thucyd. l. 7.
as has been already before showed, trifled out his time in superstitious and
idolatrous rites, upon an Eclips of the Moon, to avert such dismal accidents as
thereupon, by his Magitians their suggestions, he had fancied to himself* and
Alexander, as M.S. also relates, upon the like occasion, sacrificed to the Sun,
Moon, and Earth; thereby to divert that evil, which the Eclips might portend,
or rather to satisfy thereby the superstitious minds of his people, from whom
those cunning Gypsees, as Curtius observes, would by all means have concealed
the true cause and nature of that occurrent. And from this observation of M.
Swan it may well be further inferred, that such vain apprehensions of dismal
effects by Eclipses and malignant aspects of the Stars portended, as they fill
men's heds with dismaying fears; so they lead them into superstitious
conceptions that produce practices correspondent: and that consequently
Judiciaarie Astrology (at least as it was then professed and practiced by the
Chaldeans; from whom by a lineal succession it has been derived unto our
Wizards) does pave a plain and proclive path to Idolatry* and it is not
therefore without cause that our Prophet here does step immediately from the
one to the other, passing the self-same verdict of Vanity upon either. Verse. 3.

And here, I hope, it will not be deemed amiss, or out of the way, to insert
the judgment herein of a great and eminent Astronomer, or Astrologer, call him
whether of the two you please. John Kepler the Emperors Mathematician, in his
Treatise of a New Star discovered in the Foot of the Serpentarie, Chap. 14.
Impres. Pragae an. 1606. in 40.
has this passage: Most kinds of Divination among the Heathen were botomed
upon this foundation, that by Dreams, by the entrails of beasts slain for
sacrifice, by the occurrences of some creatures, by monstrous births, by
thunder and lightning, by tempestuous winds, by extraordinary inundations, by
earthqakes, by celestial prodigies, comets, and the like, the Gods were deemed
to give men answers, and the power and direction therefore of these creatures
or occurrences, whereby ought in that kind was signified, was transcribed to
those Gods, who thereby were deemed to discover their mind to men. But on the
other side, if it were made to appeer, that the motion or apparition of
creature or occurrence supposed to portend ought, did proceed from a natural
cause, so as there was no suspicion of a supernatural gubernation or direction,
they were freed from any further solicitude of mind, and composed themselves to
qietnes: unles peradventure some natural connection were found between the sign
and the thing signified, for disposal whereof there were no need of any free
and reason-using cause. From the neglect of this foundation sprung up a great
part of Astrology, or superstitious divination from the Stars. For when many
strange signs had br^d a belief, that the Gods did by such speak unto men;
unskilful persons began promiscuously to transcribe, whatsoever came to pas in
the Heavens, unto the Gods free disposal, and to make an omen of it; especially
if by the noveltie or raritie of it, it did much amaze their eyesight, as the
Eclipses of the Luminaries, and the Conjunctions of many Stares. Who if they
had at first well weighed, or duly considered, that all these things ar
brought about by a set Law, or course of Nature, then they would either have
sought in Nature a connection of these celestial occurrences with those events
that are wont to follow thereupon, or if they could have found none, they would
not have fallen into this lightness of belief. But others proceed^d to worse
matters, from foolerie to impiety. For when they saw that the motions of the
stars depended on a natural necessity, they brought in a new device; not that
should freely conform and frame the motions of the celestial bodies; but that
should in an ex^mplary way make use of their motions in framing and
administering humane affairs. Hence came those many thousands of Star-spr^tes,
(far beyond the number of Mr. Lillies seven Planetarie Angels, which from
Trithemius and Napeir he told us of: and indeed why should not the rest of the
Stars have their Rulers as well as the 7. Planets?) but m^re truly (says
Kepler) Legions of infernal Devils, unto whom this execrable Magike falsely
termed celestial, taught men to offer certain sacrifices, power out certain
prayers, keep certain feasts, light Tapers on certain Planetarie days and
hours, and wear garments of some peculiar color By this means came at length
to be averred, the Devils themselves being their fellow workmen therein, those
most foolish and ridiculous Decrees of the Astrologers concerning the Houses
and Dominations of the Planets. It were expedient at length to grow wise again.
The first inventers of these trifles were not so unskilful as we blamed those
before* impiety brought in this skill. But you Christian Astrologers ar very
children to them; when letting go the kernel, ye hang about the shell, when ye
embrace the body, leaving the soul, when without Magik ye exercise this foolish
trifling Astrology, that makes use of the Planets houses. (alone, I suppose,
he means, without making use of those Inhabitants the Star-spirits: which error
I hope, Mr. Lilly in his Novel way has reformed) well fare ye, that can so
wash a lether pilch, that it shall ta^e in no moisture. Thus he; whom the
rather I cite thus at large, partly because his works are not so obvious; and
partly because he is one, against whom that Exception will not hold, that he
blames and condemns Astrology, for want of capacity to understand it, or for
ignorance therein: as also because in this passage of his we have diverse points
hinted, that may be of much use in our future discourse and debate, as:

1. That things deemed to come besides the course of nature were usually deemed
ominous.

2. That when known to come in a set course, as eclipses and conjunctions of
Stars do, they used not to trouble any understanding man's mind.

3. That through want of skill or regard to distinguish between the one and the
other, men came to have promiscuously a like conceit of either, and to deem
Eclipses and conjunctions of Stars ominous.

4. That some hence took occasion to draw people to impiety; by making them
believ, that their were certain Spirits, or inferior Deities attending these
Stars that did by them dispose and order humane affairs; and t^ught them
therefore to worship them; the study whereof was termed celestial Magike.

5. That hence sprang that foolish and ridiculous Astrology of telling men's
Fortunes by the Planets and their houses.

And lastly, that it is as fond a thing to imagine that any man can practice
this kind of Astrology without some Magical superstition, as it is to undertake
to wash a lether pilch and not wet it: Yea that there can be no use of the one
for such ends and purposes as by them it is applied unto, unless the other
also be admitted, which is the very spirit and life of it.

But to return to Mr. Swan again: wherein he and we agree here, ye have heard:
to wit, that they should not be afraid or dismayed at the signs of Heaven, that
is, the Stars, in regard of such evil and dismal presages as the Chaldean
Astrologers from the Conjunctions, Oppositions, Motions of them, etc.
endeavored to posses their minds with.

Now the qestion is, what the reason should be, why the Prophet; or God rather
by the Prophet, would not have his people to be affrighted and dismayed at the
signs of Heaven* And here Mr. Lilies two Advocates and we part: For passing by
the reason expressed in the Text, they suggest us other reasons to ^ustle that
out. Not, says the one of them, J.S. Page 10
because they did not portend such sad matters, Page 14.
or produce such sad and dismal effects; (Take that away, Page 9.
and the very ground of their Art is clean gone) that which they have from God,
on whom his people are taught to have their trust so firmly fixed, that
whatsoever disaster the Heavens in the course of nature should at any time
threaten unto them, Pref. to An. ten.
they ought not to fear it. And says the other, The scope and drift is, that
they should not so stand in aw of them, as the Heathen that looked no higher
then the Firmament, and not knowing the God of Israel that overrules all, Ibid.
so feared them, as if there were no way to escape them. To which purpose is
also added, that the Chaldean Astrologers held, that such things came to pass
by a kind of fatality, which ours do not: and Osiander therefore says, that
Astrological Predictions are not to be condemned, if they be esteemed but as
conjectures, not as certain Prophecies.

But, first, are these things the les to be feared of Gods People, because God
has an hand in them, and they come by his appointment? for ar they not tokens
then of his wrath? and does he not then by them preach as much to the Sons of
men, and more specially to his people?

It is most true, that Augustine well observes, De Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 2. and
De Magistr. l. 1. c. 4.
that Signa verba visibilia, verba signa avdibilia. Signs ar as well visible
words, as words audible signs* and unto signs therefore is a Voice ascribed;
Exodus 4.8. and by the rod is God said to speak as well as by the word to the
understandings of those that are spiritually wise. Mic. 6.9. Jer. 9.12. When
the Lion roares, who feors not? says Amos c. 3.8. and shall God then roar from
heaven, Amos. 1.2. and men not fear, yea not exceedingly fear end be dismayed
here on earth? Psalm. 76.8.

Yea, but Gods people must not fear so much, tho others so do.

And do we not find it in Gods Book made a note of Gods children, such as fear
God, and even tremble at his word? Ezr. 10.3. Esaias, 66 2. The difference is
very observable noted in Jehoiakims time, between the Princes of Juda, that
were not yet so obstinate in evil, and the King with his Courtiers wholly
abandoned thereunto; upon the reading of those dreadful denunciations by
Jeremie delivered and compiled, by Baruc penned and published in the hearing of
either; it is said of the former, they were afraid, as well the one as the
other, as well the better as the wors sort of them; Jer. 36.16. but of the
latter it is related that they were not afraid, nor did rent their garments, as
was expected they should have done. verse. 24. And its true therefore that
Bernard says, Epist. 256.
Soli filii irae iram non timent. Its a note of a child of wrath, not to fear
Gods wrath; not to stand in aw of his Fathers Rod, not to tremble when he hears
his Father threaten, as by these signs these men say he does, or when he sees
him about to take the rod in his hand, ready therewith to lay about him. Yea
the truth is, when judgments ar by God or from God denounced and threatened,
they usually fear most, that have least cause to fear. When God threatened by a
deluge to drown the whole world, it is said. Noah feared, who was to be saved;
Heb. 11.7. but likely it is, as one of the Ancients says, that the wicked of
the world, who were thereby to be destroyed, scoffed at him and his sons that
labored with him in the building of the Ark, noted as an effect of his faith
and fear, imagining* Basil. Sell. ^rat. in No^.
and it may be telling them to their faces, that they should sooner come to see
them by toiling so drowned in their own sweat, then they to see them drowned in
such a deluge as they feared. David, a man after Gods own heart, 1. Sam. 13.14.
says to God of himself; When thou take away the wicked of the world, like
dros; tho I love thy testimonies; yet my flesh trembles for dread of thee, and
I am afraid of thy judgments. Psalm. 119.119.120. I might ad religious Josias
his vest rent and heart qailed at the hearing only of the menaces out of Gods
Book therein recorded by Moses. 2. King. 22.11, 19. But I shall with a lively
representation of a dread accompanied with a strange consternation of spirit,
as by the symptoms of it may appeer, close up this passage. Upon a dreadful
Vision of future events represented to the Prophet Habakkuk, when I heard it,
says he, My belly qaked, my lips qiverd, rottennes seized upon my bones, and
I trembled as if the ground had shook under me. Hab. 3.16. Was not this think
we, a dismaying fear? or was it not such as might well have been expressed by
the word used here in the Text? Yet neither is the Prophet reproved for this
his so great fear: nor can any man justly be condemned, if on the like occasion
he be so affected as he was.

Nor is such a measure or manner of fear, inconsistent with a firm constant
relieng upon God for a never failing stay and a gracious issu; nor does
necessarily implie or import a diffidence and distrust of Gods providence, or
promises concerning such succor and safety, or such protection and provision,
as God has by his Word engaged himself for, unto those that be his, as in
Habakkuk by his own sincere and ample profession there subjoyned, it does
evidently appeer. Verse. 18.

Neither therefore does the term here used infer any necessity of diffidence
and distrust. Page 10.
Nor ar the places fitly produced, as parallel to this, so taken as themselves
would expound it; wherein Gods people are incited not to fear death, when they
are called to give testimony to Gods cause, and to seal the truth of it with
their blood, Matthew. 10.28. There is a vast difference between death threatened
by man for our sticking close to God, and death denounced by God for our
slipping aside from God, in whole or in part* there is matter of worth, valor,
grace, honor, joy, and gloriation in the one, 2. These. 1.5. Rev. 12.11, Phil.
1.29. Act. 5.41. Phil. 2.17. Romans 5.3. matter of wrath, disgrace, shame, grief,
horror, and confusion of face and spirit in the other. 2. Sam. 24.1. 1. Sam.
2.30. Psalm. 44.13. Ezr. 9.6. Jer. 9.1. and 4.29. Ezr. 9.15. Jer. 23.9. Dan.
9.7, 8. David was afraid of the sword of the destroying Angel, Page 12.
and it had been an height of impiety far above the sin committed by him in
numbering of the people, not to have been sorely afraid of it, knowing whose
sword it was, and for what cause it was unsheathed. 1. Chron. 21.16, 30.

Nor ar the signs foreshewing the near approach of the last day* Luke 21.28. no
more then such as gave assurance of the speedy ruin of Babylon, Jer. 51.46.
(the full redemption of Gods people depending upon the one, as their temporal
deliverance out of captivity on the other) to be paralleled with such signs as
give warning of Gods wrath here to be executed upon people for their wicked
cariages, whether in way of vengeance and judgment, or of correction and
chastisement; and that upon Gods people sometimes, as well as upon others; Amos.
3.2. yea even upon good and bad together. Ezekiel. 21.3. Its no reason therefore
to imagine, that God should forbid his people to be affrighted with such signs
of Heaven, as do from Heaven denounce such dismal judgments ready to be
inflicted upon people for their sins. Yea it is rather to be expected, as a thing
justly reqired, that if nations more remote from God, as well in heart, in
regard of their ignorance of him as in distance of space from the place of his
special residence, should be afraid of such tokens of his displeasure; Psalm.
65.8. then surely they that are a people in either respect nearer unto him,
much more. Psalm. 147.19, 20. and 148.14. Jer. 5.22.

Again, for what they subjoyn* of a conceit, J. S. page 9 Pref. An. ten
that Heathen people should have, of the unavoidablenes of the Evils by these
signs portended; and of the fatalitie, whereby their Wizards held that they fell
out.

I demand; do not our Wizards hold and profes as much? or do not such conceits
flow and follow necessarily from the grounds that they maintain? See Lilies Dark
year* p. 55. and Title page to worlds Catast^


For, (to let pas that our Wizards themselves forbear not the term of Fate) if
we shall take the word Fate, or* Fatum, in a large sense, according to the
Latin notation of the word. Fatum a fando; Qid aliud est Fatum, qam qod de
unoqoqe nostrum fatus est Deus? Franc.
says Minutius in Octavio. What is Fate else, but what God has spoken
concerning every one of us? whence one of our own Poets; Fatur, and est fatum.
What God speaks, is Fate. And do not our Wizards hold, and these also their
Patrons, that God by these Eclipses, Conjunctions and Aspects speaks to us, and
foretells us such sad and dismal matters, as they affirm them to portend? Page
25.
So Mr. Lilie, in his Black-Book; When any memorable Eclips happens in Aries,
God acqaints us with what good or evil he intends us near upon those times. And
in his New Diurnal, such and such Conjunctions and Eclipses, are styled
Messengers of Gods wrath. Page 14.
Nor does Mr. Swan herein desert his Client, where out of an unmamed Author he
tells us, that God speaks with men, not with tongues of men only, Ibid.
by Prophets and Apostles and Teachers; but sometimes also by the very Elements
composed and wrought into diverse forms and shapes: and thence infers; If by the
Elements, then by the stars and lights. Page 15.
in such manner, ye must believ, as his Clients enform him; to wit, by their
Motions, Configurations, Conjunctions, Aspects, Eclipser, etc. As ye heard him
of late before, and this he proves from Psalm. 19.1, 3. of which also more
hereafter. So that what these Wizards tell us, as his Client Mr. Lilie of
himself, that he reads all his predictions in the Book of the Heavens, is not
Astrology as we commonly have taken it, a company of dulpated dunces, that is,
(...), a consideration or discourse, or doctrine concerning the stars; but it is
(...), the speech or language of the stars; Page 25.
of which the Psalmist speaks, or rather such as they have taught them to
speak: for that God ever set them such lessons as they have learned them, we
shall then believe, when they shall be able to prove, that he has taught them
to spel and construe thus in that goodly great Book as they do, Meanwhile we
novices in the Greek tongue, has gained a New Notation, that we never once
dreamed of, nor had learned from any Grammar or Glossarie before: to wit that
(...) in Greek is (...) the stars language, or what the stars talk; and so
(...), or King James his Book of Demonologie, shall be a Book of the Devils
language, or such language as the Devils talk. Mr. Swan should have done well to
have acqainted Mr. Lilie with this abstruse Mystery, and subtle Criticism; it
would have been an excellent sqib, exceeding fit to have been cast into Dr.
Holmes his dish, enough by the very Title of Demonologie to have utterly dashed
him out of countenance, and refelled his whole work, by telling him that his
Book consists all of nothing but the Devils language, as the Title it self
says: it might at least helped to salv that palpable untruth in his Preface to
his last Diurnal, concerning those that have lately written against Judicial
Astrology, that not one of them have defined it, nor understand any thing of
it. That is, that none of them have so defined it, as Mr. Swan has done, nor
did so much as understand, what the very word it self meant,; no more then for
him, I suppose, yet they do any better then before they did* for my part, I
should have deemed it not unfit or unworthie to be put into stuttering John of
Genoaes Catholicon set there cheek by joll next to Astericus, ab aster qod est
stella, and icon, qod est imago, but that I find Balbus herein the better. for,
Astrologus, says he, ab astron, qod est stella, and logos, qod est sermo,
loqens de stellis. But thus then by Fate, if they understand what God speaks,
designs or intends, it implies no more then the Clients and their Advocates do
in the present case avow.

Or if by Fate in a stricter notion, they will have to be understood that which
is by the Stoiks called (...), that is, according to the Greek notation of the
word; a continued series, or concatenation of causes by a necessary conseqence
successively ensuing one upon an other, as links of a chain, and depending upon
that natural course, whereinto by the first cause of all things they were entered
at the first: neither so can they avoid the term of fatality. For as we all
grant that the motions of the Celestial bodies do hold on constantly in an
unvariable course according to that which they were entered into by God their
Creator, when he created them at first; in regard whereof their risings and
settings, oppositions and conjunctions, applications and separations, aspects
and respects, may be undoubtedly foreknown and infallibly foretold: so withal
these men maintain, that those virtues and powers by which they work, (they are
Mr. Swans own words; and in such manner you must understand him to mean as they
maintain; Page 14.
otherwise he says nothing either to his Clients cause, or his own entendment)
were at the first divinely stamped in them; and ar in Job called by the name of
influences, which no man is able to restrain, Job 38.31. whereof further in its
place. And yet the same man refuses to acknowledge the old Chaldeans fatality,
Page 19.
and would fain free his Clients from the admittance of it: which yet by his
and their grounds can not be avoided. For if these things be effected of them
and produced by them through a natural power enstamped on them by God their
Creator, the operation whereof neither is it in their power to intermit at
their pleasure, being no voluntary but mere natural agents, neither can it by
any other created power be restrained or suspended; no more then their motions,
meetings or entercourses can by any such means be interrupted; then are they as
sure to produce these their effects; and men may as undoubtedly before hand be
assured-of them, as they may that the Sun will at such a certain time set at
even, or rise the next day.

Or, if ye shall please to turn the word of Fate and Fatalitie into plain
English, and call it Destiny; if such a kind of power were conferred upon the
stars, by virtue of such Conjunctions and Aspects, in relation to men's
Nativities and Undertakings, to make them luckie or unluckie, to be necessarily
well or ill affected, to design them to such disasters, and to come to such
ends, which by no wit or might, See Goclein hereafter.
power or Policy they are able to avoid, then why may not one say, as the
knave told the Stoik his Master, when he whipped him for filching, Laert. Z^non.
it was my destiny to filch; or, as his Master answered the knave again, and it
is thy destiny to be whip^. So the theif, that it was his destiny to betake
himself to that trade; and the strumpet, that it was her destiny to lead such
a life, being bred and born under such a star; and that it was such an ones
destiny to be hanged, and another to be drowned, and an others to be torn in
pieces with dogs; because by such and such constellations at the time of their
Nativitie they were designed thereunto; and such things ar as sure to befall
them, as they are sure, nay more sure, then they are or can be, to go to bed at
night, or to rise again the next day; since that the one by some humane power
or natural course, or their own will and act, may be intercepted and altered;
whereas the other save by a supernatural power, cannot be altered or avoided.
So that constru Fate and Fatalitie which way you please, these men's own grants
presumed, and grounds admitted, a fatality of necessity must be concluded. and
what impiety will thence necessarily follow, we have in part formerly showed;
and shall (by Gods assistance) again further hereafter.

But here Mr. Lilies Advocates falter with him, as some of them also with
themselves. For first Mr. Swan tells us, with good ground from Gods Word, that
certainly to foretell contingent events belongs to none but to God himself. Esaias
41.23. Page 19.
and his other Advocate, whom he so much magnifies, concludes as himself
relates him, with these words of Osiander concerning Astrology, Nihil habet de
Magia* si modo qis Astrologicas praedictiones pro conjecturis, non av^em pro
vaticiniis certis habeat. It has nothing of Magike, (otherwise then it has,
and Astrologers ar Magitians, Wizards no other then he-witches) if so be one
have, or account, Astrological predictions for conjectures, and not for certain
Prophesies.

I Stand not now to discuss or debate, how these sayings will consist, which
what from Mr. Swan we have above heard. We will consider only, what help Mr.
Lilie has from them, and whether he have so wisely and advisedly dealt in
referring himself and his cause to them. Hear we Mr. Lilie what he says of
himself and his predictions; agreeably enough, I confess, to his own
principles, as hinself speaks, in part; and to those grounds also, that these
men, and other the like Patrons of his profession have laid, howsoever here
they palter with him, and leave their Client in the lurch. But hear we him and
his own confident Assertions and peremptory in his Black-Book. Page 18.
Assuredly the vengeance of Almighty God is ready to be powered forth upon the
Dutch. and, Assuredly those actions, which will be agitated* Ibid.
will be acted with an high and mighty hand. and, Page 19.
certainly there is some eminent treason in or near these parts in agitation,
in or near the time of this Eclipse, or during its influence to break forth.
and, Page 27.
Qestionles those People who ar intended to be made most sensible of this
Eclipses influence, ar Magistrates of the highest rank in every Nation of
Europe, and those so great alterations in this Macrocosm shall be so glorious,
and conspicuous, Page 28.
that there is no Nation or People of Europe, Asia, or Africa, but they shall
stand amazed and wonder at the eminency of them. and, Page 55.
The influence of this Eclips shall operate upon the common Laws of our Nation;
but sure I am, not to its overthrow. and, Treasurers must account* and, We
affirm; Page 54.
there will be an appearance of some memorable actions, etc. And in his New
Diurnal; I am confident we shall bring those proud people the Dutch upon their
knees, by destroying their Naval forces, Ibid.
etc. And, I am confident, we of the Commonaltie joining with the Soldier,
shall endeavor to call them to an account, etc. as in the premises ye had it.
What Prophet sent immediately, and furnished with special commission from God,
ever did speak, or could speak more confidently, or more peremtorily then this
Wizard does? Ibid.
Yea he tells us, He is sure his judgment on the effect of this Eclips has
rather been Prophetical then Predictive; albeit by his own grounds he could not
be sure, that ought that had fallen out within those seven Months, were any
effects at all of that Eclips; it being affirmed by him, that it is not
necessary, that any such Eclips should begin to operate before eight months
after it: and what ar they the most of them, but what he saw already either
done, or in doing; or that any man but of ordinary sagacitie, without help of
Starlight, might as well foresee and foretell by probable conjecture? which is
the most that his greatest Patrons will by his own relation and acknowledgement
allow him; unles he will be deemed of them, and condemned by them, as no pure
Astrologer, but a mere Magitian* in plain English, an He-witch. For such they
imply them to be, that give out their Astrological Predictions for any other
then conjectures; for certain Prophesies much more. And does not this man so?
what more common with him, then to entitle his annual Predictions, his
Prophetical Merlin, for such a year and to cite them by such a Title? Yea his
great grandfather Ambrose Merlins Predictions, (whereof he professes to have a
Book of 28. sheets by himself written; it may be many hundred years after the
old Wizard was dead and buried, and past rotting in his grave) he pronounces
to be Prophesies, against which there can be no exception. of as undoubted
authority belike as Scripture it self. Thus this earth-worm, having thrust his
head out of some hole, and creeping below upon the ground, this Egyptian frog,
crawling out of the mire and mud of some Nilotik mear, sticks not to arrogate
that to himself which his own Autors affirm truly to be Gods peculiar, to give
out his own croakings and predictions for Prophesies, lessons taken out of the
Book of Heaven; to speak as peremptorily of his own figments and fancies, as if
he had received them from Gods own mouth, and to entitle such base stuf, not
his own rapsodies and rabblements only, bur the fond fopperies of the Son of
an Incubus (if the stories of him be true) an harlots bastard at the best, as
if they were both divine Oracles, Prophecies the one, and irrefragable
Prophecies, such as no exception can be taken to, the other. And what an height
of presumtion, impiety and blasphemy this amounts unto, even by the verdict of
those, whom by virtue of his Appeal to, he has made his own Judges; I shall
leav it to any understanding and religious Reader, having taken notice of the
premises, to consider and conclude.

Howbeit withal here for a farewell, I shall mind Mr. Lilie, Discourse of
effects of Sat. and Jup. conjunct. 42.
that whereas he is so bold, not only to style himself Englands Prophetical
Merlin, but in a Programme fixed over his dwelling house (as I am informed)
publicly to proclaim himself by the Title of Merlinus Verax, the Truth-telling
Merline, In Anti-Merlin
one of his own coat Mr. H. Johnson affirms that his predictions (and he
instances in diverse particulars of sundry years) are ridiculous pieces, so
full of follies, fooleries, contradictions, and lies, that an Artist would
blush to own them; and he does in them out-ly, if it be possible, the Devil
himself the Father of lies. And the like aspersions in effect does Mr. L. and
his friend the whipper cast upon Mr. Wharton, sometime Naworth, not
anagrammatised, but stigmatized, as he speaks, who had piped so long to the
Kingdom* and never hit a true note. Mr. L. urging also against him that axiom,
and a very good one, says Mr. J. wherewith he lashes Mr. W. for one only
mistake, and that a small one, in regard of his own folio failings; He that lies
commonly, and speaks or wri^es but now and then a truth, is neither to be
trusted, nor to be believed. It has been sometimes propounded in the Schools
as a qestion of some difficult solution; Gorgias a Sophister himself, said that
all Sophisters were liers; whether should he be believed? And here the
Astrologers say (as ye hear) one of another they are liers, and not to be
credited. So speaks Mr. L. of Mr. W. and Mr. J. of Mr. L. But I suppose the
qestion here is not so hard to assoil: we may herein well believe each of them.
For as it was grown sometime to a byword of Friars, and was deemed a good
Argument holding in mood and figure. This man is a Friar; and therefore a Lier.
So it may as truly be said of an Astrologer, or (to take away the ambiguitie of
the term, by restraining its latitude) An Astromancer; This man is an
Astromancer, and therefore a lier. for Astromancers are liers, no les when what
they foretell, falls out right, then when it fails. That is most true that the
Tragedian of old said; (tho the Stoik seemed to be of another mind.) ^en. Med.
1.2. ^eno. Vid. ^lut. Stoic. ^epugn. c. 2.
Qi statuit aliqid part inavdita altera,
Aequm licet statuerit havd aequs fuit,
He that one part unheard a doom did pas,
Tho eqal were his doom, uneqal was.
So here, he that shall tell a thing for a certain truth, which he has no
certain ground for, tho the thing it self be never so certainly true in it self,
yet is not thereby saved from being a lier. If I shall avow that at this
instant the Pope at Rome is either singing Mass in S. Peter's, or sitting in
Consistory with his Cardinals, tho the thing were never so true, yet were I a
lier in averring what I had no notice of. Nor will it therefore help Mr. L. to
free him from lying and cheating, when having taken men's money that repair to
him, to help them to their lost linen pewter, plate and other goods again, he
tells them it is such a person that has them, or they are in such and such a
place, if it shall afterward fall out so as he told, since that he could not
have certain notice of, or ground for any such thing, unles from the Devil, or
by compact from some other third party. Nor will it proov him to be a true
Prophet, or save him from being justly reputed a falls Prophet and a liar,
because his judgment concerning the effects of some Eclipses have proved as he
says, rather Prophetical then then predictive, unless he could upon good and
certain grounds assuredly know that Eclipses do necessarily produce such
Effects, which doubtless he neither could, nor will ever be able to do, much les
any where has done. for it is but a poor shift, to tell us, as the whipper his
worthy friend does for him, that he conceals his reasons in Art for some of his
judgments, (O envious creature, that charges the Clergymen so deeply with
the self same fault) that he may not make every man at wise as himself. The
Prophet in Moses not sent by God; that had foretold a sign or a Prodigis, tho
it did come to pas, was not therefore to be deemed a true Prophet, when he came
to be discovered, but to suffer as a counterf^it; God himself professing, that
he causes such things sometime to fall out, to prove his people, whether they
will warp aside unto such, or cleave close to the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 13.1.3.
Astromancers therefore ar, as the Prophet Esaias terms them, liers, Esaias,
44.25. whether those things which by the Stars they profess to foretell, fall
out accordingly or otherwise, because from the Stars they cannot have any
certain notice of such things; and Astromancie it self no other then a ly; a ly
in the tongue of the Astromancers, as the idol a ly in the hand of the
idol-maker; Esaias, 44.20. both vanity, so Esaias chap. 41.29. of the one, and so
Jeremy also here verse 3. of the other, which we shall now come to show. and
the Astromancer may well say of their fortune telling, as Lucian sometime of a
prodigious Story that he writ (...), This only tell I true, that I do nothing
but lie.

Hitherto then we have examined the Reasons rendered by Mr. Lilies two
Advocates, why God by his Prophet should forbid his People to be afraid of the
Signs of Heaven, as the Heathen were. the one in regard of the qalitie of the
fear; because it was a dismaying dread; which yet we have showed it might
justly have been, were the Signs spoken of, Signs of Gods heavy indignation:
the other taken from the unavoydable fatalitie, ascribed by the Chaldee Wizards
unto those dismal Events and Effects, that the Signs did presage and produce,
wherein we have showed, that our Astrologers also go along in eqipage with them.

We shall now proceed to show* what the true ground and reason is of this
Prohibition; and why these Signs ought not at all to affright or trouble Gods
People, expressed in the Text; which these men were very shie of, loath to take
notice of, or once to touch upon. And this had Mr. Swan and his associate
easily apprehended, had they ben pleased seriously to have considered, either
the first branch of this second Verse, or the sentence next ensuing, which the
causal particle prefixed shows to belong unto this, tho in way of transition,
as a middle term, coming between the subject matter of Astrology here
intimated, and that of Idolatry entered upon in the third verse, it be in
distinction of verses fastened unto the latter.

For the former Branch; Learn not, says God, the way of the Heathen, where by
the way of the Heathen, what can be meant, but such courses as the Heathen held
and took, either concerning the Signs of Heaven, which they superstitiously
regarded, or concerning their idols, which having framed they adored, and we
see the learning of their way, and the dreading of the signs, to be two
distinct branches of the present Prohibition, the former whereof these Patrons
of Astrology slightly pass over, or slily pass by, as a needless branch, or a
luxuriant sprig, not worthy of regard, but such as might well be spared, and
would therefore the more handsomely to conceal it and keep it out of sight,
involv and wrap it up in the same sentence with the next: as if the meaning
were no more then this, Learn not the way of the Heathen, nor be dismayed; that
is, Learn not to be dismayed. It is true indeed, that sometime two Verbs either
standing loose, as Psalm. 51.2. and 106.13. Hosh. 9 9. or knit together with a
copulative, as Genesis 26.18. Dan. 9.21 may be combined into one sentence; that
which by many instances I show both in some part of my Cinnus, and in diverse
places of mine Annotations among those fruitless Criticisms, that Mr. Lilie
finds there. But that will not hold here for two causes. 1. It is not an
Injunction, but an Inhibition. Its one thing to say, Learn, not to fear:
another thing to say, Learn not, to fear* the former is an injunction; and the
negative particle therefore adheres not to the imperative precedent, but to the
infinitive subseqent, the latter is an inhibition, and the negative therefore
must be joined to the imperative; which being here done would produce a strange
sense, inhibiting, not simply to be afraid, but to learn to be afraid; Do not
learn to be afraid. But 2. the two Verbs here have two several subjects that
they pass unto. the Heathens way is the subject not to be learned; the Signs of
Heaven ar the Subject not to be dreaded. and if any shall ask what is meant by
the way of the Heathen, the other branch in the frontispiece of the 3 verse will
tell us; to wit, that this (...) or way, is (...) the rules, the lessons, the
dictates, the documents, the precepts, the prescripts (for the word will well
admit any of these expressions) of the Heathen. and of what Heathen think we,
but of the Heathen Astrologers? for of them it is agreed that the Prophet here
speaks. and concerning what, but concerning the Signs of Heaven? the Prophets
own express terms lead us to it. So that its clear enough to any the meanest
capacity that, by way is here meant, such rules, documents, or lessons, as the
Chaldean Wizards taught the Heathen people concerning the Signs of Heaven, and
their dismal operations, which produced in them such trouble and consternation
or amazement of mind. God would not have his people to learn or regard the one,
that they might not be afrighted and dismayed with the other. And this Branch
therefore would not have been either slily slighted, or wholly overslipt by
those, who had professedly undertaken the discussing of the Verse.

But there is another Branch, which tho it be crowded into the next verse, yet,
(as the rationative particle appearing in its front shows) has reference unto
this. If we shall demand then why Gods people should not learn this Heathenish
way, the reason is ready at hand, we need not go far to seek for it, the
Prophet himself renders it; for the rules or lessons, that the Heathen are
taught by and take out from their Wizards, ar vain or vanity, as the word is
in the abstract, that is, very vain, as vain as vanity it self. So that if Mr.
Swan had been pleased to step but one step further, and no long stride had
needed, or to have cast but his eye to the very next line to his Text, he had
there lighted on the true cause, why neither this way of the Heathen is to be
learned by Gods people, they are not to take out such lessons as the Wizards
would learn them; nor their minds conseqently to be possessed with such frights
and fears, as by telling them of the direful effects of the celestial Signs
they endeavored to work into them; to wit, because these things among other
were mere Heathenish vanities; and a most vain thing therefore to be affected
therewith. For to the former way, must this vanity necessarily have reference,
and that way to their conceits concerning the Stars, that produced such fears
with them, unless we will say of the passages of Gods Prophets, Sveton. l. 4.
c. 53.
as Caligula sometime of Senecaes writings, that they are arena sine calce, or
as Epiphanius of some Heretics rapsodies, (...), like roaps of sand without
lime to knit them together.

And if Mr. Swan had instead of all this long discourse concerning the
dreadfulnesse of these Celestial Signs, and in what manner they were and were
not to be feared, had but preached to his people Mr. Lilies dictates and
documents (and he might as well have preached them to them as the groundless
conceits of Sir Walter Ralegh and others, tho of better note then he) to wit,
that the horrible Eclipse that was to appear the next day could do no harm to
any that were about their usual employments of ploughing and carting, or
hedging and ditching abroad, as some of his fellow Wizards had unadvisedly
affirmed it might, but that it portended much ill, that either would or might
befall them some eight months after, or the year ensuing at that time
twelmonth, or two year after: howsoever it may be doubtful what effect it might
have had with them, for the time of the Eclipse present, for that the very
sight of it, being a thing uncouth and unusual, might astonish them, as it did
many other prepossessed with that fond conceit which Mr. Lilie himself
condemns, in regard whereof some has related to me, that in some Country
towns where they then resided, not two of forty or more would either do ought
themselves, or suffer ought to be done by their servants abroad; and I remember
that an ancient Doctor of Physik of prime note in the City coming over
sometime to Clapham to visit a Patient, and being importuned to stay dinner
with them, would by no means be persuaded to condescend thereunto, there was he
said an Eclipse of the sun to fall out that forenoon, and he would be at home
before that should come, and keep within till that was ever. Howsoever, I say
therefore that for the time present it might affright them, yet for the latter
part of the story, and the tale told them of evils that should thence flow and
ensue so long after, they would have easily ben induced to believ, that all
such tittle tattle were indeed no other then mere vanity, as the Prophet here
pronounces it. Mean while ye see by what has been before delivered, what
verdict the Spirit of God has past upon these Chaldee VVizards observations
and dictates about the Celestial Signs: and yet Mr. Swans main scope throughout
this whole Sermon is to disprove that which is here so peremptorily pronounced
of them, to give the Holy Ghost the ly; to prove that they are not vanities,
Page 21.
but divine Oracles, condemning the wiser sort of the Heathen that set light by
them, esteeming of them what they are here affirmed to be; and such Divines as
are likewise minded concerning them, as no better both, then men out of their
wits, such as have rather need of Elebore to cure their brains, then any
reasoning with them to inform their judgments.

But howsoever he deem us persons that that have laesa principia* a crew of
crackt-braind coxcombs, fitter for a Bedlam cure, then for a Scholerlike
dispute or debate; yet we shall (by Gods assistance, having him and his holy
Prophets, we hope, on our side) take the boldness to examine the validity of
his Arguments produced to prove the truth of that, which diametrically opposes
the dictate of Gods Spirit, and the verdict here passed upon their Judicial
Astrology, which we conceive not without some ground from his own grants to be
forbidden, and consequently condemned in his Text.

In the first place therefore, to begin the fight, he sends out as the manner
is a forlorn hope, some velites, levis armaturae milites, Cic. de Clar. Orat.
and de Repub.
a few soldiers of light furniture, not so much skirmishing with the advers
party, as falling foul upon their own, and fighting one against another. (...)
one or two snips or od ends of Poetry, masterlesse dictates of namles Poets;
but Poets at the best; and of what credit such men's sayings ar, that old said
saw, a saying of their own, may show us; it says, (...). Plat. nom. de Just.
Aristot. post Phys. l. 1. c. 2.
it tells us in plain terms, that they tell us many lies. But let us hear what
they say. One of them tells us, Astra regunt homines, that the Stars rule men.
and there is good cause indeed to fear those that rule over us, especially when
we shall be taught, that they have very spightful and malevolent affections and
dispositions toward us, very malignant aspects and influences upon us. But how
does it appear that the Stars rule men? or whence had they that power and
office of regiment or regencie given them over mankind, thus to sway humane
affairs, as these men would have them? Has God any where in his Word made it
known to us, that he has assigned them any such office of rule over us? It is
said indeed, that God made the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon and the Stars
to rule the night. Genesis 1.16. Psalm. 136.8, 9. that is, by a certain and
constant course to make a distinction of day and night, and to exercise that
lightsome qalitie or faculty that God has endowed them with, whether
peculiarly or immediately conferred upon each, or imparted from one or more of
them to the rest, for he use of Mankind in either; but where he is said to have
appointed them to rule men's persons, and their affairs or employments, civil or
moral, counsels and casualties, genitures, states, terms of life, issues of
death and the like, we no where read, save in the presumptuous writings of
those who have assigned them such employments. Yea it has been usually deemed,
that all the creatures mentioned in Moses, to have been made before man, were
for this end made to be serviceable unto man, who was made in the last place
when all things were fitted for him before. Aug. de Deo dilig. c. 4. and
soliloq. c. 20.
Whence that common saying, Omnia propter hominem, homo propter Deum. All
things for man, and man for God. Yea the Sun it self, the principal and most
glorious of those celestial bodies has his name (...) from a Chaldee term,
that signifies to minister or serve. which word also the Chaldee Paraphrast (as
we term him) uses in that place of Moses, Genesis 1.18. in steed of that word
which we render to rule. and it is not amiss observed by our Writers, that in
those words of Moses Deuteronomy. 4.19. concerning the Sun, Moon and Stars which
Iehova thy God has imparted unto all Nations under the whole Heavens: (which
how the Jewish Rabbis have abused, we shall hereafter show) there seems to be
closely intimated an argument to dissuade from adoring the celestial creatures,
as being an absurd and preposterous course for Gods people to serve them, whom
God had appointed to do service, not to them alone, but to all the Nations of
the World. But that God made them to be serviceable to mankind is out of
qestion. The qestion is. Who has made them Man's masters and governors; who
made them Rulers over Mankind? Nor shall we need to go far to seek the
resolution of this doubt or qestion: Page 19.
Mr. Lilie will inform us: We constitute Venus Ruler, etc. says he, in his
Dark year* and they that constitute Rulers, are able I hope to furnish them
with power, as well of ability, as authority, whereby to exercise and execute
that rule or regiment, whereunto they have assigned them* And indeed herein
they imitate those of the Papacy, that have assigned unto several Countries
several Saints, and designed those Saints to rule and protect them; yea have
deputed several Saints to be Patrons of several professions. For in the like
manner have these men assigned unto several Stars and Constellations, the
government of several Countries and Kingdoms, of several states, trades and
professions, of the several parts of man's body, and the like. Yea herein they
tread in the steps of the superstitious Jewish Masters, who because the word
(...) used Deuteronomy. 4.19. does usually signify to divide or distribute, (whereas
it is freqently also taken more largely for to impart or assign, even where no
such division or distribution is at all intended, as I have showed on Esaias.
53.12.) do thence gather, that the Stars are by God designed to rule all the
other Nations, who have therefore their several Stars assigned them, whereunto
they are obnoxious; but his own people the Jews he has reserved to be ruled by
himself: and that this is the right reason, why other Nations have cause to be
afraid of the signs of Heaven, but the Jewish people have not. Council. in Devt.
qaest. 2.
And so have we the true sense of this place, as Manasses the Amsterdam great
Rabbi from Abraham Esdrassonne informs us. which if it be true, I hope we
Christians may in these days expect the like privilege that the Jewish people
sometime enjoyed. But I suppose we have as little cause to believe them, as
either the Papists or the Pagans, that herein agreed with them, as by their
Wizards Dictates we have formerly showen.

But this piece of Poetry having thus dispatched, we shall proceed to the next*
and that is so far from backing the former, whose second it should be, that as
it often coms to pass (...) with those that fieght in the dark, or with ships
engaged in a storm, he falls foul on his fellow, and in steed of smiting his
adversary, he lets sly at his friend, and so cuts his ham-strings, that he is
not able to stand to it, or do his Commander any service. For whereas his
precedent fellow- Poet sung us, Astra regunt homines, that the Stars rule Men,
this his second sings us a new song, a diverse, yea advers dittie, Sapiens
dominabitur Astris; that Wise men shall rule the stars. Regit Astra Deus. God
rules them; says he* no, men rule them; says this, and, They rule Men, says
he; no, Men rule them, says this. unless Wise men be exempted from the race
and rank of Mankind. But if God have assigned the Stars this office to rule us;
I would fain know by what might or slight we can be able to countermand and
overruled them, whom God has set, and that so far above and out of our reach
to rule us. For can, or could any man possibly by any skill or forecast avoid
it, that he should not be bred or born under such a Constellation, as should
make him a fool? or avoid such casualties of hanging, drowning, or coming to
some other evil end, as those Stars under which he was born, had designed him
unto? How many Stories ar we told of men, that being foretold by Astrologers,
of such and such ends they should come to, have by all the skill and caution
they could possibly use endeavored to avert it, but were not able to avoid
it? And surely if the Stars by such a power derived from God ar set over men
here on earth, it is no more in the power of the wisest man in the world, to
avoid any such evil, that by virtue of that power they portend him; then it is
to alter their course in the sky, and to restrain them from rising at their
constant set times, or from their meetings and conjunctions one with another,
at such precise times as their respective motions and courses in nature must of
undoubted necessity bring them together. And this forlorn Hope I should scarce
have thought worthy to take notice of, but that I find these pieces in the
Frontispice of almost every trivial Prognostic, as if they were spells or
charms of much efficacy, both to justify their fond Dictates concerning the
power of the Stars; and yet to free them from that imputation of impiety and
unavoydable fatalitie, that from the same may justly be fastened upon them.

Let us now proceed to his reserve, or his main battle; and see what arma
decretoria, what weightier weapons, or armor of proof we may meet with there.

Page 10.
The first Weapon we find here darted against us, is from a word in the Text;
which to make strike home and pierce the deeper, is welded with the arm of
Melanchthon, a great and famous Divine. The word in the Text is Signa, Signs;
that is, the steel head of the pile or the spear, which hence hedded
Melanchthon, and Mr. Swan from him thus enforces upon us. Non ait nihil esse
Signa Coeli; imo cum nominat Signa, portendi aliqid affirmat. So precisely
Melanchthon, as Mr. Swan reports him; (for I have not the Book; and it is said
to be in a Preface to one of their Autors) who also thus renders him, The
Prophet does not say, they signify nothing; (ar nothing, says his Author) Nay
rather, in naming them Signs, does declare that they sometimes signify, or
threaten great and sad things. that is somewhat more and somewhat less too
then his Author says. For his Author says indefinitely, in naming them signs
he affirms, that (not sometimes, but) somewhat is portended by them; that is,
some sad matter is threatened, as Mr. Swan renders the word of portending not
amiss. But I demand of Mr. Swan, or of Mr. Swartert either; (for that was his
Dutch name, until Luther caused him to exchange it for a Greek one) and tho Mr.
Lilie when he has nothing else to oppose Calvin in defense of his trade, tell us
only that Melanchthon, as grave a Divine, and more learned, as most hold (but
who those be I know not; comparisons are odious; and it might well be a
measuring cast between them) was a friend to it* and student in it, yet great
names do not daunt us: I demand, I say, of either of them, is it of the very
essence of a Sign, to portend or threaten somewhat? Some kind of language that
Mr. Lilie uses might a little help here; tho one of his axioms would again
hinder as much as the other had helped. He told us that the darkness portended
in the Solar Eclipse, Page 49.
would not be so great as some imagined. So that according to his language,
somewhat present may be portended, as well as somewhat future. But that is of
the same stamp with that other of expatiating himself, and his penna strutii,
rendered a cock-sparrows qil. I was taught when I was a schoolboy, from Servius
on Virgil, that portendere was porro tendere, to tend or reach forward to some
further or future thing; as also that expatiari was a neutral deponent. Page 63.
But withal he tells us in his Aphorisms, that The application of Planets
shows what is to come, the separation what is past. So that there may be signs
by Mr. Lilies grant, as well of things past or present, as to come. And indeed
how many signs ar there so named and recorded in Scripture, that neither did,
nor do portend ought, either good or evil to come.

The Rainbow was appointed by God to be a sign and seal of that Covenant which
God made with Noa in behalf of the whole world, that it should never be
universally drowned again. Genesis 9.11, 12. Yet what future good or evil does the
Rainbow portend, so often as it appears, to ensue shortly thereupon? nor let any
imagine that it will suffice to say, that in the nature of it, it may
conjecturally forewarn this or that, a sudden shower, or the like; the qestion
being, not what in the course of nature it did or might either before or after
foreshew; but what by virtue of that use, that God then made of it, or power
that he then imparted to it, to be a pledge of his promise and the performance
thereof, which it yet retains unto this day, and in regard whereof it is said
to be a sing, it is enabled to portend. In like manner God ordained
Circumcision to be a sign and seal of the Covenant that he made with Abraham
and his issue, either according to the flesh, or according to the faith, Genesis
17.11, 13. Romans 4.11. Yet did not Circumcision therefore portend unto each one
that was circumcised, what should betide or befall him either for good or evil,
through the whole tenor of his life, either of it self, or in reference to the
day of the week on which, or the hour of the day in which he received that
rite. Of the Sabbath it is said by God himself, that it is a Sign between him
and his people, that he has sanctified them; that is, separated them unto
himself. Exodus 31.13, 17. Ezekiel. 20.22. Yet did not each Sabbath in that regard
portend ought in particular to fall out the week following; it having rather
relation to the week past, that it concluded, then to that ensuing, as being
another, a new week. But pass we from these mysterious rites, to strange,
stupendous, miraculous signs, Moses his rod turned into a snake, and that
snake returned into a rod; his hand suddenly overspread with a leprosy; and as
suddenly restored to its wonted plight; is called either of them a Sign: Exodus
4.8. and did either of them manifest Gods power, and signed his mission of
Moses: but did neither of them portend particularly or respectively ought
either to him or any other. The like may be said of those other signs that God
wrought in Egypt by the ministry of Moses, the Frogs, the Lice, the Locusts,
the Flies, the Hail and the rest, Psalm. 78.43. and I suppose men may strain the
strings of their wits till they crack, before they will be able to show, what
those several plagues did particularly portend; Oper. Tom. 9.
albeit some have fondly applied them to the ten precepts of the Law, and have
foisted into Augustines works a saplesse discourse of that subject; De Civit.
Dei. l. 18. c. 2.
and others as frivolously would have them prefigure the ten primitive
persecutions; which Augustine relates indeed, but withal rejects as vain and
ridiculous. The Suns standing still in Joshuas days, Josh. 10.12, 13. was it
not a sign, and a strange one too? it furthered Gods people in pursuit of their
adversaries: but what further matter did it portend? The Miracles that our
Savior wrought, of which more hereafter, were they not signs? or ar they not
so termed? Act. 2.22. And here by the way I shall make bold with my Reader to
step aside a little, to remove a common error, by Mr. Junius in his Parallels
before me observed. It is by the most conceived from those words of our
Savior. Matthew. 12.39.40. There shall be no sign given to this wicked and
bastardly race* that ask a sign of me, save the sign of the Prophet Jonas. For
as Jonas was three days and three nights in the belly of the Whale, so shall
the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. It
is, I say, hence by the most generally concluded, that Jonas his being for such
a space of time in the Whales belly, was a type intended to prefigure Christ's
abiding for the like time in the grave. But the context well weighed will show,
that no such matter is therein intended. For look to the demand; and it will
thence appear what the words of Christ's answer thereunto do import. It is a
saying of Augustine, that the man, who after the Doctrine of the Gospel, so at
first by miracles confirmed, De civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
and since that by such means, and in such manner spread over the whole world,
the whole World now believing, does yet reqire a miracle that he may believ,
may justly go for a miracle himself. Yet after that our Savior had wrought so
many and so great miraculous works, as that the Pharisees themselves could not
but be convinced in Conscience, as one of them also ingenuously and freely
confesses, John 3.2. that he was no counterfeit, nor one that wrought by the
Devil, as they bore the people in hand, Matthew. 12.24. but was a Prophet at
least sent from God; yet some of them come to him, and crave a sign of him; by
sign understanding as our Savior, where he said, John 4.48. Unless ye see
signs and wonders ye will not believe; not some type to be told them out of
Moses, as that of the brazen Serpent, John 3.14, 15. but some miraculous work
at their reqest wrought then in their sight, as Herod hoped to see some miracle
done by him; Luk 23.8. But our Savior puts them off with a negative answer,
telling them withal what manner of people they were that asked such a sign,
and that he would not at present show any such sign, but refer them only to
one that hereafter should be shown, and that just such another as Jonas his
was, such an one as was sometime wrought upon him. That which the Evangelist
Luke delivers more clearly, Luke 11.29. For as Jonas (says he) was a sign to
the Ninevites; not by typifying Christ, whom he preached not to them, out that
which had befaln him, coming some way to their notice, and being thereby
assured that the message he brought came from God,) so shall the Son of Man
(Christ himself rising again from the dead, after part of three days spent in
the grave) be a sign (no type, but such a miraculous evidence sufficient to
testify what he was, as no other should need) unto this generation. Yea and to
the ages ensuing also; it being a far greater matter for him, Avg. de temp. 174.
as some of the Ancients have well observed, De sepulcro resurgere, qam de
patibulo descendere; to rise up from the grave, then to come down from the
cross; on which latter condition they engaged themselves to believe on him if
he would do it. Matthew. 27.42. but tho more regarding his Fathers pleasure, and
our welfare, then their scoffing reqiries, he did not that, yet he did in steed
thereof* a work much more miraculous, which he here engaged himself to do.

Ye see how many signs here of either sort, and yet not one portending ought:
and the weakness conseqently of this Argument, whither as Melanchthon himself
delivers it; When he calls them signs, he affirms them to portend somewhat;
which reduced to a Syllogism, must thus be framed, All signs portend somewhat,
but these are signs. Ergo they portend somewhat. or as Mr. Swan delivers it,
In naming them signs, he declares they sometime signify or threaten great and
sad things; which syllogistically conceived, must run on this wise; All signs
sometimes (for if ye give it only, signs sometimes the syllogism will consist
all of particulars, and be of no force or worth) signify or threaten great and
sad things, but these ar signs, ergo sometimes they so do. For whether way of
the two we take it, the Proposition is manifestly untrue in either. It is not
of the nature or property of a sign to portend ought; signs not a few do not,
much less to threaten great and sad things: the contrary whereunto by the
instances above given does most evidently appear.

Yea but says Melanchthon, the Prophet does not say, they are nothing. Yes, he
does say, they are nothing, in the same sense wherein the Apostle says, that
an idol is nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4. that is, a thing of nothing, as good as
nothing, of no use, no worth, no regard, no weight, for he says, the signs,
wherewith the Wizards affrighted them, ar mere vanity: and that is as much as
nothing, Esaias 41.29. I might ad, that it follows not, that they are signs
indeed, because the Holy Ghost uses this term of them. For the Holy Ghosts
usage is, to speak often of things, not as they are in truth, but as men vainly
esteem of them, It were no good Argument to proov Epimenides a Prophet, because
the Apostle says of him, One of their own Prophets, Tit* 1.12. or the Devil to
be a God, because the same Apostle calls him the god of this world, 2. Cor.
4.4. And again there are lying and falls, as well as true signs. 2. These. 2.9.
Nor will it take off the edge of this instance, to say, that the signs here
spoken of, are called the signs of Heaven. which name Moses also uses of
them* Genesis 1.14. (of which more anon) and that they are somewhat therefore. For
were not the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, the signs of Heaven, amongst those
Idols the Apostle speaks of? and yet the Apostle says of them, they are nothing
in the world. as they are idolized they are nothing; there is nothing worthy of
any regard, much less of any divine worth in them, and in like manner the
Prophet of the signs of Heaven, as they are by these Wizards abused to put
people into falls fears, they are nothing but mere vanity; lying signs void of
all truth; or the signs of the liars, as Esaias terms them, Esaias 44.45. even
like those whose signs they are.

And surely since that Mr. Swan himself grants that the Text speaks of
Astrological Predictions, such as the Chaldee Wizards then used; and the
Prophet pronounces those he speaks of to be very vanities; Page 7.8.
I see not by what art or flight he will be able to keep them from coming
within the verge of those superstitious or lying vanities, as himself renders
it; which the Psalmist professes to abhor, together with all those that
regard, or hold of them; Psalm. 31.6, 7. more then salts falling toward one, or
a Ravens croaking over one, or an hares crossing the way before one, and the
like; which fond fancies, together with those that fear or regard them, he
brings within compass of David's doom, as both deservedly worthy of detestation
and hate. And I would gladly demand of Mr. Swan what difference there is
between such old Wives tales concerning such fooleries, and all the long tittle
tattle, that Mr. Lilly his clients rabblements, and the like of those other of
his Tribe, are full fraught with, of a Melancholy Saturn, and a jovial Jupiter,
and a furious Mars, and a thievish Mercury, and a wanton Venus; An. ten. p. 11
and fiery and ayerie and waterie, and earthie Trigones; and dismal houses of
death and misfortune; and a mad Bull, (for he can be no other) with an eye hot,
violent, fierce, furious, and of evil influence; (and what think we, ar his
horns then, when his very ey is so fierce and furious?) and a mad dog, that
maks dogs run mad; and malignant aspects, that do a world of mischief in the
world here below, that is ruled by them. But will ye see the difference between
the one and the other? Sen. epist. 115
As Seneca, after Aristo the Stoik, sometime said, speaking of such vanities as
many men spent much upon, and were much taken withal, whom he compared to
children, qibus ludicrum omne in pretio est, that set much by any toy to play
with, Qid inter hos and illos interest, nisi qod carius inepti sunt? What
diffe^e^ce is the^e between the one and the other, but that childrens toys are
less costly then theirs? So may we well say here, there is no more difference
between these silly conceits that those poor women ar possessed with, and those
fopperies of the other kind that the Wizards fill their heads with, then
between a game at draughts, consisting of a few plain pins or pebles, that may
easily be managed, and a game at chesse, consisting of more variety of Figures,
and reqiring more study and forecast, styled therefore by King James a more
fashious game, or, if you please, between a Christmas show, or rude country
May game, and one of Ben. Johnsons Comedies or Tragedies; that there is more
art and skill, or more state and solemnity in the one, then in the other; but
both alike Ludicrous games or sports; both at the best, no matter of truth, but
fabulae, as the Latins termed them, fabulous figments and representations, as
well the one as the other* there is in these Wizards fantastical conceits a
great deal of art and skill to bring them about, and so they are nugae
difficiliores, toys and trifles of more difficulty; but after all study
about them, and pains taken in them, not unlike those (...), that Galen taxes,
Gal. hortat.
the product of them is but vanity, as the Prophet here informs us.

Page 19.
Yea but Mr. Swan tells us, that it is by consent of all ages granted, that
great Eclipses and conjunctions have always had sad events.

I suppose I have said enough hereof before, dealing with Mr. Lilie* See Plin.
l. 28. c. 2. and Cicer. De Divin. l.. 1.
yet a little further to Mr. S. here. First, he says no more herein, then what
others long since have averred of those observations and events, from the
flight of Fowls, and bowels of Beasts; concerning which they made boast of
experiments of so many hundred, yea thousands of years. And will no^ those old
women use the same argument for those their unluckie presages, which yet Mr. S.
rejects, that they were and had been from time to time observed to fall out
unluckilie before either he or they were born; and tell you Story upon Story,
of one that after an hares crossing him as he rode on the highway, with the
fall of his horse, brake a Leg, and an other an Arm, and an other his Neck? And
will they not bring you as solid proofs, for the rules, that from Erra Pater
they hare learned, and do very constantly and seriously observe, concerning
St. Paul's and Candlemas day? And here, I hope I shall not much displease my
Reader, unles he be over austere, if I shall fall sometime into a fit of that
infirmity, that is so incident to men of my years, to entertain him with a
tale. They say Herodote made his History somewhat the more delightful, by
stepping aside to tell a tale or two now and then. Not long before my leaving of
Lincolns Inn, in the reading time, one that had brought Mr. Reader venison,
being an ancient man and one of some fashion, was entertained with some other
at Mr. Readers board; where some table talk falling in about Candlemas day, and
a word or 2 cast out by occasion thereof concerning the vanity of such
observations, their old gvest very sagely told them, that he was a Keeper
himself, as also had his Father ben before him, and he had constantly observed
so far as he was able to remember ought, that on Candlemas day, if the Sun
shone out, and it were afaire day, the Deer (contrary to their ordinary usage)
would keep close in the covert; whereas if it were a close and gloomy day, they
would come abroad and be frisking upon the lawn; as presaging that winter was
in a manner gone, and little hard weather behind, and that this had also ben
observed by his Father before him, as also by other Keepers as well as himself.
Now when I perceived this his relation to take with some of the company, and
one among the rest had past his verdict, that there might be somewhat in it:
conceiving it no fit course to debate any further by way of argumentation in the
business, I thought better as Socrates sometime dealing with the Sophisters of
his time, to move a qestion only to the Keeper (tho Mr. Lilie tax me for that
course, and would have puzzeling qestions debarred from these disputes.) I
demanded therefore of him, which Candlemas it was, the Popish o^ ours which are
ten days asunder, on which the Deer were so disposed. and he answering ours;
for he knew no other; I inferred thereupon, that that would then afford a good
argument, to prove not theirs, but ours, to be the right Candlemas day: for that
the Deer went not by any Calendar, but by instinct. It was soon perceived what
the Demand and Inference aimed at; and the business was instantly at an end*
But what frivolous fopperies will not pass for current, if tales and stories of
occurrencies may be admitted for good proof? Again, neither is Mr. Swan able to
make good what he here avows, and the contrary also to what he affirms, has by
others been averred, as formerly I have showed. Tho to shift off that, they
have devised another trick, by telling us that those Events need not follow
them close at the heels; they may come a year or two after; when they shall
please to assign them* that endued them with this faculty, and gave them this
power: and so come they earlier or later from them they proceed.

But lastly, it follows not, such and such things came after them, and
therefore were either portended by them, or proceeded from them. When as by
other causes they either might be, or apparently were produced: whereof more,
when we shall come to Pericles, De Divin^^. l. 2.
and the Solar Eclipse in his time. To conclude, as Tully says of a
Philosopher, so say I of a Divine; It is not a Divines part to ground a truth,
especially in matter of faith, upon the testimony of such witnesses, as may by
peradventure speak true, or through faltinesse fain and fail: by reasons and
arguments matters must be proved, not by events; such especially, as any thing
almost may be made good by. and with that of the Lord Howard, in his Discourse
of Blind Prophesies, Until a man can as well produce a certain reason to make
his guesses good, as score up a register of blind events, we may rather commend
his luck then his learning.

But we shall have a Testimony beyond all exception, and that arguing not a
posteriore, from the Events, but a priore, from the first cause and ground of
this use and office of the Stars. for the Scripture, Page 15.19.
says Mr. Swan does not speak in vain, when it says, concerning the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, Let them be for signs as well as for seasons, days and years,
Genesis 1.14.

I will not stand long to qarel with Mr. Swan about his rendering of the Text,
thus, Let them be for signs as well as for seasons, days and years. The words
are precisely, Let them be for signs and for set seasons, and for days and
years. Nor will I pres the version of Junius and Tremellius, who render it,
Sint in signa and tempestatibus and diebus and annis, Let them be for signs,
both for seasons, and for days and years: tho the version be not improbable:
such use of the copulative that it reqires, being very freqent in Scripture; as
Esaias, 4.6. from storm and from rain, that is, from a storm of rain: on which
place see more instances of the like. So Matthew. 3.11. He shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire: that is as most Interpreters, with the Holy
Ghost like unto fire, (of which yet more else where) not as Mr. Swan here as
well with the H.G. as with fire: So certainly, John 3.5. Unless a man be bred
of water and the Spirit, that is, of the Spirit in Baptism by water
represented. nor dare I say, whatsoever Mr. Swan may, as well of water as of the
Spirit. Now this their version admitted, and it may be doubted whether Mr. Swan
can refel it; it will clearly sweep away all those his superstructures of such
and such either Events or Effects, that are founded thereupon.

But we will admit Mr, Swans Version without further debate. Take we the Text as
he renders it; will it thence follow that the Scripture should speak in vain,
when it says of the Sun, Moon and Stars, Let them be for signs, unles the
great Eclipses and Conjunctions had always sad Events? for upon that account
is this inferred by him. Page 19.

Yea but, says Mr. Swan, they could not be signs to us here below, (and to
whom else unless to us? Page 15.
) If they signified foreshewed or spoke nothing to us, by their motions,
configurations, risings, settings, aspects, occultations, eclipses,
conjunctions, and the like, Ibid.
And this he sets on, to put the more strength into it, by a qeint nicetie from
Psalm. 19.1, 3. wherein he so much pleased himself, that he repeateth it again,
Page 23. For in the right consideration of that Psalm, (says he) there is a
double speaking to be observed; the one for God in the first Verse, the other
to men, at the third V. Page 23.
that is, (as where in the second course it is served us in again) to
Astrologers. for this latter language is Astrology, not the former; as before
you heard from him.

But first, is not this enough to make them signs, not in vain, but truly and
deservedly so termed, if they signify and declare unto us the might, majesty,
glory, wisdom and excellency of that God, that made them and settled them in
that transcendently admirable constant state, order, course and intercourse for
the benefit of the creature here beneath, wherein to this day they continue?
but of this further also hereafter.

2. What reason can be rendered, why the Voice spoken of in the third Verse,
should not be the same, that was generally propounded in the first Verse,
illustrated more particularly by one special branch of it, in the second
Verse, and the vast extent of it, in the third?

3. As himself reasons, If they be signs, then they signify and speak
somewhat, and to whom but to us? So here, if they speak for God, Page 15.
they speak to some body for him; and if to any, to whom but to us; whom God
(says Mr. Swan) has given a lofty countenance to look up unto them? And if
to us, why not to mankind in general? or why to Astrologers only? Or lastly,
ar there such Wizards as our Astrologers in all parts of the world? for they
are the only men, that understand the Stars language, as Mr. Swan informs us.

4. That they should not be signs, unles they should foreshew somewhat; and
much more, unles they should portend some sad matter, is a very weak and sandy
conseqence, as by instances not a few bath evidently ben showed already

5. If the Sun Moon and Stars be Signs, does it thence follow, that all their
particular motions, meetings, configurations, aspects, conjunctions,
oppositions, risings, settings, etc. be significant, and portend some new
matter? The Tabernacle was a sign, as was also the Temple, Heb. 10 1. but can
it thence follow, that every loop, or tach, or pin, or stake, or socket, or
cord, or curtain, and the length, and breadth, and depth, of each, or coupling
of them one to another, or distance of them one from another, or situation of
them one against another, or taking of each down, and folding of it up when
they were to remov. or unfolding of each again, and setting it up, when they
were to make some stay, were all therefore significant also and mysterious?
that men should employ their wanton wits (as it were to be wished that some did
not) in picking strange matters and deep mysteries out of each of them. Or
because the Paschal Lamb was a sign, and represented Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7. does
it thence follow, that its fleece signified one thing, and its hoofs an other,
and its ears a third, and its eyes a fourth, and its purtenance a fifth, and
its posture in the dish, a sixth, and so forward, with fore leg and him leg,
and right and left eye, and ear, and nostril, and legs, and the like? What we
find in Scripture noted as symbolical in it, that with good ground we deem
significant. And what we find in Gods Word noted as significant in these
celestial creatures, that may we warrantably conclude to be such, and so far
forth significant as it informs us, or strength of reason thereupon grounded
shall lead us. As for configurations being mere contrivances of man's fancy, to
what end soever at first framed, or to what other good purpose soever still
retained, for the better observation of the motions rising and setting of each
of them, and the distinguishing of them one from another, to make mysterious
signs of them, or attribute ought to them, in regard of such Figures as man's
fancy has framed them unto, what can it be les then mere superstition and a
palpable abuse of them? Can not the Sun, Moon and Stars speak unto us, unles
they speak unto us by all these particulars?

Lastly, do not the Stars speak at all unto us, unless they speak to us in the
Wizards language? This is just like to the Patrones of Popish superstitions,
and of that monster more particularly of Transubstantiation; who because they
find the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood often termed a Mystery, and a great
Mystery in the writings of the Ancient Fathers, would thence conclude it to be
a Miracle, or a miraculous Mystery, such a Mystery as they would have it to
be. For so does Mr. Swan reason, and Mr. Lilie before him; The Sun, Moon and
Stars ar signs: therefore Fortune-telling signs, foretelling the ruin of
Kingdoms and States or such signs as we Wizards will have them to be. But this
is to reason a genere praedicato ad speciem statuendam, A Mystery; and
therefore a miraculous Mystery? A sign; therefore a prodigious or portending
sign: as if one should thus reason; A man is an animal; and therefore a bruit:
or, An ass is an animal: and therefore a reasonable creature. And as we
therefore answer those Romish Factors, that the Sacrament of Baptism is a
Mystery, and yet not a miracle; the Element of water in it is mysterious, yet
no miraculous matter. no such essential change in the one, as from the word
Mystery they would infer in the other. So may we justly return the like answer
to these Wizards and their Factors, that the Rainbow, Circumcision, the
Passover, the Sabbath, diverse other were, and our Sacraments ar Signs; and yet
neither such prodigious or portending signs, as from this term given them, or
office thereby assigned them, they would conclude these to be. But we will take
Mr. Swans argument, and try what use we can make of it. The Stars were not
signs, if they did not speak somewhat. To which I ad, that it is sufficient to
proov them Signs if they do speak some what; as it is enough to make letters
and words signs, if they signify somewhat. But the Psalmist says, they speak
somewhat, and tells us withal what somewhat it is that they say. the stars
therefore may be signs, tho they speak no more then what the Psalmist says
they do; rho they speak not such a language as Mr. Swan and his Clients would
have them to speak, ^nstit. l. 1. c. 5. ^. ^.
and rack Moses most unreasonably to make him say that they say. Communi omnium
idiomate (idiotismo, we may ad also) loquntur, says Calvin speaking of this
place* They speak in a language that all may understand. These men's Astrology
therefore is not, as Mr. Swan before told us, the stars language: for Mr. Swan
himself tells us in the very Front of his Book, that few understand that: and
yet has the same man the boldness to say, Page 14.
thus they work and by their working they speak to all those who will but lend
an ear to hear them.

But these men, tho they be not able to make out from this Text, so much as
they avow, and would thence conclude, concerning the Voice of these celestial
Creatures, as portending and threatening such dismal matter as they would have
them to foreshew; yet would they from hence infer and enforce upon us matters
of an higher nature and greater concernment, to wit, that they do not only
portend such things as events, but produce them as effects. And here Mr. Swan
to ty us fast hand and tongue, that we may not once hiscere, open or stir
against what he propounds, tells us; that It is an axiom so firmly grounded
upon experience, Ibid.
that all the world will never be able to confute it, that the Lights of Heaven
work upon the inferior world; and the virtues and powers by which they work
were at first Divinely stamped in them, (where, if not here by this Word of God
in the Creation of them?) and are elsewhere called by the name of influences;
(of which term in his du place) and that even to the subversion of States, Page
18.
change of Common-weals, Translations of Kingdoms, with change of Laws and
Religion.

But, Sir, let your Axiom be never so undeniable, such as all the world can
not refute: yet (qid dignum tanto hiatu?) your Argument thence drawn to
conclude what it should proov, is so silly, as that not some exqisite
Sophister, but any punie Sophumer may at first sight discover the feebleness of
it. For let your Argument be drawn into a syllogistical form, and what will it
be but this? [The Lights of Heaven work upon this inferior world. But the Sun,
and Moon, and Stars are the Lights of Heaven. Ergo the Sun, Moon and Stars work
upon the inferior World, to the subversion of States, changes of Common-Weals,
Laws and Religion, and Translations of Kingdoms, etc.] For who sees not, if
he have but his eyes in his head, that there is much more in the Conclusion
then is to be found in the Premises? Or thus if you please; [The Lights of
Heaven work upon this World by a power stamped at first upon them by God: Page
21.
But the Sun, Moon and Stars ar such Lights; Ergo they work by such a power, to
subvert States, and translate Kingdoms, to make new Lords and new Laws.] And
is not this think we an irrefragable Argument? or were it not worthy rather to
be hissed out of the Schools?

But thus we have at length the full latitude of these men's interpretation of
Moses his words, or Gods rather by Moses recorded; [Let the Lights of Heaven be
Signs, not only to foreshew, what men bred and born under them shall be and
shall do, and what evils shall betide them in life and in death, and to portend
Rebellions and Ruins of Kingdoms, States and Churches; but efficacious Signs
so to work upon men, as to make them thievish and lecherous, and disloyal, and
furious; to make them subject to many miseries and disasters in their lives,
and to bring them at length to such and such evil ends; and upon States to stir
up people to sedition and Rebellion; and to subvert and utterly overthrow them,
change their fundamental Laws, and to remov the Religion professed formerly
among them.] All this and much more then this they ascribe to the Stars: and
when we demand, where they find that God at first endued them with this power,
they deem it answer sufficient to tell us, that God himself when he made them,
said, Let them be for Signs. Is not this I say, non sanguinem elicere, but
saniem exprimere? to wring Scripture, not until they make it yield blood, but
until they sqize out of it such rotten stuff, such purulent matter, as a man
would wonder any Christian soul should not abhor?

Mr. Swan did forecast, what would here be objected; to wit* that the Word of
God tells us, that its God, not the Stars, that disposes Kingdoms and States,
Prove. 8.15, 16. that sets up and pulls down; Psalm. 75.7. that, as Daniel told
Nebuchadnezzar, rules the Kingdoms of men, not leaving them to the disposal of
the Stars, but giving them to whom he pleases, Dan. 4.25.

To this Mr. Swan returns a long laci^ious answer, winding and turning to and
fro, Page 18.19.
as a Hare in chase to elude the the Hunts-man and his Hounds. The sum of what
he says, in short is this; that Its one thing to so dispose of Kingdoms, as
to translate them to another Nation; another thing so to dispose of of them, as
they who live in them to be punished for their sins. Which distinction of
his, what it makes for his purpose, a better head then mine must tell. For God,
he grants does the one as well as the other, and does he not for man's sins as
well the one as the other? See Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5. or do not our Astrologers ascribe
the periods of Kingdoms to the Stars? or have the Stars any regard to the
goodness or badnesse of a people, working as these Wizards, and their Patrons
tell us, in a natural course, not in a moral or arbitrarie way, as well in the
one as in the other?

2. To omit what he returns to an Objection of his own framing, that God works
always extraordinarily in such cases: (which no wise man I think, will or did
ever avow) that yet the signs of Heaven have their working also, and ar
serviceable to God in these. Which what is it else but (...), principium
p^tere, to bring us back to that which was in qestion at first; and to prove
what he would have, by that which is under debate?

Besides that the qestion is not, whether God by a miraculous way make use of
any creature to effect thereby, what he pleases, but whether these celestial
bodies have an innate power to effect such strange alterations in States, as
our Wizards attribute to them.

I might demand of him where in any authentical Record, he he finds that God
ever made such use of the Stars.

Page 19.
For who almost would not smile to read to this purpose alleged, that of
Asaph, Psalm. 50.4. He shall call to the Heavens from above, and to the earth,
that he may judge his people. that is, to hear the debates, and decide the
con^roversie between him and them? For did not Esaias, chap. 1.2. and Moses
before him, Deuteronomy. 30.29. and 32.1. call Heaven and Earth to hear the
controversies between God and his people, and to bear witness what was to pass
in way of plea and allegation on Gods behalf against them; implying thereby
what they might do and would do, were they apprehensive of such affairs? See
the like, Jer. 2.12, 13. Mic. 6.1, 2. And might not that man deservedly be
derided, who would thence conclude that the stars had ears to hear, what God or
his Prophets there said; as well as the Jewish Masters, who with some great
Heathen Writers, from Psalm. 19.1. assert them to be rational creatures? or
that should from the places before designed out of Moses, Asaph, Esaias, Jeremie,
and Micah, maintain as much concerning the mountains of the earth, and the
earth it self, as these men would hence gather concerning the Stars and the
Heavens?

As little to any purpose for proof of the point in qestion is that other
instance from Deboraes words, The stars in their courses fought against Sisera,
Judge. 5.20.

For first, if Rhetorical flourishes be made matter of Faith, and Allegorical
expressions strained up to the highest piteh of propriety, we shall soon frame
a strange and monstrous Body of Divinity, and make Scripture story little
better then a Popish Legend, or a Jewish Talmud, which by such means is grown
up to a main mass of fabulous and ridiculous relations. Will any be so absurd,
as because David one while complains that He stuck in the mire where he found
no footing, Psalm, 69.20. an other while praises God for drawing him up out of
the miry clay, Psalm. 40.2. Plut. Mario.
Therefore to imagine, that David sometime like to the Roman Marius, lay hid
in a bog, from whence God in safety drew him out? Or because God threatens the
Israelites by Amos, chap. 8.9. that he would cause the Sun to set with them at
noon tide, and darken the earth in the clear day; can it thence be concluded,
that some great Eclipse of the Sun should fall out on that day, wherein the
judgment then threatened should be inflicted? Galatin. arcan. l. 8. c. 19.
or as some groundlesly, that it should be a Prophecy of that obscuration of
the Sun at the time of our Saviors suffering? Matthew. 27.45. or when God says
of Babel, that at the time of her fall, Esaias, 13.10. as if the Heavens should
wear blacks for her, The stars of Heaven, and the constellations thereof shall
not give their light, the Sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon
shall not cause her light to shine out; who understands not, that the meaning in
both places is other then the propriety of the letter imports? to wit, in the
one, that in the height of their prosperity and jollitie they should suddenly
be surprised with anxietie and distress, that should dash all their glory, and
mar, yea utterly damp all their mirth: in the other, that they should have no
more joy or comfort in ought, albeit they had Daylight, or Moonlight, or
Starlight; then as if the whole Heaven over their heads were totally darkened,
and those glorious Luminaries all utterly extinct. Take one place for all,
wherein most Interpreters agree, and against which there can be no exception.
It is said, Rev. 6.12, 14. Upon the opening of the sixth seal, there was a
great Earthqake, and the Sun became like a sackcloath of hair, and the Moon
became as blood, and the Stars of Heaven fell down to the Earth, even as a
Fig Tree casts its green Figs when its shaken with a mighty wind; and the
Heavens went away like a scrole, when it is rolled up together; and every
Mountain and Island were removed out of their place, etc. much whereof is
borrowed from Esaias, 34:4, and is all spoken as the most and best Interpreters
unanimously agree of that great and strange change, that was wrought in the
World, upon Constantines conversion to the Christian Faith, the abolition of
idolatry generally before professed, and the profession of Christianity
settled in the room of it; together with the consternation of the Pagan party,
that so possessed the minds of men great and small, high and low in all parts, as
if the whole world had been turned upside down, as the Cynik said it would be
shortly after his decease, Diogenes. Lae^t. l. 6.
and willed them therefore to bury him with his face downward; and as well the
Heavens above, as the earth beneath, had with a most violent concussion ben
shaken and removed out of their wonted places: albeit not any of those
particulars there recited were in likelihood literally then effected. For of
the last day of the World the subseqent Prophecies will not permit it to be
expounded.

Now to apply this and the former instances to our present purpose; when
Deborah says, The stars fought from Heaven, the stars from their ramparts, or
terraces, or parapets, or higher works, fought against Sisera; It is by Peter
Martyr, Junius, Piscator, Antiqit. l 5. c. 1.
and who not? after Joseph the Jew, expounded of such storms and tempests, with
gusts of wind, showers of hailstone and rain, cracks of thunder; flashes of
Lightning or the like: such as that was in Egypt, Exodus 9.23, 24. that at
Gibeon Josh. 10.11. and that described, in likelihood, at the destruction of
Pharaoh and his troops, Exodus 14.24, and 15.6.7. Psalm. 77.16.18. So vehement
and violent, that all the powers of Heaven might seem to concur and join
together in the encounter with, and the assaults of Sisera and his forces: tho
it be not therefore necessary to imagine, that the Stars had any particular
employment in that Action; no more then the Sun or Moon, or Stars, in those
other before described. That some such storm is there intended, is the more
probable, in regard of that which is there subjoyned that the river Kishon
swept them away; being raised up and swelling in likelihood by the abundance of
rain, that then suddenly fell.

But let us grant Mr. Swan, which yet cannot be proved; no more then that there are (...) ramparts, or terraces, or parapets in Heaven; that the Stars had such
a particular employment in this business; will this* think we, be a sound
Argument? God did sometime extraordinarily, and for ought can be said,
miraculously make use of the Stars to defeat some forces: Ergo Stars have an
innate power from their original stamped on them by God to do much mischief, and
to overthrow Countries and Kingdoms. Or may not one upon the same ground
reason in this manner? Christ made use of clay tempered with spittle for the
opening of the eyes of one that was born blind, John 9.6. Ergo clay tempered
with fasting spittle has a singular faculty and innate virtue given it by
God, to cure such as are born blind, which Christ doubtless well knew,
otherwise he would never have made use of it to any such purpose. The one
Argument is sure enough every whit as good as the other, and it may evidently
show, what pass they are at, that are fain to fly for want of sounder Arguments
to such sorry. shifts as these.

But Mr. Swan proceeds to demonstrate unto us, taking in Sr. page 20
W. Ralegh for his second, how Mars, that fierce and furious fellow is able to
subvert any Kingdom or State. For after a long discourse, how the stars work
upon elementarie bodies, and so mediately upon men's souls, their minds and
their wills; (which you must remember, must be according to such faculties, as
our Wizards have assigned them: for ye must of necessity, as Mr. Lilie pleads,
grant them their principles, tho they be not able to prove them:) [Hence says
he, it comes to pass, that in places where the present state of things is apt
to kindle into a combustion, there Mars being powerful in operation, does
sometime sow the seeds of War; or the Air being out of tune by bad influences
of Planets, causes not only many sicknesses, but strange disorders of minds,
which breaking out into act, do many times disturb States, translate Kingdoms,
etc. For when the Air is distemperately heated, then it is for certain very
apt so to disorder and dry up the blood, as to breed much choler red and
adust; this stirs up to anger, with thoughts of furious and violent actions;
whence War, from War Victory, from it change of Common-Weals, and translations
of Kingdoms, change of Laws and Religion, New Lords, new Laws.

Have we not an ocular demonstration of whar was before said, of the Power that
the Stars have over Persons and Peoples, Kingdoms and States? But I suppose we
shall not need to borrow great Alexanders whiniard to cut this Gordian knot
asunder, any sorry whittle will serve the turn. In a word Sir, you beg still the
qestion, you presume what you should prove, that which you know is denied, and
must still be denied until it be proved, that the Stars have such bad
influences, that is, as before you explaind your self, Powers and faculties
stamped in them by God. Now this we deny, and for us to deny it, is enough. You
that avow it, mvst prove it. And this Mr. Swan will as well be able to prove,
as Mr. Lilie his Client, that the good Angels told holy men so; or Mr. Johnson
his Antagonist, that God told it to Adam. Now this barely denied, cuts clean
away the dependence and consecution of all that follows after and is inferred
thereupon. Here therefore we might justly without more ado set down our rest,
and ease our selves of further labor: Howbeit to manifest the impiety of this
groundless conceit, and the frivolousnesse of these specious pretenses, we
shall take a little pains to wade somewhat further in discussion of these their
Assertions.

First therefore, whereas Moses tells us, and God himself by Moses, that God at
the first made all things good, yea very good, Genesis 1.30. Yet Mr. Swan and his
Clients tell us, it is not so. God created some stars and Planets with a
malignant power stamped in them by their ascendencies, conjunctions, aspects,
and eclipses, etc, coming as constantly and certainly at set times, as day and
night, summer and winter, by that course that God entered them into at first; and
working as necessarily, as fire heats and burns, where it meets with
combustible matter, to instill into Adams iss^ that should be bred and born
under them, yea or live under their pretended regiment, whether he stood or
fell, a vehement inclination, and strong disposition in some to fury, in some
to folly in some to thievery, in some to lechery, and the like: as also to
produce plagues, seditions, insurrections, changes of State and Government, and
the like epidemical evils, in those Climates and Countries, unto which they
have special relation, without respect to any notorious wickedness, or heinous
delinqencies reigning in those regions. Now consider we seriously, and sadly
withal, what an height of impiety this may raise up men's spirits, prone
enough by nature to entertain and embrace any conceit tho never so vain tending
thereunto. For when any such judgment in an excess more then ordinary, of
mortality, famine, war forain or intestine, shall befall a people, and Gods
faithful Ministers shall enform them, as Paul those at Corinth, 1. Cor. 11.30.
that such evils befall them for such and such sins, as they observe to be rife
with them, and to reign among them; may not men trained up in these Schools,
and drencht with these Principles tell their Teachers, that it is a fond and
frivolous fancy, to tell them, that these evils befall men for their sins; for
that these things were in the course of Nature necessarily produced by the
Stars, and must needs therefore in their set times as certainly come, as the
Sun keep his course, whether men did well or ill? Ye see, what a prone and plain
path to impiety and contempt of Gods judgments, is paved out by these dreams
and dotages, and made not slick and smooth only, but even steep and slipperie,
to work the downfall and breakneck of men's souls. What Engine more efficacious
could the whole Court of Hell devise, to keep men from repentance for their
sins, when God by his judgments calls upon them for it then this? Which we may
therefore deservedly deem to have come out of the Devils Forge; for this end
and purpose there contrived, by holding men in impenitencie to help to fill Hell.

2. We might demand of Mr. Swan, who made that third Planet Mars, so powerful
in operation, and of so bad influence, as well as of his Client Mr. Lilie who
has made that fixed Star the Buls-ey to be so hot fierce and furious. It was
those in likelihood that so Christened him, and dedicated him thereby to that
furious deity. God, we are sure of it, never so named him; nor, that can be
proved, ever gave him such power.

3. Mars, says Mr. Swan, works thus in such places, Where the state of things
is apt to kindle into a combustion. and does not Mars by his innate power, and
powerful operation over men's genitures from their very birth design and dispose
them thereunto? Page 14.
Or does not your Client Mr. Lilie tell us that the former Eclipse of the Moon
that we had the last year, being in the beginning of Libra a turbulent and evil
sign, and its greatest obscuration falling near or fully in the seventh House,
is without doubt the forerunner of many tumults and desperate designs, that
shall terminate in the blood of those that contrived them? and that without any
such proviso, where a state is apt so to kindle? Yea may we not well say, that
these men's predictions ar fit matter to kindle men into combustions? Since that
from a multitude of instances it may be made evident, that by such courses,
people have been incited and animated unto insurrections and rebellions, that
which Agrippa sometime minded Augustus of. Dio. l. 42.


4. If by such means, to wit, of overheating men's bodies, breeding abundance of
Choler adust in them. Mars is wont to produce War and change of States, and the
like; Why should we not have War and a change of State, so often as we have any
extraordinary scorching hot Summer? For from the same causes why should not the
same effects flow? yea according to this deduction, the danger of change in
States, should arise from none but such as ar choleric and hasty; whereas it
proceeds rather often times from close and reserved persons, men of a diverse
constitution: whence it was that Caesar said, Plut. apopth.
He feared more: hose meager pale fellows Brutus and Cassius, then Antonie and
Dolobella.

5. If the Efficacy of the Stars hang upon such loos links, as the long chain,
(the longer, and the more links, the weaker) of Mr. Swans sorites consists of;
how uncertain must his Clients Predictions all of them proov? which yet with
such confidence they are wont to give out, as has formerly ben showed. Mars
does sometime sow seeds of War, (not ever belike then.) and, Disorders of mind
breaking out into acts do many times (not at all times; or necessarily then)
either disturb States, or work some unlucky disaster; (but not unless they
break out into action; nor then this or that disaster more then any other;) and
again, Choler adust stirs up anger: (but not necessarily, unless it be stirred)
and anger breeds War; (and so often as men ar once angry, must War needs ensu?)
and, from war comes victory; (not always neither: how often do forces come off
with eqal loss on either side?) and from Victory proceeds change of Common
VVeals and translations many times (not always belike then) of Kingdoms. But
how many fights may there be, yea and victories too on either side, between
State and State, (I spare instances) and yet no change of State with either?
And what an heap of Inferences are here packt and patcht up together to make up
Mr. Swans Sorites* no one whereof has any necessary. connection with another?
for men may have store of Choler, and yet not be angry; be angry, and not not
fight; fight, and not overcome; overcome, and not change State, or translate
Kingdom. Whereas in a Sorites, if any one link fail, the conclusion is of no
force. So that we may well say here as Pliny in somewhat the like case, Hist.
Not. l. 2. c. 7.
Solum inter ista certum est, nihil esse certi, there is no certainty of ought
in these things, but that nothing is certain.

6. If the Planets work for the subversion of States by no other way then this,
how is it that Mr. Swans Client tells us in his New Ephemeris, [That when Saturn
is got into a Regal sign wherein he has no right of Dominion, he stirs up in
the minds of many men in the Regions subject unto that Sign a desire to rule
like a company of Kings and Tyrants, and to back their crooked actions by
force, power, impudency, and a kind of severe reverence of their Persons,
while they mind only a continuation of War for maintenance of their present
greatness; and they that govern regard more the fi^^ing and cramming their
purses and coffers with gold and silver, then the business and common good of
the Nation: at which time there will be much breach of trust; -- the Air dark
and dry, and much cold wether*] and all this not from the constitution of men's
bodies, but from the Regalitie of the Sign. Where, Sir, you see the Planets
and the Signs, working another way, and in another manner on men's minds then
you tell us; and causing disturbances as well in cold wether as in ho^. And
again in his Dark year, page 8. [That Saturn and Jupiter do change and
overturn many humane affairs, and do work diversely therein when they change
from one Triplicitie to another, and that having ben for some 200. years in the
Waterie Triplicitie, they are now entered into the Fiery Triplicitie, and will
therein continu for almost 180 years; during which time, as Water and Fire ar
contraries; so the Actions of these times to come will be qite avers to what was
in those times past.] So that Mr. Swan must invent some new way to show, how
those his imaginary Rulers of humane affairs do subvert and change States, as
well in their waterie Regiment, as in their fiery Reign; as well by rheumatik
and phlegmatik humors, as by superabundance of choler adust.

Little pleasure therefore in fine has Mr. Swan done his Clients by all this
his long discourse, and the sandy chain of his sorry sorites consisting of so
many links, not one of any necessary coherence or connection with an other. For
suppose we should, to do Mr. Swan a pleasure, grant him over liberally, as much
as he here presumes, and would either crave of us, or obtrude upon us, to wit,
that the Planets by some malignant qalities do work upon men's bodies, and by
this means also disturb their minds, and so make them to do such and such
things. Yet would this be sufficient to justify that Art of judiciary
Astrology or Astromancie rather, which he has here undertaken to defend? How
many courses ar there by these Wizards his Clients generally professed and
practiced, which this his Argument drawn from the Celestial creatures working
upon Elementary bodies, and by men's complexions or constitutions upon their
souls and minds, will not reach?

And first here, how came it to pass, that Mr. Swan forgot the principal
Occasion of his present Discourse, the matter of Eclipses? Why did he not as
well undertake to demonstrate from the grounds of Nature, and those
irrefragable, that these Eclipses have such an innate power in them to produce
such terrible Effects, as his Clients ascribe to them; as that Mars, that
unruly and turbulent Planet by disaffecting men's bodies to distemper their
souls, and so disturb and subvert States? But the task belike was too difficult
for him to undertake: or else he was loath, as Whartons whipper, of his friend
Mr. Lilly, by such dealings to make his people as wise in these matters as
himself. The present Occasion of the next days Eclipse, for which the Sermon
was prepared, one would have thought should have reqired this rather then that,
concerning which his peoples thoughts were then wholly taken up* without regard
of Mars, a Planet it may be, that the most of them never heard word of before.

Besides, there is an other matter of much concernment; for it is a principal
pillar, Prefac. to Eng^. Proph. Mer^l.
on which the support of his Clients Trade mainly depends; to wit, the
Cognizance of Qestions; which tho (says Mr. Lilie) Many have no conceit of,
and suppose Ptolomey did not approve; yet if the Centiloqium be his, the
Qestion is ended: but whether he did approov or no; if Art since his time have
found out more then he knew, (all Astrology was not buried with Ptolomey) it
is not to be rejected. And indeed, what ever ground there be for it, as a young
Attorney sometime that went very brave, above the most of his rank, being
demanded how he could maintain such apparel, made answer; that He maintained
not his apparel, but his apparel maintained him; Juvenal. sat. 7*
(what thereby he meant the Satyrist will show) so this here must be maintained,
because it maintains them. The business is this* their Clients repair to them
when they have lost Linen, Pewter, Plate or ought else, to know what is become
of their goods; a Man's servant is run away from his Master, and his Master
would fain know which way he is gone; a man has a mind to a woman that may be
his wife, and he would know, whether he be like to obtain her or no; a woman
that has a suitor, whether such a match will be succesful; one intending the
Sea, whether the voyage will be advantageous; some that have friends or other
relations abroad at Sea, or in forain parts, for these and the like purposes
repair for resolution to Mr. Lily, he acknowledges as much, he takes rheir
money, and tells them somewhat what he pleases; and sometimes (he says) he
gives them satisfaction, and sometimes he erres. but their moneys he has, and
that he is sure of, howsoever it fall out, or fare with the parties from whom
he has it: it is just with them, as it is usually with those that for stolen
goods repair to your Newgate-Birds; and thereby for the most part they do but
make some further addition to their former losses: and hereof therefore he may
say, as the Parasite or cogging knave in the Comedy, Hinc qestus no^is est
uberrimus, by this cheating course our greatest gain comes in. See Mr. Miltons
Figure-caster. I forbear to relate what notorious pieces of knavery ar reported
to have been practiced under pretense of this Star-advice in contriving of
matches, and bringing of them about by setters made use of for that purpose,
money for advice being taken on both sides; because that will justly be deemed
a gross abuse of the pretended Art; or to rip up such aspersions as by some
Mercuries have herein been cast upon Master Lilie, because I deem Mercuries and
Merlines both of a like credit. I shall only enform you, in what form or
manner Mr. Lilie by his own confession is wont to proceed in entertainment of
his Clients and Customers in these cases, and one head to shun prolixitie,
shall serve for all; which also, that we may not wrong him, you shall have in
his own words. [Our manner of dealing is thus, one loses somewhat; W. L. where
before.
and every man would willingly have his own again, or know which way or by
whom it is gone. He comes to us and asks our advice, if we can help him to it
again: this, I confess, is the ordinary qestion and manner of proposal. I
think no man ever warranted the goods again; that can not be done.] (That no
man ever did warrant it, may justly be doubted; but unless you put them in good
hope of it, your custom would soon fail) only thus much we do; we erect our
Figure, and give answer, whether man or woman did the fact, their qalitie and
shape, domestical or not, to what part of Heaven the things are carried, the
probability of being obtained again or not. and the like you may conceive of
the rest of the qestions or proposals before mentioned. and all these things in
a Natural way from the Stars, for in all this he assures us that he makes no
use of ought, Ibid.
but of Nature only. Now here if Master Swan can come in at a dead lift, and
make it appear how by Natural courses all these matters may be effected, and
from such irrefragable Principles as he talks of, or reasons thereupon built,
and thence necessarily deduced, sound proof may be made, that by contemplation
of the Stars and the situation of them. either at the time of the thing done,
(which commonly is unknown) or of the qestion moved concerning it, Mr. Lilie or
any of his accomplices can frame such judgments, as he here confesses they do,
he shall do him and them Knight Service, and to make use of Mr. Lilies
expressions, Erit illis magnus Apollo. Which until he, or some other of their
Advocates shall do, both he and the rest of his consorts ar in danger justly to
be deemed no other then a Crew of cheating companions, or such as work with
damned Spirits. And this they have the more need of Mr. Swans help in, because
it is the most advantageous branch of their trade. I remember, when during my
employment at Lincolns Inn, I lodged in the vacation times with a friend and
kinsman in the edge of North-hamptonshire, there abode not far from thence, but
in Buckinghamshire, one Master Sandy a Minister, withal professing Physic,
of the same kindred and family, it may be with that grave, reve^end, and
profoundly learned Doctor Napier, for matter of Astrology incomparably beyond
all the Scholars of other Nations that ever Master Lilie was acqainted with:
For I have heard, that he had a brother Merchant in London, that was called
Master Sandy, as he was, but after King James his coming in, being Knighted by
him, of Master Robert Sandy became Sir Robert Napier. This man, as I said,
professing Physic, when any repaired to him for advice, or he was called out
to visit a Patient, used to erect a Figure from the time of the qestion
demanded concerning the party, and thence to conclude for recoverie or death.
and being on such an ocsion, the Lady where I then abode, lying very weak,
reqested a visit, to join with Doctor Cotta of North-hampton, more to satisfy
some of her near friends, then any misdoubt the other had of her recovery, at
his access thither presently had recourse to his Ephemeris, and after
Consultation with that sight, of the Patient, and a little conference with the
Doctor, approoved the courses he had taken, advised to continue them, and there
might thereby be hope of recovery, hasted away, having taken his fee; after his
return home told some of her friends, that she could not live a week to an end;
which proved otherwise: for the Gentlewoman recovered, and lived many a year
after. Now this man demanded by some of his neighbor Ministers, what ground or
warrant he had for such a course of judicature; all he had to say for it, was
that He had received it from an ancient Physician of long experience, and had
himself found it very succesful. and that is just as much as Master Swan has
said, for the matter of Eclipses.

Lastly, to pass by all other, is not the judgment of Genitures, whereof they
are termed Genethliaei, a principal part of this pretended Art? and does not
the prediction of casual Events grounded upon the Constellations at the time of
men's Nativities, which have no relation at all to the Constitutions of the
body; possess a large room, and fill either page usually in their judgments
of Genitures? Nor were it a hard matter indeed to fill up not some few pages,
but many large folioes with instances of this Nature. But I will content my
self with a few, and those out of one Author, Rodolph Goclein the younger, (in
whose steps Master Swan treades much) a stout maintainer of, and sedulous
practitioner in this pretended Art and Trade, as the like in other vanities of
the same stamp with this. In his Vranoscopie, among many other, in the first
place he presents us with the geniture of a young man a Dane, that suffered
death for a murder: That, says he, having erected a Figure of his Nativitie,
who could not but see, to be portended by the Stars, from the combination of
Mars with a violent Star called the head of Algol? For the Luminaries having
Mars mingled with the head of Medusa (a Monster which they have given a room in
the Heavens) does signify according to our Astrological Aphorisms, (which
must pass for Divine Dictates) such as ar to be beheaded: (not hanged then
belike) and our jovial men could not prevail to save him, interceeding for his
life, because Jupiter was but weak in his geniture, and in an abject part of
Heaven: nor could the Women, albeit they also assayed what they could, do him
any good, because Saturn made the mischief the more, being retrograde in the
ascendent, and Mars seated in his essential dignity, etc. An other geniture he
gives us of an other murderer. In this Mars, says he, culminating in the West
with the Stars of Cancer, did strongly signify bloodshed, and meeting his
Horoscope, did besides murder to be committed by him, portend imprisonment for
it, which for six Months he sustained: yet for this Trigon of the Moon,
Mercury, and Saturn and Jupiter then Lord of the twelfth House, great Jovial
men interceeding for him, he was at length set at liberty. But to let all the
rest pass, concerning his own geniture, whereof he has drawn a Scheme, he
tells us, that certain malignant Stars situate in the Angle of the Earth, and
afflicting the Moon in the qadrate Angle of the West, did portend him great
danger by slips and falls from aloft: whereunto he adds, that accordingly he had
had two grievous falls, whereby his feet were hurt; (some such malignant Stars
in likelihood had Mephibosheth in his Geniture. See 2. Sam. 4.4. and 9.13.) and
withal admonishes men very sadly and seriously, not rashly to imagine, that
they can escape and avoid dangers, when they have malignant Stars in their
geniture so situated: and subjoyns, that unless the one of them had been seated
in its dignities, and the Moon supported with the Trigon of Venus, he had
hardly escaped with his life. But Mercury being in his principal essential
dignities, conferred on him a Mercurial wit; (It was well he made him not a
thief) to which the sextile of Saturn added profound Cogitations, (such as you
see these conceptions are) and the Sun fervor of spirit; (gallant spirits, I
hope then all that are born at Noontide, if no unluckie Planet cross it)
Jupiter in the ninth, and Mercury in the third House, imported journeyes as
well long as short. the Signs were all prosperous and honorable, by reason of
their beneficial Signicatours; Mars only excepted, (he might otherwise have
prooved a brave Warrier) who being Lord of the ninth House, imported at some
time peril by water, which yet else where he imputes to the Moons being then in
the sign of Aqarius, and wounded with another malignant aspect; thus the Stars
in the Heavens, it seems fight together, and wound one an other) which he
called to mind, when being wrecked on the Swedish Coast, he hardly escaped
with his life; but the most luckie trine of Venus (well deserving therefore the
title of a Deity) to the Moon, and the Moon withal hasting in his geniture to
the Sextile of the Sun, did mitigate many calamities to him. And are not
these such fopperies and fooleries as do justly deserve laughter? Or may we not
well deem those given up to strong delusions to believe lies, that give heed to
such frivolous fancies as these? or is all that Master Swan has above
delivered, of any force to warrant such significations and operations enstamped
upon the Stars, as this Doctrine of Genitures extends unto? which out of this
Author I the rather relate, for that Master Swan in his Inference annexed unto
his former discourse, takes up the same words and taunting terms used by him
against those, that tax and deride these fond and bold fancies, or refuse to
afford them credit.

For albeit all that he has herein produced, be of no force or use to support
the main tottering Fabric of this their groundless Art; yet as if he had done
them a stout piece of service, and cleared all their never yet prooved, nor
ever to be prooved, Principles, he breaks forth into an Exclamation and
Declamation against all those that do not acknowledge the Truth of them, and
that deride them much more. All which, Page 21.
says he, is very plain; (and plain dallying and playing indeed; and yet
neither plain dealing: for concealing much of what is by them averred; nor
sound arguing and debating; for presuming what is to be proved) and yet there
be some, says he, so full of scruples, that they altogether oppose this
manifest Doctrine: (to wit, that God endued the Stars with malignant
properties, when at first he made them; which must needs be manifest, because
himself, his Clients, and some their Patrons so say,) others so full of self
conceit, (because they relish not all that you and your Wizards say) and
Epicurean security, (such as God by Jeremie encouraged his People unto, not to
dread such vanities) that they wickedly deride it, (deride it indeed
deservedly; for it is worthy of derision; yet not wickedly, no more then Esaias,
and by Esaias God himself did, Esaias, 47.12, 13.) Whom we leave (says he) to
play the fools with their fond fancies, frivolous frumps, and affected
derisions. We well understand your friend Gocleins Language, from whom you
borrow all this, but Sir, be pleased to know, that those whom you speak of,
some as good men, and as wise as either Goclein or your self, do no more play
the fool in deriding the fond and impious fancies of those whom you Patronize,
then did Elias in deriding Baals Priests and Prophets; 1. King. 18.27. Or
Tertullian in dealing after the same manner with the Valentinians, whose
fantastical conceits were just as these of your Clients, no less impious then
ridiculous. But you conceive us to be such, Page 21.
as want rather a little Hellebore to cure our brains, then force of reason by
Arguments and Demonstration to inform our judgments. And indeed by this
discourse you have sufficiently, yea abundantly showed* that you so deem of us.
For how little force of reason there is in any of your Arguments, to convince
any man, that will not renouncing his own reason, swallow down your Principles,
admitting them upon your bare word without proof, will (I hope) easily appear
to any one, not forestalled with prejudice, by what has been here returned
thereunto.

But such a one, Master Swan says, Ibid.
he thinks was Pericles that great and famous Athenian. he should rather have
said, that crackbraind fellow, one that wanted a little Hellebore to purge his
brains, and that loved to play the fool with his own fond fancies and frumps.
For such they are among whom he ranks Pericles. for which his censure of him,
some it may be will deem that himself may need as much Hellebore as all
Anticyra will yield. The Story of him he relates in effect as I have before
delivered it in dealing with Master Lilie, the close whereof is, that when upon
a Solar Eclipse falling out as he was setting foot on shipboard, the Master of
the Ship was therewith much dismayed, he cast his cloak over his face a while,
and then taking it away again, asked him [If he had been ever a whit the worse
for ir: or, as Master Swan renders it, whether it portended ought, which the
Master denying, no more said he, does this Eclipse; or rather, there is no
difference between the darkness caused by the Eclipse, and that which was
caused by his cloak, save that there was a greater body between the Sun and his
sight in the one, then there was in the other.] Now howsoever Master Swan is
pleased to tax this in Pericles that noble and intelligent Greek, as surely an
over bold presumption; yet does not Master Swans Sentence so peremptorily
pronounced so assure me of the eqitie and reasonableness of it, but that I
dare undertake the justification of him therein, and profess my self to be
therein of the same mind with him, especially had he put but some thick cloud,
or the body of the Earth, in the room of his cloak. To which purpose, having
some neighbors at Supper with me the evening before that expected Black
Monday, when upon some speech of the Eclipse, that was to fall out the next
day, I perceived some of them somewhat fondly affected therewith* I told them
that there would be an other Eclipse, within less then 24. hours after it,
that would be far greater then it, and would last at least twice as long as it.
Which when they wondered much at, I assured them it would so fall out, albeit
that their Almanackes had took no notice, nor made mention at all of it. In
fine, to put them out of their wonderment, I told them, [We were already then
entered into such an Eclipse; yea had such an one every night in the year. the
one being no other then a depriving of us of the Sunne-light in part for a
while by the intervention of the body of the, Moon passing between us and it;
the other a depriving of us of the same Light totally, for a far longer space
of time, by the interposition of the body of the Earth, between us and the
Sun. And there was therefore no more matter of dread, or dismal presage in
the one then in the other.]

Page 21.
Yea but, says Master Swan, the effects of this Eclipse brought not only
misery upon his own Countries and dishonor upon himself, but did put even all
Greece under the sad calamities of a long lasting war. And Master Lilie his
Client begins his Dark year with the same observation. [It was (says he) as
wisely as truly observed by the learned Thucydides, that some years before
those three and twenty years Peloponnesian wars of the miserable Greeks among
themselves; wherein every City or Commonweal of Greece, was in one kind or
other engaged; that those things which in former times there went only a fame
of, tho rarely in fact confirmed, were then made credible, by the ensuing wars
of the Grecians one with another. the forerunners of which qarels he says were
these; Earthqakes generally to the greatest part of the World, and most violent
withal, Eclipses of the Sun oftener then is reported of any former times, great
droughts, etc.]

Our first work here shall be, to rectify the relation, and deliver the truth
of the Story. Thucydides therefore endeavoring to show, that the War, which he
intended to write of, was in diverse respects not matchable only unto, but even
greater then any that had gone before it in Greece, whereof any record was
extant, says, that Poets by their Fictions used much to enhance the greatness
of those Wars whereof they wrote; and Historians also themselves often times
related many things upon bare reports besides the truth of the things reported.
But those strange occurrents before mentioned made this Story the more
remarkable, not that were fore runners, as Master Lilie renders him, or, as he
says, went some years before, that is but his own gloss; but (...), that did
together with that War fall in or fall out, (for the Greek word will bear
either, of Master Lilies notions neither) were not the forerunners, but the
concomitants of it, or concurrent with it. But what do I talk to Master Lilie
of Thucydides his Greek, who understands not so much as one of his own fellow
Wizards Latin, as has formerly ben showed. Now among those things that fell
out during the time of that War, or that fell in with it, ar reckned up, Solar
Eclipses more freqent then in former times: the more in likelihood then
observed in regard of the present state and condition of the times wherein they
fell out; whereof a only ar by Thucydides mentioned, the one in the first, the
other in the eight year of that War; Earthqakes; whereof one, thar did much
mischief, in the sixth, and two other less considerable in the tenth year of
that War: droughts; and dearths following them, now and then lightly touched.
But one of the most remarkable Occurrents of those times was a Pestilential
disease* which taking its rise in Ethiopia, fell down from thence into Egypt:
then out of Africa struck over into Asia; whence crossing the Midland Sea into
Europe, it arrived at Athens in the second year of that War; where it
continued for two years in great force; and in the fifth year breaking out
again, continued about a twelve-moneth; yet not sweeping away so many as
formerly it had done; the manner of it being by observation, better discovered,
and means of remedy and recoverie, accordingly devised and made use of with
success.

These Occurrents therefore, as appears by Thucydides his express terms,
seconded with his punctual Relations, were Comitants of that War; and fell
within the limits of it, not forerunners of it, and that by some years
forepast, as Master Lilie, or the party from whom he had it, do misreport and
belie that Noble Historian. But with the rest of those Accidents at present we
have nothing to do, with the Eclipse only we now deal. The Effects whereof,
says Master Swan brought misery upon Pericles Country, dishonor upon him,
and the Calamities of a long lasting War upon all Greece. Where I might ask
Master Swan what dishonor it brought upon Pericles, who lived and died in high
repute.

It is true, that after the War was begun between the two prime States in
Greece, jealous either of others greatness, having now found occasions to
pick Qarrels either with other, and the Spartanes having invaded the Attike
Territories, Peticles persuaded the Athenians to sit qietly, fortify the
City, send out only some to make light skirmishes, and intercept their
straglers, but to bend their main Forces by Sea to invade the Spartanes and
their accomplices, which would make the Enemies Country the seat of War, and
enforce them to call home their Forces. To which purpose himself in Person set
out with a great Fleet: And howsoever Plutarch says, that in that Expedition
he performed nothing worthy of so great a Preparation, nor did answer the
Peoples Expectation; yet does Thucydides a judicious Writer, approove of his
Advice; and affirms that he did more damage and detriment to the adverse
Party, by wasting their Country, before he returned, then to his Country men
they by their incursion had done. Howbeit the people indeed more sensible of
present loss, then of future emolument, and of their private affairs then of
the public concernment, the War still continuing, began to mutiny, and to
exclaim against Pericles; the poorer sort, in regard of the damage they
sustained, and the difficulties they were driven to in retiring to the City,
the richer sort, because their Country Farms were spoiled, underhand inciting
the rude multitude to cry out against Pericles, as if through his evil advice
they sustained all that they suffered. VVhereupon by the major number of Votes,
(for it was a Popular State) Pericles was at the present put beside his
Command, and Fined in a great sum of money, which he instantly making no
reckoning of it, did not unwillingly pay, but according to the mutable minds of
the multitude, ready to turn to and fro as variably as either VVinde or Tide
is wont, at a second Court or meeting not long after was the same Pericles
created the Commander in Chief, of all the Athenians Forces: in which Command
he continued to his dying day; and so prudently managed the Affairs of that
State, that Thucydides, tho a prime Man of a contrary Faction, by Pericles
prevailing exiled, and in that his Exilement writing his Story, this part of
it at least, after Pericles his de^ase, and no partial Man conseqently in his
behalf, sticks not to affirm, that the swarving from those courses that
Pericles had set on foot while he lived, by those that succeeded him in place
of Command, but not in Policy and prudent disposal of Affairs, brought not
disgrace and dishonor only, but destruction upon diverse of them, and utter
ruin almost upon that State. Which the rather I observe, to show the gross
partiality and malignitie of these men, that regard not what they say, or
write to the disgrace of those, that have in any kind descried, or discovered
and opposed their Fancies. For why should the Effects of this Eclipse be said
to have fallen foul upon Pericles, of whose valor and integrity, prudent and
eqall carriage of State Affairs; Thucydides himself, a Man as well judicious
as ingenuous, tho of an other side sometime in the State, and by means of him
and his friends for a certain number of years seqestred, yet affords a most
ample Testimony, by evidence of Truth evinced; rather then on Cleo that base
turbulent Fellow^, or Demosthenes (not the Orator, but another) that headie,
rash and unadvised Commander, and others of the like stamp, who out of
by-respects to their own private ends, fed the Peoples vain humors with
specious pretenses, and while none durst oppose their Proposals, for fear of
being deemed Malignants, and Enemies to the honor of the State, put them upon
such inconsiderate Designs, as brought not shame and dishonor alone, but
ruin and destruction also upon some of them; Why, I say, should that Eclipses
dismal Effects be said to have lighted on him rather, then on them, but
because Pericles had manifested his contempt of those superstitious Conceits,
which afterward in that very War prooved fatal and destructive to Nicias and
the forces under his Command, whereof mention is before.

Yea, but the Effects of this Eclipse, whether they lighted so upon Pericles or
no, brought misery upon Athens, and calamity by a long and grievous War to
all Greece.

Of the Original of that war we have said somewhat before; and showed that it
was on foot before that Eclips, having ben also some good space of time in
brewing and breeding ere it brake out, as Thucydides declares at large
throughout his whole first Book, the Preface introductory to it only excepted.
Nor was Thucydides so selie as these men would make him, as to asscribe either
the War it self, or the continuance thereof unto such occurrents as were but
the concomitants thereof. Yea suppose we, that that violent earthqake, and that
terrible Eclipse, had both fallen out before that war was begun. as it had been
absurd to say of such an Earthqake, or of any Earthqake whatsoever, that it had
by an innate efficacy produced that War that then ensued; or that any
earthqake has an inbred faculty, by virtue whereof it is able to produce Wars,
as drought does dearth, yea and necessarily in the course of nature so does: In
like manner is it no less absurd for any man to attribute the like efficacy
to that, or to any other Eclipse, unless he be able to render some reason as
well for the one as for the other. And he that shall consider the occurrences of
those times, as they concern the Athenian State, looking on them, not with an
Astrological, but a Theological eye, as it behooved Mr. S. to have done; when
he shall have read in Thucydides, an eye witness of what he wrote, how far that
heavy visitation, that seized on them at Athens, and from thence overspread
their whole Country, not much afflicting any other part of Greece, a strange
contagious disease never known the like before, that weakened them more then the
war it self had done; how far, I say, it had been from working any good upon
them, Thuc. l. 2.
that the greatest part among them took occasion thereby to break forth into
all manner of wickedness, loosnesse, and licentiousness, spoiling of others,
and rioting with what they gat from others, without fear of divine vengeance or
legal penalties: Idem. l. 3.
as also what horrible outrages were in the several States and Cities
committed; no place of safety least to any, that was not as forward as others
in acting of vilanies; no regard had of faith or oath, or of relations and
tials natural, civil or sacred; honesty scorned as simplicity, fidelity as
folly, clemency as cowardice; and on the other side fraud cried up as prudence,
perfidiousnesse as policy, force as fortitude, cruelty as courage. This state
of things, whosoever shall seriously weigh, may with good ground and warrant from
Gods Word, yea led by the very light of nature it self alone, asscribe rather
those calamities, that afterward during that war befell the main body of Greece,
that State of Athens more specially (the pride and power thereof so impaired
and pulled down by the Spartan, and they brought so low, Diodor. l. 13. c. 107.
that they were enforced to beg a peace in most submisse and base manner; and
to accept it on most dishonorable and destructive conditions, of dismantling
Athens their mother City, and Pyreum their haven town, delivering up their
whole Fleet, twelv ships only excepted; and receiving a new government by
thirty such as the Spartane then approved, who by them supported, ruled
according to their own lust, Xenoph. hist. Graec. l. 2.
without regard of Law or right, and exercised such extreme cruelty upon them,
that as Cleocritus avowed, they murdered more of their own countriemen within
eight months space, then their enemies the Spartans had in ten whole years.)
unto the just judgment of God and his wrath incensed against them, for their
transcendent excess of ungodliness and wickedness, not restrained, much
less reformed, but improoved and enhaunced upon those forepast grievous
judgments, then to an Eclipse or two coming in a certain fixed course naturally
at a set time, without regard had to any superfluity of wickedness or ought
of that nature in those times. And I desire any pious and judicious Reader to
deem, whether of the two, either are guilty themselves, or make others guilty of
Epicurean security, as M. Swan from Goclein is pleased to speak, those that
teach men not to be afraid of a little loss of Sunlight for a quarter of an
hour more then they are of the total want of it for many hours night after
night, coming in a known natural way as well the one as the other; but to fear
Sin, that may cloud the light of Gods countenance toward them, and may cause
him to withdraw the bright rays and gracious sunshine of his favor away from
them; or those who would make them beleiv, that every great Eclipse, coming
certainly in a set time, by such a course as God settled these heavenly
creatures in at first, draws ever at its tail a long train of inevitable evils
by a natural power stamped upon them by God, as sure to ensu, as night folowes
the Sunset, and day the Sunrising, and to light upon such people and places and
persons as these men have assigned them unto, without any regard of their doing
well or ill. For it is observed by Thucydides, that in that strange infectious
sickness, wicked wretches, when they saw that it surprised and swept away, as
well good as bad, all sorts alike, they grew to this resolution, Let us get what
we can by hook or by crook, by right or by wrong, and make merry with what we
have got while we may. and will not men be prone to make the like inference from
these Wizards principles? These evils attend Eclipses in as certain a course as
the Eclipses themselves come; and there is no means to escape or avoid them by
any religious course or change of life, no more then by any such course the
coming of the Eclipse it self; and it is in vain therefore, whatsoever Mr. S.
See Goclein before.
elsewhere tells us, to hope or assay by any such course to avoid them. and so he
takes off the edge, and debilitates the force of all his pious exhortations.

But pity it was, that Pericles had not some of these Wizards, as had Xerxes
and Alexander, to have informed him, which of the States, the Athenian, or
Spartan, was under the Suns tutelage* and which under the Moons, that he might
thereby have been better informed of the issu of that War; which had his
counsels ben followed, and those courses insisted on, which before his death he
advised, might have prooved more successeful to his people, Thucyd. l. 8.
then for want and neglect thereof it did; who after his decease being
encouraged by such miscreants as these, to engage themselves in a forain war,
when they had their hands full enough at home, wherein their forces miscarried,
and their State was thereby exceedingly weakened, were then, when too late,
extremely incensed and enraged against all those that had set them upon that
design, and those more specially, that by their vain predictions had put them
in hope of good success; some of whom also they might the rather curse,
because by following their foolish, unadvised and unseasonable advices, their
Forces (which tho re infecta, yet might have been brought off with safety, as
has been showed formerly) were utterly destroyed. And thus much for the
clearing of Pericles from, M.S. his inconsiderate and groundles aspersions, and
our selves from the like, who profess herein to concur with him; as also to
free Thucydides from such false and frivolous relations as M. L. has endeavored
to fasten and father upon him, being in truth no other then bastardly brats of
his own adle brain.

But let us at length, after this long digression, that Mr. S. by Pericles
censured, and M. L. by Thucydides misreported have put us upon, return to
consider of such further Scripture-proofs as Mr. S. has produced for the
justification of his Astromancie.

Page 14.
These virtues and powers, says he, were at first divinely stamped on them;
and are called in Job 38.31. by the name of influences. The Greek word is
(...), from (...) and (...), super and fluo, that is, to flow into, or upon;
which derivation implies thus much, that they must have some object to flow
into, or work upon, it would else be nonsense, to use that name of influence.

But 1. Sir, you should do well to tell us, where you find the word (...), yea or
influence in the Text. the Original, I am sure, has none of it. nor has the
Greek version any such word at all there. that our English version has, not
influence barely, but sweet influences, I acknowledge. but the epithet rather
then the substantive, is suggested by, and deduced from the Hebrew, which has
no more then delights or pleasances. the word is the same with that 1 Samuel
15.32. used there of Agag. howsoever the Jewish Doctors some of them* by a
transposition of letters, a trick with them not unusual, do in either place
render it bonds. Beside, that (...), as your self give the notation of it,
should signify rather a flowing upon, then a flowing into: as in the Lords
Prayer, (...) would rather be rendered, on, then in. (...). as in heaven, so on
earth also. Matthew. 6.10. But this is not unlike, what you have elsewhere; Page
13.
where speaking of Arcturus, in English* the Bears tail, (for such unruly
creatures as bears and bulls have they placed also in heaven) you tell us in your
margin, it is a Star so called in Job, as if such a term were found in Jobs
text, Job 38.33. Sphaer. c. 10.
wherein you follow also your Goclein to an hair, who tells us, that the names
of Pleiades, Arcturus and Orion are found in Job, and may be retained therefore
without impiety or superstition. What the Stars are there mentioned by the
names of (...) and (...) or (...) or what Stars or Constellations are by those
terms particularly designed, neither the Hebrew Masters, nor Christian Writers,
do generally agree, nor, I suppose, any the Wisest man living is able certainly
to determine. Not improbable is it, that by the delights or pleasances of Cimah
(be the Star or Constellation what it will) are meant such delights, or
delightful seasons, as the spring of the year making its entrance by the Suns
nearer approach about the time at which that Star or Constellation (be it the
Pleiades, or what other soever else) arises, is wont to produce. as on the
other side by Cesil (whereof see on Esaias 13.10.) seems to be understood some
such Star or Constellation, at whose appeerance VVinter is wont to come on,
that with stormy weather dasheth those foregoing delights, and by frost and ice
closes up the surface of the ground, which the spring had opened before.
whence the Month Caslew seems to have had its name, being the first winter
Month in those parts. And in like manner Mazzaroth, and Ash, or Aish, seem the
names of some Stars or Constellations, the one whereof arose toward the
beginning of summer, the other of Autumn. Not that these Stars did by their
appeerance above the Horizon through any innate qalitie or intrinsecal faculty
by God stamped upon them, produce those seasons, or those effects and symptoms
of the same; which it is apparent that the access or recesse of the Sun, unto
and from several parts of the world does respectively produce: whence it comes
to pass, that by reason of his approach or remooval it is summer to some
parts, when it is winter to others, and spring to a third, and Autumn to a
fourth; and so backward again; but those by their appeerances in Jobs time to
those parts of the World wherein he lived, did signify and give warning of the
near approach of such seasons; and admonish people conseqently to apply and
address themselves unto such works and employments, as in such times were most
seasonable and suitable thereunto. So the coming of the Swalow, Jer. 8.7. and
the sprouting of the figtree, Matthew. 24.32. argu and signify the approach of
spring and summer; but neither of them effect either: and so the Sirius, or
Dog Star, does by his appeerance and continuance with us denote the most
unseasonable time of the year with us for distemper of heat, and infirmities in
men's bodies proceeding from the same; whereas yet that affection arises not
from any power of the Dog Star, of which that great Mathematician M. H. Brigges
sometime occasionally in conference averred unto me, that in the ancientest
times it had risen in the spring, and if the world should continue for a
certain number of years, the Dog Days, as we term them, would be in the very
heart of winter, as they also in some part of the world are at this day: but
the excess of heat in those days, is from the continuance of the sun
augmenting the heat of the air, tho upon his recesse, at that time of the
year; as in the same manner, and by the like proportion, enhancing the heat of
the day, for some time an hour or two after noon, tho then entered upon and
having made some progress in his declination from the highest pitch of his
exaltation with us. Pisc. in Genesis 1.14.
And I incline therefore to the Judgment of that learned Scholiast, who thus
expounds those words in Moses concerning the Sun, Moon and Stars; Let them be
for signs; (to admonish men of the Seasons of of the year, and to direct them
in their affairs and employments, concerning matter of voyage and tillage, yea
and use of physic also) and for set times, (for so the word properly
signifies, Genesis 21.2. 2 Samuel 24.15. Jer. 8.7. as are months) and for days and
years. signifying or giving notice of those; but producing these, as the Moon
by her proper motion does the Months, the Sun by his diurnal and common course
the day, by his annual and peculiar course the year. So that M. Swans argument
from the word influence is of no force, being not at all in the Text: nor were
it there, would it be of any validity to infer such strange malignant
influences, as he and his Clients for whom he pleads, would groundlesly fasten
upon the Stars.

But if all this will not serve, which is all as light as a little thistle down
or a feather, to infer or enforce ought that Mr. S. should proov and would
have, you shall have a convincing place, that will hit the nail on the head, and
strike all ded, and that out of the same Book, Job 9.7. where God is said to
seal up the Stars. And here indeed Mr. S. gives us the words of the Text
aright: but with such an exposition, as neither he is able to prove, nor would
at all avail him, albeit he could make it good. The sense of the place is, as
plain and familiar, so as ready at hand, as is rainwater in a shower. Let the
simplest man almost, of any the meanest understanding, read but the whole
verse; To the Sun he says, (to wit, arise not) or, he speaks, and it arises
not: he also seals up the Stars; and he will easily and readily at the very
first sight see, that clouding and darkning, withholding or withdrawing of
light, is intended as well concerning the Stars in the one branch, as
concerning the Sun in the other: It is a plain parallel to those places, Esaias
13.10. The Stars of Heaven, and its Cesilim (the brightest of them) shall not
give their light: the Sun shall be darkened in his seting out: nor shall the Moon
cause her light to shine forth. Ezekiel. 37.7, 8. I will cover the heavens, and
make the Stars thereof dark: I will cover the Sun with a cloud; nor shall the
Moon give her light: all the lightsome lights of Heaven will I darken over thee;
that I may set darkness upon thy land. and Joel 3.11. The Sun and the Moon
shall be darkened; and the Stars shall withdraw their shining. It was to the very
letter so in Paul's voyage from Jewrie to Italy; wherein neither Sun, nor
Stars, for so many days appeered. Act. 27.20. To cite for this Interpretation
a multitude of writers (which otherwise were not difficult) would be but a
great deal of lost labor, as much as to set up a torch or taper at clear
noonday light, and to cast some good store of water into the Sea.

But let us hear M. Swans exposition. God, says he, Page 13.
seals up the Stars, when he keeps back the rain from the watering the earth.

I will not press Mr. S. to produce some Autors of note, that in this his
exposition concur with him. which yet if either the course of the context did
back, or other Parallel passages of Scripture did second, I should not in that
regard refuse to admit and embrace. But I desire to be informed from Mr. S.
where the giving of rain is attributed to the Stars, and the restraint thereof
to the obsignation or cohibition of them. We read in this very Book of Job in
Elihues discourse, Chap. 36.27, 28. Drops of water the clouds do dril, distill,
and pour down abundantly. And Chap. 27.10, 11. God in watering the earth
wearies the thick cloud, and scatters the lightsome, or lightning, cloud as
also in Gods own words to Job, Chap. 38.34. Can thou lift up thy voice to the
clouds, that abundance of water may cover thee? So Psalm. 77.17. The clouds
poured down water. and Psalm. 147.8. who covers the heaven with clouds, and
prepares rain for the earth. and Eccles. 11.3. When the clouds be full of
water, they empty themselves upon the earth. and Esaias 5.6. I will command the
clouds, that they rain no rain upon it. But I no where find it said, that the
Stars pour down rain; or that the Stars are forbidden to give it, or said to be
restrained from yielding of it.

This Interpretation therefore having no strength at all, either from the tenor
of the context, or other passages of holy writ, cannot in reason be urged for
ground of an argument. Nor again were it admitted, would it help Mr. S. or
those whose Advocate he is. For what manner of argument will this be? God seals
up the Stars, by keeping back the rain, from watering the earth: Ergo the Stars
have a power to work upon the sons of men, to dispose them in their genitures,
some to one vice, and some to another, to expose them to casualties of diverse
kinds, and to design them unto sundry sorts of ill ends. Would it not be, as
they use to say, to reason a baculo ad angulum, from the cudgel to the corner?
What can from hence be averred of the Stars, that may not as well thence be
concluded of the clouds?

And indeed this place of Job is just in the like manner abused, wronged and
wrested by them to confirm their Astromancie, as is another in the same book to
assert their Chiromancie or Palmestrie, which Mr. L. so much magnifies, and of
which Goclein (the prints of whose footsteps are in Mr. S. freqent) tells us, it
has great concent with Astrology, and the predictions of it are more firm
then those of Astrology are. I rather beleiv both alike. The place alleged in
defense of it, is Job 37.7. which Goclein reading according to the vicious
Vulgar Latin thus renders; Qi signat in manu omnium hominum, ut singuli
noverint opera sua. Who signeth in the hand of all men, that each one may know
his works. Now howsoever Gocl. acknowledges that the place is diversely
expounded as well by ancient as later Divines, (and that by those of them also
who admit the Vulgar Version) especially, says he, by those that set light by
Chiromancie, (as if any Divine of note, old or new, Jew or Christian, Papist or
Protestant, commenting on the Text made it look that way) yet if we look to the
Original in the Holy tongue, as diverse very learned Hebrews, whom he had advised
with, had informed him, it neither could, nor ought to be understood other wise
then of the use and signification of the Chiromantical Art. Whereas on the
contrary, unless we will tear the words away from the Context; (which we ought
not to do) and have no regard, either to the common use of the pauses, or the
ordinary rules of Grammatical construction, they cannot at all imply, or hold
out any such thing; but as all generally understand those first words, speak of
restraint of men from work abroad, and confinement of them to their houses, by
such stormy, snowie and showrie wether; of which in the verse next before; as
enforces the beasts to betake themselves to their covert, and keep close there,
as it is in the very next verse after this. And Mercer therefore a man
singularly versed in the Hebrew tongue and Hebrew Writers, says, that whereas
your Chiromantiks would writhe and wrest it to their purpose, eo nihil facit
and extra rem est; it makes nothing at all for them, but is clean beside the
matter. And Cocceias, one whose writings generally proclaim him, a man
eminently skilled in that language, sticks not to term them stark fools that
dream ought of Palmestrie in that place. Stulti sunt, says he, qi hic de
Chiromantia cogitant. But this obiter. the word of obsignation, or sealing up,
has in either place a manifest notion of restraint. nor does the one any whit
concern Astromancie; no more then does Chiromancie at all the other: which may
as soon be found in the Book of Job; as the Philosophers stone in the Apocalypse
of John, Dilher. elect. l. 3. c. 21.
where one sometime told that learned Divine of Norimberg, he had found a
promise of it in the term of a White stone, which could be no other then it,
Rev. 2.17. So prone are men to wrest and writhe the words of Gods sacred
Oracles for the gaining of credit to any fancy, that they inordinately affect.

Yea but it is certainly true, that the time will one day come, Page 12.
when the whole world it self shall go to ruin; before which time there shall be
signs in the Sun, and signs in the Moon, and signs in the Stars, Luke 21.25.

I remember to have heard a Court Preacher in Qeen Elisabeths time, who having
made choice of that Text to entreat of, began his Sermon with these word^; It
is no strange matter to have the Sun in the Sign; but it is a strange matter
indeed to have Signs in the Sun. I do not approve such dallying with Scripture.
Howbeit I suppose, it may seriously and soberly be said, that it is one thing
to have the Sun in this or that Sign, which in regard of the Sign is a matter
of no moment; and another thing to have Signs, that is, dreadful and
extraordinary apparitions, coming besides or beyond the ordinary course and
nature of the creature, in the Sun, or Moon, or Stars, conspicuous and obvious
to every ones eye. Within which compass cannot be forced, either Eclipses,
because coming in an ordinary set course, and in a necessary natural way, nor
conjunctions of malignant aspects (if any such were) because not apparent unto
any but such, as apply themselves unto this vain study. But because Mr. S.
frames no Argument from hence, we shall so let it pass. Suffice it shall, to
have intimated, that the Signs there spoken of are much discrepant from those
Signs of Heaven, which we have now under debate.

Page 16.
Yea but David says, Psalm. 111.2. The Works of the Lord are great, sought out
of all those who have pleasure therein. And as was David's doctrine, Page 17.
so was Salomons practice, 1 King 4.11, etc. For he was wiser then all men,
then Ethan, and Heman, and Calcal, and Dardo; and he spoke of trees, from the
Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hyssope that springs out of the wall; as also of
beasts, and fowl, and creeping things, and fishes,

But because all this will not help to make Solomon a member of the society of
Astrologers, and a brother of their profession* for all this skill is without
their verge, and far beneath the Sphere of their sublimated Science; yet to
fetch him in, that he may grace the Society and Brotherhood of them, they fly
to the Apocrypha* and from the Book of the Wisdom of Solomon, falsely so
termed, the work of a Namelesse and unknown Author, Chap. 7. v. 17, etc. in the
person of Solomon, Mr. Swan sings us the same song, that M. L. his Client
before sang in the very entry of his Preface unto his Dark year; I know how
the World was made; Page 17.
and the operations of the Elements; the beginning and the end, and the midst
of times; the alterations of the turning of the Sun, and the change of the
seasons; the circuit of years, and the positions of Stars. (for which M. Swans
Printer has put in possessions; he may mend it, if he please, in his next
impression; the Composer, it may be, dreamed of their houses in heaven, that
were not, he thought, fit to stand without tenants) But thus they both; and so
far Mr. L. who tells us, that from the sense of these verses it may be inferred,
that the Science of Astrology, or influences of Heaven, are clearly intended,
and the Art lawful; else the wisest among mortal men would not so significantly
have mentioned the Positions of Stars. for no man can know the operations and
virtues of the Elements, except by Astrology: and a Position or figure of
Heaven is needless, unless from thence a judgment be derived. So Mr. L.

But, Sir, you should proov that Solomon ever spoke this. and unless you be
able to make good the authentic Authority of your Author, (which we well know
you cannot do) who makes Solomon speak more, then he would ever have spoken, of
himself; you may do well to keep him by you, to talk out of him to those, that
will admit for substantial witnesser, against whom no exception lies, all such
Autors as you cite, your Grandsire Merlin, and Mother Shipton among the rest;
and not offer to obtrude them upon those, qi norunt qid distent era lupinis,
that know how to distinguish between gold and copper, or laton, between current
money, and comical coin, between base counterfeit, and authentik records.

But suppose Solomon had spoken those very words, that your counterfeit Solomon
(not unlike that counterfeit Samuel, 1 Samuel 28.) here gives him; yet is your
inference thence of no force. for where is there mention of influences in the
Text? So that as the common saying is, Plus habet rubrum qam nigrum. There is
more often in the Rubrik, then is in the Paragraph: so there is more here in the
gloss, then is in the Text; there is more in the Conclusion then is in the
Premises, and your inference therefore is lame and feeble, vain and frivolous.
Mr. S. his (...), and your influences, may both be well returned you with a
nevter inventus est: and should it any where else be found, I shall for my
answer thereunto, turn you over to what has been returned Mr. S. urging that
term; for your arguings are both alike.

Yea but, the wisest of mortal men would not so significantly have mentioned,
etc. what is that in English? think we. Some belike speak significantly, and
some not significantly, as M. L. now and than; and Solomon himself also, it
seems, sometime elsewhere, tho not here: but be it what it will be, So wise a
man as Solomon was, would not in such a significant manner have mentioned the
Positions of Stars; if the Science of Astrology were not lawful. And who
denies the Science of Astrology, so far as it considers the site of the Stars
to be lawful? But what is that to your Judiciary Astrology, or Astromancie
rather? (not unlike to your Chiromancie, its harmonious Consort, Englished by
C.G. Wharton, Page 64.
which you so highly extol) whereby you presume and profess to foretell
certainly and undoubtedly (I give you your own words) future contingencies and
casualties; which Mr. Page 19.
S. confesses to be Gods peculiar. And in regard whereof you term your
Grandsire Merlins magical and mystical Predictions, whether he took them from
the Stars, or had them from the Incubus his Sire, Prophecies: tho they may
justly be deemed (as Erastus well in defense of Savanarola against Stathmi^ one
of your patrones) rather mendacinia then vaticinia. But without such Astrology
the operations and virtues of the Elements cannot be known; and Anaxagoras, and
Plato and Aristotle therefore could not belike know or write ought to purpose
of them, because either they were not acqainted with, or did not regard, this
magical part of divinatorie Astrology: and to know the Positions of the Stars
is needless, unless from thence a judgment be derived* such a judgment you
mean, I hope, as you and your accomplices are wont thence to deduce. and so all
those observations of those famous Mathematicians, so sedulously versed in the
Contemplation of those celestial bodies, and so deeply seen in the Sideral
Science, such as were Eudoxus of old, and of late our Mr. Brigges, and other of
the same mind with them concerning your Astromancie, are wholly superfluous and
useless; because they receiv not, but reject your groundless and fantastical
judgments.

And here any simple Reader may easily discry the selinesse of your Arguments:
The Stars had influences, which Solomon knew: (tho you find no such word either
in Solomon himself, or in your counterfeit of him) therefore such influences as
we assign them; to make men and women vicious and of a naughty disposition.
and, King Solomon knew the Positions of the Stars: therefore King Solomon was
acqainted with and approved of such a divinatorie Astrology as we profess and
practice, in telling people their fortunes, and what misfortunes shall befall
them in their life and at death. and, The knowledge of the Posture of the Stars
is not useful unless some judgment be made by it, or derived from it:
therefore unless some such judgment as we build upon it concerning casual
events to befall people and persons, unto whom we have assigned them such and
such special relations. What young novice, or punie freshman, that has
traveled in Logik no further then his Seton, would not be ashamed of such
Arguments? But I suppose Mr. Lilies Logik is much at one with his Greek and his
Latin; which latter is so mean, that he is not well able to English his own
Autors aright, or to speak true English in Latin terms, as has formerly ben
showed. And yet (which may well be wondered at) M. Swans Arguments are most of
them of the very same stamp, as if the one had taken them from the other. unto
whom, leaving M. L. we shall now return. He supposing, it seems, that M. L. had
not given us enough of his Alchymie stuff, presents us with some more of it.
Wherein Salomons Ape too palpably discovers himself, by vaunting in so high a
strain, as Salomons Wisdom would never have suffered him to aspire to, so long
as it remained with him; to wit, inter alia, that he knew men's imaginations;
Page 17.
(which the Apostle says, none can do but a man's own spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11. and
Solomon himself, none but God only, 1 King. 8.39.) and all such things as are
either manifest or secret. more I believe, am sure, then any man is able to
prove, that ever Adam did.

But Mr. Swans inference from it let us hear too; as much to the purpose as M.
Lilies before was. All this, says he, Solomon knew. and how does Mr. S. know,
that Solomon knew all this, but that Salomons counterfeit, one that never
consulted with Solomon about it, unless it were as Saul with Samuel at Endor,
has so told him? whom we are not therefore bound to beleiv, nor Mr. S.
conseqently speaking from him.

Yea but, says Mr. S. further, God gave him this Wisdom: Ibid.
which had it ben diabolical and vain he should never have had; but because it
was not, he prayed for it and had it.

But Sir, give me leave, I beseech you, to mind you of two old said saws; The
former is, Debile fundamentum fallit opus. A faulty foundation will fail the
fabrik built on it: and a qaggie ground will bear no weighty work. This is too
sandy a foundation to bear up such a frame as you would build upon it: your
bottom is unsound, it is but a mere qagmire; your author is not authentic.

The other byword that I would mind you of, is that which Nazianzen thus
expresses, Orat. de Pasch. Probl. Phys. Part 2.
(...). or as Simocat gives it, (...). as we would say, Keep the horse within
the hedge. hold you close to the point; speak to the purpose. For Sir, you
ramble too far from the point in qestion: which is not about the Sideral
Science in general, concerning the motions and positions of the Stars; which
who among us affirms to be vain and diabolical? and this therefore is but a
figment of your own brain, which having vainly devised, you cunningly cast in,
concealing that which you should defend, to divert your hearers and readers
mind from eying that which is in present debate. For grant we your Witness, or
Advocate, whom you have been pleased to call in and produce, as much credit as
you can desire, tho he should stand rectus in curia, and were one beyond
exception, yet he speaks not a tittle for you, unless this were a good
Argument: God gave Solomon Wisdom to know the alterations of the turning of
the Sun, and the change of the seasons; (which the Sun thereby produces) and
the circuits of years; and the Positions of Stars: Ergo, God taught him to
erect Houses in the Heavens of good fortune and bad fortune; and to foretell
men's fortunes by their nativitie; and to help people by the Stars to their lost
goods again; and all those fopperies and fooleries that Mr. L. and those of his
fraternity have devised and do practice to delude and cheat people with. the
defense of whom Mr. S. has here undertaken, and whom unless he can herein
maintain, he does but leav them in the lurch. It is undoubtedly a strong
Argument of a weak and bad cause, that must be supported and born out with
lies, with Solomon says what he never said, and backed with counterfeit
Testimonies; and those such also, as being admitted to speak, speak nothing to
the purpose.

Page 17.
Yea but, Adam before he fell, knew the nature of every thing; insomuch that he
gave names to all the living creatures. and conseqently as much as ever Solomon
did, and this Art of theirs among the rest. which must needs therefore be good
(for this seems to be that, which Mr. S. drives to) and we may lawfully seek by
all good means what Solomon prayed for, and had, for the making up of what was
lost in Adam.

I might demand, how Mr. S. can prove, that Adam knew the nature of every
thing. his reason annexed will not necessarily evince it. his nomination of the
creatures intimated rather his interest in them, and power over them, then an
exact knowledge of the natures of them; of which we have discoursed more at
large elsewhere. But if he knew the nature of every thing that he named; (for
the reason subjoyned will reach no further,) and the Stars come not within that
compass; unless they be of the number of living creatures, as some both of
the Jewish and Gentile Masters have held; and of those living creatures, that
were convented before Adam, and presented to him, to be named by him, how is it
hence proved that he knew the nature of the Stars? Again, suppose he did know
the nature of them: what then? why? then he must needs be very skilful in our
Wizards Art: and the art must needs then be very good. But to omit, that they
presume the nature of the Stars to be such, as they pretend it to be; and Adam
therefore knowing the nature of them, must needs know them to be qalified so as
they say; which is nothing else but to beg the main point in controversy.
Might not Adam know it, and know it to be vain and frivolous? as God, who knew
it undoubtedly, does pronounce it here to be, Jer. 10.3. as he is said to know
the thoughts of wicked men, and withal to know them to be very vain. Psalm.
94.11. But if Adam knew this their Art of Astromancie, as he knew the nature of
the creatures, whom he gave names unto, as Mr. S. seems to import, how does Mr.
Johnson, another Master of that Science, but M. L. his antagonist and of the
royal party, say, that God taught it Adam? for if he knew it before, what
needed he be taught it? unless we shall say, that Adam by his fall forgot all
that ever he knew before: as the Jews fable, that whosoever by stealth having
gotten into the inmost recesse of the Temple under the second House, had read
the Fower-lettred Name with its Vowel-points there engraven upon a stone,
Raymund. Pug. fid. part. 2. c. 8. Sect. 6.
was so terrified at his coming out with that hideous noise that a couple of
Dogs made of Brass, then made, which the Jewish Masters having by Magical Art
framed, had on the top of two columns at the door of the Sanctuary set for that
purpose, that they clean forgot what they saw or read there. But not unlike to
these fancies is that of Mr. Ramsey, another bird of the same feather, who
making up a list of the Patriarks of their profession, begins, as the Author of
the sacred Annals does, with Adam, Seth, Enosh, and so on; as if all the Holy
Patriarks had been such Wizards as they profess themselves to be. And the truth
is, with as good reason as any that is by Mr. S. or M. L. with the rest of
them, here alleged, a man might prove that Adam and Solomon had skill in
Palmestrie, and Metoposcopie, and Geomancie, and Sorcerie, and Auspicie, and
Aruspicie, and Enchantments, and Necromancie, and Witcherie, and approved all
these superstitious and impious vanities, as that they did the like of their
divinatorie Astrology. for the Argument will follow as firmly for any one of
those as for this. So that to me it seems that these men write and reason, as
if they intended, that none should read or scan them, but Salomons simpletons;
such as will beleiv every word, Prove. 14.15. admit and take in any thing upon
their bare word, without any du proof or further enqirie, any tale whatsoever
they shall list to tell them: they would never else stuff Sermons and Pamphlets
with such frippery trash as this.

Page 18.
But if Adam and Solomon were not such VVizards as ours are; yet sure Thales and
Solon, two of the Wise men of Greece were. for to what other end should Mr. S.
hale them into his Sermon, save to justify such study of, and enqirie into the
signs of heaven, as through the whole tenor of his discourse he persuades to,
and pleads for?

As from Diogenes Laertius therefore, he tells us, that Thales was by the Greeks
called a Wise man, because he was the first among them, that found out the
secrets and mysteries of the heavenly bodies. But, what think we, were those
secrets and mysteries? for these are not Mr. Swans Autors, but his own terms;
whereby he would intimate to his hearers, when he preached it, to his readers,
when he writ it, that Thales had discovered and delivered some of those our
Wizards hidden mysteries of genitures, and aspects good and ill, and the like:
Whereas all that his Author reports of him is this, that Thales was the first of
those seven, that were styled the Wise men of Greece: and afterward, that he
seems (...), to have been the first that discoursed of the Stars in Greece, and
to have foretold the Eclipses of the Sun, delivered the set time of the Suns
course and recourse from tropik to tropik; of which latter and the Eqinoctials,
some say he wrote only; supposing other points of that Science not difficult
to attain, these being rightly understood. moreover that Callimachus says of
him, that he discovered to his countrymen the use of the Constellation called
the lesser Bear, which the Phenicians, of whom he was descended, were wont to
observe in like manner before: Others that (...), he was the first that
discoursed with them of Natural Philosophy; that from the Egyptians he learned
Geometry, wherein he excelled; that he dealt also in Astronomy, and by help
thereof took the magnitude of the Sun. And this is all of the secrets and
mysteries, as Mr. S. terms them, and as they were indeed to those who were
before ignorant of them, and for which he was deservedly among his Countrymen
admired, as was Sulpitius among the Romans. All which I have the rather
sedulously scraped together out of Laertius his chaos or confused heap, to show
how little therein is to Mr. S. his purpose; or to infer, what he would have men
to deem, or suspect at least, of Thales, to wit, that he was such another as
our modern VVizards are. He might with as good probability raise and fasten the
like aspersion or suspicion of and on our Mr. Brigges and other Mathematicians
of the best note with us, who in likelihood have gone as far beyond Thales in
all these, as he is reported to have exceeded Euphorbus in some of them; and
yet so far from approving these Fortune Tellers figments, that they even detest
and abhor them.

From Thales Mr. S. proceeds to Solon. and here, I hope, he will come nearer
home to the mark he aims at. For Pliny, Ibid.
says he, reports, that Solon the wise Lawmakers among the Athenians, did by
the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon foretell the defects and subversions of certain
States and Kingdoms in Asia.

This were somewhat to the purpose indeed, if it could be made good, to prove
that Solon had some smack of this Divinatory trade; tho not sufficient to
justify the warrantablenes of it. But Mr. S. should have done well to have
informed his Reader, in what place or part of Plinies Natural History, this of
Solon is reported. for Plinies Natural History is a vast work, consisting of
37. large Books, divided each of them, into a multitude of Chapters. And tho I
have taken more pains in searching into Pliny, as well where he entreats
purposely of Eclipses, as where he has ought occasionally of the subversion of
the Asian Empire, then I took in picking up of Laertius his scattred scraps
concerning Thales; yet can I meet with nothing in him concerning these
predictions of Solon. This testimony therefore concerning Solon, is justly
liable to suspicion. and that the rather, not only because Laertius has not a
word of it, but much more, because Plutarch a more diligent Author, in the life
of Solon written by him at large, reports of him, that he gave himself most to
Ethik, or Moral Philosophy, and herein to the Politik or Civil part of it
especially; but that (...), in Physiks, or Natural Philosophy, he was very
simple, and vulgar, or selie, rude and raw; for so the word (...) is often used,
and must needs be here, being joined with (...), as elsewhere with (...) in
Plato. This therefore is not likely of Solon, who was so meanly seen in
Physiks, whereof Mr. S. from Melanchthon (if he also so say) tells us, this is a
part, by the Stars to foretell the mutations of Common-Weals.

Page 16.
Neither does this tend, as Mr. S. would seem to intimate, to deter or dissuade
men, from enqirie into Gods works; which are most worthy to be sought out, as
David truly avows, Psalm. 111.2. But to blame these men for presuming to be of
Gods privy council, further then he has in his Word by his Spirit revealed
it, and for arrogating that to themselves, which Mr. S. grants to be Gods
peculiar; to frame particular judgments of a necessary certainty concerning
future contingent events. Page 19.


Page 16.
Mr. S. himself acknowledges, that the Devil has always ben busy, to sow his
tares among the Wheat, and into the profitable Knowledge of the celestial
Influences.

And of these tares, or weeds rather, (as the word (...) would be rendered,
Matthew. 13.25. whereof more elsewhere; for tares, or fitches are an useful grain)
do we charge these Fortune Tellers predictions to be: since that the
maintainers of them, being not able to make any good proof of them from the
grounds of nature, principles of reason, or light of Gods Word, are enforced
with Mr. S. to have recourse to Revelation, and to tell us, that by Angels they
were revealed at first to the Ancients: which seeing of good Angels they cannot
make good, we have just cause to deem, with diverse of the Ancient Fathers, that
they were revealed by the Apostatized Angels, if by any; and to be of those
Tares, or Weeds, that such have sown among the wheat of the lawful and
laudable study and use of the true and genuine Sideral Science, which is surely
and demonstratively grounded upon principles undeniable of nature and sound
reason, having no need of Angels good or bad to attest what it asserts.

But what would Mr. S. Ibid.
have to be of these Tares of Satan's sowing? forsooth, the doctrine of
Characters, and Numbers, and Charms, and Images made under such and such
Constellations.

And are not the maintainers of these and the like superstitions, able to say
as much for their devices, as you, or any of your Clients for their devices of
malignant Aspects, and unfortunate Houses, whereof one bears the name of
Cacodaemon, (you may English it the Devil, if you please) to wit, that their
figures, and numbers, and spells, and modules, have such a power enstamped upon
them by God, and that some good sprites have revealed so much to them, and
taught them the right use of them? Now tell us, Sir, what you will return in way
of answer to them, and see if we cannot retort it upon you and yours.

Among other of the Tares of Satan's sowing, he says, Page 24.
is such observation of times, as may bring any dishonor to God. and here to
ward off and avoid that (...) Deuteronomy. 18.10. by some rendered, an observer of
times: and to justify Astrological observations of times, of good and bad
days, he produces that of Eccles. 3.1. There is a time for every thing, and a
season for every purpose under Heaven: which prudentially observed, and not
superstitiously sought after, and doted on, may conduce to the benefit of
mankind.

Where what he says, is undoubtedly and undeniably true; according to what the
Lyrik says, Pindar. Pyth. 9.
(...) seasonable performance is in every thing a principal matter. and that
worthy Philosophical Emperor, M. Anton. l. 12. Sect. 35. Contr. Evnom. 1.
(...) that is good only that is seasonable. and as Nazianzen well, (...), Even
a good thing is not good, when it comes out of season; when it is unseasonably
done. But neither is that place at all to that purpose. howsoever by diverse
learned it be so understood and applied. the scope of it being, not to advise
men to do all things seasonably, as may make most for their advantage; but to
intimate the variety of Gods overruling providence; in the various
dispensations whereof, there are times, and set times with him, tho uncertain to
us, for men to come into the world, and to go out of it again, (of which things
in what man's power is it, concerning himself seasonably to dispose?) sometime
to greiv and mourn, by occasion of cross occurrents, and sometime to be merry
and cheerful in regard of prosperous successes. that which other learned have
observed to be the genuine sense of the place, whereof I have entreated at
large elsewhere, and have showed that the words would rather be rendered, For all
there is a set time, (so is (...) used, Neh. 10.34. and 13.31. and Est. 9.26,
31.) even a time (not, for every purpose; for what purpose can any man have, at
such a time to be born, or at such a time to dye, but as the Greek well renders
it, (...)) for every thing under Heaven. as the word (...) is used in the very
same Chapter, verse. 17. and in the self same book again Chap. 8.6. So that
neither does the Scripture concern that, for which it is alleged; tho the
thing it self be undeniable. Nor does that for which it is produced being
granted, concerning the observation of times seasonable in general for several
occasions, proov the lawfulness of observing times as luckie or unluckie, out
of respect had to the Aspects of the Stars, supposed to be benign or malignant,
as these Wizards please to make them. as if one should thus reason; Some fish
at some time, because not in season, is not wholesome to feed on: ergo some
times of geniture are unseasonable, and it is an unluckie thing to be bred or
born in them; as under the Pisces or Fishes, and Aqarius or the VVater-bearer,
because watery Signs expose persons so bred and born to hazard by water.

Page 25.
To as little purpose is that of the Children of Issachar, spoken of as men of
eminency, in regard that they had understanding of the times, to know what
Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12.30.

Whereof the Jewish Masters give two Interpretations, as David Kimchi reports
them. Some, that they were men of great skill and experience in politik
affairs, whose advice therefore the King made use of, for information in
matter of Law and Judgment: alleging to this purpose that of Assuerus, who is
said Est. 1.13. to have spoken to the wise men that knew the times: and in the
next words; for so it was the Kings manner toward all that knew Law and
Judgment; to wit, to advise in all weighty affairs with such, as by reading or
observation of their own, were well seen in such occurrences. and this way go
Tremellius, Junius, Lavater, and most Christian Interpreters. Others of them,
which may seem to come nearer home to Mr. S. expound it, men skilful in
Intercalations, and fixing the New Moons. for being, say these, acqainted with
the revolutions of the Signs of the Zodiak, or the Planets (for Mazzaloth is
used by them for either) they were to determine the seasons of the world and
the times of the year. And this Kimchi the rather enclines unto, because it is
said, to know, not what the King, but, what Israel should do; tho withal he
acknowledges, that according to Ezekias appointment, the King was to fix the
Intercalations and the set seasons. But what was the main end and principal use
of this their skill, says Kimchi? to let the people of Israel know the set
times of their solemnities were they fasts or feasts. And what is all this to
Mr. L. his Clients teaching men to observe some as luckie, some as unluckie
days? some unluckie Planet may seem to have reigned, what time Mr. S. penned
this discourse: for his Arguments are al very unluckily framed. Take them in
the Enthymem, and they argu a genere indefinito ad speciem definitam. A dog;
therefore a hound: A deer; therefore a stag. Men eminent for knowledge of
times; Ergo of good and evil, luckie and unluckie days and hours. or a specie
ad speciem, A lusorie Lot is lawful; therefore a Consultorie Lot is lawful. or,
A divisorie Lot is warrantable; therefore a Divinatorie, So, There are some
time^ seasonable for sundry occasions, and it is a point of prudence to observe
such opportunities. Ergo there are some days luckie and some unluckie, in
regard of the aspects of the Planets good or bad, and it is no small point of
wisdom to observe such And, Some men have been eminent for their skill in
fixing aright the seasons of the year, and set times of solemnities; therefore
men ought to be had in repute, not and justified only, but magnified, for
telling men by the Stars, what will befall them. as if the one were the same in
effect with the other; or the one a necessary conseqent of the other. Or frame
them into an entire Syllogism, either they will consist all of particulars, or
crowd into the Conclusion more then is in the premises. So that when I
consider the levity and loosnesse of Mr. Swans Arguments in so weighty a
business, I cannot but call to mind that of Seneca to Lucilius; Superest ex
hesterno mihi cogitatio, qid sibi voluerint prudentissimi viri, qi rerum
maximarum probationes levissimas and perplexas fecerunt. He says he wonders
what very wise men should mean, to bring so exceeding light proofs in matters
of exceeding great weight.

But that you may perceiv, that Mr. S. himself could not but see the
inconseqence of his own Arguments; consider we a little further, what other
Tares there be, that he says the Devil has sown amids the good wheat of
lawful and praiseworthy Divination.

Page 23.
1. To observe the flying of fowls, and thereby to judge of good or evil success
in the wars; but not to observe the crying of crows against rain. And why not
this as well as that? Because, says Mr. Page 24.
S. hereof a reason or cause may be given; and it is not therefore
superstitious. Observe ye not here, how Mr. S. can, when he lists, descry the
invalidity of his own inferences? For upon what ground but this do we reject
and condemn their Fortune-tellings of disastrous events from Eclipses and
Genitures under such and such malignant Aspects, as superstitious, but because
no true cause or sound reason can be given of them; and the maintainers of them
therefore are forced for the justifying of them to flee to revelations?

Page 24.
2. Inspection into the entrails of beasts for the same purpose, as if God had
written the secrets of his providence in the livers and bowels of such
creatures.

And I desire Mr. S. to show me, why the Inspection into the Conjunction and
Aspects of the Stars for the very self-same purpose, as if God had written the
secrets of his providence in the Stars, should not be bound up in the same
bundle of Tares or weeds with that former for the fire: unless its patrones be
able to proov, (which they will never do, tho they strain till their
heartstrings break) that God has written the secrets of his providence in
these creatures. For as for the observation and experience of long times and
numberless ages, the Patrones of that practice will prate and crake as loud for
their heart-bloud as they.

Lastly, to let pass the rest, Page 25.
that conceit that every day in the week has a several Planet to govern it;
and to assign a several Planet to every hour, called by the name of Planetarie
hours. which in Mr. S. his judgment is no better then folly and superstition:
and in this respect therefore to make choice of good or bad days, or luckie
and unluckie hours deserves to be exploded, and not to be harbored under the
harmless shelter of Astrology.

But I demand of Mr. S. whence had people these frivolous fancies and
superstitious conceits? or from whom did they at first arise? was it not from
the ancient Egyptian Wizards, the Patriarks of our modern Astrologers, from
whom this their Astromancie, or divinatorie Astrology, by idolatrous Pagans,
and superstitious Paynims has been handed down to them and others unto this
day? For did not they at first dedicate the seven days of the week to the
seven deified Planets? assigning the first day of the Week to the Sun; the
second to the Moon; the third to Mars, whom the Saxons our Ancestors, called
Teuto, or Twisco; the fourth to Mercury, whom they termed Woda, or VVeden; the
fifth to Jove, whom they called the Thunderer; the sixth to Venus, whom they
called Frea, whence our English Fry; (as Verstegan, if my memory fail not; for
its long since I saw him) the seventh to Saturn. Hist. l. 37.
Of which order observed in the assignation of them Dio Cassius of Nice
(relating withal, that not long before his time the Egyptians had so disposed
them) renders a twofold reason; and Joseph Scaliger in his Thesaurus Temporum,
or Treasury of Times has exhibited a Scheme of it. And why might not those
antiq Wizards as well assign the days of the week to the government of the
seven Planets, as our modern Prognostiks the parts of man's body to the regiment
of the twelve Signs? framing a very maimed and mangled dismembration and
deartuation rather then division and distribution of it into 12. unequal and
disproportionable parts to fit it to the twelve Signs: not unlike the
counterfeit Prochorus his tearing the Ancient Symbol or brief Sum and System
of the Christian Faith into 12. pieces, to assign each Apostle his shot or
share to contribute toward the making up of the whole mess; mistaking, it
seems, symbolum for symbola, and supposing the one to signify a supper-shot as
well as the other. They may have as good ground for ought I see, or for ought
you here allege, and as good authority from antiqitie, for their Planetarie
days, yea and Planetarie hours too, as M. Ls. Trithemius has for his
Planetarie Angels, or Mr. L. himself for his Horarie qestions; or your
Astromancers in general, for their Planetarie genitures, and those luckie and
unluckie hours, wherein persons are bred and born either to good fortune, or
misfortune, or your Prognosticators, for such good or bad days, as in their
trivial and trifling Almanaks, they are wont to warn people of.

For, Sir, why is this conceit of the Planetarie days and hours such as is to
be exploded? because, say you, there is no reason for it, seeing the Stars were
made all on one and the same day. And may not we much better say, that this
conceit of malignant aspects and mischievous efficacies, and bad influences
into men's souls and minds, to incline and enduce them to wantonness and
wickedness, is to be exploded, and not to be harbored under the harmless
shelter of genuine Astrology; because there is no reason for it, seeing that
the Stars were, not only made all in one day, but were also all made alike,
not good alone, but very good? Genesis 1.30.

Page 22.
And here I was about to lay down my pen, had not one passage more pulled me by
the sleev; wherein Mr. S. first admonishes us to purge away the dross, and
keep the gold, wash away the filth, and keep the cloth, fan out the chaff, and
keep the corn. for, says he, it proceeds either from ignorance, or from an
overnice scrupulosity, such as no way sorts with wise and learned men,
promiscuously and without difference or distinction to confound lawful and
praise worthy knowledge with that which is impious and diabolical, and to
condemn lawful Arts in the right use of them for such corruptios and
superstitions as the Devil shuffles into them, wherewith wicked Knaves have
done abomination. for if we confound Arts with the abuse of them, we shall in
short time obscure and bury all kind of good lerning, and drown the world in
ignorance; and that is just as the Devil would have it, that he may lead men
about which way he pleases.

But I would gladly demand a qestion or two of Mr. S.

1. Why he has not followed this advice himself; and why he has labored so
eagerly throwout this whole Sermon, to dissuade men from disregarding, and
checked them for rejecting and deriding that which the Prophet in the very next
words to his Text pronounces to be mere vanity, and such chafe, dross and
filth conseqently as himself says, ought to be purged away and cast out? also
why he has not more distinctly expressed himself whether he deem the doctrine
of genitures such as has been showed, and course of professing to tell by the
Stars which way men's goods are gone, are of the chafe and dross, or of the
solid grain and pure oar of that praiseworthy Astrology, which in a confused
generality he seems to maintain.

2. What one sound Argument he has brought to proov those practices which he
pleads for, not to be chaff and trash, and droffe, and dirt, that being reduced
to the form of a Syllogism, will not presently appeer to be a mere Paralogism.

3. Who those be, that promiscuously, and without difference or distinction,
out of ignorance or over-nice scrupulosity confound lawful and praiseworthy
knowledge with that which is impious and diabolical, and condemn indifferently
the one with the other. It is true indeed that a German Bishop sometime in the
days of deep darkness by one of the Popes, is reported either out of ignorance
or malice to have been condemned of suspicion at least of Heresy, for the
studying of Astronomy, and holding a very strange point, and dangerous error,
that there were Antipodes, men living on the other side of the earth, and
standing or walking with their heels against ours. But did any of those ancient
Philosophers, Anaxagoras, Eudoxus, Panetius, Archelaus, Cassander, and others
that rejected this Astromancie or Fortune-telling Astrology; or do those
Christian Writers, that have professedly handled this Argument either in former
times, as Abulensis, Picus and Savanarola; or of later times, as Sixtus,
Pererius, Calvin, Erastus, Kepler, Salmasius; or do any of our own Countrymen,
that have dealt in the same subject, the Lord Howard, Fulk, Perkins, Abbots,
Chambers, Willet, Gerey, Holmes, Rouland, any of them, whether ignorantly, or
out of any overnice scrupulositie, without difference or distinction
promiscuously confound and condemn all Astronomy or Astrology? or do they not
all approov of natural Astronomy or Astrology, as an useful Science and a
laudable study? condemning only this Astromancie, or that Fortune-telling
Astrology, that goes masked under the specious Title of Judicial Astrology,
and with us now adays more presumptuously, of Prophetical Predictions, whereby
Mr. Swans Clients, for whom he pleads, and in defense of whom, it appeers that
he published this Sermon, (let him call them what he please, amd Mr. Calvin
indeed in plain terms styles them no otherwise then he here does) do daily
cheat and delude people, pick their purses, and either commit, or make way for
many abominable designs. And indeed so palpable is the distinction between the
one and the other, that even those blincking and blundering Grammarians Papias
and Balbus, that lived in one of the obscurest ages, wherein all good
literature almost was buried in oblivion, yet by that duskie twilight, that
those times afforded, were able to discry a difference between those two above
mentioned: whence that distribution in their vocabularia, as they termed them,
annexed to their Grammars, Know, say they, that Astrology, is partly natural,
and partly superstitious: natural and true, that handles the course of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and the certain stations of the times: superstitious that
which the Mathematicians follow, that divine by the Stars, disposing the 12.
signs according to the several parts of soul or body, and by the course of the
Stars foretelling men's nativitie, and their manners. which, tho somewhat rawly
delivered by them, yet shows that they conceived a distinction of these
things; which the learned in times of cleerer light, did both much more
distinctly apprehend, and ever evidently express. As for his imputation of
ignorance, he sings but his own and Mr. Lilies old song, so often chanted by them
both over and over, again and again, and toward the close of his work in a
higher strain and harsher tone then before, Page 26.
Thus then, says he, I see, that as Dogs bark at them they know not, so some
among men condemn and hate the things they thoroughly understand not. which
satirical snarling censure, I esteem no other then as such another picture of a
Dog set over the Postern, as we before spoke of, when we met with this Motto in
the Frontispice before; and so let it pass, yet presuming that some at least
of the before mentioned who have opposed and condemned these practices, had as
much skill and knowledge in the deep mysteries thereof as Mr. S. that does
maintain them. And for Scrupulosities, those that are any whit scrupulous
concerning them, are like to find little ease of their scruples from Mr. S. who
is so far from giving satisfaction therein, that he may rather improov them, by
such reasons as he renders for the condemning and rejecting of some other
superstitious conceits, which (as has been showed) will hold as well in the one
as in the other, and conseqently with eqal strength conclude against either.

4. Whether it be not just as the Devil would have it, so to blend these things
the one with the other, to induce men to admire and swalow down both together?
as with the true worship of God, and doctrine of Christ, he mingles many
superstitious rites, idolatrous practices and erroneous conceits, such as may
eat out the very heart of sound piety, and make the profession of Christianity
a mere matter of formality, a shel without kernel, a shadow without substance,
a title without truth, that under pretense of the one he may draw on the other.
Nor are men to be blamed, because they refuse to receive both promiscuously
without distinction, as Mr. S. would here have us to do in the Doctrine of
Star-Divinitie. Will he needs enforce us, because we like well of the wine, to
drink up the Dregs too?

For as for his fear of burying all good lerning, and drowning the world in
ignorance, by condemning of lawful Arts together with the abuse of them. (as
Saravallius sometime charged Sixtus of Seen as an enemy to all good Arts,
because he averred Astrology to be no Art, but a fallacy, and a detestable
imposture) there is no such matter intended, nor fear of danger thence to ensu,
by discovery of abuses in Arts and in the practice of them, or of Arts and
Sciences falsely pretended to be such, when as indeed they are no other then
cheating tricks, having no matter of sound Art, or Science truly so termed in
them. far was it from those good Christians their intention to bury, or burn,
al good lerning, that made a bonfire (we may well so term it) of those their
books of such superstitions at Ephesus, Act. 19.19. And so far is it from that
which Mr. S. would herein intimate, that the opposing and rejecting of these
fanatical and superstitious fancies should either arise from ignorance, or
endanger the bringing in of ignorance, much less drowning the world in it;
that such frivolous conceits and superstitious practices have been never more
rife, then in times of ignorance, and when the world was drowned in darkness;
whence it is, that since the light of Gods saving truth and knowledge has
shined more clearly among us then among most abroad, and the study of Arts and
Sciences in these later times ben improoved and flourished with us, this
pretended Art, or cheating Trade rather, has lien till of late, so neglected
and disregarded among us, that Mr. Lilie is enforced pitifully to complain,
(would to God we were so happy, Preface to Eng. Prophet Merlin.
that he might still have cause so to do) that we English of all Nations make
least use of this Art: insomuch that Mr. Booker, another Atlas to underprop all
good literature with us, ready to fall to the ground, unless he bear it up,
has alone almost without help, until Mr. L. came in to ease him, by his own
virtu and abilities (an admirable Scholar) for so many years maintained the
reputation of the Art almost utterly decayed. Preface to Worlds Catastr.
and howsoever it have begun to thrive and spread abroad with us, in these
loose and licentious days, yet it is the selie sort of ignorant and profane
people that flock most after it, and are Mr. Lilies and his fellow practitioners
most constant customers, and such as could well be content to have all Religion
as well as lerning abolished, whether drowned or burnt, so they might be freed
from tithes and taxes they cared not with whom Mr. L. therefore labors to
ingratiate himself, yet would have this Art upheld, and this Trade stand still;
whereas those that plead for Lerning and Learned Men, See Mr. Edw. Waterhouse
Apolog. for Lern. and Ler. men.
as I perceiv by some that have lately taken good pains to that purpose, do
justly and judiciously condemn it as pernicious and prejudicial both to Church
and State, and wish it utterly abandoned.

Mr. Swans advice then of severing the dross from the gold, and filth from the
cloth, and chafe from the wheat, (tho he have not followed it himself, as we
wish he had) yet we readily admit and willingly embrace, it is no other then
what Solomon wills us to do, Prove. 25.4. And if it be demanded how we may here
distinguish the one from the other. Mr. S. himself gives us a good rule,
negative at least, tho given for no great good end; where, to encite men to
dive as far as they can into the depths of this study, he tells them, Page
22.23.
It is a thing well worth the noting, that by the understanding the uttermost
activitie of Natural Agents, we are assisted to know the Divinity of Christ;
the works he did being thereby understood, to be beyond the terms and limits of
Natural Power.

It is a good rule, I say, in the negative, tho not in the Affirmative. It is
not conseqent, that whatsoever a creature in his utmost activitie of natural
power is able to do, that he should do. For it is not necessary that a creature
in working should always put it self out to the utmost of his natural power.
else the Argument would be good, A lazy man does no more then as if he were
asleep: therefore he can do no more then he does. or, A faithless friend, tho
present, stands a man in no more steed, then if he were absent: therefore he
can do no more then he does. But in the Negative it holds well, for what the
creature in its utmost activitie cannot do, that without miracle cannot be
done. And this very consideration furnishes us with a weapon of steel to
dispatch that most frivolous and fabulous conceit of a Solar Eclipses working
such dismal effects so long after it is over, as Mr. S. Page 22.
before informed us. for if it be beyond the uttermost activity of the total
interception of the Sun-light for diverse howrs from us, by any natural power to
produce some dismal effect a sevennight, or fortnight, or a month after, then
undoubtedly it is much more above and beyond the uttermost activity of the
interception of the Sun-light for a far shorter space, by its natural power to
produce the like dismal effects, a twelv-month or two after. No wise man, I
think, will deny the truth of the Antecedent, and no reasonable man, I suppose,
will deny the necessity of the Conseqence. If Mr. S. imagine he may, when he
shall afford us his reason, if it appeer to be sound, I shall begin to make
doubt, whether I were in my right wits, or had any reason within my brain-pan,
when I writ this.

But concerning what he adds of helping us in the knowledge of Christ's
Divinity by his Miracles. It shall be a thing worth the noting, as Mr. S.
speaks, to consider, what good service our Astromancers have done God and
Christ, in asscribing and entituling their strangest and most stupendous works
of wonder to the Stars. Artapanus apud Diodor. Tars. Albumasar apud H. L.
Howard.
For as some Heathen Writers have ascribed Gods conduct of his people thorough
the Red Sea, to Moses his skill, in observing the time of an unusual low ebb,
and making use thereof for his peoples passage: and the water that God by
miracle gave them from the Rock in the Wilderness, to Moses his observation of
an heard of Wild asses, Tacitus hist. l. 5.
that were repairing to a spring, by tracing whom he found out a watering place
for the refreshment of himself and his people ready otherwise in that wast and
wild desert to have perished with drought: and the Jewish Masters all the
Miracles that our Lord and Savior Christ wrought here upon earth to the power
of the Tetragrammaton: Raymund. pug. sid. par. 2. c. 8. Sect. 6.
whereof they tell us a tale, how by stealth having gotten into the Inner
Temple, and found it engraven there on a Stone, that he might not forget it
again, as some other had done, by the hideous barkings of the brazen dogs, that
stood at the door, he writ it in a piece of parchment, which having cut and
raised the skin about the calf of his leg; he there enclosed, as did Jupiter
Bacchus his Mother Semeles abortive in his thigh; which afterward opening he
drew out again, and by virtue thereof did all that ever he did. In like manner
do these our Wise Masters asscribe Christ's Incarnation, his miraculous Birth,
his Offices, what betided him, and was done by him in his life, together with
the manner of his death* unto the Constellations, the conjunctions of the
Stars, and the postures of them at the supposed time of his Nativity. To this
purpose have they erected a Scheme or Figure of Christ's Nativitie, whereby they
say the Wise men that came conducted by a Star, might well have foreknown
Christ's Birth of a Virgin, the manner of his life, and the great alteration
that he was to make in matter of Religion. and all this, Albert. nom. Specul.
ex Al^umas.
as some of them indeed say, by presignification only, as the Stars might
foreshew it; God having written in the Book of Heaven, whatsoever from
eternity he had decreed should be done here on earth. that which one of the
Ancients, a man of great lerning, but mightily addicted to his own groundless
fancies had long before him delivered, Origin. tom. in Genesis apud Evseb.
praepar. l. 6. c. 11.
and endeavored to make good by an Apocryphal Writ, entitled Joseph's Prayer,
wherein Jacob should say, (which I cite the rather in the Autors words to amend
a default in them) not (...), Legit, but (...), Legi, (...), I have read in the
Tables of Heaven, whatsoever things shall befall you and your children. for the
words are said to be spoken, not as (...) or (...), of or concerning, but
(...), of, or by, Jacob, and related by Joseph, as his speech and in his
person; as if Jacob by the Stars had been informed of all that by the Spirit of
Prophecy he foretold his Sons concerning what should befall either them or
theirs. But such counterfeit stuff must be set out under some specious titles,
that they may the better help to vend such braided wares as those are for which
they are produced; unto which our Noble Countreyman not undeservedly applies
that of Lactantius concerning some qack-salvers, tituli habent remedia, pyxides
vexena, Instit. l. 3.
that their boxes had the names of sovereign salvs and receipts painted on
them, when as there is nothing but trash and venom or poison within them. Yet
other of them go a step further, and stick not to assert, that the Stars by
virtue of an innate efficacy in way of effection, Petr. Alliac. in Genesis 30. and
de Leg. and Sect. Vid. Sixth. Sen. Bibl. Sacr. l. 6. Annot. 10.
not of signification only produced all these things that of our Savior have been said. for that all those virtues and benign influences of the Stars
wherewith Christ in their creation endowed them at first, did conspire and
concur together to furnish Christ as largely as possibly they could at his
birth, doing what service they were able then to him, from whom they had
received them.

Yea Cardan, a great Author with Mr. Lilie, (as the L. Howard reports him; for
that work of his I have not) albeit they be not certain what year, much less
at what time of the year, or day of the month, and much less yet in what hour
of the night his Mother was delivered of him; yet having fixed the time of his
birth, to such a year, and time of the year, and day of the month, and hour of
the night he pleased, following the groundless tradition of his Romish Rabbines
therein; does from the Stars, as he conceives them disposed at that instant,
very solemnly and seriously deliver his judgment thereupon, not only that our
Savior was to be born of a Virgin, because the first face of Virgo was then
ascending, whose proper image is a Virgin nursing a Child; but that also he
should be both a Priest and a Prophet, because Saturn was then in the ninth
House, and in the Sign of Gemini: (whereas yet, says the L. Howard, their
great Bassa Abraham the Jew is of the mind, that whosoever finds Saturn at his
birth so consorted, shall never proov a good Christian) and that he was to
suffer a violent and bloody death, because Mars was then in the house of death.
In which both his calculations and observations upon them, although that
Honorable Person control him, as mistaken in the one, nor following the
principles of his own Patriarks in the other: yet let them go for current, be
they right or wrong in either: it being nothing to the particular that we are
now upon. Only thus much, that if these grounds be firm and solid, we may
through Cardanes misreckoning miss of the assurance of our Savior: and
whether his reckoning be right or no, we may come to have many Saviors, that
is, many so peculiarly qalified, as he was, who was alone to be our Savior;
since that it is scarce imaginable but that sundry should be born in diverse
places at or about the same instant in which the Virgin his Mother was
delivered of him, and conseqently under the same situation of the Stars at his
birth.

To this may be added that, whereas there are two universal and most miraculous
destructions of the whole World, the one past by Water, the other future by
Fire; there want not those addicted to this pretended Star-divinitie, that
attribute either to the Stars. Gvil. Paris. de Univers. part. 1. Petr. Alliac.
ubi sup. and in de Theol. and Astron. concord. Henr. Machlin. Comment. in
Albumas. Vid. Sixth. Sen. l. 5. Annot. 81. Ever. Digbie in Theor. analyt.
For so diverse of them more then one or two have affirmed, that Noe might well
have foreknown the flood a long time ere God revealed it unto him, from the
conjunctions of those watery constellations and signs, whose concurrence then
produced it, and whose influences are called the cataracts or floud-gates of
Heaven. Genesis 7.11. And with us one sometime Fellow of S. John's in Cambridge, a
man mightily possessed with these mysterious profundities, has confidently
delivered, as treading in their steps, that as certain waterie signs and
constellations meeting together brought in that general inundation and
ecumenical deluge that drowned the whole world; so a number of fiery ones in
like manner conjoyning should after a certain stint of time, (which whether it
be past or no, I know not, having not his book written above threescore year
ago now at hand) produce that universal conflagration that shall set the whole
world on a light fire.

Thus contrary to that which Mr. S here tells us, this their supposed Art, and
the received principles of it, are so far from confirming Gods most strange and
remarkable works as miraculous; that they do rather directly infringe and
remoove the miraculosity of them; since that nothing is averred to have been
done in them, but what the Stars by virtue of an innate power were able to
produce. And if it shall be replied, that yet they say, that God himself
enstamped that virtu in them, and furnished them with that power at first; yet
it will stand firm, that those acts, of a Virgin bearing a Child, the drowning
of the world at one time, and burning all up at another, are no more
miraculous, then the intercourse of night and day, and the vicisitudinary
courses of the several seasons of the year: the one being produced by an innate
power settled in and enstamped by God upon the creature at its first creation
and constitution, as well as the other, and the creature working in a natural
course, according to these men's principles in either.

But to draw to an end of this more prolix discourse then at first I intended,
while as in a wild goose race, I have been enforced to follow, first Mr. Lilie,
and then Mr. Swan: I shall only tell them what Lucilius an Epigrammatist, whom
in the Greek Florilege they may find, says of the Astrologers of his time that
amused selie people by talking to them of a Ram, and a Dog, and a Bull, and a
Bear, and a ramping Lion, and a shrewd stinging Scorpion, and a wry crawling
Crab, and the like scare-bugs in the sky, by such discourse having wrought
them into an amazement of them and their skill, to cheat and gull them, and pick
their purses, under a pretense of reading them their destinies, and foretelling
their fortunes, just as our Wizards do at this day, (...). which leaving to Mr.
Lilie to English, either himself, being so well acqainted with Thucydides, or
else with the Assistance of Mr. S. or some other; I shall close up all with the
Verdict of that Noble Lord so often formerly mentioned, who (in that work whereof
(...), says, he never showed less lerning then in that discourse, I mervail
where he thinks he showed any) sticks not to aver it as a truth no less
clear then the light it self, that (not Astrology simply, but) their
Astrology (such Fortune-telling Astrology as these men profess) has done,
and is likely hereafter to do, more mischief to the Church of God, then all
other rotten branches, which not conscience alone, but very shame enforces
them to lop and cast into the furnace. That which the Lord open the Eyes of
those in Authority, to see, and take notice of, and take to heart, that some
speedy course may be taken for preventing of such mischeifs, as from such
abuses suffered, unless timely prevented, may accrue both to Church and State.

The Annotations on Jerem. Chap. 10. Verse 2. and part of Verse. 3.
Verse. 2. THus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen,] Because the
Jewish people, were a great party of them to go into captivity into Babylon,
and other the regions adjacent, yea, many of them in likelihood were there in
captivity already, (See ver. 11. Chap. 24.1. and 29.1, 2.) God by the Prophet
endeavors to confirm and strengthen them, the pious especially among them,
(for such also there were there of them, Chap. 24.5. Ezekiel. 11.16.) against
those superstitions and vanities that were rife in those parts; and they might
be in danger, being exiles and captives in a strange land, to be strongly
tempted unto: Heb. Learn not to the way: where either the particle is
superfluous, omitted therefore, Psalm. 106.35. Chap. 12.16. or else it may be
rendered, Accustom not your selves to the way of the heathen; and so some
render it; do not imitate them, See Chap. 9.5. their way; that is, their
superstitious courses, Lev. 18.3. and 20.23.

and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven] The first head of superstitions,
which he begins with, is Astrology, a study and practice so rife among them
in those parts, Esaias 47.13. that the professors and practisers of it, not with
them alone, Dan. 2.2. and 5.7. but among other nations also, are generally
designed by the name of Chaldeans; See Strabo l. 17. Cicero of divination, l.
2. Pliny l. 6. c. 26. Astrology, I say, not that which we commonly term
Astronomy, whereby the true nature and motion of the celestial bodies are by
grounds of reason, and rules of art thence taking their rise, enqired into, and
discovered; but that Judiciary Astrology, as it is usually styled, whereby men
take upon them, from the postures and aspects of them, to foretell the issu of
humane affairs, either public, or private, and what casual events, shall befall
either persons or people: a practice grown of late with us into great esteem,
being either countenanced or connived at, by those in authority with us, tho
having entered themselves, and caused others with them, to enter into a
religious bond of a solemn oath and covenant, to endeavor the extirpation of
all those things among us, that are contrary to sound doctrine, and the power
of godliness, whereof this is none of the least. For the original whereof,
(since it has not, nor can be showed to have any ground from the light of
nature, or natural reason) we shall not need to go far to find it out: We have a
blind, but insolent, buzzard (I may well so term him) among us, one that
professes himself no small Doctor in these impostures, and dotages (wherewith
he has bewitched not a few with us, esteeming his predictions, as no other
then divine oracles) and takes upon him by the Stars, to steer the affairs of
our State, pretending to read in the Book of Heaven, all that he writes* who
will sufficiently inform us herein. Now this man, to justify the
warrantablenes of this his practice, tells us, that the good Angels of God in
former ages, at first by personal conference, acquainted the sons of men with
this learning of the Stars; and those holy men, (says he) so instructed,
living many years, and in purer airs, where they curiously observed the Planets
and their motion, brought this Art to some maturity, without the least hint of
superstition. But as the sons of men fell from God in divine worship, so in
flitting and shifting their habitations, they forgot the purer part of this
art; and in some Countries added superstitious conceptions. The holy Angels
then belike by this man's relation, did at first inform those holy men, which
they could not otherwise have known, of the nature of the Planets; to wit, that
Saturn was a melancholic malignant planet, Mars, a choleric and litigious
one, Mercury, a theevish, Venus, a lascivious and wanton one: and that they do
accordingly affect and dispose such people, or persons, as are either bred
under them, or whom they have special relation unto. For these, and the like
ridiculous fopperies, and impious calumniations of those glorious creatures,
are with them, as the Popish Purgatory with the Papists, the main grounds and
principles of their whole Art, which being taken away, the whole fabric and
frame of their superstitious superstructures, will presently fail and fall flat
to the ground; as with those other, all their masses, dirges, obites, pardons,
and indulgences, if you deny them their Purgatory; which because they can
produce no clear Scripture for, they run with these men to their forged
revelations. But whence these frivolous conceits, and irreligious surmises
concerning those celestial bodies, (which if you question, you shake the ground
of all their conjectural skill,) had their original, may well be conjectured from
the very names, the heathen imposed upon them, being borrowed from their
counterfeit deities, whom they deemed so qualified: assure our selves we may,
that Gods holy Angels never raised any such foul aspersions and groundless
defamations, upon those pure and spotless creatures, far from, and wholly
incapable of any tincture of such vicious dispositions. But all that this man
relates, we may if we please, and be so selie as so to do, take upon his
credit; for he tells us not what times those were, wherein it was thus, or
who those holy men were, unto whom the holy Angels at first revealed those
things; or out of what records he has these relations, concerning such
pretended revelations. And as little reason have we, to engage our faith to his
Antagonist, another fowl of the same feather, that flies yet somewhat higher
then he, and pretending his predictions, to be grounded on Art and Nature,
tells us (that we may not mis-doubt or question his Art) that this art was
deduced from God to Adam, to Seth, to Abraham; for proof whereof, he refers
us to a Knight of note, for his studies in this kind; who in favor indeed of
this Art, which he was overmuch addicted to, and besotted with, affirms in
part what he says, but bringing no better proof of it, then a tale out of
Joseph the Jew, who in his Antiquities l. 1. c. 3. tells us, that those of
Seths issue living long and without disturbance, gave themselves to the study of
heavenly things, and the constitution or administration of them; and because
Adam had foretold, a twofold destruction of the world that should come, the one
by water, the other by fire; they left the sum of what they had, of that kind
of learning observed, engraven on two pillars, of brick the one, of stone the
other: but neither is any word in the Jew, of this their Judicial Astrology,
nor of any skill in this kind or any other by God imparted unto Adam, which they
yet father upon him: and the whole relation of the two pillars seems as true, as
that which he adds of the continuance of the latter of them in Syria unto his
time. And indeed, if any sons of Adam ever had any such immediate communion,
either with God himself, or his holy Angels, it must be those Ancient
Patriarks, Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, and those Prophets of God among his
people; unto whom God used sometime immediately, sometime by the Ministry of
Angels, to impart his mind, concerning future events, as well public, as
private: but no where in Scripture read we, that God did this, either by the
natural course of the celestial signs, or, as from thence to be observed; nor
undoubtedly had any such art and skill, been taught the godly ones among Gods
people, whether by God himself, or his Angels; would they either have concealed
it from them, or much-lesse committed it unto Paynims, and Pagans, and by such,
have transmitted it unto posterity, for from such in corrupt times, it crept in
among Christians, being yet ever among them liable to censure; nor was any in
the Ancient Church, that had professed such arts, admitted into the profession
of Christianity, unles that first they renounced those damnable practices, and
recanted such their superstitious conceits. But men may easily guess what
Angels they were, that acquainted men at first with these things, and set them
on work, to busy their brains about such matters, as neither light of nature,
nor grounds of reason, were able to inform them of, but must have some
revelation; either Divine, or Angelical, or Diabolical rather, for the finding
of them out. So far are God himself and his Prophets, from taking notice
hereof, as some such heavenly discovery, or giving any approbation thereunto,
that God by them sometime derideth it, Esaias 44.25. and 47.13. and sometime
disswadeth and condemns it, as an heathenish practice, not befitting his
people to heed; as here, so elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 18.10 -- 14. From the Prince of
the air therefore, it may justly by this man's own grounds and grants, be deemed
to have proceeded; at first by him taught the heathen that were ruled and
swaied by him; and from them, together with the worship of them in their dols,
conveyed unto Gods own people: For what of further observation he subjoyneth;
to omit, that those ridiculous principles must first be made good, ere any
observation can be grounded upon them: the like did the Heathen Magicians
report of their charms, and other superstitious divinations by the flight of
fowls, and from the bowels of beasts; to wit, that observations had been made
of them, for many hundreds of years. See Pliny l. 28. c. 2. and this and those
may well go together, one with the other, unto him, that was the first founder
of them, the father of lies, Joh. 8.44.

and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven] As if the event of things, or the
issue of your affairs depended upon them; which those fond star-gazers bare
people in hand, and took upon them thereby to determine and foretell, what good
or bad success men's designs should have, Esaias 47.12, 13. Howbeit, signs there
are of two sorts; first, natural, and ordinary, the Stars themselves being set
in the sky, to distinguish the times and seasons of the year; to which may be
added, the conjunctions of them one with another, or oppositions of them one to
another, whence the Eclipses of some of them at some time do proceed; and these
are those signs, which coming in a constant course, and continued tenor, (in
regard whereof men skilful therein, are able either going backward, to tell how
it has been with them for thousands of years past, or looking forward how it
will be for as many, if the world it self should so long continue:) God would
not have his people to be affected or affrighted with, as if in regard of them,
or from them, any evil in the success of their affairs could betide them:
other signs there are extraordinary, in dreadful apparitions, besides the
ordinary course of the creature, by which the Lord does sometime give notice
unto his people, of his displeasure, and warning of ensuing wrath; and these
God does not inhibit his people to be affected with, and taking of them unto
heart. See Joel 2.30, 31. Luke 21.11, 25.

for the heathen are di^maied at them] Or, rather, though the heathen be
dismayed at them. Though they be so selie or superstitious, as to be therewith
thus affected, yet ought ye not so to be. So is the particle very freqently
used, in our versions also not seldom expressed, Genesis 8.21. Josh. 17.18. Psalm.
23.4. Esaias 12.1. Dan. 9.9. Mic. 7.8. Hab.3.17*

V. 3. For the customs of the people are vain] Heb. The statutes, or,
ordinances of the people; (that is, those courses of this nature, which people
of several Countries herein concurring do, as if it were some sacred or divine
ordinance, very precisely and superstitiously observe) vanity it; that is, are
each of them exceeding vain, as vain as vanity it self; and a matter therefore
very ill-beseeming such as profess themselves to be Gods people, as did the
Jews then, and as Christians at this day do, to be taken and carried away, with
such frivolous and ridiculous fancies and fopperies: the pronoun, for the verb
substantive, as Chap 6.16, 28. the abstract, for the concrete, as verse. 15.
Eccl. 11.8, 10. and the singular distributively joined with the plural, as
Chap. 5.8.

FINIS.
Places of Scripture in this whole Work discussed, cleared, or alleged.
Genes.
Chap. 1. Verse. 14. page 69. line 3. p. 123. l. 7. p. 126. l. 33. -- p. 130. l.
19. p. 131. l. 18. p. 458. lin. 19. Verse. 16. p. 115. l. 33. V. 18. p. 116. l.
13. V. 30. page 136. lin. 37. p. 176. l. 33.
Chap. 2. ver. 19, 20. p. 166. l. 36. p. 167. l. 5. C. 7. v. 11. p. 184. l. 34.
C. 8. v. 21. p. 192. l. 1. C. 9. v. 11. -- 16. p. 69.11. -- p. 70. l. 16. p.
119. l. 29. C. 17. v. 11, 13. p. 120. l. 3. C. 21. v. 2. p. 158. l. 23. C. 26.
v. 18. p. 112. l. 17.
Exodus
Chap. 4. ver. 8. p. 101. l. 12. p. 120 l. 19. C. 9. v 23, 24. p. 135. l. 2. C.
10. v. 22, 23. p. 52. l. 11. C. 14. v. 24. and 15. v. 6, 7. p. 135. l. 4. C.
31. v. 13, 17. p. 120. l. 10.
Deuteronomy.
Chap. 4. ver. 19. page 115. l. 16. p. 117. l. 1 Chap. 9. verse. 4, 5. page 132.
l. 14. Chap. 13. Verse. 1, 3. page 111. l. 9. Chap. 18. verse. 10. page 171. l.
26. C. 30. v. 29. etc. 32. l. 1. p. 132. l. 39.
Josh.
Chap. 6. v 4. p. 56. l. 32. C. 10. v. 11. p. 135. l. 2. V. 12, 13. p. 43. l.
13. p. 44. l. 7. p. 120. l. 32.
C. 17. v. 18. p. 192. l. 1.
Judge.
Chap. 5. verse. 20. page 133. l. 16. p. 134. l 36 -- p. 135. l. 30.
1 Samuel
Chapter 1. V. 30. p. 103. l. 6. C. 13. v. 14. p. 102. l. 7. C. 15. v. 32. p. 150.
l. 24.
2 Samuel
Chap. 4. v. 4. etc. 9. v. 13. p 145. l. 10. C. 24. v. 1. p. 103. l. 5. V. 15.
p. 158. l. 23.

1 Kings.
C. 4. v. 11. p. 162. l 9. C. 8. v. 39. p. 165 l. 23. C. 18. v. 27, p. 147. l.
5. C. 22. v. 11. p. 56. l. 36. page 58. l. 15.
2 Kings.
Chapter 22. v. 11, 19. p. 102. l. 13. 1 Chronicles. Chap. 12. v. 30. page 172. l. 35.
p. 173. l. 19. C. 21. v. 16, 30. p. 103. l. 11.
Ezra.
Chapter 9. v. 6.15. p. 103. l 6, 7. C 10. v. 4. p. 101. l. 20.
Nehem.
Chapter 10. v. 34. etc. 13. v. 31. p. 172. l. 15.
Ester.
Chap. 1. v. 13. p. 173. l, 2. C. 3. v. 5, 6. p. 12. l 10. C, 9. v. 20, 31. p.
172. l. 15.
Job.
C. 9. v. 7 p. 158. l. 36, -- p. 160. l. 21. C. 27. v. 10, 11. p. 159. l. 37.
Chap. 36. verse. 27. page 159. l. 36. chap. 37. v. 7. page 160. l. 29. -- p.
161. l. 21. chap. 38. v. 31. p. 106. l. 2. p. 156. l. 12. p. 157. l. 6. V. 33.
p. 156. l. 36 -- p. 157. l. 39. V. 34. p. 159. l. 39.
chap. 42. v. 7, 8. p. 90. l. 8.
Psalm.
19. v. 1, 3. p. 104. l. 21. p. 127. l. 28. -- p. 130. l. 19. p. 133. l. 17.
23. v. 4. p. 192. l. 1. 31. v. 6, 7. p. 123. l. 26. 37. v. 6. p. 90. l. 11. 40.
v. 2. p. 132. l. 24. 44. v. 13. p. 103. l. 6. 50. v. 4. p. 132. l. 35. -- p.
133. l. 15. V. 21. p. 81. l. 14.
51. v. 2. p. 112. l. 15. 65. v. 8. p. 103. l. 28. 69. v. 20. p. 133. l. 25.
75. v. 6, 7. p. 13. l. 26. page 132. l. 2. 76. v. 8. p. 101. l. 17. 77. v. 16,
18. p. 135. l. 4. p. 160. l. 2. 78. v. 43. p. 120. l. 24. 94. v. 11. p. 167. l.
27. 106. v. 13. p. 112. l. 16. 11^. v. 2. p. 162. l. 17. page 170. l. 25. 119.
ver. 119, 120. page 102. l. 10. 136. v. 8, 9. p. 115. l. 3^. 147. v. 8. p. 160.
l. 3. V. 19, 20. p. 103. l. 29.
148. v. 14. ibid.
Prove.
Chap. 8. v. 15, 16. p. 13. l. 27. p. 132. l. 1. chap. 9. v. 16. p. 83. l. 15.
Chap. 14. verse. 15. page 168. l. 18. c. 25. v. 4. p. 181. l. 4.
Eccles.
Chap. 3. v. 1. p. 171. l. 29 -- p. 172. l. 30. V. 17. p. 172 l. 19.
chap. 8. v. 6. p. 172. l. 20. chapter 11. v. 3. p. 161. l. 4. V. 8, 10. p. 192. l.
12.
Esaias.
Chap. 1. v. 2. p. 132. l. 38. chap. 2. v. 6. p. 88. l. 39. chapter 4. v. 6. p.
127. l. 5. chapter 5. v. 6. p. 160. l. 5. c. 12. v. 1. p. 192. l. 1. chapter 13. v. 10.
p. 133. l. 36. p. 157. l. 12. p. 159. l. 10. C. 34. v 4. p. 134, l. 18. C. 38.
v. 8. p. 43. l. 14. page 44. l. 8. C. 41. v. 20. p. 122. l. 36. V. 23. p. 107.
l. 7. V. 29. p. 111. l 13.
Chap. 44. verse. 20. page 111. l. 13. V. 25. p. 111. l. 8. p 123. l. 17. p.
190. l. 33.
Chap. 47. v. 12, 13. p. 146. l. 35. p. 187. l. 21. p. 190. l. 33. p. 191 l.
15. C. 50. v. 8, 9. p. 90. l. 9. C. 53. v. 12. p. 117. l. 4. C. 66. v. 2. p.
101. l. 21.
Jerem.
C. 2. v. 12, 13. p. 133. l. 4. C. 4. v. 29. p. 103. l. 6. C. 5. v. 8. p. 192.
l. 15. v. 22. p. 103. l. 29. Chap. 6. v. 16, 28. p. 192. l. 13. C. 8. v. 7. p.
157. l. 36. page 158. l. 23. C. 9. v. 1. p. 103. l. 6. V. 5. p. 187. l. 17. V.
12. p. 101. l. 14.
C. 10. v. 2, 3. p. 18. l. 26. p. 29. l. 3. p. 87. l. 36. p. 95. l. 14 -- p.
96. l. 39. p. 100. l. 8 -- p. 109. l. 11. p. 111. l. 13 -- p. 115. l. 2. p.
117. l. 9. p. 118. l. 26 -- p. 123. l. 30 p. 146. l. 31. p. 167. l. 25. p. 187.
l. 3. -- p. 192. l. 15. V. 11. p. 187. l. 7. V. 15. p. 192. l. 12.
C. 12. v. 16. p. 187. l. 15. C. 20 v. 11. p. 19. l. 9. C. 23. v. 9. p. 103. l.
7 C. 24* v. 1 p. 187. l. 7. v. 5. ibid. l. 10. C. 28. v. 4. etc. 29. v. 15, 21,
23, 31. p. 58. l. 21. Chap. 29. verse. 1, 2. page 187. l. 7. Chap. 36. v. 16,
24. p. 101. l. 28, 30. C. 41. v. 6, 7. p. 25. l. 28. C. 51. v. 46. p. 103. l.
14.
Ezekiel.
Chap. 11. verse. 16. page 187. l. 10. Chap. 20. verse. 22. page 120. l. 11. C.
21. v. 3. p. 103. l. 21. C. 37. v. 7, 8. p. 159. l. 13.
Dan.
C. 2. v. 2. p. 187. l. 22. C. 4. v. 25. p. 132. l. 4. C. 5. v. 7. p. 178. l.
22. Chap. 9. verse. 7, 8. page 103. l. 7. V. 9. p. 192. l. 2. V. 21. p. 112. l.
17.

Hosh.
Chap. 9. verse. 9. page 112. lin. 16.
Joel.
C. 2. v. 10. p. 159. l 16. V. 30, 31. p. 191. l. 35.

Amos.
C. 1. v. 2. p. 101. l. 15. C. 3. v. 2. p. 103. l. 20. V. 8. p. 101. l. 14.
C. 8. v. 9. p. 133. l. 29.
Mic.
Chap. 6. verse. 1, 2. page 133. l. 5. V. 9. p. 101 l. 13.
C. 7. v. 8. p. 192. l. 2.
Hab.
C. 3. v. 16, 18. p. 102. l. 13 -- 31. V. 17. p. 192. l. 2.

Mal.
C. 3. v. 17. p. 81. l. 15.
Matthew.
Chap. 3. verse. 11. page 127. l. 6. Ch 5. v. 12. p. 25. l 14. Chap. 6. verse.
10. page 136 l. 31. Chap 10. verse. 28. page 102. l. 38. Chap. 12. verse. 24.
page 121. l. 21. V. 39, 40. p. 121. l. 1 -- p. 122. l. 12.
Chap. 13. ver. 25. p. 170. l. 34. page 171. lin. 5. page 174. l. 11. Chap, 23.
ver. 34 -- 37. p. 25. l. 14. Chap. 24. verse. 38. page 157. l. 37. chap. 27. v.
45. p. 25. l. 17. p. 133. l. 34. V. 47. p. 122. l. 9.

Luke
C. 4. v. 6. p. 13. l. 30. Chap. 11. verse. 29. page 121. l. 35. C. 21. v. 11,
25. p. 191, l. 35. V. 25. page 161. l. 35 -- p. 162. l. 16. V. 28. p. 103. l.
13.
Chap. 23. verse. 8. page 112. l. 26.
John.
Chap. 3. Verse 2. Page 121, l. 20. V. 5. p. 127. l. 10. Verse 13, 14. Page
121. lin. 26.
Chap. 8. Verse 44. Page 191. l. 10. V. 48. p. 121. l. 24.
C. 9. v. 6. p. 135. l. 24.
Act.
Chap. 2. Verse 22. Page 120 l. 36. C. 5. v. 41. p. 103. l. 3. C. 19. v. 19. p.
31. l. 1. p. 180 l. 4. Verse 24, 27, 28. Page 26. l. 27.
Chap. 27. verse 20. Page 159 line 20.
Romans
C. 4. v. 11. p. 120. l. 3. C. 5. v. 3. p. 103. l. 4. C. 8. v. 35. p. 90. l.
11.
1 Cor.
C. 2. v. 10. p 4. l. 9. V. 11. p. 165. l. 22
Chap. 4. v. 9 -- 13. Page 25. l. 14. C. 5. v. 7. p. 128. l 36. C. 8. v. 4. p.
122. l. 31. C. 10. v. 20. p 13. l. 29. Chap. 11. verse 30. Page 137 line 19.
2 Cor.
C. 4. v. 4. p. 123. l. 4. Chap. 26. verse 4, 5: Page 25. line 15.
Philip.
C. 1. v. 29. p. 103. l. 3. C. 2. v. 17. p. 103. l. 4^
2 Thessalonians.
C. 1. v. 5. p. 103. l. 3. C. 2. v. 9. p. 123. l. 5.
1 Timothy*
C. 3. v. 16. p. 82. l. 36. C. 4. v. 7. p. 31. l. 21.
Tit.
Chap. 1. verse 12. Page 123 line 2.
Hebr.
C. 10. v. 1. p. 128. l. 25. C. 11. v. 7. p. 101. l. 39.
Jam.
C. 3. v. 14. p. 26. l. 15.
Revel.
C. 2. v. 14. p. 4. l. 7. V. 17. p. 160. l. 28.
Chap. 6. v. 12 -- 14. page 134. l. 11. C. 12. v. 11. p. 103. l. 3. Chap. 16.
verse 13. page 21 l. 16. C. 17. v. 5. p. 83. l. 6.
FINIS.

