THE Papists Bait; OR Their usual Method IN GAINING PROSELITES: ANSWERED

By CHARLES GATAKER, B. D. A Divine of the Church of ENGLAND.

To which is added, A Letter of the Lord Viscount FALKLAND to the same
Gentleman, much to this present purpose.

Job 34. 3, 4. The ear tries words, as the palate tastes meat. Let us choose
to us judgment: Let us know among our selves what is good.

Luke 12. 57. Yea, why do ye not even of your selves judge what is right?

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Hen. Brom, at the Gun at the West end of St.
Paul's, 1674.

A Premonition TO THE READER.
THe Title Page of a Book does commonly hold forth a Bill of Fare (as I may so
speak) whereby Passengers, who are either hungry after sound knowledge, or
delight to feed on the thin and airy Diet of Wit, or are greedy of Novelty, are
invited to the Stationers Ordinary. But a Preface to the Reader is often
necessary to excite and prepare his mind for the kindly reception, and good
digestion of the Treatise it self. Give me leave therefore (Courteous Reader)
to arrest you, before you sit down to your enterteinment, with giving you an
Account concerning the Questions here agitated; the Answerers Engagement; and
the occasion with the design of this Publication.

First, As for the Five Questions, they have been of late years thrown about in
several Families, where Popish Huntsmen or Fowlers take the boldness to set
their toyls or snares to catch souls; insomuch as they make near as much noise
and yield as much matter of discourse in England, as the Five Propositions in
Jansenius did lately in France. We may by this see the truth of Ephesians. 4. 14.
(...).
St. Paul's observation, that false Teachers are cunning Cheaters, like to
common Gamesters, who are skillful in all the tricks of Dice, true and false,
and have (...), a methodical course of imposture. Apoc. 12 9. Joh. 8. 44. Mat.
13. 38, 39.
The old and subtle Serpent, who is the Father of lies, and active sower of
tares in Gods husbandry, is the grand master of this art of deceiving. The
Papists are the most diligent students, and the most unlucky proficients in
this School of darkness, whose principal study it is to obscure the light, and
to hinder the power of truth. And their method is the same, that the
adversaries of our Blessed Savior used, who attempted often to ensnare him by
insidious Questions, vainly presuming, that their shallow wit could baffle him,
who (unknown to them) was the eternal Wisdom of God, veiled under a cloud of a
mean Mar. 6. 3. Joh. 7. 15.
illiterate Carpenter. But Mat. 23. 8.
our only Master, the Christ, quickly put them to silence and shame, either by
propounding cross questions, or by parables, wherein they might with little
study read their own malice and folly. And as then, they that thus lay in wait
to entangle See Mark 11. 27. and 12. 13.
Christ in his discourse were the Emissaries of the High Priest and his
Council, who were in appearance the visible Church of God, but did set
themselves in opposition against Christ and the Gospel, and those Antichristian
Ministers acted by instructions given forth by those who set them on work: Thus
the Popish Circumforane^, that go up and down like the juggling Exorcists at
Ephesus, do not Act. 19. 13.
act merely by their singular private fancies, but as they are taught and
prescribed by their superiors, and the wellhead of their Sophistries is the
Court of Rome: There are indeed in the seven-headed or seven-hilled City, which
is Septem urbs clara jugis, toti quae praesidet orbi. Propert. Apoc. 17. 9 18.
the seat of the Mother of abominations, more shops then one, where these
weapons are forged, The Congregation for the propagation of the Tridentine
Faith, the Schools of the Loyolists, the English Seminary, without doubt are
all deep in Counsel, and hard at work, now or never (for England's unhappy
divisions fomented secretly by Papists, are Rome's most advantageous
opportunities) to reduce this lost Nation to become once more enthralled and
tributary to the Pope's spiritual usurped Monarchy, which indeed is an
Antichristian Kingdom of this World. Hence comes that consent in the way, which
Romanists now take to gain Proselytes. But we may further observe, that by
order they alter their course, and shift their weapons every forty years or
thereabouts, since the Reformation, which indeed is no light argument of a weak
Cause, which cannot stand without shifting the ground, and the defenses of it.
But still they accommodate their persensions to the different temper and humor
of our Countrymen, that are variable in several ages, taking advantage also
from the changes in the state of the Kingdom, in which the Church cannot but
suffer some alteration in the outward form of Ecclesiastical Administrations. I
can upon a good occasion offered produce five Popish Propositions cast abroad in
A. D. 1623. and also the Answer of a learned and pious Divine then living, and
still of happy memory. Those were of a fashion somewhat different from these
Questions, but tended to the same purpose. For the chief aim of all such
writings is to amuse Protestants, especially those who are unacquainted with
true antiquity, and to put them off from applying the Rule of faith delivered
in the holy Scriptures to the present Religion of Rome, and from attending on
that Ministry, which is Gods Ordinance for our instruction, and under which
Gods providence has seated us, and to make men gape after an infallible Guide,
which Papists say is necessary, but for no other reason, but because they hope
(as they endeavor) to cosen credulous people to mistake the Papacy for that
infallible Guide. These men are so blinded with self-interest and pride, that
they strongly presume, that these five Questions, as being the two-horned
Arguments of the Beast, are so subtly framed, that whether we answer Yea, or
Nay, we are catched for certain, and shall be forced to deny our own
principles, and to confess the existence of an infallible Guide somewhere,
though it be in some undiscovered corner of the earth. And they have such a
mean opinion of us for shortness of sight, and easiness of belief, that being
once drawn to the acknowledgement of an infallible Guide, we cannot choose but
take the bare word of a few Italian Factors, that the most magnificent Whore of
Babylon described by St. John to the life, and designed evidently to be the
Papal Power of Rome as it appears at this day, is the infallible Guide of Gods
Institution. I shall add but one Advertisement concerning the preposterousness
of this procedure. This Questionist in the close of his Reply, says, that till
his Questions are answered he has nothing to do with the proof of any thing.
It is a remarkable thing, that all Papists by the instruction common to all
their Schools of deceit, dispose their Disputants to decline proving any thing,
and to impose that burden of proof upon their adversaries. But we that do take
our selves to be in the just possession of the faith once delivered Ephesians. 2. 20.
unto the Saints, and indeed do build our Religion upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, that is, upon the Luke 16. 29. 31. They have Moses and
the Prophets, let them hear these. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, if one arise from the dead. Where note, that
the holy Scriptures bear in them the same Authority, that was in the living
persons of Moses and the Prophets, and also have the same efficacious virtue to
beget faith, as their words had being orally pronounced, and where these lively
Oracles are freely confuted, and faithfully applied, (though by men that are
short of Infallibility, but faithful dispensers of holy mysteries) an
infallible Guide is superfluous: Also mark, that where the Authority of
Scriptures is despised, Miracles, (and there is the same reason to say so of
Infallibility) are useless, because uneffectual to work faith.
writings of both, (as Abraham in his Dialogue with Dives gives the name of
Moses and the Prophets to their holy Books left behind them) do reasonably
expect, that whosoever goes about to draw us off from that Church and way of
salvation, wherein we are engaged, unto another Society, under pretense, that
we can be safe no where else but in that Ark, do strongly and clearly prove,
that our Religion is for the main body of it false, treacherous, and
destructive of salvation, and that the Society to which we are invited by
Papists is the sole Mistress of saving truth. For all that are acquainted with
the course, either of Judicial proceedings, or of Scholastical disputations,
know well, that this Rule holds, Actori, and, Asserenti incumbit probatio, The
proof lies upon the Accuser, or the Averrer of any thing. But this puzling way
without proving of any thing, savours so strongly of deceit, and is so far from
a fair way of reasoning, that it can catch none but them, that are unsettled in
their Religion, and Novices in both divine and humane learning. And because
there are too many such in the world, whose precious souls are in danger at
this time, the discovery of Popish illusions is now become a necessary work of
the prudent and faithful Guides of souls, who by Gods grace have an actual
certainty of their Religion, and can justly say, in the words of St. John, We
know, that we are of the truth, and, We know that God has given us a mind or
understanding to know the true God, and we are in him that is true, (1 John 3.
19. and 5. 20.) although they have not the vanity to challenge to themselves an
Infallibility. So much for the five Questions in general, which whether the
Divine has answered or no, it is now free for the indifferent Reader to judge.

As for this Answerers Engagement in the Controversy, it was very casual. A
Romanist that is very zealous to promote the Pope's Interest in this Kingdom,
had endeavored to gain credit with the Eve by a surprisal, and if the old
stratagem had prospered, by her insinuation to draw in the Adam, presuming that
the Rhetoric of love would be more prevalent, then his Logic upon a
considerate Gentleman. To this end a Copy of the five Questions was commended
to the persons with a presumption, that no Minister of our Church could give a
fit and full Answer to these confounding Queries. And then it was to be hoped,
that the parties assaulted would presently despise, and then desert a Church,
that was unfurnished of a Ministry able to answer such doughty Questions, as
the refined Wits of Papists devise. It was also to be supposed, that whosoever
breaks off from our Church, would without any further ado at the next step run
into that which is next him, the Church of Rome, whose Mat. 7. 13. Noct^s atque
dies patet atri janua Ditis.
wide gate stands open day and night, and is ready to receive all that would
find a broad way to Heaven, such as is the Roman passage by a Priests
Absolution without a holy life, or sincere contrition for a debauched. But it
fell out about this time, that This Rustack Divine says of himself, (...). He
speaks plainly, he calls things by their right names.
a Country Minister of the Gentleman's ancient acquaintance being in the City,
and invited to dine at his Lodging, came to see his Friend a little sooner,
then some other Guests then expected. The Gentleman thought fit to make these
Questions a part of the Ministers entertainment. The Minister took the short
time of that expectation to read the Riddle, and after a small ruminating took
Pen and Ink, and set down the double Answer hereafter following, and resigned
the Writing to the Gentleman to be disposed of at his pleasure. Shortly after
the Romish Mountebank renewed his visit, to see how the Pill had wrought. The
Gentleman then took the opportunity to deliver him the Ministers Paper. But
many months past, before any return was made: at length a Reply was
communicated to the Gentleman, who conveyed it to the Answerer as soon as he
could conveniently, being at a distance from him by the interposition of
several Counties. The Minister took his first time of leisure to give his sense
of this Reply, by a Letter to his Friend, who was the person concerned in the
Contest, as being the man aimed at for to be made a Roman Convert, that is to
say in plain terms, a child of Hell in a double measure, for leaving the clear
and living Well of salvation, and then seeking it in a broken cistern, or in a
foul puddle of errors and corruptions. Withal it was the Ministers intent,
that the Letter should be imparted unto the Romanist, that he might make some
good use of it: For the Protestants charity is employed to turn a sinner from
the error of his way, as well as to secure a Christian in the path of
righteousness. And although this transaction was past A. D. 1666. yet be that
drove the trade pursued it no further, and has neither (as it was on our side
heartily desired) acknowledged his error, whereof he Non est pudor ad meliora
transire. Ambros.
might be convinced, and confess it with a wholesome shame; nor attempted any
vindication of his Writing, that we know of, which silence has more of
prudence, then any fresh proffer of more impertinencies could have. His silence
therefore cannot be taken for consent in a matter of Religion, where the
confession of our faith is a duty; but Romans 10. 10.
may be taken for a modest laying down of his weapons.

Now as for this way of publication of all that has passed on both sides, he
that observes the bold activity of Romanists at this time, may apprehend a
sufficient reason of it, without being told one. Indeed the Gentleman who had
an interest in the Papers had used his freedom by showing them to some Divines
of our Church, who gave a favorable judgment of the Ministers whole design,
and advised the Gentleman to publish that, which they conceived to be of a
general concernment, and might prove a public benefit by the removal of a
stumbling block laid in the way of weak Christians, and might be useful to the
prevention of much mischief, which these Questions might produce, if permitted
to pass uncontrolled.

The Minister hereupon has been pressed for his leave to let his Writings with
the Adversaries to pass the Press. And he considered, that there was no reason
imaginable, why he should now conceal what was designed for the maintenance of
our Religion from the sight of his Brethren, which he had before exposed to the
view and censure of our Adversaries, who are seldom equal Judges of our
Writings. Since therefore the five Questions are spread abroad by our
Adversaries, who may have too great a complacency in their own inventions as
unanswerable, if we all pass them by as contemptible, but may be Gods grace,
which often works by weak instruments, and beyond man's opinion, be moved and
directed to consider their ways, and turn their feet unto Gods testimonies,
even for their sakes, who both Psalm. 119 59. -- Mos est miseris, trahere omnia
secum, Mersa juvat. -- Lucan.
are miserably misled, and also industriously mislead others, as well as for
the good of our fellow-travellers whose company we desire to keep in Gods ways
of truth and peace, the Minister has complied with the Gentleman's desires in
this particular, and both have the Christian civility to communicate the use of
their Light to all travelers that may reap benefit by it, whether they be in
or out of the way. But because we publish the Writings of a Papist, we desire
to assure the Reader, that the Gentleman is not so void of Honor, which is his
particular Conscience, and the Minister is not so forgetful of his Office,
whereof 1 Cor. 4. 2.
Fidelity is the quality, as that either of them should by any wilful
alteration corrupt and falsify them in the private conveyance, or in the
present publishing. The Minister indeed in his second pains of preparing all
for the Press by transcription, has upon the review of his own Letter to his
Friend added two short Considerations, which for distinctions sake are enclosed
within these marks []. Also he has made some small alteration in a few
sentences for the fuller explication of his own Answers. This he thinks it
necessary to advertise the Reader of, because the Romanist who gave out the
Questions and made the Reply, may have the curiosity to peruse this Book, as
being concerned in it. If then he shall compare my Letter as it now runs, with
that which was formerly imparted to him, and find something altered, and some
things added, he has yet no reason to cavil or carp at the Ministers
proceeding as unsincere, or to charge him with foul play in calling this the
Letter to his Friend dated June 18. 1666. For he has unsaid nothing, which was
then delivered, and he has only endeavored both to make himself to be better
understood then he might have been before, and also to instruct his Friend more
fully concerning two particulars, which he had occasion to treat of. If
therefore the Romanist list to read this second Edition of the Letter, he will
have cause to thank the Minister for his double diligence to discover his
errors, and to give him fuller satisfaction then formerly. And this comes
timely enough to prevent his Defense, or to procure his Amendment. Thus (gentle
Reader) thou may perceive the whole design of the publication of this
party-colored Discourse.

I shall detain thee yet a little longer with offering unto thee a
Consideration that is near a kin to our Matter in hand. We see the
indefatigable diligence of Romanists equal to that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, whom our Blessed Savior branded with the infamous character of
Hypocrites, Mat. 23. 15
and denounced a dreadful Woe against them, for their restless travels, and
divelish labors in compassing Sea and Land to make one Proselyte. I desire my
Christian Reader to observe the Parallel between them. The Roman Sheep-stealers
of this Age, the Scribes and Pharisecs took upon them to be the Guides of Gods
people in that Nation of the Jews which was the only visible Church of God at
that day, and had obtained great credit with the vulgar by the ostentation of
counterfeit holiness, boasting of knowledge, and pretense of Authority. The
Jewish Church was then very corrupt in Religion, not indeed by Idolatry, as
formerly before the Babylonian Captivity, (for the smart of Gods rod lying long
on their backs made them after their return for everweary of Idols) but by a
tenacious adherence to humane Traditions; which burden, how heavy and hard to
be born, the Lawyers considered not, but the Scribes and Pharisees bound upon
the consciences of the people for religious Ordinances of divine original, not
written in the Law of Moses, but traduced by oral tradition of the Fathers. It
was then (as David speaks) Psalm. 119. 126. Mat 15. 3. Mark 7. 9, 13.
high time for the Lord to work, to lay to his hand, that is his Ministry, when
they had destroyed Gods Law, and made his Commandments of none effect by the
traditions of men. Yea, St. Peter says, that Christ died to redeem his 1 Pet.
1. 18, 19.
people by his blood from that vain conversation, which the Jews were enslaved
unto by the tradition of their Fathers. The Pharisees then, that took such
pains to make Proselytes, did not make it their business to gain strangers to
the Commonwealth of Israel, unto a communion with the people of the God of
Abraham according to the pure Law of Moses, for which Christ certainly would
never have condemned them, as he did. But the aim of their labors was to
increase their own party, by captivating men under their yoke of Authority to
the observance of a traditional Religion, and thereby to strengthen their power
and worldly interest in that Nation, which was called by Gods Name. Now, for
this inveagling of Disciples to the keeping of counterfeit Traditions, some
whereof were but vain and uneffectual to sanctification, others were violations
of Gods Law, our just Master curses these seduced and seducing Guides for
making their wretched followers the children of Hell, even worse then
themselves, by engaging their new conquered Subjects to the most violent
hatred, and fierce opposition of the truth, and the professors of it. See now,
how the Papists tread in the steps of the Pharisees, and in one particular
out-act their crimes. Their pretense to the Chair of Authority endowed with
Infallibility, their outward varnishes of sanctity laid over their covetousness
and uncleanness, their horrid hypocrisies, I omit to speak of. But their
Proselytizing is that which I propound to your notice. Their work is not to
convert Pagans from the worship of Devils and dead Idols to serve the true and
living God, nor to turn Jews and Turks, who abhor Idols, and therefore are too
rationally scandalized by Roman Idolatries, and averted from Christianity by
that conspicuous Mother of spiritual fornications, but to pervert Christians,
who know and worship the only true God through and with the One Mediator Jesus
Christ according to the simplicity of the Gospel, and to persuade these to
break off communion with all other Christians, who have obtained the like
precious faith with themselves, and to subject their 2 Pet. 1. 1.
souls to the conduct of Traditionaries, and so to become an accession to a
potent Sect or Faction in Christendom. Indeed the Roman Sectaries are in no
small measure more pernicious false Teachers then the Pharisees, because they
not only evacuate the Authority of the Gospel, and corrupt the purity of
Christian Religion, by novel devices, some directly repugnant to Law and
Gospel, others vainly superstitious, and all obtruded under the false title of
Traditions; but also have introduced into their Religion the most gross
Idolatries, that ever the Devil did pollute the confederate servants of God
withal. Since then the purple Apoc. 17. and 18.
Whore has made the Kings of the Earth and many Nations drunk with the
poisoned Wine of her fornications, as St. John being in the Spirit foresaw and
foretold, and it is the labor of Roman Emissaries to invite Englishmen to
drink of her golden Cup, St. John's Caution was never more necessary for
Christians then now, Little Children, keep your selves warily from Idols: And
Christ's Admonition 1 John 5. 20.
concerns us nearly, Beware of the leaven of the Mat. 16. 6.
Pharisees. Since Papists are thus manifestly the heirs and successors of the
Scribes and Pharisees, let all that love their own souls decline the snares of
these travelers to make Proselytes, lest while they think to find a new way to
Heaven, which is called Tradition, they be made the children of Hell. Here
indeed we have set one 2. Tim. 2. 26.
snare of the Devil before thine eyes, the Papists first set it to take
Christians captive, and set it in secret, in chambers, whispering in the dark,
but now what was spoken in the Read Luke 12. 1, 2, 3.
dark, and in the closet, is brought forth to be examined by the light, and I
hope, that this stratagem of our enemies is defeated by being discovered.
Indeed it is a happy ignorance not at all to know the depths of Satan; but
since God Apoc. 2. 24. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14.
has in his wise and just providence let loose Satan amongst us, who can
transform himself into an Angel of light, and transfigure's his messengers into
the Apostles of Christ, who spare no pains to vent his delusions, we had need
to pray heartily, that God will be our Sun to enlighten us with the saving
beams of his heavenly truth which shine in his written Word, and our shield,
our shelter, our shadow to secure us from the snare of the Fowler, from the
pestilence Psalm. 91. 1, 3, 6.
that walks in darkness, and the destruction (the bold. faced Devil) that
wastes at noonday. And that the Christian Reader may be provided of an
Antidote against this noysom pestilence, and that he may both see and escape
the deceit and destruction of this snare, is the end of this publication; which
God make prosperous to his Glory. Amen.

C. G.

First SECTION, Containing the PAPISTS QUERIES.
Five Queries propounded in Religion.
_1. WHether there is not in all ages a visible Catholic 1.
Church?

2. Whether out of the visible Catholic Church 2.
any can attain Salvation?

3. Seeing there are now very many Professions 3.
amongst Christians, which give themselves out to be either the holy Catholic
Church, or part of it; I desire to know by designation* which amongst them all
is now the holy Catholic Church?

4. Whether the Holy Catholic Church so designed can teach her Children any
error, as matter of Christian Faith, either destructive 4.
of Salvation, or endangering the attaining of it?

5. If the said Catholic Church can teach errors, as matter of 5.
Christian Faith, how any Christian can be infallibly certain, that She has
not taught some error in determining the Canon of Scripture, and in teaching
some Book, or Books, to be the word of God, which is not so; and then what
certainty any one can have, that all those Books are Gods word, which Gods
Church delivers to be his word?

[A Categorical Answer to these Queries is demanded.]

Second Section containing the Divines Answer.
1. THe Queries answered by propounding others, reflecting upon the State of
the Jewish Church of God, to which God had made as ample promises of its
continuance, till Shiloh came in humility, as he made of the Christian Churches
perpetuity, till the same Savior come in glory.

1. Whether according to the veracity of Gods promises, there were not then to
be a Visible Church of the Jews?

2. Seeing the Kingdom and Church of the ten tribes pretended to the truth and
service of God, as well as the House of David with the Priesthood at
Jerusalem, and even that Kingdom and Priesthood were sometime infected with
gross Idolatry, and that publicly set up and erected; I desire to know by what
designation a Jew, that was truly inquisitive of the way and means of
Salvation, should then discern and discover that Church, in which he might find
it, and out of which, he could not, since (as Christ himself affirms John 4.
22.) Salvation was then of the Jews?

3. Whether the Visible Society of the Jewish Nation that was in covenant with
God could not teach her Children any error as matter of Religion, that was
corruptive of the same, and destructive of Salvation?

4. If the said Church could teach such errors, how any Jew could be infallibly
certain, that the living Oracles committed to that people were not corrupted,
or lying legends obstructed under pretense of Holy Scripture.

5. If God in that Oeconomie did preserve the Holy Scriptures, which were to be
the standing Rule of Religion, to which private persons were to have recourse
for their direction, to secure themselves from the seducement of erring Guides
(Esa. 8. 20. and 9. 16. compared); and also the Instrument of public
Authority, for reformation of a corrupted Church: why may not the Scriptures of
the New Testament, added to the Oracles of the Old, be sufficient to make us
wise unto Salvation, and to enable them who have their senses exercised
therein, to discern between good and evil?

[If the Querist can frame a good Answer that might satisty the conscience of a
Jew, then, mutatis mutandis, the same will be an Answer to his own Queries.]

II. Take this Categorical Answer to the said Queries.

1. There was, is, and shall be till the worlds end, ae Catholic Church, that
in every age is visible by the profession of Christianity to the persons then
living.

2. Out of this Catholic Church ordinarily there is no Salvation.

3. That is the Holy Catholic Church, which professes that One Holy Catholic
Faith, once for all delivered unto the Saints, whereof the Holy Scriptures are
the Conservative and Rule.

4. That Holy Catholic Church teaches no error destructive of Salvation.

5. Therefore cannot, so long as it continues so, abuse the world by imposing
false, or forged Scriptures upon it.

Quere further;

What reason now from hence can be deduced, why any rational person should
desert the Church of England, that adheres to (the acknowledged Rule of Faith)
the Scriptures, and enter into the present Church of Rome, which at the
threshold requires him to renounce his Senses, Reason, and Charity, and obliges
him to the belief of a Creed composed a few years ago at Trent, which we desire
the Papists to prove was the Catholic Faith of the truly ancient and Catholic
Church.

Third Section containing the Papists Reply.
N. 1. A Categorical Answer to the Queries concerning the Jewish Church.
I Admit the promises of God here mentioned respectively to Jews and
Christians.

To the first I answer affirmatively.

The Second commits a fallacy of Ignoratio elenchi. The A. to 1. 2.
Queries about the Christian Church (to which these ought to correspond) A. to
2. Q.
proceed not upon any particular Kingdom, no nor upon any particular Church,
nor on every one, or any particular mumber of the Priests or Pastors of the
Church; but upon the representative Catholic Church in a full and lawful
meeting of the chief Pastors to teach the Church diffusive, what she is to
believe as matter of Faith, or to reject as errors in Faith, when questions
arise about any of them. I therefore answer, that when any such question arose
amongst the Jews, they were neither to have their last refuge to the Kings of
Israel or Judah, nor to the State, Magistrates, or common people for resolution
in what they were to believe; but to the lawful High Priest for the time, with
his High Council or Synod of other chief Priests and Doctors, in the Law of
Moses. And they were to conform their belief to what they defined, and taught
them; so that whatsoever either the Kings, or some number of inferior Tribes,
or some particular Priests, taught, practiced, or believed, contrary to the
Doctrine and definition of this Supreme Spiritual Council was to be held
erroneous, and those who held forth such erroneous Doctrine pertinaciously, or
practiced publicly contrary to it; were to be esteemed in their doctrine
Heretics, and in their practice Nonconformists to the True Church, or
Separatists from it. If therefore a Jew in the times mentioned in the Querie
should have demanded, which was then the True Visible Church, wherein Salvation
could be acquired, the answer must have been, That it was the High Priest then
being, and all these believers, who conformed their Faith, Practices and
Communion to him and his high Council, ut supra: And all such, as stood in
oppositions against him, and division from him, were Aliens (so long as they
continued in that state) from the True Church. Now if the Querist had proved
efficaciously, that the High Priest with his fore named Council taught the
people, either Idolatry, (the common sin of the Jews) or any other breach of
Gods Law, to be lawful, or any error against Gods Revelations to be true, or
any of his Revelations to be false, he had overthrown the whole fabric of my
Queries. But seeing this is not yet done by him, his Queries are neither an
Answer, nor any obstruction to mine, and therefore they remain in their full
vigor against him. For notwithstanding all he says in his second Query, (which
is the main force of his instance) I have clearly showed, a Jew of those times,
which was then the True Visible Church, out of which Salvation could not be
had. Now it is impossible, to prove any such matter, unless he enervate the
words of our Savior, Mat. 23. 2, 3. where he says, That whatsoever the Scribes
and Pharisees taught, who had and did sit in Moses his chair (that is succeeded
in his Spiritual authority) was to be observed and done by all the Jewish
people: which supposes evidently, they could not teach them either error in
Faith and Manners, as part of Gods word; for then he should have commanded to
do evil, and believe errors: so that they were infallible in their teaching
till Shiloh came. And the reason why they were so infallible (says our Savior)
was, because they sat upon Moses his chair, and so governed successively the
Church of God faithfully in matter of doctrine, as he did in his time: Upon the
chair of Moses have sat the Scribes and Pharisees: All therefore that they
shall say unto you, Observe and do it. And this reason proves not only, those
that sat then when our Savior spoke these words, but that all those who sat
before them ever since the time of Moses were infallible in all divine
doctrines both of Faith and Manners.

The third Querie is therefore thus answered; That the Jewish A. to Q. 3.
Church, (understood ut supra) could not teach any error, as matter of Divine
Faith or Religion.

To the fourth Querie, I answer, That, though from the precedent A. to Q. 4.
Answers, it follows, that the Jewish Church by divine direction preserved the
Holy Scriptures so entirely, that it never rejected any true part of Gods
written word, nor received into their Canon of Gods written word any Book, or
Sentence, which was not his word; yet it follows not thence, that every
private person should find out every particular point of Religion by particular
or express proofs out of that written word alone; but that the Authority of the
Jewish Church, ut supra, in matters controverted, should interpose it self, and
determine the controversy. Nor do the two Texts quoted in the Querie prove
thus much: For that Esa. 8. 20. proves only this, that they were neither to
have recourse to Soothsayers, nor to extraordinary visions, but to the Law and
Testament, when doubts arose. Now this is so far from forbidding to have
recourse to the present respective Priests and Governors of the Church, that
the Law and Testament command expressly, that recourse is to be had to them in
doubtful cases, Deuteronomy. 17. from the 8th. to the 12th. verse, and Malachi. 2.
from the 4th. to the 8th. In which places the interpretation of the Law is
reserved to the Priest, and the disobedience to the Priests command, declared
to be so great a sin, that it is to be punished with no less than death. And
for the Scriptures themselves, it was so far from the Ordinance of Moses his
Law, that every particular or private Believer had license, or opportunity, or
ordinary possibility to peruse them, and gather from them by his sole perusal,
what was, and what was not to be believed, (as private Protestants now do) that
the Law was only to be read to them once in Seven years, Deuteronomy. 31. 10, 11. and
was accordingly performed by Esdras, Nehem. 8. 1, 2, 3. And this was all we
read in Scripture of the common People knowing the written word. And it
appears, that the people were so far from undertaking by their own private
judgments to attain to the full meaning of every hard sentence in the Law,
that it is said v. 79. that the Levites interpreted to the people, and that
Esdras taught them: And v. 13. not only the people, but the inferior Levites
and Priests came to Esdras the chief Priest to hear from him the interpretation
of the Law. Now the respondent, if he will make a parallel between the common
people of the Jews and his Protestants, must produce some clear place of
Scripture, where the Books of the Law of Moses, and not only they, but the
whole Old Testament was as common and familiar in the houses and hands of every
ignorant Jew, as the Old and New Testament is now in the houses and hands of
every ignorant Protestant, which I believe he will find a very hard task,
seeing Printing being then unknown to the world, it would have been very
difficult to have found so immense a number of copies, as are now (since
Printing) of the Bible amongst Protestants. Yet are not we of opinion, that the
Scriptures are either not profitable, (as Saint Paul says they are) or not
sufficient (supposing them to be the written word of God by some precedent
proof) by way of Rule to make us wise unto Salvation. For they contain many of
the most important points of Religion clearly and expressly to all, who are
not wilfully pertinacious, and what they contain not in particular expressions
by general rules they refer to the Church, and the chief Governors of it, to
learn them from their mouths, or from the Universal Tradition of Christendom.
But that every particular Christian is to receive and know what he is to
believe, what not, by his sole perusal of Gods written word, as though every
particular point of Christian Faith were particularly set down in it, or by
particular respective consequences, or other particular proofs concerning every
such point to be deduced from it, is so great a Paradox; that no man (I think)
who has his right senses can averr it. For besides the unlearned, which is the
far greater part of Christendom, whereof a very great part know neither to
write nor read, and therefore depend upon the credit of others, what are the
words of Scripture; or if they can read, know no other save their Mothers
tongue, and thereby are subject to a thousand misconstructions of the words or
Phrases in the Original; or if they arrive to the knowledge of the original,
know not the true Rules of interpretation of Scripture, and thereby run into
errors; or if they know them, out of Pride, or self-conceit of their own wit
and jugdment, will not apply them: And as to the Learned, seeing they, after
all their industry, skill in Languages, comparing one place with another, etc.
are yet so far from according one with another in the interpretation of diverse
places of Scripture touching points of Faith controverted, that there is no
hope after 150 years discord they will ever come to an agreement.

But suppose some learned men might have a greater insight into Scripture, and
approach nearer to the sense of it, then those that are less learned, or the
ignorant; yet Scripture interpreted by private men's judgment cannot be a
sufficient Rule of Faith, or means to obtain it. For the Rule and means
appointed by almighty God to attain Faith, must be common and universal to all
sorts of Christians; nor must there be one rule and means for the learned, and
another for the unlearned. Seeing Scripture cannot be sufficiently interpreted
by the sole means of Scripture by the unlearned,, as I have showed, and
Scripture interpreted by private men cannot be the Rule and Means appointed by
Almighty God for the guiding of consciences in all points of Faith, there must
therefore be some other for the unlearned, and consequently for all. Now this
other means and rule can be no other excogitable (unless we run to the Sole
private Spirit of Phanatiques, which is more absurd then all the rest,) save
the direction and universal Tradition of Gods Catholic Church, as is above
declared.

As to your last sentence, I acknowledge, That he who can answer these Queries
may answer mine, and the same substantial answer mutatis mutandis, will
satisfy a good conscience in both. Nor did I ever think my Queries
unanswerable: for I know I could answer them my self, or any one may do, who
assents to the Principles of the Roman Church. But I propounded my Queries to
Protestants, and showed they are unanswerable by them; and from them only it
is, from whom I in this occasion expect an answer.

N. 2. Now let us weigh the Categorical Answers.
To the first the Answer seems to be affirmative. Only there is some
dubiousness in the word, Christianity. For all Heretics make a visible
profession of Christianity.

Supposing therefore you mean true Christianity in their whole Profession, the
Answer is accepted.

To the second you add the word, Ordinarily. If therefore you mean by this,
that some may be saved in extraordinary cases out of the visible Church, I take
the Answer to be affirmative, that some may be saved out of the visible
Catholic Church, which I think is contrary to the stream of all Christian
Antiquity.

The third has nothing of a Categorical Answer. For I demand, amongst all
different pretended professions, which is now the Holy Catholic Church by
designation of some one, or some set number of Professions now on foot. And you
tell me what the Holy Catholic Church is, but give no designation of any
particular profession or professions of Christians. Or if you intended to make
a designation, you have answered obscurum per aeque obscurum, which can be no
Categorical Answer. For it is now as obscure among Christians, which profession
that is which now professes the true Catholic Faith once for all delivered to
the Saints, etc. as it is, which is now the Holy Catholic Church.

Your fourth Answer is defective ex insufficienti enumeratione partium, and not
Categorical. For I put two parts in my Querie, Destructive of Salvation, or
indangering of it.

You answer to the first, but you say nothing to the second; wherein
notwithstanding was the main force of the Querie.

Your fifth Answer is not Categorical, because only conditional. You say, The
Catholic Church so long as it continues so cannot, etc, Now this conditional,
So long as it continues so, supposes, that the Catholic Church can cease to be
the Catholic Church, which is both contrary to your answer to the first
Querie, wherein you grant, that there is in all ages a Visible Catholic
Church, and a most damnable error in Christianity. For if the Visible Catholic
Church can ever cease to be, Christ who has promised, it shall ever be, Ephesians.
4. 10, 11, 12. etc. will become a false Prophet. But suppose, you had given a
Categorical Answer, That it can never obtrude false Scripture, etc. then you
must grant, that the Catholic Visible Church is infallible in the delivery of
Scripture. If so, then is there an Infallible Judge upon the earth concerning
this point. If so, I require some satisfactory reason, why the Church should be
infallible in this and fallible in other points of Faith, seeing it is as great
absurdity to abuse the world with salse Faith, as with false Scriptures. Or
what authority is there either in Scripture, or Antiquity, which limits the
infallibility of the Church to the sole determination of Scriptures. Or is it
not as pernicious to a Soul to be put in danger of damnation by having a
dangerous error taught it by the Church, as by having some Books, happily less
dangerous than that error, imposed upon it by the Church,

To your Conclusion I answer, The reason, why you are to desert the Protestant
English Church, is not, because it adheres to the Scriptures, as a Rule of
Faith, (for the Roman does that as well as the Protestant,) but because they
will have that the sole Rule, in exclusion of Universal Tradition, and the
voice of the Catholic Church,

Nor is it any reason to refuse to join with the Roman Church, because it
enjoins one to renounce his Senses and Reason. For it enjoins this no more,
than Scripture and the Protestant Church does. For was not Lot to deny his
Senses, when he perceived them to be Angels, whom his eyes ears and touch
taught him to be living men? And how could our Savior pass through a whole
crowd of people, and neither be seen, heard, or felt, without a deception of
the Senses? Now it is far more opposite to humane reason, to believe one to be
three, and three to be one, and that in the very self same being without any
difference, or mutation, then to believe bread to be changed into flesh, or one
body to be in more places at once.

What you say of breach of Charity, is misconceit of our doctrine. We censure
not the Persons, but the Doctrine, and that maintained pertinaciously and
obstinately. Now who does so, we cannot absolutely judge, and therefore pass no
absolute judgment upon particulars. And this is so far from breach of Charity,
that it is only out of Charity, that we let Protestants know, what danger they
are in, that they may avoid it; whereas otherwise we should be Flatterers and
Sycophants in letting them go on securely in the danger we conceive them to be
in.

The Council of Trent composed no new Creed, at all, but gave a Catalogue of
such points to be professed by all those, who were to teach in public
Academies, before they were admitted to that office. As the English Protestants
do exact a profession of the 39 Articles of such as she admits to Orders. I
have nothing to do with the proof of any thing, till these Queries be answered
by Protestants.

Fourth Section, containing an Examination of the foregoing Reply made by the
Romanist; which was comprised in a Letter to the Gentleman assaulted. Mr. F. M.
SIR,
I Received the Papers, which you conveyed unto me by many Ambages, on the
12th. of April; since which time I have been entangled in several businesses,
that allowed me no leisure to consider the Cavils of the Factors, for the Court
of Rome, who are like the Clients of Beelzebub, the Lord of Flies, 2. Reg. 1,
2, 3. the Prince of Devils. Musca est meus pater: clam illum nihil haberi
potest. Plaut.
the Idol God of Ekron, the Flies, not only for their insinuation into secrets;
but also for their restless importunity, who though beaten off from the Hesh,
they would taint and corrupt, yet return again. But now, though enough has
been lately published by eminent persons in our Church, to stop the mouths of
gainsayers or at least to secure prudent readers from the dangerous practices
of those, who like Elymas cease not to pervert the straight ways of the Lord;
yet I have taken some spare time to Act. 13. 10.
examine what is returned to that Paper, which you know Sir, I writ in your
Dining Room whilst you staid a while for your company to dinner. Upon the
perusal I find nothing, that may render the defense of mine own former writing
so difficult to me, as it may be tedious to you. For you will see that Oracle
of Solomon verified, The beginner of strife is like one that opens a passage to
waters. As waters Prev. 17. 14.
let in at a small breach quickly spread to a deluge: so you may observe, how
contentions about Religion begun by admission of a few questions swell to
Volumes that cloy, or tire rather then instruct readers, except they be such
lovers of Truth, as to seek it with patience. But least my silence might give
some occasion to the Adversary of triumphing over our Church, (whereas indeed
neither the validity of our cause or profession, nor the credit of our Church
depends on so weak a Basis, as the acting of one of the meanest of her
Children) I shall endeavor to repair this breach, and to retrench these bitter
waters of Romish contentions against the Truth into their own channels. And
that you may not be affrighted with the very bulk of my Reply, I shall not
enlarge my discourse to disprove every particular, which these Papers may tempt
me to contradict, but make short animadversions upon whatever occurs and
appears material to our present Queries.

My first Querie ministers no occasion of dispute. The second, in which he
rightly apprehends the main force of my instance against his Queries to lie, is
attacked by him confidently, with such weapons, as I may safely trust you to
judge of their validity. And indeed you that are assaulted in the possession of
the truth of Christian Religion, conveyed unto you by the light of Gods Word in
the Scripture, which is held forth by a Ministry, that does not pretend to
Infallibility, but professes legitimate Authority to instruct all under their
charge in the Doctrine of the Gospel, must be Judge in the Court of your own
conscience, whether the Roman Questionist, or I, speak that which is agreeable
to the common Rules of Truth. And your Reason assisted with the blessing of
God, the Father of Lights, who freely and liberally gives wisdom sufficient to
salvation unto all, that with humility, meekness and resolution of obedience
implore his holy Spirit of understanding, must be permitted to be your Guide in
discovering the True Church from the False; and may as well and safely be
allowed to distinguish the wholesome Doctrine from the corrupt and noxious:
since this may be easier and sooner discerned by the agreeableness of any
Doctrine to the sense of Scripture, in which all things necessary are plain,
then the truth of a Church can be discovered by those Notes commonly given by
the Papists, which are uncertain, variable, difficult to be examined, and
(which is of most importance) not infallibly known to be the infallible Notes
of a True Church, nor infallibly applied to their Church, except you will take
their Testimony of themselves to be infallible, which is the thing in question.

But not to make unnecessary excursions, I shall betake my self to examine his
Answer to my second Querie. I will not waste time to unfold the Logical term,
Ignoratio Elenchi, though I can show how unjustly this fallacy is charged upon
me, and how easily it may be retorted upon him. I shall appeal to your reason,
and leave you to determine, who is guilty of mistaking the Argument in debate,
or of proceeding fallaciously. He thinks, he has convinced me of such a
sophistical dealing, by saying, That the Queries about the Christian Church, to
which those propounded by me ought to correspond, proceed not upon any
particular Kingdom, no nor upon any particular Church. But I desire you to
consider, whether there be not an exact analogy (as to the sufficient way and
means of salvation) between the Christian Church under the Gospel diffused
through all Nations, and the Jewish Church, which was the only Nation, which
had then the peculiar privilege to be in Covenant with God, and to enjoy the
living Oracles of truth; and whether there be not a just correspondence in the
obligation, that lies upon the members of either Church, both to serve God
sincerely according to his will revealed in his Word, and also at the same time
to yield obedience to their Superiors in the Lord, and according to that Law,
which was given to Prince and Priests and People. The whole Kingdom of Israel
at first, as it was undivided, was the only Church of God: And the Kingdom of
Judah, after the Rent, was the only Spouse of God, till she had a Bill of
Divorce for her spiritual whoredoms. And therefore let any indifferent Reader
judge, whether I proceeded not upon a good ground, when I compared the present
Catholic Church, with the only Church, though then confined to one Nation,
since both are equally furnished by God with sufficient means to preserve
Religion, and both are equally liable to corruption in their members, and if
you will believe St. Paul's warning to the Church of Rome, the visible Romans 11.
18. 22.
Roman Church is more then equally with that of the Jews obnoxious to a grand
apostasy and excision.

[There is indeed one difference between the particular members of the Jewish
Church under the Law, and particular Christians under the Gospel, for which the
condition of Gods servants under the Old Testament was much harder, then ours
is under the New. For the prescript service of God being of old tied to the
Temple at Jerusalem, and the people being bound to worship God there, when the
Temple was shut up, and the worship of the Lord wholly laid down, as under King
Ahaz, (read 2 Chronicles. 29. 7.) or when the City and Temple were polluted and
profaned with the execrable Altars and Images of Baal, of the Sun, and of the
Host of Heaven, and Devil-worship which were set up by Manasseh, who required
obedience of Priests and People, and filled Jerusalem with the blood of them
who chose to obey God rather than Man, (See 2 Chronicles. 33. 3, 9. 2. Kings 24. 4.)
Gods faithful servants must needs have been in a sad straight between their
zeal for Gods House and service, and their obligation to their superiors, who
caused, at least urged them to err, and to do worse then the Heathen (as the
Holy Ghost speaks in that story) when there was no appearance (as this Romanist
fondly dreams) of a standing Council assistant to the High Priest resident at
Jerusalem, as a Visible guide in Gods way, but the Priest that showed their
heads were all Sycophants and Seducers. But now the Service of God being
spiritual and not tied to any one place, nor the Law Joh. 4 21, 24.
of Christ confined to one Bishops chair only, but the Church being spread
throughout all nations, and every Church, that is associated orderly in any
Kingdom, or Nation, or being endowed with a sufficient power of conduct and
government, (in which the Christian Magistrate is concerned) if a prevalent
party of Governors be not only corrupted in matters of Religion, but also so
abusive of power, that the communion with that Church be unsafe, Christians are
much more at liberty than the Jews were, because by removal of their habitation
they may leave a gangrened limb of the Catholic Church, and join to a sounder
part, where they may, be it in the East, or in the West, offer a pure oblation
and incense unto God Malac. 1. 11. Heb. 13. 10. 15.
with acceptance upon the Altar Christ Jesus. This advantage of freedom and
safety for the Service of God, and working out their own salvation, a Christian
gains above a Jew by the propagation of the Gospel unto the Gentiles, and the
settlement of particular Churches in several Territories under several
jurisdictions. But still the parallel holds between Jews and Christians, both
in regard of their duty to God, and their Governors, and in respect also of
the provision for their eternal Salvation, when the iniquity of the times is
such, that their Governors will either make the people committed to their
charge drunk with the poisoned wine of their fornications, or make Apoc. 14. 8.
and 17. 6.
themselves drunk with the blood of Martyrs]

But he goes on to tell us, that his Queries proceed upon the Representative
Catholic Church in a full and lawful meeting of the chief Pastors to teach the
Church diffusive what she is to believe as matters of Faith, or to reject as
errors in Faith; when Questions arise about any of them.

1. Now Sir, again I appeal to your reason, 1. whether you did apprehend, or
could divine, or by any thing in those Queries imagine, that by the Visible
Catholic Church (which he supposes must be consulted as the Guide of
Salvation) is to be understood a truly general Council lawfully assembled.

But now you may be satisfied, that when the Papists make a noise, with crying
up the Catholic Church, they do not mean the Body of the Christian Church
diffusive over the whole earth, which though it cannot err in matters of Faith
necessary to Salvation (for then, it should cease to be a Church by not holding
the head Christ Jesus) yet can not this be a Guide, because it cannot be
consulted by particular Christians, or others, who having got an incling of the
truth, and desirous of Salvation, may be inquisitive for a Guide. And though
every Christian which is a sound member of the Catholic Church, by holding the
true Faith, and being ready to join upon every good occasion with all his
Fellow members in the worship of God through Christ Jesus according to the
Rules of the Gospel, be obliged to communicate his Light to any man that wants
it, yet is not every man that agrees with the Catholic Church, an Infallible
Guide: And less than Infallibility will not serve a papists turn when he talks
of a Guide, though the poor souls in that Synagogue never see any but such
Guides, which are confessedly fallible, because Infallibility is not the Lot of
particular Priests.

And now being instructed to take their meaning (which was a secret not to be
foreseen) for their saying, I hope you have not forgot, what you have heard my
Lord Falkland often say, The Pastors assembled in Council, though a governing
part, are still but a part of the Church Catholic; and this may be secured
from the gates of Hell, though they may be permitted to err in matters of Faith.

2. But allowing all due honor of Reverence and Obedience to a truly General
Council lawfully assembled in the name of Christ, and proceeding sincerely by
the assistance of the Holy Ghost; I desire you to consider, how particular
Christians are by this man's explication of the word, Church, set forward in the
way to find that which is pretended to be absolutely necessary, to wit, an
Infallible Guide in matters of Faith, and holy Life. You know, that, after the
Apostles had finished their course, the Church subsisted upon the stock of
their doctrine, with an ordinary Ministry erected and supported by Christ in
several Churches respectively, for many years, and some ages without a general
Council. Yet particular Christistians had all that while a sufficiency of
certain means for the conduct of their Souls in the ways of Truth, Peace, and
Holiness, unto eternal life. And therefore does it not appear evident, that
there was Salvation attained without a Church in the sense of this Querist? But
never was there Salvation out of the Catholic Church. I pray mark now, who is
ignorant of, or wilfully mistakes the Argument we treat of, the Querist, or the
Respondent?

3. Thirdly, I desire you to consider, in what a wilderness you are entangled,
without certain path, or issue, if once you be persuaded to forsake your
ordinary Guides, who lead you not by their own light, but by the Lanthorn they
hold forth, which enables you to judge of their leading and your own walking in
the right way, and then to look for this Chimerical Guide called the Church.
For you know, 1. General Councils are not standing Guides. 2. And how shall
particular Christians be infallibly assured, (and less then that, according to
the common Hypothesis of Papists, will not serve for a ground of divine Faith)
that a Council when it is assembled is truly a full meeting of only lawful
Pastors, and that they proceed so as to be assisted by the Holy Ghost, since
the Learned are not agreed on the Conditions requisite to make the Body of an
Assembly fit for the spirit of Infallibility; and the unlearned are never able
by disquisition to be assured that the Council which pretends to be their Guide
is justly qualified to be so.

3. Again 3. Remember how silent Councils are in cases of conscience, and
particular matters of holy life; in which there is as much danger, if you
mistake the way, of rushing into Hell, as in matters of Faith. If reason and
ordinary Pastors, without any fancy of infallibility, can apply Scripture Light
to guide our feet certainly in the way to Heaven, why is there more necessity
of a Council to teach us matters of Faith, than to instruct us in holiness of
life? Mistake me not I acknowledge the Authority of Councils as useful for the
preservation of Peace, and for the more vigorous suppression of false teachers,
which corrupt the truth. But I see no absolute necessity of that extraordinary
power to teach the Church diffusive the form of wholesome Doctrine established
now by the Consent of Ages to the Faith once delivered to the Saints.

4. But supposing a general lawful Council to be the only teacher, to be
trusted, how shall particular Christians be infallibly assured of their
Doctrine; the knowledge whereof is conveyed by no other means, but such as are
confessedly fallible? And therefore you will still be to seek for a sufficient
Guide according to the Sense of this Grand-Signior. All the objections made
against the Holy Scriptures as they are used for instruments to discover the
truth and the will of God (which certainly they were by God designed to be, for
the benefit of the People as well as Pastors) will be more forcibly urged to
the disenabling the Canons of Councils from being a certain Rule of Faith, than
they can be to the degrading of Scriptures from that dignity in the Church:
Since the words of a Council in the original cannot be planer nor more
expressive of the mind of God, then those which the eternal Wisdom and Holy
Spirit of God immediately directed the Penmen of Scripture to endite: And their
Translations into Vulgar Languages are subject at least to as many
uncertainties as the Translations of the Bible; And lastly there will still be
wanting a living infallible Judge, that shall expound and apply the Canons of
Councils to particular Christians, which may be called with less danger of
Blasphemy, a Dead Letter and a Lesbian Rule, then the Holy Scriptures are, when
they are defamed by such disparaging Characters fastened upon those Holy Oracles
of God by Popish writers, who are, as the ancient Heretics, Lucifugae
Scripturarum.

But notwithstanding his reprehension of me for a feigned correspondence
between the Jewish and Christian Church, yet at last to maintain the
infallibility of general Councils (which, if granted, comes very short of
making good his design, that we should mistake the Roman Church for the
Catholic, and the factious Conventicles of Italy packed by the Pope to serve
the interest of the Court of Rome for Legitimate Councils) He will be an
Advocate for the Synagogue. And rather, then the Successors of the Scribes and
Pharisees (who imitate their crimes, and inherit their woes denounced by our
blessed Savior against them) shall lose their privilege of Infallibility, the
Jews, that in their consistory persecuted David, murdered the Prophets, set up
Idols in the Temple of God, corrupted Religion, and condemned our Savior the
Truth it self, shall have the Gift of Infallibility fined upon them. What
short-sighted men are other Papists in comparison of this Illuminado, who
derive the Pedigree of an Infallible Guide from St. Peter; when this man
deduces it from the Scribes and Pharisees, whom Christ calls openly Blind
Guides, and from the Sanhedrim at Mat. 23. 24.
Jerusalem, who, as the Holy Ghost says, took counsel against the Lord and
against his anointed? Psalm. 2. 2.


Observe what he says; viz. If I had proved efficaciously, that the High Priest
with his forenamed Council taught the people Idolatry or any other breach of
Gods Law to be lawful, etc. I had overthrown the whole fabric of his Queries.

Indeed I offered no large proof of it to you Sir, whom I know to be so very
well versed in the Law and the Prophets, that you could not be ignorant of the
story and the Sermons, which record plainly and reprove sharply, the Read 2.
Chron. 36. 14. Ezekiel 8. 5. to theend.
horrid crimes of the Priests and Elders, (whether in Council, or out of
Council, it matters not; since neither place, nor company did change their
manners) in corrupting Religion, in seducing the People (which certainly was
done by doctrine as much as by example, and by Authority abused in both) in
persecuting the Prophets, and in complying with Idolatrous Kings to the
erecting Idols and Altars to them in the house and City of God, to the shutting
up of the Temple, and extinguishing the Lamps, and which is worse than all
this, to the rejecting of the very Books of the Law, that the people might not
see that Light, which would reprove their deeds of darkness. I may ask the
Querist, as St. Paul did K. Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? But I dare
not answer for him Act. 26. 27.
as St. Paul did for the King, I know that thou believe them. For indeed the
Prophets assure us, that the Priests, (whose lips should have kept knowledge,
and should have taught the people the true way of serving God, and therefore
the people were bound to seek the law from the mouth of Gods appointed
Messenger; but were not tied to receive chaff instead of wheat, much less
poison instead of Jer* 32. 28. Mal. 2. 7, 8.
wine) were themselves departed out of the way, and caused many to stumble at
the Law, and broke the covenant of Levi. And notwithstanding their vain
presumption, controlled by the Prophet Ezekiel (which you see is taken Ezekiel. 7.
26. Jer. 18. 18.
up by their successor) that the Law should not perish from the Priest, yet
they that handled the law knew not the Lord, the Pastors also were brutish, and
transgressed against God. Jer. 2. 8. and 10. 21.
But though the prevarications of the Priests in the Law, and their seductions
of the credulous people to their ruin (for if the blind lead the blind, and
none were so blind as Gods servants and messengers, were in the Prophet Esays
days, that they not both fall into the ditch) be written with a pen of Iron,
and graven with the point of a Esa. 42. 19, 20. Mat. 15. 14. Jer. 17. 1.
diamond upon the horns of their altars, yet this Querist would have told a Jew
that inquired for the good old way, that the Prophets of the Lord were
mistaken. For he says he has clearly showed a Jew of those times, that the
High Priest then in being (suppose for example, Vriah the Priest who to please
King Ahaz set up an Illegitimate Altar according to the pattern of one at
Damascus, and set aside the Altar of the Lords appointment) with his crew of
Court-parasites was the true visible Church, to whose word and practice the
whole people of God were bound to stand and conform.

SIR, I know not what apprehensions you may have of this man's extolling the
Jewish Priest with contradiction to Gods Prophets: But I cannot without horror
look upon the discourse, because I foresee the consequence of it, and discover
the drift of it, which is to palliate, yea too justify, the Doctrines of Devils
taught, and the Superstitious and Idolatrous practices in the present Church of
Rome, which are as reconcilable to the second Commandment, and that of
Christ, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, as
Mat. 4. 10.
the Calf in the desert, and those at Dan and Bethel, and the worship of Baal
were consistant with the Law of Moses.

But that which the Prophets have done, he says is impossible for me to do,
unless I enervate the words of our Savior, Mat. 23. 2, 3. God forbid, that I
should attempt to enervate the words of him that is the Truth it self; but give
me leave to show you, if you do not already clearly perceive, that there are no
sinews in his discourse strong enough to tie Infallibility to the Chair, in
which the Scribes and Pharisees sat.

To pass by the observation of some learned expositors, that by the chair of
Moses (our Savior did not mention the chair of Aaron, the High Priest, to whom
alone this man no friend to Sovereign Magistrates confines the recourse of Gods
people) is meant, not so much the Spiritual Authority, (as the Querist
presumes) as the Civil Power, the Remains whereof yet indulged by the Roman
Conqueror to the Jews our Savior would have preserved. Let us allow that
Christ enjoins Obedience both to the Civil and to the Spiritual power then
exercised by the Governors of that Nation. What then? Do precepts of Obedience
to our mortal superiors necessarily infer Infallibility in Parents, who are but
the Fathers of our flesh; or in Princes, who though they be the Sons of God,
and as the Angels of God, yet may fall as one of those celestial Princes? Are
they thereby so priveledged, that they can never enjoin any thing so repugnant
to Gods word, as that the inferior shall be driven for trial of his Faith to
the choice of obeying God, rather than man? But though Kings are not made
infallible, when they are invested with a divine power, albeit Solomon says,
that a Divine Sentence is in the lips of the King, and his mouth Prove. 16 10.
transgresses not in judgment, and their subjects are tied by the Oath of God
to keep the Kings commandment; Eccl. 8. 2.
yet Priests, it may be, have a privilege above Kings. You see, what these men
would be at, and you may quickly discover their intention to seclude
Magistrates from meddling with Religion, when he says, that the Jews in
questions about Religion were not to have the last refuge to the Kings. But the
sacred History informs us abundantly, that the Kings of Gods people were the
Guardians of the Law, and governed the Priests; and the Religious Kings by
their severe edicts established the true Religion, and reformed the Church, as
well as the State, and pressed the Priests (of themselves otherwise backward) to
attend their charge, and to teach the people, so that a zealous Jew might with
better success have made his resort to an Ezekiah, or a Josiah, then to some
chief Priests and Pastors, that had been infected with the fashions of an
Idolatrous Court.

But not to insist more on that, consider the impudence of this man, who
fastens upon our blessed Savior that which he was so far from saying, that he
says elsewhere the contrary. For he affirms, that Christ says that the Scribes
and Pharisees were infallible, because they sat in Moses's Chair, and so
governed the Church of God successively and faithfully in matter of doctrine,
whence he concludes, that neither their predecessors, nor they, could teach
Error in faith or manners. As I have evinced by the Prophets, that the
Predecessors of the Scribs and Pharisees (or rather the Priests and Elders
which commonly bear the name of the Church) were so far from Infallibility,
that God himself for their teaching lies, overthrew their Chair; and for their
profaning the Temple, in which they vainly trusted when they turned it into a
den of thieves, God deserted his own habitation, and laid it wast: So he that
reads the Gospel will quickly perceive this figment of Infallibility, (not so
much usurped by Scribs and Pharisees, themselves, as pinned upon them by
Papists,) overthrown by our Savior Christ were they secured from error in
expounding the Law, and teaching the people the sense thereof, whose partial
righteousness our Savior condemns as inconsistent with true Mat. 5. 20. etc.
justice, and whose corrupt glosses Christ confutes, and opposes his own
authority to their comments which adulterated the meaning of Gods law. But
because it may be said, that this was a defect in them for want of light and
spiritual obedience was the proper Doctrine of the Gospel, so that this is not
enough to convince the Scribes and Pharisees of error in Doctrine; I answer,
that St. Paul says the Law is in it self spiritual, and it was a gross seducing
the people Romans 7. 14.
in faith and manners, to teach such carnal Doctrines as encouraged and hardened
men in sin, and kept them from repenting of their vain thoughts and vile lusts,
which lodged in their hearts. But to go a step further. Christ that commanded
obedience to them, (which necessarily must be limited by the standing and known
Laws of Gods people) expressly warns his Disciples to beware of the Mat. 16. 11,
12.
Leaven of their Doctrine. If Christ did by the Precept alleged evidently
suppose (as the Querist says) that the Scribes and Pharisees could teach the
people no error in faith and manners, then why did our Savior go about to
secure his Disciples by such a Caution, whereas they had no reason to suspect
that which the Scribes and Pharisees offered them for the food of their souls?
Their very sitting in Mose's Chair was a sufficient assurance, that they were
as faithful in the House of God as Moses, (if you will take this man's word,
Christ meant and said so) and were so wise as they could not be mistaken, and
so honest as they would not give sour Leaven instead of heavenly Manna. Oh
brave Patron of the accursed Scribes and Pharisees! But Sir, I believe you have
read the 23 Chapter of St. Matthew throughout, wherein our Savior sets out
those blind Guides, and abominable Hypocrites, who had the Luke 11. 52.
Key of knowledge (as the Pope pretends to the custody of St. Peter's Keys) in
such detestable characters, as are inconsistent with Infallibility. But some
will say, their corruption in manners does not infer their erroneousness in
Doctrine, and therefore Pope Alexander the 6th. though a Devil incarnate, might
be infallible in the Chair, as a learned Lady of the Romish side, whom you
knew, once told me. I answer, that it will be hard to persuade a sober
Christian that has reverent apprehensions of Gods holy Spirit, that the Spirit
of Discipline will abide with Wisd. 1. 5.
such unrighteousness and uncleanness, or that persons immersed in worldly
lusts should enjoy the constant presence and influence of that Spirit which
leads humble and See Joh. 14. 17.
holy men into all truth. But he that can persuade you that they, whom Christ
calls blind Guides, were not only Mat. 15. 14
fit but also infallible Directors, may with the same confidence and arguments
make you believe that the Sun shines in our Horizon at midnight.

I do not forget, that it is not the Pope's Infallibility, but a Councils,
which the Querist pleads for by the example of the Scribes and Pharisees,
albeit they were perhaps Doctors of the Law, but few of them members of the
great Council. But I touch this briefly, because it may be the next Papist,
that creeps into your familiarity, will be for the Pope; or perhaps this
person, who has in his second Paper resolved the Catholic Church into a
Council, will in his next Paper melt down a Council into the Pope, which is the
more likely to be a Guide, because a living person to be consulted with, if
many reasons did not hinder our acceptance of him for an infallible one.

But that the Scribes and Pharisees were guilty of teaching Mat. 15. 3. -- 9.
for Doctrines obligatory of conscience, the traditions of men, and did by
their devices annul the Commandments of God, and encourage men under pretense
of Religious Vows, to disobey their parents, and by false Doctrines involved
souls in the guilt of perjury, is evident by our Saviors convicting and
condemning them. Can Mat. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
you now be of the opinion, that this ungodly fraternity of Villains could make
up an infallible Consistory by possessing the Chair of Moses? If you can
entertain such a conceit, you bless whom Christ has cursed, and put darkness
for light, and call blind Guides the Seers, and so Esa. 5. 20.
draw down the woe upon your self. Indeed such Guides are sit for them, who
wilfully wink against the light, and make themselves slaves to the enemies of
true Religion, who put out the eyes of their captived Proselytes, that they may
with quiet grind in their Mills.

I will conclude my Reply to this Paragraph with one Proposal. This Querist
defers such honor to the Jewish Priesthood, that the Priests ought to be
simply believed upon their word till Shiloh came, because they or at least a
Council of them could not err in faith.

I will not instance in the Council that condemned our Savior, because,
although some plead for Caiphas by virtue of his Priesthood to have been
inspired by the Holy Ghost which always assisted the Chair, yet perhaps this
Querist will not extend the continuance of Infallibility thus far: And yet he
that has feigned Christ to assign it to the Scribes and Pharisees, cannot give
a good and solid account how Caiphas and his Confederates came in that critical
hour to lose it, or why the people without a manifest Declaration of God to
abrogate their Authority, should not then also be bound to believe their
sentence, though it were blasphemy, and tended to the murder of the Son of God;
or how Joseph of Arimathea could be absolved (according to this man's
principles) from being an Heretic and Schismatic, for not consenting to the
counsel and practice of the High Priest with his Assembly, for which very thing
the Gospel commends him to be a good and a just person; since at that very time
the whole Nation of Luke 23. 50, 51.
the Jews were obliged, (according to this man's assertions) by Christ's own
injunction, to rest in the Doctrine and Determination of the Council of
Jerusalem, as infallible in matters of Religion, and consequently to deny Jesus
to be the Christ. Think of this seriously. But there is another instance which
I aim at. It is well known, that in the degenerate estate of the Jews there
started up a powerful Sect of the Sadducees. These, Act. 5. 17.
though pretending to adhere unto the Law of Moses, yet are noted to have been
infected with pernicious errors in Religion, for they believed not any world of
Spirits present or to come, and therefore denied the existence of Angels or
Spirits departed, and the resurrection of the body by the return of souls to
resume their earthly tabernacles Mat. 22. 23 Act. 23. 8.
repaired. The heads of this Heresy were the chief of the Nation, and as it
fell out in the vicissitude of Priests, (whose office was made venal by the
Court) the High Priest himself was sometimes a Sadducee. (Read Act. 4. 1. and
5. 17.) when such an Heretic possessed the Chair of Moses, or Aaron, who
understood not Moses aright, (as our Savior ascribes the error of the
Sadducees to their ignorance of the Scriptures) you may be sure that men of the
same judgment made up the greater part of the Sanhedrim. For the an mosity of
the Sadducees against the Pharisees, together with their interest in the
Nobility, was such, that they would not allow many birds of another feather to
perch upon the same branch of Authority, though one Pharisee Gamaliel once was
permitted to be of the Council. Now then if a Jew loath to rely on his own
understanding should desire to be instructed in this main Article of Religion,
which is the chief root of obedience and supporter of patience, to whom should
he See Act. 26. 6, 7.
repair, and whom should he believe? If you will take the Querists word, The
High priest with his Council was the true visible Church to be hearkened unto.
But if they declared their own sense (and no body can reasonably imagine that
they would contradict themselves, or as Balaam once was so they all being met
together in Council should by a powerful Enthusiasm be constreined to speak
contrary to their own mind, and deliver that Truth which they did not approve
in their own consciences, and should in speaking Truth lie by the power of the
Holy Ghost) the inquisitive Jew was bound (contrary to the general sentiment of
the 12 Tribes, which did in the Expectation of a Resurrection (called the hope
of Israel) serve God day and night) to become a Sadducee, to disbelieve Moses,
and to condemn himself to an everlasting death, which should swallow up his
person and his piety, and separate him for ever from having any communion with
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. If the Council it self should happen to
be divided by factions, and interrupted by clamor and violence from
determining any thing, as it was the fate of the Council, to which the Apostle
Paul appeared, then Act. 23.
what is become of the Visible Guide? Or how shall the Jews conscience be
satisfied of this fundamental doctrine? Certainly he must remain a Sceptick,
and that is next degree to Atheist, if he do not find a clear Rule and a firm
Rock, whereon to build his holy faith, which is the ground of a holy life. And
if he do, he need not look for an Infallible Guide, which if he have yet the
vain curiosity to seek for, he will never have the good hap to find.

I leave you now to judge of this man's resolution of my Queries.

And though he be like the Scribes and Pharisees in his industry to make
Proselytes, yet I have no fear of you, but that you can discern the fraudulent
course he takes to persuade, and discover the sad end to which he leads his
abused followers.

Since now I have out of Gods word evinced that the Priests of the Jews, high
and low, were not only corrupt in their private manners, but also grossly
ignorant of Gods Law, and seducers of the people from the true service of God,
and suborners of false prophets (for that See Jer. 5. 31.
also may justly be taken into consideration) for the support of their eredit
and power with the people, and employed their Judicial power to condemn the
true Prophets, I have Mat. 23. 37.
done enough (mine Adversary himself being Judge) to overthrow the frame of his
Queries, which were set up, as a Gate or Bulwark of Hell to maintain the Devils
devise, The Infallibility of the Church of Rome masked with the specious Title
of the Catholic Church. And because I have also by our blessed Saviors
sermons and sentence showed the impiety as much as absurdity of honoring the
Scribes and Pharisees with a privilege of Infallibility, I have said all that I
conceive requisite concerning his answer to my second and third Queries, which
he resolves thus: The Jewish Church understood ut supra, (that is, the Pastors
of the Church representing the whole, and acting with authority for the
government of the people) could not teach any error as matter of divine Faith
or Religion. Only take this Corollary. He must have a mind able to swallow and
concoct Transubstantiation, that can believe, these Idolatrous Pastors, so
often complained of by God, could do all this mischief in the Church, if they
See Jer. 2. 26, and 23. 1, 2. Read Esa. 56. 10, 11. Certainly blind watchmen,
dumb and yet greidy doges, Shepherds that could not understand, were but sorry
Guides, and as far from being infallible teachers of Religion, as Hell is from
Heaven.
had been as dumb dogs in the Devils cause, as they were in Gods, and as silent
for teaching any error in matter of Religion, as they were in the instructing
of men in the true way of God: Or that these ignorant and debauched Priests
being consulted concerning the Law of God would, or should of necessity by a
secret and powerful instinct of an Infallible Genius perpetually waiting upon
them, at least inspiring them upon such occasions, teach the people contrary to
their own persuasions and practice.

To the fourth Querie, etc. The vanity, falsehood and impiety of the precedent
Answers to my 3 counter Queries being sufficiently evidenced, it may seem
superfluous to disprove what he builds upon the sand, because this will sink of
it self with the unsound foundation. But because from that absurd supposition
of Infallibility settled in the Jewish Priesthood, he inferrs, that the Jewish
Church (he means the Priests, or chief Pastors thereof: for he is much in
proving that the people had very little to do with the Bible) by divine
direction preserved the Holy Scriptures entire without mutilation or addition
of any thing uncanonical, I shall briefly consider this Consequence, which
imports that the preservation of Scriptures depends upon the Infallibility of
the Priests, or the Church that keeps it. I confess that Gods gracious
providence is remarkable in preserving his precious Word, contained in the Book
of the Law. But I pray you consider how little the Priests above montioned
contributed their care to the conservation of the Scripture. For in the reign
of Idolatrous Kings, who sometimes profaned the Temple with Idols, sometimes
shut up the doors of it, the Priests, who basely flattered and officiously
served their Kings, were so far from considering the Law at all (and much more
from reading and teaching it publicly that it might be the rule of Gods
service) that in Josiahs time the Penta, teuch, or the whole Law of Moses, or
(as some think) the Book called Deuteronomie being casually found in the ruins
and rubbish of Gods house, and then read by the High Priest, was looked upon as
Hos. 8. 12.
a strange thing, which they were not acquainted withal. But though Priests
were sometimes careless Depositaries, yet God inspired such a Love of the Law
into many of his People, both Priests, Levites, and Laics, that that
inestimable Juel was never lost, which God would have preserved to be the
Standard of his public worship, the measure of private devotion, and the
constant light to their walking with God and with men in the fear of God.

And notwithstanding the scandalous corruption of the Holy Order it self for a
time, pious persons could then be, and were rationally assured, that the Book
of the Law, as well as the law of the Lord, was perfect and uncorrupted. And I
desire you to take notice that this is the Principal thing which is aimed at by
way of instance or retortion to his fifth Querie. For if a direct true Answer be
given to my fourth Querie, it will follow by Analogy, that Christians may be
as perfectly ascertained of the integrity of the Canon of Scriptures, though
the major or more eminent part of Bishops (the Bishop of Rome not exempted)
should be infected with Arianism, as once it happened, and although all the
Bishops of the Roman Church (which the Querist would fain have us to take for
the Catholic; but can never persuade us that a member of a Body is the whole,
as we can never believe that The Tyrrhene Sea is the whole Ocean) do teach
errors as matters of Christian Faith. Now this being the design of my Question,
by getting out of a Papists mouth an Answer for a Jew to furnish a good
Christian with an Answer to a Popish Cavil, and to ensnare the Querist in his
own ginn, he craftily slips the Question out of the way, and without making any
direct answer to the Jews inquiry, as he offered to do in handling the former
Queries, turns aside to make an impertinent Harangue concerning private men's
use of the Scriptures.

Mark, I pray, my fourth Querie, and compare the return; and you will see
nothing of an Answer in this; That the infallibility of the Jewish Church was
the means to preserve the Scriptures entire. The question was not about the
means by which the Book of Moses was preserved, but about the manner how a Jew
might be assured of the integrity of it. Now the truly pious Jew, who with
Jeremy bemoaned the corruption of the Church by the errors and seducements of
the Priests, could not make that Infallibility (which he did not believe,
because he saw the contrary) the reason why he believed the Scriptures to be
preserved in purity and integrity.

And it is as impertinent to any of my propositions, to proceed, (as he does)
that it follows not thence, that every private person should find out every
particular point of Religion by particular or express proofs out of the written
word alone.

For I neither make, nor suppose any such Inference from any thing premised in
my fifth Querie. But Sir, I would have you take notice, that when we make the
Holy Scriptures the Rule of Religion, and Instrument to make us wise unto
Salvation, we do not exclude the Authority of those persons whom Christ has
made dipensers of Holy Mysteries; but always suppose the Mynisterie to be a
Means appointed for the edifying us in our Holy Faith. Again we allow
particular Christians, that are endowed with the Spirit of understanding, which
is one of the gifts which Christ received without measure; but has imparted
Esa. 11. 2. Joh. 3. 34. Ephesians. 4. 7. Phil. 1. 9, 10. Col. 1. 9. Act. 17. 11.
to all his living members according to his good pleasure in a certain measure,
to try the Spirits and as the Bereans did, to examine the agreeableness of
their lawful pastors Doctrine to the Scripture. And if a Priest (though the
highest in a Church) tells Christians, that the Blessed Cup in the Eucharist is
not to be given to all them that receive the Holy Bread, or that God may be
represented by any picture or devise of men in any shape whatsoever, or that
any mere Creature is to be worshipped with religious worship, the Sheep of
Christ, that know their chief Shephards voice, may use their talent of reason
to try these doctrines by the touchstone of truth. But we do not affirm, that
it is necessary for every Christian to deduce and prove every particular point
of Religion out of Scripture. But since the faith once delivered to the Saints
with the Romans 15. 4. Hos. 8. 12. psalm. 19. 7, 8. Prove. 8. 7, 8. Esa. 35. 8.
rules of Holy Life are now written for our instruction and direction by God
himself, on purpose, that they may be a Light to our feet, and make wise the
simple, and therefore the Testimonies of the Lord are clear, sure and plain in
all things that are necessary to be believed and practiced; therefore every one
according to the circumstances of his condition and calling, is bound more or
less to use the means vouchsafed him by Gods providence, and may by diligence
satisfy his conscience in building his Faith and Obedience upon Scriptum ect,
It is written.

Now let us see what our Querist says to prove, that a The Jews at this day
are so enslaved to their Rabbis, that if a Rabbi or wiseman tell them their
Right hand is their left, they are bound to believe it. Now what difference is
there between an obstinate Jew, and an infatuated Papist?
Jew was bound to rest upon the Authority of the Priests, (though they were
Idolatrous, or infected with Sadducism,) he endeavors to invalidate my
allegations of the Prophet Esa. 9. 16. Esa. 8. 20.
Esaias, who expressly says in the place alleged, The leaders of the people
caused them to err, and they that are lead of them are destroyed. Is it not
evident, that leaning upon their leaders hand, and resting upon their Authority
was the peoples ruin? God therefore, not only to secure them from sorcerers
(as this man restrains the caution) but also from all seducers whatsoever, who
surely would pretend divine warrant to gain credit to their erroneous doctrine
(for never any one brought false doctrine upon the stage without a vizard)
advises his people to have recourse to the Law and the Testimony, not excluding
the Ministry of the Priest and Levite, who were faithful in things concerning
God, if any such could be consulted with (and some such God did reserve in the
worst times) but giving the people liberty, if the Grandees spoke not according
to that manifest Rule, to disbelieve them, as destitute of true Light. The
Prophet indeed does not forbid men to resort to the present Pastors of the
Church, but allows them the judgment of Discretion, to try the words of their
leaders by the Law, which shines brightly enough to enlighten their eyes, that
they may discern Chaff from Wheat, and false doctrine from true. Let the next
Paper, if it can, show the contrary: for this offers nothing to that purpose.
Till then, and for ever, the Law and Testimony written by Gods special design
stand for a Rule of Pastors teaching, and peoples obeying.

Next he brings 2 proofs of his assertion out of Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 12. Mal. 2. 4.
The Devil could find Scriptures to advance Deuteronomy. 17. 8. If there arise a matter
too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea;
and between stroke and stroke, etc.
his temptations. But Consider the violence offered to Gods word by this
racking it. As to that of Moses, there is indeed there an establishment of a
High Court without appeal, to whose cognizance are referred all important
Controversies about the Law of Moses, which being in the whole frame of it
divine, gives a tincture of Religion to those causes, that were for the
substance Civil, or concerned the outward estate or persons of the people.

In that Court, the Priests and Levites, who by their office were bound to
study the whole Law of God, and fit to expound the political Statutes given by
the hand of Moses for the government of that Nation, but contrived, enacted and
endited by God himself, did sit with the Elders, as Judges. Now judge you,
whether the submission required of all Jews being at difference about civil
matters to the sentence of that Court, signify any thing to enforce upon Jews
an obligation to believe and obey the Priests in all things, when common reason
assured them, that their doctrine, practice, and injunctions were contrary to
the Law of God? Submission to the sentence of a Supreme Court, (which was
necessary for peace to put a period to contentions) did not oblige the party
adjudged to believe the sentence to be just, though the aggrieved party had no
remedy till the judge of all the world appear to do right. That those Judges did
often turn judgment into wormwood, it is evident by the Prophets; and it is
well known that that Court settled at Jerusalem, having taken to themselves the
power of judging Prophets, did very often condemn the Lords true Prophets. Now
what Master of reason can ever fairly deduce from the outward subjection, which
was necessary both for wrath and Conscience to a Supreme Court of Gods
institution, though the Judges were not infallible in judicature, That those
Priests were infallible teachers of Religion, whose word was to be taken and
relied on without refusal or so much as trial?

As to that of the Prophet Malachi, it is subtly done of him to touch it
lightly, but fraudulently done to cite it imperfectly. It is enough that I have
already showed the full sense of the Prophet, who declares what the Priests
were by their office obliged to do, and from their Dignity and Duty aggravates
the crime of the debauched Priests of that age, who abused both their power and
also the people. And this sharp reproof is far enough from proving them then to
be infallible.

But this Querist surely presumes you to be a Papist already, and of that form
that is unlicensed to read the Book of God. Else, he could not be so stupid, as
to affirm that which any one but indifferently versed in the Scriptures knows
to be false. Or it may be (and that is very likely,) he himself is very little
acquainted with the Bible, but borrows both his citations of Scriptures by
halves, and also his Answers to them, that are commonly alleged by us, from
his deluding Masters. Otherwise how were it possible that a diligent reader of
Scripture should say, (mark his words) It was far from the Ordinances of Moses,
that every private believer had license to peruse the Scriptures; When nothing
is more inculcated by God, and Moses, then that parents should learn, and teach
their children the Law, bind it about their arms, make Phylacteries of it, and
by all means possible derive unto posterity the Ordinances of God and the
History of his Providence, which are the subject of the Holy Scriptures. If it
be said, that all this they might do without Book, because once in seven years,
they heard the Law read, we must then allow the Jews quicker apprehensions and
more comprehensive and tenacious memories then we have in our generations. But
see the unpardonable ignorance or impudence of this cross-grained Querist, who
says the Law was to be read once only in seven years, Deuteronomy. 31. 10, 11. Does
that precept, which enjoins the Law to be read in the Panegyris at the Feast of
Tabernacles in the Sabbatical year, include a Prohibition of the Jews to read
the Bible by themselves, and to meditate in the Law, day and night, as occasion
serves, which is a blessed employment, Psaal. 1. 1, 2. Would Moses deprive them
of this happiness? Or was that Statute broken by the Jews every Sabbath day, as
often as Moses was read in the Synagogues, in every City, as St. James tells us
it was the Custom of old so to do? Mark then the Sophistry of this illiterate
impostor, and Act. 15. 21.
his companions; I say, Illiterate, because he says, that passage of Moses, and
the story of Esdras, Nehem. 8. 12, 13. was all, We (that is, Papists) read in
Scripture of the common Peoples knowing the written word. Blessed be God that
We Protestants may and do read more, that assures us, that the word of God did
dwell plentifully among the Jews, and ought to do so with all Christians,
without Bushels set over the Light, as in the Church of Rome. Yet we do not
affirm, that every Idiota, or private servant of God could by his private study
attain to the full meaning of every hard sentence. None of us thinks this
necessary, or possible. Yea, we make a question at least, whether any High
Priest, or Council, under the Old or New Testament ever fully understood all
the things hard to be understood, or hard to be interpreted in the Law, and
Prophets, or in the (...), 2. Pet. 1. 16. (...), Heb
Evangelical and Apostolical writings. It is enough (as to my purpose, and
indeed for the safety of Gods people) that the Faith and Duty of every one was
written with a su^-beam, and lay open to be read and understood by the common
people with the help of a good Guide, though he were below Infallibility. And
it was a grievous fault in the despisers of the riches of Gods Grace, that God
had written for them the great things of his Law, and they were counted as a
strange thing. This Querist does bewray his ignorance Hos. 8. 12.
by another mistake, of some consequence in his design to make the Levites and
People dependent on the High Priest for the sense of Scripture. He says, Esdras
the chief Priest interpreted the Law to the Levites, and enabled them to
expound it to the people. Indeed Ezrah was a Priest, and a perfect Scribe, by
whose industry and Gods special assistance the Books of Moses, the Psalms, and
Prophets were collected into one body of Oracles, which was in trust committed
to the custody of the Jews. But not Ezrah, but Jehoshuah was then High Priest,
who Romans 3. 2.
no doubt was diligent in the discharge of his sacred office, whiles Ezrah was
active in interpreting, that is, translating the Law written in the Hebrew
Language, which was well-nigh lost with the vulgar in their long captivity, who
were accustomed to the common speech of the Chaldeans their Lords, and rendering
it intelligible in their familiar tongue, and also in expounding and applying
the Law to their present use, and in assisting the Levites, that they might be
well instructed to perform their office of teaching the people. Now this work
of Ezrah did much help, but not hinder or obstruct the common people in their
private study of the Law; and the use of their own particular judgment was
fairly consistent with the attendance on the public Ministry, which was then
sincere and uncorrupted; but was not so throughout the whole course of the
Jewish Polity. And for this reason nothing can be concluded from Ezrah's age
and actions to strengthen the pretended Infallibility of the Jewish Priesthood
for ever.

Now the Jews indeed wanted the beneficial Art of Printing, and this defect
made the Copies of the Law less frequent, then the Bible is now adays. Yet
such was the zeal and diligence of pious men in that Nation, that the Law was
not so rare a thing, as this man would persuade you. There was then no
prohibition of the High Priest or Sanhedrim either to transcribe, or to
translate the Law and Prophets, or to read them in their Original, or
translated, no not in our Saviors Age, when he sent his Auditors to the
Scriptures, to search for testimonies of him; when indeed it had been in vain
for the people to have made their recourse to the Scribes, Pharisees, Priests
and Elders, who through ignorance of the Scriptures denied Jesus to be the
Christ, and out of malice excommunicated all those that understood the
Scriptures better then themselves, and by their light were led to own Jesus to
be the Glory of Israel. I hope you will apprehend this to be sufficient to
vindicate your title to the Scripture, and your power to use it according to
that judgment of discretion, which every Christian, that stands bound to give
an account of his faith, cannot be denied, without usurping a dominion over
faith; the very suspicion whereof, St. Paul, although he were truly infallible,
yet 2 Cor. 1. 24.
did carefully decline.

The Querist treads the beaten path of Papists in debasing the holy Scripture,
and divesting it of the fitness and power to be a complete Rule, and an
effectual instrument of faith, that he may make room for a new Quack: of which
impious way to diminish the credit of Gods Word, I leave you, or any sober
Christian that loves and reverences that invaluable pledge of Gods love, to
make a judgment without my further censure. But give me leave to propound
briefly some remarks of this Discourse.

1. [First I observe, that he often joins the Rule and Means of Faith together,
and confounds them so, as if they were one and the same thing. But the
distinction of these two is of great importance to the preventing; or to the
ending of frivolous Disputes.

The Rule of Faith is that public standard of Christian Religion, which
includes things of belief and practice, both in the service of God, and also in
conversation with men. The adequate Rule of Faith for Christians is the Word of
God revealed by Christ, or the Gospel which was first preached, and then
written by the instinct of the same Spirit, (Romans 10. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 25) The
Gospel in this sense does include in it the whole Scripture of the Old
Testament, the divine Authority whereof it affirms, and confirms by the harmony
of both. This Rule is one and immovable, and so entirely delivered by the
Apostles, Tertul. l. de veland. virgin. speaking concerning the Creed; Regula
fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis, and irreformabilis.
that it is incapable of addition, and the attempt of addition or mutilation or
any corruption makes the falsifier of this Rule liable to a dreadful Anothema
denounced by St. Paul, Gal. 1. 8, 9. Now because the holy Scriptures in their
fullness contain this Gospel, therefore they are usually called by the ancient
Fathers both Greek and Latin, the straight, unerring, unswerving Rule of Faith,
that can deceive none, and needs no correction. This Rule contains and like a
Light holds forth the object of our Faith, and is not the less a Rule of Faith,
because this holy Scripture comprehends many other things of great use for our
instruction and spiritual delight; as a Carpenters Rule justly carries that
name, and serves the turn of measuring stuff and work, though it be set out
with ornamental and useful Tables.

You may now apprehend what we mean by the Rule of Faith. But the Means of
Faith signify another thing. For whatsoever by its nature and efficacy does
serve to bring man to the knowledge, right understanding, and full assurance of
the saving Truth, comes under this Notion, the Means of Faith. The holy
Scripture as it conveys unto us the Gospel, which it contains and preserves, is
indeed a principal instrument of God to work that faith which is his gift.
Moreover God has in his wise government of the World and his Church appointed
many means, which according to the course of his providence contribute to the
working of faith in our hearts. There are some outward, whereof the chief is
the public Ministry, which is compared to a Candlestick that holds forth the
light to the household of faith. And not only Pastors are the means of faith,
but also Parents, and Masters of Families, and every good Christian, which is,
as Christ says of his Disciples in general, (for the twelve Apostles were not
then selected out of the multitude) the light and salt of the earth, by
communicating the Word unto others, are very Mat. 5. 13, 14.
often the happy propagators of the faith. Besides men, some things, as Books,
are instrumental to promote our knowledge and faith. There are some inward
means of faith, as our sense and rat onal faculties, in the exercise whereof if
there be not an actual certainty allowed, the whole frame of civil society will
be dissolved into confusion, and the foundation of Religion will sink, since
faith is a reasonable service, and was first built upon their sight which were
eyewitnesses of the Gospel, and now comes by hearing, (Romans 10. 17.) which two
senses are the instruments Luke 1. 2. Act. 4. 20. 1 John 1. 1.
of Discipline. Neither will I exclude Oral or Practical Tradition from being a
means to propagate the faith. But this is so slippery a way, so changeable,
uncertain, and liable to corruption, and forgery, as appears by the
superstitions of Heathens and Jews, for the divine Authority of all which
Tradition was pretended, that without Scripture to support it Tradition is too
weak to hold up faith. Thus it appears that the Rule of faith can be but one,
and it must be common to all, as the Tit. 1. 3. Iud. v. 3.
faith and salvation are common, and it must have the unmovable certainty of a
Rock for man to build on. And this firmness you may call, if you please,
Infallibility, for this property of God, who is (...), (Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 5. 18.)
can neither be deceived, nor deceive, is communicated to his Word, which is the
Truth it self, and therefore the Rule of faith. But the term, Infallible, is a
Scholastical Novelty, which neither Scripture, nor the ancient Fathers used to
attribute unto the Church; but now it makes such a noise in the world with the
incessant ringing of Papists, that it stupifies many men's senses and
understandings. But the Means of faith are manifold, which, where God himself
by his Spirit manages them, are effectual to beget a saving faith, though many
of them are far short of Infallibility, though Papists in their confused way of
talking require Infallibility in the Ground, Rule, and Means of Faith equally.]

2. Again, Pray note his unprosperous fraud in the abatement of the Scriptures
perfection and all sufficiency to teach us the whole mystery of godliness,
without setting us to seek out elsewhere for a remnant of faith, or an
unwritten Word. For he confesses the Scriptures to be a profitable, but a
partial Rule, which contains many of the most important points of Religion
clearly and expressly enough, to satisfy any capacity, but wilful pertinacy;
and for the rest which are not thus expressed, it refers us to the Church, and
the Governors thereof, etc. For certain the Monarchy of the Pope, and the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome, are the fundamental stones of the Romish
Religion; and if they could be proved true, are of the most importance to the
ease of conscience and the peace of Christendom in that sluggish and servile
way, wherein Papists would lead us: and therefore it is no wonder that Papists
who are true to their interest, contend earnestly for these that are such
points, as being once admitted they facilitate the reception of all other
Doctrines whatsoever. Now let the Papists show these two clearly expressed in
Scripture, or show us a good reason why the Apostle should have a greater mind
to tell the after-Ages of the Church of his Cloak and Parchments, then to
inform them of those points which according to their opinion are necessary to
preserve the Church in peace, especially then and there when St. Paul had it in
his design to recount all the grounds, motives, and means of Christians keeping
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and yet has Read Ephesians. 4. 3. to
14.
left out the Headship of the Pope, and the Magistery of the Infallible Guide,
the Roman Church. What reason imaginable can be given, why Christ and his
Apostles should not have an equal kindness for all the important points of
Religion, and an equal care to conserve their memory by writing? or indeed what
need was there of writing any thing at all of particular points, when one
Reference of us to the Church for all, would have served the turn? would not
one precept written of, Ask the Church, that is the governors of it; or,
instead of Search the Scriptures, Inquire for the universal Tradition of
Christendom, have been convenient and sufficient for our satisfaction in all
points as well as in some? Ah, how palpable is the folly of vain and proud man,
when he opposes the wisdom of God? But when I seriously consider what this man
writes of the Scriptures referring us for the rest of our Faith to the Church,
or universal Tradition, I cannot but wonder at his confidence of your
credulity, if you were bound to take his word; who offers no proof of what he
affirms.

But we shall justly conclude him to belly the Scripture, till he or some body
for him produce some place of Scripture, which expressly referrs us for some
important points of Religion unwritten to the oral teaching of the Church, or
to the universal Tradition of Christendom. If this Querist be asked the
Question, Where has Scripture made the partition of the Faith into the Word of
God written, and the word unwritten, and set up a Christian to stand (as the
Angel in St. John's vision) stood with the right foot on the Sea, and the left
foot on the land) with one foot on the unstable waters of Tradition, and Apoc.
io. 10.
the other fixed on the firm ground of Scripture, he must be as mute as the man
without the wedding garment was.

But after all this pray observe, how irreconcilable this man's allowance of
Scripture to be a Rule clear enough for many weighty points of Religion, is
with his Conclusion, That the sole Rule general for all persons and all points
of Religion is universal Tradition.

3. Whereas he spends time to oppose a Christians receiving and knowing what he
is to believe, what not, by his sole perusal of Gods written word, he fights
not against any assertion of ours, but against his own Jackstraw: we advise
Christians to make use of faithful guides as well as the light, and to learn
the use of the Rule by conferring with spiritual builders, that can inform them
in the application of it, and not to neglect any means which God offers them
for their conduct in the way of truth.

4. The common Objections against the dignity and efficacy of Scripture, which
Papists repeat, usque ad nauseam, to the Scandal of Christianity, and the
advancement of Atheism, are abundantly answered by the Champians of our
Religion; to which I would refer you, if I did not know you able to discover
their impertinency and impiety together. But I will put you in mind, that the
unlearned Protestants, if they depend upon the credit of others, what are the
words of Scripture, (when the Laick that cannot read hears the Minister that
does, and may ask his neighbor that can read whether the Minister read right,
and the ignorant may ask the learned, and the weak Christian may ask the
strong, and all men by some means or other may be satisfied of the words of
Scripture being faithfully delivered unto them) are in no worse condition, then
unlearned Papists, who depend upon the credit of surly (and very often silly)
Priests, or interested Bishops, for knowing what is the universal Tradition of
Christendom.

5. As to the learned, whom the Querist takes into consideration, I pray
observe, whether the Scholars of both the opposite sides do not dissent as much
about the universal Tradition of the points in dispute, as about the sense of
Scriptures urged on either side. If so (as you will be sure to find it) then
upon the same ground which this man lays as sufficient for the removal of
Scripture from being a rule, Tradition also must be cashiered. Remember that
the learned Papists who differ about the Conception of the blessed Virgin Mary,
do on either side urge for their defense universal Tradition.

If then it be not sufficient to determine this controversy, why should it be
set up to justle Scripture out of its Seat to make room for another means of
determining controversies, which is as uneffectual, and indeed infinitely more
unfit? If a Papist say, that the determination of this point is not necessary,
(which is a gross absurdity, because this remaining undetermined no small part
of Popish worship of the Virgin Mary, as the Feast of the Immaculate
Conception, has no certain ground of Faith, and by the Apostle St. Paul's
sentence is Sin) we may with more reason say, that the determination of the
points Romans 14 23.
in controversy between us is not necessary: Or if it be necessary, that
determination is to be regulated now, as the decision of things in dispute was
of old in the general Councils, by the Scripture, or written word of God, by
which Tradition it self is to be measured and judged; as St. Paul made the
Scriptures the (...), or measure of truth between Mat. 26* 15. Read 1. Cor. 15.
3, 4.
the Tradition of the Jews on the one side, and the Christians on the other
side concerning the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

6. [Because here is frequent mention of Tradition, and the ambiguity of the
word is apt to beget mistakes; and confusion therefore give me leave to unfold
the Senses of the word, that we may have a clear apprehension of the matter in
hand. Tradition is sometimes put to signify the thing delivered, whether the
way of delivery be writing or speaking, and Tradition thus taken materially is
indifferent to the being written, or unwritten: for the same Tradition, or
Doctrine of the Gospel which was at one time unwritten, might have been
written, and for certain was at another time written.

And the Jewish Traditions, which for many generations past by a successive
conveyance without Book, have been by the Rabbis committed at length to
vvriting for their better Security. And the Papists now make no scruple of
vvriting their Traditions, which they call the unvvritten Word of God; (let
them justify the presumption as well as they can). Now as the Traditions of
the Elders mentioned in Scripture signify the doctrines and Ceremonies, Mat.
14. 2, 3, 6.
that were delivered by the Fathers; but were distinct from the Law written:
So when we speak of Traditions in the Christian Church; we do now in these
latter ages commonly understand some particular doctrines or Rites or matters
of fact delivered with a pretense of divine or at least Apostolical Authority
for their reception, which are not expressed in the written word of God.

These Traditions once accepted and commended by the present Church of Rome the
Conventicle at Trent, has very severely enjoined to be received and embraced
with an equal affection of holy reverence, wherewith we entertayn the sacred
Scriptures themselves. But to keep up the mystery of iniquity with the liberty
of laying aside old Traditions, and giving credit to new inventions; as their
interest and occasions may require, they who determined the Canon of
Scriptures, and numbered the Books; yet would not reckon up and determine the
Traditions of the Church, that Christians might know what is the perfect and
fixed Rule of Faith.

Thus Romanists, though they have a larger Object of Faith, then we have, yet
they have no certain measure; because the Traditions of the Roman Church are
like the Moon subject to decreases, (as the giving of the Eucharist to Infants
was once held by D. Innocentius 3. as a Doctrine of Faith, and a Tradition of
the Church; but Maldonate on John 6. confesses thus much.
after 600 years practice wore out insensibly, and has been condemned by the
Councils of Constance, and Trent with an Anathema) and to increases also, and
therefore their Religion is indeed Irregular. But concerning Traditions as the
word signifies particular points of belief or practice in Christian Religion,
these 3 Rules are worth Observation.

1. Whatsoever is offered to us or enjoined to us in belief Nihil credi Deus
voluit, adversus Sc^iptu^arum authoritatem. Aug. l. 13. cont. Faus. Manich.
Mark 7. 5, -- 13.
or practice under color of being a Tradition, if it be repugnant to the
written word of God, or destructive of Gods precepts, ought to be rejected by
Christians. Christ's reason together with the refutation of Pharisaical
Traditions confirms the Truth of this Rule.

2. Whatsoever is obtruded upon us under the pretext of being a Tradition, that
is neither clearly delivered in, nor fairly by good consequence deduced out of
Gods written word, needs not, and ought not to be received as a matter
necessary to Salvation. The manner of convenience, or necessity, wherein things
which are strangers to Scripture are held, is carefully to be taken notice of.
For several practices have been in early times introduced under show of
convenience (as the Apostle says, some bodily exercises carry a plausible show
of wisdom) which having once obtained credit by the favorable commendation of
eminent persons and custom, have been in succession of time adorned with the
Title of Tradition and grown up from being thought convenient to be accounted
and pressed as necessary to Salvation. This danger is to be prevented by
circumspection. And the perfection of Scripture as it is a complete Rule of
Religion proves the truth and usefulness of this second Rule.

3. Doctrines of Faith and divine Worship being secured by Gods written word
from intrusions of humane inventions: if any Rites or Ceremonies can be proved
by fair Testimonies of Antiquity to have been practiced by the Church universal
of primitive times, and are still continued by the Authority of Church
Governors as tending to edification, or the free and open profession of our
Faith, whether they be called Traditions or no, are not lightly to be rejected;
much less violently opposed by private Christians. Thus much for Traditions, as
meaning Matters of Religion delivered down from former times to posterity.

But Tradition often bears another sense, and is taken formally for the manner
of conveyance of matters that concern Religion, which is partly oral partly
practical. The joint agreement of Doctrine and practice continued by succession
of one Age after another, whilst one generation derives to another the whole
body of Religion, is now called Tradition, and of late is asserted by Papists
in this Kingdom to be the only Principle and Rule of Faith, and affirmed to be
of its own nature infallible and incorruptible, and to be evident by its own
light. And thus the order of inquiring for the ancient days and old ways is
quite inverted: for now we need only (as they teach) mark what the present
Church of Rome does, and because Tradition cannot fail nor vary, therefore the
Popes Court at this day, with the Church, Altars, Pictures, Wafers, mangled
Eucharist, adoration of the Virgin Mary, Invocation of Angels and Saints,
offering of a real Sacrifice for Souls in Purgatory, and offering of the Mass
to God for the honor of Saints, is a true Glass, wherein you may see the face
of the Church when St. Peter sat Bishop of Rome. This is the aim of the
Querists Discourse to set up this Tradition instead of Scripture. If you will
not believe him, you may choose, because he tells you plainly it is not his work
to prove any thing. But I will give you a little touch of proving the vanity of
this pretense. The experience of all Ages before the flood, after the flood, in
the Jewish Nation, and in the Christian Churches, does manifestly show, that
the derivation of Religion from mouth to ear, from hand to hand, from Fathers
to children, from Priests to Successors, from Age to Age, this course of
Tradition, which is opposed unto and preferred before the Scriptural way of
preserving and propagating and recovering of Religion, has been and may be
quickly corrupted, often interrupted, and has suffered notorious changes, and
may do at any time, when sloth, and sensuality, and neglect of the light, and
vanity of mind set forward by the Devils malice and cunning make men weary of
the true Religion. But I will add another Argument to another purpose. St. Paul
by word of mouth taught the Thessalonians 2 These. 2.
what he thought not expedient to write, to wit, what hindered the Man of sin
from being revealed. Here was a matter of consequence that concerned the Church
delivered by word of mouth, which if it had been written as well as that
Character of the Man of sin, the fame Scripture, which preserved and conveyed
the one, would have also secured the knowledge of the other to posterity. If
now an eminent Church failed in deriving one point of Doctrine to after Ages,
which with little difficulty might have been kept and taught, but is now lost
for not being recorded in Scripture, what likelihood is there, that the whole
body of Christian Religion was, or could be traduced entire and pure merely by
oral Tradition, without dependence on the Scripture, for 1600 years? For my
part I think still, that as the Church of the Jews were either more or less
pure, and their Religion more or less Hourished in truth and sincerity, as the
Governors gave heed more or less to the light of the Law written; in like
manner according to the degrees of Pastors attendance to the holy Scriptures
the Tradition of Christianity has varied. Therefore the Scriptures are the
only fixed and stable Rule of Religion.]

7. Lastly, Let us allow the Rule of Vincentius Lirinensis, Quod ubique, quod
semper, quod ab omnibus, non est erratum, sed traditum; That which has been
taught every where, always, and by all Pastors of the Church, is not an error,
but a true Tradition. If we make Antiquity, Universality, and Consent, twisted
together, the measure of our faith, for certain we shall have a very short
Creed, and that large Assumentum, that new piece of Italian stuff which was
woven in the Shop at Trent, and by the Popes stitching is added to the old
garment of the Church (the Constantinopolitan Creed) must of necessity be pared
off, and thrown away. But the main thing to be considered at present, is the
difficulty of applying this Rule, for the examination of the Doctrines which
pretend to Tradition; and the trial of the Spirits, even of all 1 John 4. 1. 2
These. 5. 21.
Doctrines, before we trust any Teacher, is always an act of Christian
prudence, so long as the world is pestered with false Prophets. For can you, or
any reasonable man imagine, that Universal Tradition of the Catholic Church is
more evident in it self, and more conspicuous to learned and unlearned, and
easier to be applied by particular Christians, then the Scripture, the study
whereof for the discovery of so much as is necessary to be believed and done,
requires infinitely less pains, then is requisite for the certain knowledge of
what the Church in all ages and places has taught as matter of faith necessary
to salvation? You Sir are pretty well versed in Books; and have been
inquisitive into Antiquity, and I believe you will conclude it much easier, to
know the mind and will of God, (which is the measure of spiritual wisdom, and
the Vnum necessarium, the One thing Romans 12. 2 Ephesians. 5. 10, 17.
necessary for us to seek after) then to learn the sense of the Church, that
is, still according to the Querists Exposition, of the chief Pastors in all
Ages, concerning the points in debate between us. To close up this Discourse,
try whether you find not within your self enough of reason to consent to this
resolution; he that by attendance on Gods Ordinances dispensed by a faithful
Ministry and by private study of Gods Book has learned the Gospel of Christ,
and is a good practical Scholar of the saving Grace of God which has appeared
unto all men (a Catholic Light, common as the Sun) teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts Tit. 2. 11, 12. (...) Joh. 6. 45.
we live soberly, righteously, and religiously in this present world, this man
(I say) being * taught of God, does know a priori, beforehand, and by the very
seed, and in the first principle, what the true Church Catholic holds. For
that Word of God which lives and abides for ever in Heaven (Psalm. 119. 8, 9.)
in the hearts of believers, (2 Cor. 3. 3. 1 John 3. 9.) in the Scriptures, and
in the Church, is that incorruptible 1 Pet. 1. 23, 25.
seed by which the Church Catholic is begotten, and by which it lives. Since
then the Church is no longer, or further a Church then as it believes the
Gospel, and the faithful Pastors in all ages do teach that Gospel, it must
needs be, that whosoever knows the Gospel, knows what is the sense of the
Catholic Church, though he never spend an hour in the reading of history,
whereas if he spend Methusalahs age in tumbling over the Fathers, Schoolmens
Ecclesiastical Histories and other Volumes, he may weary his flesh, and yet
notknow by them what was the Faith of the Catholic Church.

Now to the man's conclusion; He acknowledges that a direct fit and true answer
to my Queries (mutatis mutandis) would be an answer to his captious questions,
which he propounds with the same mind, as his admired Masters the Scribes and
Pharisees did trouble our Savior Christ with Interrogatories, thinking (but in
vain) that we should be entangled in our own Answers, whereas indeed he had
been catched, if he had given apposite Answers. But after mine examination
which I resign up to your discretion, I desire you to transform your self by
the power of imagination for a while into the person of a well-minded Jew, that
seeks for satisfaction in Religion in a distracted estate of the Church, and
try whether this Querist being forced to turn Respondent has fully and fitly
answered my Counter-Queries.

My next Task is to examine his exceptions against my Categorical Answers. I
shall not contend about words, nor much crave excuse for want of accurate
expression in that hasty delivery of my Conceptions to comply with your request
at that time.

As to the first, he excepts against the term Christianity, 1.
as dubious to make my Answer acceptable, I will insert the Term he desires,
and say, True Christianity. But I fear the addition will dispel no mist of
doubtfulness, if there were, any such about the answer. For Heretics always
pretend to Truth as much as to Christianity; and would be taken for the only
true Christians. But to satisfy his nice and curious palate I answer as fully
as he desires.

There was, is, and shall be till the worlds end, a Catholic Church, that in
every age is visible by profession of true Christianity to the persons then
living. That is to say, In all ages God had, and will have and preserve some
Christians, who shall so profess the Truth according to the doctrine of the
Gospel, that their light of Faith shall shine to the men of their generation
respectively.

But I cannot so easily admit another addition sliely made by the Querist to my
Answer, viz. in their whole profession. -- -- Latet anguis in herba. He that
professes 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13.
true Christianity may build hay and stubble upon the foundation, and yet not
miscarry in his person, whilst he holds fast his profession of the saving truth
unto the end, though he be saved through the fire, and loose his
superstructure, as St. Paul assures us. It is not therefore necessary that any
person, or Church which maintains true Christianity, should profess it in such
an absolute purity, as that water should never be mixed with the wine. It is
enough, that poison is not admixed with the liquor of life.

But because I perceive, that there is much ambiguity in the terms of the
Query, for which it deserves to be called Fallacia plurium interrogationum, a
sophistical trick of asking many things under one word, that has two faces
under a hood, I will weigh the words over again, and mould my answer anew,
fitted to his explication of the word Catholic. In common speech Catholic is
no more-than Universal: Justin Martyr, who with many others of that age Just.
Mart. dial. cum Tryph.
believed a particular Resurrection of some that should rise and reign 1000
years, before the end of the World calls the last Resurrection (...), the
Catholic or in plain English Universal Resurrection. There is also a Catholic
Faith, which is common to all Christians and comprises all that is necessary
to Salvation. And the Church of Christ now unconfined to any one place or
nation; but spreading like a fruitful vine her branches throughout the earth is
called Catholic that is not National; as the old Church of the Jews was, but
Universal, since the Gospel is preached to all the world indifferently, and
the voice of the Apostles went forth into all the earth, Col. 2. 6. Romans 10.
18.
and their words unto the ends of the habitable world. It is not to be
omitted that in a secondary and borrowed sense the word Catholic is applied
to them that hold the true Faith which is common to all Christians and
therefore Catholic. In this sense not only a particular Church, but also a
singular person may be called Catholic, meaning one that professes the
Catholic Faith. But the Querist who has a peculiar language, and though he
speaks English, yet means Italian, has taught me since I first read his
Questions, and answered them according to the common usage of the words, that
he meant by the Catholic Church the Representative Church in a full and lawful
meeting of the Priests and Pastors to teach the Church diffusive. Now according
to this sense of the words, Catholic Church, I do turn my Affirmative Answer
into a Negative, and say; There is not in all ages a visible Catholic, Church,
meaning a general Council lawfully assembled. If this be Equivocation, you see
who teac hes me to be double tongued.

The exception against my second Answer is, that I add the word, ordinarily,
and he supposes that I might mean, that some may be saved in extraordinary
cases out of the visible Church, and therefore he takes my Answer to be
Affirmative; That some may be saved out of the Catholic Church, and this he
thinks is contrary to the stream of Antiquity. If he had not had the malignant
disposition rather Mage cernit acutum, quam aut Aquila, aut Serpens Epidaurius.
Horat.
then the quick-sighted eye of a Serpent, he would never have espied a fault in
my Answer, and fancied an Affirmative sentence in a Negative Proposition. For
if he had not been forward to cavil, he might have easily conceived a very
obvious reason of my putting in the word Ordinarily. Because we know not how
God will deal in judging all out of the pale of the Church, and we that live
within it are concerned to give an account only for our selves, and for the
use of our Light and Talent, I said that, Ordinarily out of the Catholic
Church there is no Salvation. This negative, which resolves nothing positively
concerning Gods extraordinary acting cannot without unjust violence to my words
be taken for an affirmative sentence, That some may be saved out of the Church.
And I hope, you will excuse, if not justify, my unwillingness to limit the
spirit and mercies of God, which blows and shine where God pleases. As for
Christian Antiquity, you know that many ancient Doctors have been very
favorable in their judgment, not only of them who lived by the law of nature
in a communion with God, when the Covenant of Grace was first ratified with the
Hebrew Patriarchs, though those worshippers Of this see Is. Cafaub. Exerc. 1.
ad Card. Baron. App. c. 1.
of God were not of the stock of Israel; but also of them who lived in latter
ages in the acknowledgment of one God with a constant observation of Truth and
Justice, such as were Socrates and Aristides.

But according to the Querists explication of the Church Catholic, I shall now
change the shape of my second Answer also, and say; That Christians may attain
salvation out of a Representative Church, which he gives to be the meaning of a
Catholic Church in the Querie, and charges me with sophistry because I will
not understand it so. The members of a general Council being but few, (and that
not agreed, who have right to be so) it were hard with Christendom, if all who
are extra Concilium, out of that compass, were excluded out of Heaven. I add,
that the Church Catholic may stand, and all the members of it may be saved
without a Church Representative.

Now because all that he says is but beating the Air, and very impertinent to
his design of making a Convert, (which is the thing aimed at) I add a
Proposition, which though it be not a direct Answer to his Question, yet it
shall strangle or stifle his intended Conclusion in the conception, and it is
this;

A Man may be a member of Christ's body (which we now call the Catholic Church)
and be in the Ark, out of which there is no Salvation, though he be not in
communion with the chief Governors of the Roman Synagogue. Let him deny Read
the Bull. of P. Pius 4. which enjoins all Clergymen, and all in Religious
Orders to swear to the new Creed whereof this is one Article. I acknowledge the
Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches.
this, if he dare make an open forfeiture of his charity* Let him disprove it,
if he can. There was a visible Church, and Salvation attained in it, before
there was a stone laid at Rome of a spiritual Temple, (for. Jerusalem was the
mother and Mistress of all Churches, and not Rome, as the Father of lies
teaches Papists to say and swear) and it may be so again, when Babylon the
great; the City seated on seven hills is fallen as a millstone cast into the
bottom of the Sea. In the mean time, the old position of Dr. Jo. Reynolds is
worthy of Remembrance, The Roman Church is neither the Catholic Church, nor a
sound member of the Catholic Church.

My Answer to his third Querie is very magisterially, but ridiculously censured
by him to have nothing of a Categorical Answer. The Proposition is for certain
Categorical, because it is not hypothetical: Let the Question and the Return be
compared, and this will appear defective in nothing necessary to an Answer. The
demand is this,

I desire to know by designation, which, amongst them all which pretend to be
the Catholic Church or a part of it, is now the Catholic Church:

The Answer runs thus; That is the Holy Catholic Church which professes that
one Holy Catholic Faith, once for all delivered to the Saints, etc. ut supra.

He says, I give no designation of any particular profession or professions of
Christians: That is to say, (if I mistake not his meaning) I do not name
Protestants, or Papists, the Church of England, or of Rome, or of Greece, or of
Germany. Indeed if I had so done, I had then given an Answer, that could not
satisfy any rational man. For no Church denominated from the place of
habitation, (which way of distinction of Churches is usual in Scripture) or
from some bond of union, which is not general to all Christendom, can properly
and truly be called the Catholic, that is the Universal Church. But I that was
at liberty to design it as well as I could, did give a significant Character of
the Catholic Church taken from its proper office and action. The Querist says,
I tell what the holy Catholic Church is. Very good. But I do not design which
of so many several professions in the world is now the Catholic Church. Now if
he expect that I should play the fool, and say that a particular Church is
properly the Catholic Church, I hope you will not be offended if I do not
satisfy his expectation. And when I have designed the Church Universal so,
that a man may understand what it is, I think with the same labor I have told
him which is it, because the Church Universal is but one; as he that tells what
the Sun is, designs which is the Sun, because there are not many Suns. And
because the Church is a collective body, that is, one by aggregation of similar
parts, each of which lesser Societies is called a Church, I have given him a
Mark whereby he may know, whether any particular Society be a member of that
Body, since the one faith runs through the one body, and is the life of that
body and of every limb of it. But my fault is, that I design one obscure thing
by another that is equally obscure. I will mend my fault, if I do not justify
my self from having committed one. I confess all spiritual things are obscure
to men that are merely carnal or natural, but where the Gospel shines, if it be
attended unto, it brings light with it, whereby we may discern things that
differ. For judging or discerning of a true Church from a false, we must first
know in some measure what is Truth. For if we must discern Mat. 7. 16, 17, 18.
a good tree from a bad by the fruit, as our Savior directs us to do, then we
must first know what is good, and bad in fruit, and then consider what fruit
the tree bears, and from thence give a judgment of the tree. This is the
method, which we must take in the enquiring for a true Church. Till we know
what is Truth, (and that is Thy (scil. Gods) Law is the Truth, Psalm. 119. 142.
Gods Word is the Truth, Jok. 17. 17
the Faith once delivered to the Saints) we cannot know what Church brings
forth good or bad fruit. Profession of faith is bearing of fruit. The goodness
of this fruit is Truth, that is, agreeableness to the Word of God. It is
therefore necessary that we know the Truth, before we can know a Church to be
true. Now though the Truth, or the holy Catholic Faith may be under doubt, and
debate, yet has God set it up in the Scriptures so conspicuously, that if the
Gospel be 2 Cor. 4. 3.
hid, it is hid to them that perish. Therefore I added to the Character of the
Church by which I designed it to be known, that is, the profession of faith,
the means whereby we may know what the faith is, which being professed is the
sole certain mark of a true Church. For the marks of the Church which Romanists
commonly give are separable from the Truth, and if they be taken singly without
truth are false and treacherous indices, whereas the true faith of it self is a
sure note of a true Church. And I pointed at Scripture, which is the Rule of
faith, on purpose in mine Answer, that I might not be thought to send a man to
look for a thing in the dark without a light. And now Sir do you judge, whether
I have deserved blame by my designation of the Catholic Church by professing
the Catholic Faith. But to make mine Answer both applicable to the Question,
and also useful to you, I shall a little explicate and enlarge my sense. It is
presumed, that the enquiry after a Church is made by a Christian, that may be
distracted in the variety of visible Societies differing one from another; but
every one equally pretending to be a Church; but his distraction is the
greater, because of all Societies, only the Roman Synagogue does challenge to
her self to be the Ark, out of which there is no salvation. There are three
Reasons which may move Christians to enquire for a Church, or a visible Society
of Christians: 1. That they may serve God, and offer up the spiritual
sacrifices of praise and prayer by Christ Jesus. 2. That they may grow in grace
and the knowledge Heb. 13* 15. 1 Pet. 2. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 18
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. That they may join with Gods people, and keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace by communicating together in Gods holy
Ordinances. To compass these ends a Christian is not concerned to enquire where
the Catholic Church is, for it is confessedly diffused through the Nations,
but so spread by Gods dispensation of the light, that the Sun of righteousness
does not at one time arise to all parts of the world. Besides, the Candlestick
is moveable from any place, and the Kingdom of God may be transferred from one
Nation to another, neither has God by any the least indication of his will
Apoc. 2. 5.
and pleasure encouraged any portion of mankind, or part of the world, to
promise to themselves a perpetual establishment of the Church in that place and
in that successive body of men, which at some time has been, or is now
irradiated with the Gospel. It is therefore not at all material to trouble our
selves with delineations of the Catholic Church which has no set or certain
limits of extent. That which concerns us to know, is what Church pretending to
be a member of the Church Universal (for no men but Papists, that can admit
contradictions into their Creed, will speak such nonsense, with deliberation,
as that is, when they call a particular society of Christians combined under
one Bishop the Universal Church) is fit and safe to be communicated withal,
that we must reap the benefits of a Christian Congregation. Therefore the
Question is now, whether the Church, wherein I was born and baptized, and by
Gods Providence am seated under its government, or another different society of
Christians which invite me to their communion, be such a company as I may
safely join with them in all public offices of Religion. For if it be, I am
bound to communicate with that Church as being a member of the Body of Christ,
the unity of which Body I am bound to maintain.

The Truth therefore of the doctrine taught, the integrity and purity of the
divine worship celebrated, and the way of administering Ecclesiastical power
must be examined by some Rule, and known to be agreeable to the Gospel of
Christ, before a Christians conscience can be satisfied of the necessity of
communion with that Church upon this account, because it is a member of a
Church Catholic. Since then it is the custom to call any public society of
Christians, that are compacted together by a frame of political government into
one body, a Church, that particular Church is a member of the Catholic, which
holds that Faith, the profession whereof constitutes the Church Catholic. He
that sleights this Designation, would have dealt kindly with us, if he had
discovered unto us, a better way, or a clearer Light by which we might find the
Church, and discover a true Church from a vain pertender. Till he or some other
do that office for us, we think it best to seek for a Church, if we were now to
seek, by looking for the light of truth in it, which always shines in the
house of God. And because truth and peace are both the legacies of Christ
bequeathed unto the Church, we may do well to try what society of Christians
does follow peace and edification of the Body of Christ. If the Church of Rome
that sets up Images of God, (which are the teachers of lies) in their Temples,
and by her Anathemaes makes divisions in Christendom, be tried by those two
marks; I leave the event to any one, that will impartially pronounce sentence
according to the evidence of fact in the whole bulk of their doctrines and
Devotions, and in their public Government.

My fourth Answer has the same fate with the former, to be called not
Categorical* I must learn new Logic, as well as new Theology, to understand
this Gentleman. But it is charged with defect, because it reflects not upon the
whole Question, and takes no notice of the tail, wherein the sting of the
Scorpion lies. I confess mine Answer comes short in that particular; because I
did not apprehend then, the last clause of his question to be of any moment.
For I thought it enough, that the Church Catholic is secured from any error
that is destructive of Salvation. But because I am now informed, that the main
force of the Querie lies in this, Whether the Holy Church so designed can teach
any error as matter of Faith endangering of Salvation; I now make a return to
that part, as well as to the former; and indeed to the whole Question.

1. Errors that endanger Salvation do not always destroy it.

2. God has promised to preserve his Church from destruction; but not from
danger.

3. All errors when they are discovered are to be rejected.

4. No doctrines offered by any Church to her Children are to be received
without examination.

5. The Catholic Church as it signifies the whole Body of Christendom is too
big to be a teacher, that may be consulted, and hearkened unto.

6. The Church in this man's sense and explication, that is, an Assembly of
chief Pastors in Council may teach errors endangering Salvation. Arianism has
been taught in as large Assemblies of chief Pastors, as the true Faith has
been.

7. But because it is the design of this man, that we should take the Roman
Church for the Catholic, I stick not to say that the Roman Church teaches her
children errors that endanger the attaining of Salvation.

My fifth Answer is excepted against for the interposition of these words, [so
long as it continues so] which looks like a condition, 5.
and seem to suppose that the Catholic Church can cease to be so. The words
are capable of another construction, viz. The Holy Catholic Church so long as
it continues secured from teaching destructive errors cannot even for that
reason abuse the world with forged Scriptures. This was then my meaning, who
had no intention that my last Answer should contradict my first.

Let us now see, what he draws from my Answer, if it were Categorical, and how
rational his inference is. For now we are come to the bottom of his project.
And he thinks he has catched us so fast in his trap, that either we must give
him the Cause, or be condemned out of our own mouths.

If mine Answer be, (says this new fashioned Logician) that the Church can
never ohtrude false Scripture, etc. then you must grant that the Catholic
visible Church is infallible in the delivery of Scripture. If so, then is there
an infallible Judge upon the earth concerning this point.

How rash this inference is, and how incoherent the conclusion with the
premises, a few words will serve to discover. It is acknowledged on both sides,
that the primitive Church, which received the Scriptures was not, and because
Gods spirit guided and governed the Church in this important business, could
not be abused and mistaken in the receiving of Canonical Scripture. The
Catholic Church being quickly after enlarged, and spread through many regions
of the earth did together with the Gospel preached receive Copies of the
Scriptures, which had been communicated by the particular Churches, to which
they were directed at first, unto their neighbor Churches. These Scriptures
were by all Churches reverenced and preserved as the Grand Charter of their
Salvation, and the Laws and Records of their Society; as the Church was the
Kingdom of Christ distinguished from the world. The zeal of Christians for
their Laws, and their knowledge of them, which were frequently read in the
public Assemblies, according to an * Apostolical order, to which we must add
above all the Providence of Gods watching over the Col. 14. 16.
Church for the preservation of Scriptures, being more precious to God than to
Man, and as precious to God as the world it self, these being well considered
may assure us, that it was morally impossible, that the whole Church of God
should be cousened into the reception of any forged Scriptures. And if the
Church in following ages could not combine together to coin counterfeit
Scriptures, then the Church universal could never obtrude any thing upon the
world for Canonical Scripture which was not received from the Primitive Church
at first. But how does it follow from hence, that the Church is an Infallible
Judge in this point? A creditable witness is not presently an Infallible Judge. A
faithful Depositary that keeps Records is not the same thing with an unerring
Judge. The Tradition of the Church Universal, which has derived the Holy
Scriptures from age to age, is not an Act of Judicature. The Nation of the Jews
is at this day a credible witness of the divine Original and authority of the
Old Testament, at least at the first plantation of the Church Christian, the
Jevvish Church did preserve and deliver the Holy Scriptures entire (so much at
least as God thought necessary or expedient, and if any book were lost, that
by being lost became unnecessary) and was secured by Gods Providence in the
conveyance of his Oracles to Christians. Does it hence follovv that the People
of the Jews was a visible Infallible Judge in that point and if so, then in all
matters of Faith? For thus the Papist proceeds.

If so, I require some satisfactory reason (says the Querist) why the Church
should be infallible in this, and fallible in other points of Faith, etc.

I have already showed that the Case is not so, as this man imagines; therefore
I am not bound to give him the satisfaction which he requires. Yet for your
further information, I add this: 1. The reception and tradition of Scriptures
by the Church is a fact which God orders as expedient for the preservation of
Religion. 2. The certain number of the Books written by inspiration is not a
point of faith necessary for every Christian to know and believe unto
Salvation. 3. The Catholic Church cannot err in any point of faith necessary
to salvation. 4. But any particular Church may believe and teach erroneous
Doctrine for matter of Faith. The Church of Rome (which is not the sole keeper
of Scripture) may and does err in several points of their Religion, and does
impose upon her children uncanonical Books for Scripture, and false Doctrines
for matters of faith, as is evident by the Canons of the Conventicle of Trent.
And yet it is not in the power of the Church of Rome to abuse the whole
Christian world by the imposition of counterfeit Scriptures upon it. I shall
yet persist in my reflection upon the Jews, that I may show that the keeping of
Scriptures without forgery, falsification, and corruption, is a thing distinct
and separable from erring and teaching errors. The Jews cannot be denied to
have been good keepers of the Books, even then when they corrupted the Religion
enjoined by the Law written in those Books. Never yet was any man so weak, as
to conclude that the Priests and Rabbis of the Jews were Infallible Judges of
the Doctrine concerning the Messiah, even those who condemned Christ the Son of
God to be guilty of blasphemy and worthy of death, because they kept the Books
of Moses and the Prophets. There is now less reason why we should take the
present Church of Rome, which we evidently see to teach Doctrines and set up a
worship as contrary to the Scriptures as darkness is to light, to be an
infallible Judge of faith upon this account, because the Primitive Roman Church
in communion with other Churches did hand down to posterity the holy
Scriptures, without any falsification, since the Church of Rome at this day
does both accept and impose upon her own Children, and would but cannot upon
others, Apocryphal Books for Canonical.

I have now showed that these Queries are not unanswerable by Protestants
adhering to their own principles, or Axioms. I desire you to consider the
result of the whole design: Except you allow him at first that the Roman Church
is in propriety of speech the Catholic Church, this disquisition can advance
you not an hairs-breadth to a better opinion of the Roman Church for a Guide,
then you had before. For after all the clamor made for resolution of these
Queries concerning the Catholic Church, the main Question stands as it did,
Whether the Church of Rome at this day be to be subjected unto, as an
infallible Guide, and to be communicated with, all other Churches being
abandoned, and particularly the Church of England, whereof you are now a settled
member. Till this be resolved, you that know the frame of our Church and the
module of our Religion may stay safely where you are.

It remains now that I examine his Answer to my conclusive Querie. And I shall
briefly note, what you may by your own reason or experience discover either
absurd, or false in it.

He does not require you to desert the Reformed Church of England for adhering
to the Scriptures as the Rule of Faith: For the Roman Church does that as well
as the Protestant, as he says. If this Querist do not pretend to Infallibility
and Authority over you, he will out of modesty allow you to examine whether
Papists do as well, that is as fully and firmly, adhere to the Scriptures as
English Protestants. Certainly they do not well own them for a Rule, who accuse
them of obscurity and imperfection, and make it a point of faith, that the
defectiveness of Scriptures must be supplied with unwritten Traditions. And as
certain it is, that we who maintain the fullness of Scriptures in delivery of
all things necessary to salvation, and the perspicuity in that delivery, and
therefore admit of no point of Religion that is a mere stranger unto the
Scripture, do more closely stick to that Rule, then the Papists. But because
you are free to examine the adherence of Papists to the Scriptures in
particulars by comparison with the English Protestants, try whether a mangled
Eucharist, the real Sacrifice of Christ by a Priest that makes his Maker and
eats his God, The public service of God in a foreign and unknown language to
the generality of the people that must say Amen to all, Pictures of God used in
Religious worship, the superlative worship of the Virgin Mary, Invocation of
Saints, Purgatory, the ease of departed souls by offering of Masses, the
baptizing of Bells, the treasury of superabundant merits of Christ and holy
persons, etc. be as agreeable to the Scriptures as our Liturgy, and the 39
Articles agreed on in our Church. If you find it otherwise, and Papists do not
so much as pretend to make Scripture the Rule of these Doctrines and practices,
what credit can be given to such an impudent boaster?

But the ground of deserting us he pretends to be this, That we will have the
sole Rule of faith to be the Scriptures in exclusion of Universal Tradition,
and the voice of the Catholic Church.

1. Suppose the chief Pastors and Doctors of England should dispute in the
Schools about the Rule of faith, and exclude Tradition and the voice of the
Church from that honor which they think due only to the Word of God in
Scriptures, now since the decease of the Apostles, and the unhappy divisions of
Christians, that make it difficult, if not impossible to know assuredly, what
is delivered by Universal Tradition, or taught by the Catholic Church; why
must you upon that account, (or any man) desert the Church of England, where
the worship of God through Christ Jesus is celebrated without any mixture of
superstition, and the means of salvation are offered to you in a sufficient
measure for your conduct in the way of truth and peace? Let a Papist, if he
can, prove that our making Scriptures the sole Rule of faith makes the
communion with our Church unsafe. Must you needs run out of our Church, as if
it were a House visited with the Plague, merely because it relyes only upon the
Scriptures for a Religion? And if you must do so, must you needs then at the
next step run into a Roman Assembly, that (as my Lord Falkland speaks) keeps
her children from Scripture, as a Mother would keep her children from
Rats-bane? Think of both these, because the Gentleman will not be pleased, if
you desert us, but will not come to them. He will think himself still a loser,
if any water go besides his Mill.

2. This calumny thus impudently fastened upon our Church shows this Querist to
drive the Devils trade several ways, in tempting by impostures, and in falsely
accusing the brethren. For I challenge any Papist to quote (if he can and will
cite an Author faithfully and fairly) any Article of Religion, or Writing of a
Bishop, or sentence of an Academy, wherein we disclaim Universal Tradition, or
the voice of the Catholic Church. For mine own part I do openly profess, that
if any point in controversy between us and Papists can be proved to have been
taught by the Primitive Church as a matter of faith, and derived by the voice
of the Catholic Church from age to age, and this Universal Tradition be
manifested by as good evidence, as is usually produced for the divine original
of the Scriptures which we receive for Canonical, I will embrace that Doctrine
as the Word of God.

3. SIR, you cannot but know, that we constantly reject many of the Popish
opinions, obtruded upon the Christian world, as Novelties, which not only want
a sufficient warrant from the Scriptures; but also cannot be made credible and
acceptable by Universal Tradition. Such are the Popes Universal Bishopric, or
Occumenical Headship, (which Pope Gregory the great called the character of
Antichrist) the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, and many other points of
Popish Religion, some whereof I recited above, and need not repeat. We have
incessantly required the Advocates for the Papacy to prove the consent and
conformity of the present Roman Church in these particulars with the Primitive
Church, whose voice is the Precentor in the Quire, and the first circle in the
diffusion of Universal Tradition. Thus, let due esteem and credit be given to
Universal Tradition, but you see how little it is in earnest valued by Papists,
or how far they are from making use of that Rule, (which they extol so
zealously as you hear) thereby to prove the truth of their religion. In fine,
you may apprehend the No reason to desert the Reformed Church of England
therefore, because she makes the Holy Scripture the sole Rule of Religion, when
indeed she knows no other given by God to the Church, and looks upon Universal
Tradition whenever it appears fair and full with reverence, as being the
sense of the Church.

He proceeds to abate the force of my dissuasive of you from entrance into the
Roman Church, when the condition of your entrance is the renouncing of your
senses, reason, and charity. For the two former, though the terms seem hard,
yet his rigor abates nothing of them. You must be contented to lose the use of
your senses and reason, when you become a vassal to Rome. To mitigate the
severity, he tells you, this is no more than Scripture and the Protestant
Church requires. He abuses Scripture in two instances.

1. He says, was not Lot to deny his senses, when he perceived them to be
Angels, etc. I say no, and the Scripture does not say any such thing as this
man supposes. When God thought fit, either to appear himself to the Patriarchs
in humane shape clad with flesh in a transitory manner, (which is generally
taken to have been a Praeludium of the words, or the Son of God his
incarnation) or to send Angels invested with humane bodies, the servants of
God, to whom those heavenly messengers were sent so fitted for converse, were
not bound to renounce their senses; but by their reason, and their knowledge of
Gods way of enter course with his choice servants by Angels, they were to
regulate the notices of the object, which their senses represented unto them.

2. He cries out, How could our Savior pass through a crowd of People, and
neither be seen, heard, or felt, without a deception of the senses? Judge, I
pray; whether it suits with the Faith and Reverence we owe to Christ, the truth
it self, in his Person, Doctrine, and Actions, to ascribe unto him the
deception of the Peoples senses, which comes very near to the practice of
Magicians, and will if admitted diminish the credit of Christ's Miracles. Our
Saviors passage through the multitude so, that he escaped their fury, and left
them in amazement, might be wrought many ways, which we are not concerned to
imagine, and must not determine though we could devise, because the Gospel has
not recorded the manner of it. But it is rashly and irreverently said to be
effected with a deception of the senses. But how is Christ's action at that time
an obligation laid upon Christians to the worlds end, to deny their senses in
the Eucharist, where Christ instituted the material objects of our senses to be
the instruments of our faith, and the Bread and Wine are designed to be
sensible Symbols of spiritual things even as the Water in Baptism is? Briefly,
since our Blessed Savior, the Angels and the holy Apostles, have made our
senses competent instruments to assist L. k. 24. 39. Joh. 20. 27. Mat. 28. 26.
Act. 10. 41. and 1. 9. 1 John 1. 1, 3.
our faith and reason in judging of the truth and presence of Christ's Body,
even after the Resurrection, and Christ has not any where by himself or his
Apostles limited the free exercise of our senses, nor lessened the credit of
their Verdict in the Sacrament of the Eucharist more then in Baptism, is it not
a horrid tyranny over Christians, to require that we renounce both senses and
reason, and at the command of a Romish Priest believe that there is no Bread
and Wine, where all our senses (almost^) conspire to inform us of their
presence, and the very nature of the Sacrament requires it; and on the other
side to believe that Christ's Body is in every consecrated Host, and in every
crum whole and entire, and continues one, though divided from it self in a
million of places, when our senses can give us no information of this presence,
and our reason assures us that it is inconsistent with many Articles of our
Creed? But observe the confidence of this Factor, who with a forehead well
rubbed tells you, that Protestants, require you to renounce your senses; whereas
we think that our Saviors command, He that has ears to hear, let him hear,
holds Mat. 13. 9. Apoc. 2. 9.
by proportion in the rest, He that has eyes to see, let him see, with
assurance, that the God of truth, who fitted man with senses for the service of
his Maker as well as for his own benefit, does secure him from deceit in the
use of them about their proper objects, in Religion as well as in civil
conversation.

As for our Reason, this he would persuade you must be renounced in the belief
of the Trinity, that you may renounce it for the easy swallowing the Camel of
Transubstantiation. Think what advantage this man gives to Heathens, Socinians,
Anti-Triniarians, and indeed all the adversaries of the Gospel, by confessing,
that the prime Article of our faith concerning the God whom Christians worship
is more opposite to reason, then the scandalous Monster of Transubstantiation.
The Doctrine of three Persons in one God is indeed a sublime mystery, which is
beyond the discovery of reason before it is revealed, and incomprehensible by
reason after revelation, as many secrets in the very course of nature cannot be
accounted for by our dark and narrow understandings. Reason it self tells us,
that the infinite nature of God is not to be measured by the limited being of
the creatures, and also that the glory, of the invisible God cannot be
discovered but by his own manifestation of it, and that according to his own
good pleasure with different degrees of light, as Gods wisdom thinks fit to
impart unto man the knowledge of God: And lastly, Reason resolves that Gods
Word, especially of himself, who like the Sun is seen by his own light, is to
be believed without dispute. Since therefore God in his Word written has
clearly revealed that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one God, it
is a kindly office of enlightened reason to bring down every vain thought and
weak reasonings that lift up themselves against the knowledge of God, and to
lead them captive under the obedience of faith. But there is no cause, why we
should struggle with our reason, and un-man our selves, that we may admit the
divelish figment of Transubstantiation, whereof there is not the least shadow
in the Word of God. This subtle Sophister aggravates the difficulty that may be
fancied in the Trinity to the greatest advantage of Atheistical cavillers, but
he would lessen the absurdities of Transubstantiation by an imperfect and false
representation of his own Doctrine, which has no ground in Gods Word. All that
is with any color alleged out of Scripture to give countenance to the lie,
which we are required to believe, is Luke 22. 19, 20. Mat. 26. 26, 28.
the sentence of Christ, This Bread is my Body, This Cup is the New Testament
in my Blood, or My Blood of the New Testament. Mark now, what a vast difference
between the speech of our Blessed Savior, The Bread is my Body, (that is,
signifies and represents my Body, as God himself says, Ezekiel 37. 11. These Co^il
T^d. Sess. 13. c. 4.
bones are the whole house of Israel; and Ezekiel. 25. 3. This, to wit the Hair
beforementioned, is Jerusalem) and the definition of the Tridentine Fathers:
The whole substance of the Bread is turned into the whole substance of Christ's
Body, and the whole substance of the Wine into the whole substance of Christ's
Blood. Where is this Conversion recorded in the Gospel, or Apostolical
Epistles, that we should offer violence to our reason to work our minds to the
belief of it? It is also false, that you are required only to believe that
Bread is turned into Flesh. We do believe, and that without renouncing our
reason, that Christ who could turn stones into Bread, and did turn water into
Wine, could turn, if he pleased, Bread into Flesh, and Wine into Blood, as
easily as he did Water into Blood in Egypt. And if Christ should do this at any
time, the change would be as evident to the senses, as it was in all miraculous
conversions, and the Flesh would be as visible, as the Serpent was into which
Aarons Rod was turned, and the Blood as truly obvious to the eye, as the
sanguified streams of Egypt. But Papists require your unreasonable belief of
another thing, to wit, that the Sacramental Bread is turned substantially into
the very Body of Christ which was before that born of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
and is now at the time of every conversion sitting at the right hand of God in
glory above the Heavens. By the way, (because it is not my business now to
refute this false Doctrine) remember that unquestionable Axiom of true
Philosophy, Nothing is before it is made, or whilst it is in making. But
Christ's Body was before the Sacrament, and is already when the Priest begins
the first syllable of his Magical murmur, by which he pretends to make the Body
of Christ. You see the manifest contradiction, which you are obliged by Papists
to believe in this insensible conversion. Now if you will, to please a Papist,
renounce sense and reason, that you may be capable of this rare belief, I know
no cause why you should not also take Ovid's Poem of Metamorphosis for a
veritable History. He fraudulently minces the matter again, when he speaks of
the easiness of believing that one Body is in more places at one time. I know
that Thomas Aquinas in his Quodlibets says that the subsistence of one Body in
more places at one time is impossible, because that which is one in it self
cannot be divided from it self without the destruction of its unity and being
together.

But that is not all which you are bound to believe in this device: For you
must believe, if you can, that the very Body of Christ which consists of limbs
and lineaments distinguished by several proportions and situations, and at this
time is now in a certain place in Heaven, clothed with glory brighter then the
Sun, is now lurking, an invisible and indivisible Body, in all the Hosts that
are consecrated, or enchanted rather, in the Papacy, and in every crum of every
Wafer. This is the substance of the Popish Doctrine, which the Sophister
rarifies into a thin cloud but that has still gross contradictions in it,
which are enough to divert a man that would serve God with his reason and
understanding from going into the region of darkness, that is the Roman
Church. Romans 12. 1 1 Cor. 14.


He would fain repair the breach which is made in their Charity. Here his
juggling is unsufferable. He conceals the uncharitable condition of your
admission into the Roman society. To join with Papists, you must break off
communion with all Christians that are not subject to the Sea of Rome. Can you
leap over this stumbling stock, and think your self in a safe Sanctuary when
you have shut up your self in the Popes cloister from converse with all
Christians besides in offices of Religion? But all our complaint of their
uncharitableness, he sais, is our mistake. You have read enough of that
argument. I need say nothing now.

But see how untowardly this wolf puts on the Sheeps skin on his back. He
thinks their Charity unreproveable, because they (as he shamelesly affirms)
censure not Persons, but Doctrine, and that maintained pertinaciously. Read the
Canons of the Council of Trent, wherein this is the constant form of cursing
their Adversaries, Si quis dixerit, If any person say so and so, let him be
Anathema. And have not Arms been raised after that the Anathemaes were
thundered, to extirpate with fire and sword the doctrine of the Gospel by
destroying the persons that profess it? What truth can you expect from such
open liars, as the men of this mould are?

He says further that neither Papists nor Protestants can absolutely Judge, who
maintains an error obstinately. Where then is their Charity, or Justice, when
they do (as the Histories of Christendom sufficiently witness) adjudg
Protestants to be Heretics, and so render them up to the secular arm to be
slaughtered, as the Executioners of Papal decrees think fit?

But the Papists do so abound in Charity, that it is only out of Charity that
they endeavor our conversion by warning us of dangers. I will believe that
Romanists seek our Souls Salvation, more than English money, when out of mere
Charity they seriously undertake the conversion of the Strumpets in the Popes
Dominions, who are in as great danger of being damned, as those whom they call
Heretics can be by their profession. But they that are the Popes creatures
dare not exercise their Charity to the impoverishment of the Popes Exchequer,
to which the licensed Stews afford no small contribution. Neither will these
charitable savors of Souls allow us the same exercise of our Charity in Spain
or Italy, although we are as firmly persuaded of the danger, that Papists are
in, as they are conceited of our perils, and have as much pity and kindness for
poor Souls kept in bondage and blindness in spiritual Egypt, as Papists have
for us. Till we can obtain the same freedom for us to employ our Charity, it
is not agreeable to justice that Papists should be permitted such liberties as
they now take to make an ostentation of their counterfeit Charity, which is
indeed carnal Policy to restore the Papal jurisdiction in England,

He proceeds in his falsehood, and denies the profession of Faith expressed in
the Pope Pius 4. his Bull dated A. D 1554: to be a new Creed. Do you not take
that to be new, in Christianity, which is but a little above a hundred years
old? for the whole mass which is superadded to the ancient Creed of the Church
was never known for a Creed till that Pope gave it out for one. But what name
will you find out for this Gentleman, who says it is no Creed; but a Catalogue
of points to be professed by teachers in public Academies, etc.

If you read the Bull it self, you will see that Credo, I believe, runs through
the whole body of the form, and I acknowledge, profess, assert, firmly embrace
this and that, are the expressions used in that Creed, which is there also
called, The true Catholic Faith, without which no man can be saved. The
Querist also knows as well as I, though he does worse than dissemble his own
knowledge, that the Popes Bull enjoins this Creed to be sworn to by all
Ecclesiastics (which are more then Teachers in Universities) all dignitaries
in Churches, all Regulars, etc. and it strictly charges all Clergymen to
endeavor as much as in them lies, that all men under their care and charge
shall learn and hold this Faith. These animadversions I offer to your
assistance in the giving a right judgment of the Gentleman's Reply to mine
Answers.

If you please to offer a Copy of my Letter to the unknown person, you may do
well. And if he shall return any thing that you shall think fit to impart unto
me, I shall peradventure be at leisure to consider it, and tell you what sense
I have of it as freely and plainly, as I have dealt in the examination of the
precedent discourse. I conclude in St. Paul's words, The 2 Timothy 2. 7.
Lord give you a good understanding in all things. So I rest, SIR,

Your very faithful Servant, C. G.


THe emptiness of this spare Paper, tempts me to recite the Exposition of that
acute Commentator Maldonate; who, though a Jesuit, expounds our blessed
Saviors Precept, Mat. 23. 2, 3. far otherwise, than this Advocate for the
Jewish Chairmen does. His words are these; Ergo cum jubet servare and facere,
quae Scribae and Pharisaei, dum in cathedra Mosis sedent, dicunt, non de
ipsorum, sed de Legis and Moysis doctrina loquitur. Perinde est enim ac si
dicat, Omnia quae Lex and Moses vobis dixerunt, Scribis and Pharisaeis
recitantibus, servate ac facite; secundum autem opera illorum nolite facere; ut
Hilarious and Hieronimus videntur intellexisse. The sense of his words is this;

Therefore when Christ bids them keep and do what the Scribes and Pharisees
say, whiles they sit in the Chair of Moses, he speaks not of their own
doctrine; but of that of the Law and of Moses. For it is all one as if Christ
say; All those things, which the Law and Moses have told you, when the Scribes
and Pharisees recite them, do ye keep and perform; but do ye not according to
their works; as Hilarie and Hierome seem to have understood the Text.

Mark, that this learned Papist is constreyned by the force of truth, and
uncontrollable evidence of the false doctrines of the Scribes and Pharisees, to
imply tacitly that those Chairmen could teach a Doctrine far different from
that of the Law and of Moses, and openly to averr that the Doctrine of the Law
and Moses, (that might then be well known) was to be the Object, and limit of
the Observance and Obedience enjoined, as due to the Ministry of the Scribes
and Pharisees. The Commentator, to justify his Exposition, alleges Hilarie and
Hierome, two ancient and very learned Latin Fathers, seemingly at least to
have been of his sense in the understanding our Saviors words.

A Letter of Sir Lucius Carry Lord Viscount Falkland, to Mr. F. M. An. Dom.
1636.
Frank,

I Have received, not your Letter; but your Declamation: for I would rather
believe, that you had a mind to exercise your style, then that you are likely
to make Mr. Lee once Tutor to that Gentleman did often say, that his Scholar
would one day prove a Jesuit.
Mr. Lees prediction a Prophecy. But if it be possible, that having carried up
Baronius, you should be in earnest; that you should be moved by the Authority
of a Father living 400 years after Christ to the choice of that Religion, which
I have showed you in that question of the Chiliasts, opposes seven Fathers;
(the youngest more ancient than he, and the rest the most ancient that are)
That their Sanctity should move you, which not only their own learned Salmeron
makes a false Note of the Church, but which, as I find by their own Authors,
they have had but so lately, that their Piety is but the effect of their
Emulation, who till we reformed their Doctrine, reformed not their lives, and
owe the purity of their Church to him whom they style the Author of ours; That
you should choose them for the convenience of an Infallible Guide, when they
neither know her Infallibly to be Infallible, nor Infallibly what Definitions
are hers, when those are yet more hard to be understood, than to be known, and
those who have the convenience of so infallible a Director neither agree by
what Notes she is to be known, nor what Doctrines she teaches, and cannot but
confess, that there are infinite Questions which concern the Duty of our lives,
of which she is wholly silent, and concerning which they are in the same
miserable estate, in which we are who have none; That their Multitude should
move you, who cannot but know, that almost all the world has been Idolaters,
and most Christians have been Arrians; Indeed if any such Topical Arguments
should seem to you worthy to enter the lists with those, at least much more
apparent, Vnreasonablenesses, which are in so many of their doctrines, as
Transubstantiation, etc. If (I say) this be possible, I doubt not, but either
at the end of this week, or the beginning of the next, to say so much more to
you, as will serve to let you see, that those Works of theirs are very weak,
which may be demolished by a Potgun. Till then I pray consider, That, if God
(as we say) requires our Assent to nothing, but to what is apparent to be his
Will, then there is no necessity of a Guide, since those who would deny
apparent Doctrines, would as well resist an apparent Guide: And that they
confess that it is Obstinacy, in which Heresy consists, and which damnation
follows, and that sure this secret (I mean who is guilty of Obstinacy) is
fitter to be reserved for Him to discover who made the heart, then to be judged
by them who cannot know it, and both parts may keep their Opinions, till it
shall be made there infallibly appear, both whose Opinions are erroneous, and
whose errors are guilty; whereas the subsistence of the Commonwealth will not
suffer Criminal matters to stay for so long (though a more certain) trial. I am
in have, (for it is late, which time I was fain to take, lest your Mother
should come in.)

Your very affectionate FALKLAND.
Pray read Baronius over, and carefully. Not the Cardinal Baronius, whose
Annals are compacted to serve the Popes Interest without any regard to truth;
but a learned Divine of Scotland, who has written solidly. De object^ formali
fi dei, and has defended his Discourse against Turnbull a Jesuit.



FINIS.

