LITTLE-VVITS Protestation, to defend Popery: Since the decease of his Sister
SVPERSTITION.
Anno Dom. 1642.

By I. G. Gent.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for F. Coules, in the little Old Bailey, 1642.

LITTLE-WITS PROTESTATION, To defend Popery: since the decease of his sister
Superstition.
WHereas it is too too manifest to my great grief and sorrow, that the family
of Popery is like to come to destruction and fall to ruin, especially in those
Kingdoms and States where the adverse party is predominant, the greatest of my
Kindred and their Adherents, and Competitors of that family are already
ruinated, yea and some of them altogether extinguished, specially my sister
Superstition, being the greatest pillar and prop of that Family in the Kingdom
of Idolatry: I conceive my self engaged and bound in duty, not only by reason
of my near consanguinity to the same, but for that I have had my chiefest
nourishment and subsistence by and from the same, To my p^^er and best of my
witless ability, to uphold and defend the Family, and prevent the final
destruction and confusion thereof: It having so potent adversaries, and already
so much impaired in the strength and ancient glory, and fame thereof, Even over
the whole Wo^ld, so many Reverend and Learned Cardinals, and Prel^ticall
Bishops, nay Kings and Emperors, that have had near relation thereunto either
by affinity or consanguinity, and have yielded Reverence and Obedience to the
same; That it may be parallelled to the most famous and flourishing Families in
all Europe, and never yet could be ruinated and abolished in any Kingdom or
Nation whatsoever, where the same has had Off spring or Alliances, until this
unfortunate year in the Kingdom of England, where a Council called
a-PARLIAMENT, have indeed spoke their minds against the Family, and have
endeavored themselves, and proceeded so far against it, that they have wrought
its utter desolation and confusion.

1 By accusing and impeaching the chief defenders, and upholders thereof, the
Reverend Prelaticall Bishops, and confining them to their several and private
Lodgings, in the Tower, not to stir abroad without their special License,
and Commission, whereby they are become helpless, and useless to the defense
of the same.

2 They have by public Orders, Edicts and Proclamations commanded, the
rejection of the Ceremonies, in the exercise of Religion whatsoever, belonging
to the same, which was the principal cause of my Sister Superstition her
sickness, whereof at last she dyed.

3 Thirdly, putting down Mass, that holy exercise, that it may not so much as
be used in public, or private, by any person of what degree or dignity soever,
or in any place whatsoever, within their jurisdiction, in that Kingdom of
England, which increased much my Sisters disease.

4 The taking of Arms, and all other provision of defense away, from all that
are of our kindred, or affinity of that family, whereby they are destitute of
all relief to preserve themselves from ruin, which aggravated her sickness.

5 By put^ing to death, and banishing our holy fraternity of Priests, Jesuits
and Friars, whereby all hopes of preservation by instruction, teaching, and
Discipline, is quite taken away, this added greatly to her grief.

6 And lastly, they have taken away the holy and prudent Voices of learned and
godless Prelates, that formerly had the greatest and chiefest amongst the
Temporal Lords, sitting in that Assembly, whereby our Family was much honored,
and strengthened. This gave her her deaths wound, whereupon she immediately
departed.

And not withstanding they have brought her to destruction, yet cease they not,
but prosecute all such that had any relation unto her or any ways wished her
prosperity, fearing by her well-wishers means might be wrought to restore her
Off spring to that dignity and honor in that Nation, which she in her
prosperity enjoyed. They to prevent the same, endeavor

1 To take away the Honorable Votes of Noble Lords, favorers and well-wishers
to our Family, and their sitting out of the House of Peers, thereby taking
away all means to raise the same again.

2 To put down Organs and Singing in all Cathedralls in the Kingdom, and every
holy and necessary Ceremony thereunto appertaining, by which not so much as a
remnant of the Family may be lest.

3 To take away the demeanes of all Deanes and Prebends, worthy instruments for
the preservation of the Family.

4 And lastly, to punish all of the Clergy that speak the least word in favor
to the same, in their public Teaching, or private Communication, or that are
but loose and lascivious in their lives and Conversations: Conceiving such
persons are at all times ready to comply with such as shall speak or write in
defense of our cause.

These being the cause that have and will work, our utter confusion, in
defense thereof, and to prevent these future dangers threatened, I make this my
Protestation. Videlicet,

In the presence of his Holiness and all the Popish Saints departed, I
Litle-wit, of the Parish of Nonsense, in the Borough of Ignorance, in the
County of Blind-devotion, do make this Vow and Protestation, that I will to the
uttermost of my witless power, and headless Jurisdiction to the loss of my
liberty and prosperity, and to the hazarding my perpetual destruction and
abolishment, defend, maintain and uphold the Family of Popery, and all the
kindred and alliances of and to the same in the Kingdom of Idolatry, in what
Nation soever the same, or any person belonging thereunto, does now inhabit,
or has heretofore had residence, especially in the Kingdom of England,
against all men and counsels, of what power or jurisdiction soever they be, and
by what practices, divelish stratagems, or defignes I can think or devise, I
will endeavor to prevent and hinder their proceedings, in bringing our Family
to confusion, that possibly in my power lies.

Little-wit.

FINIS.

