A true and faithful NARRATIVE Of the much to be lamented death of Mr. WILLIAM
TYRRELL And the more to be magnified preservation of Sr. JOHN ROUS Of Henham
Baronet, And diverse other Gentlemen of worth, and persons well reputed in their
Country.

PUBLISHED For the vindication of Gods Truth, and those Persons honor and
credit, from some foul and scandalous aspersions cast upon them, in a lying
Libell Entitled, Sad and Lamentable News from Suffolk, etc.

By LIONELL G^TFORD D. D. and Rector of Dinnington in Suffolk.

LONDON Printed for I^nes Lawson, and sold at (...) ^n Covent Garden 1661.

A true and faithful NARRATIVE OF The much to be lamented death of Mr.
William Tyrrell, and the more to be magnified preservation of Sir John Rous of
Henham Baronet, and diverse other Gentlemen of worth, etc.
You have heard not long since, both by Books and Ballads, (whether from the
same or several hands, is somewhat doubtful, though the Title and Relations
be the same, so far as the Confederates in iniquity thought fit to lay their
lies and slanders together) Sad and Lamentable News from Suffolk, being (as
they falsely term it) A true and perfect Relation of the great Thunderclaps, and
Lightning, that fell upon the House of Mr. Absalon at Wangford, where Mr.
Torrill, Mr. Brom (for so they call them) Mr. Blowgate, Mr. Lemon, and diverse
other Gentlemen were drinking Healths. And the manner how the said
Thunderclaps, etc. as follows in their swelling Titles. And all this (say they)
attested by the foreman of the Jury, Mr. John Gibson, who was summoned upon
the Crowners Quest.

Now that God may be glorified in his wonderful works, both of mercy and
judgment, his Truth magnified, the Honors and (...) Names, both of the
mercifully preserved and miraculously s^in (...) hurt Gentlemen vindicated, and
loud Lies, slanders and reproaches, of the Saint-seeming, Devil-imitating, and
Hell-breathing Phanaticks, that have divulged and published those pernicious
and pestiferous reports to the world, be thrown back into their own impudent
faces: I shall first give you a true Narrative of that whole business, as I
received it from the Pen of a Person of Honor and Integrity, who, I verily
believe, abhorres to tell an untruth, or speak deceitfully for God himself, as
Job's expression is, cap. 13. ver. 7. much more for the salving of any man's
credit: and that done, I shall give you some few animadversions thereon, and so
leave the Libellers to repent of their lies and slanders, or to suffer for
them, as God and the Executioners of his wrath shall think fit.

Upon Wednesday the last of July after Dinner, Sir John Rous of Henham in the
County of Suffolk, a Gentleman of known honor and honesty, and highly beloved
and esteemed in his Country, and a member of this present Parliament took out
with him Mr. William Tyrrell, that was (if I mistake not) a Kinsman of his, and
well respected of him, to walk with him into some Grounds of his, not far from
his house; where they met with Mr. Thomas Absalon of Wangford, that hired some
Grounds of Sir John; and he entreated Sir John to go to his house, and the
rather, for that Captain Lemon, and his Nephew Mr. John Lemon were there, and
the latter of them had a desire to speak with him, being to go the next day
toward London. Sir John Rous promised to call there, ere he returned home; and
as he was going, he found Mr. Breame, and his Brother Mr. James Breame selling
of Cattle to a Butcher, and called to them; and they, together with Mr.
Blowgate, Sir John's Steward, and Robert Brown another of his Servants (who had
been abroad with his Gun, as he used frequently to do) went along with him.
And when all, or the most part of these Persons had been in the Parlour of Mr.
Absalons house some small time, viz. about half an hour, or not so much, and
had only received the civility of a Cup or two of Beer (there being nothing,
no not so much as the Beer provided on purpose for them, nor the least design
of any such meeting pre-determined many minutes before) on a sudden there
happened a very great shower of Rain, and after the violence of that was a
little over, there followed a clap of thunder, which breaking just over the
said house, seemed much greater to them and the neighbors adjoining, then it
did to those that were some small distance from thence, it being not taken
notice of at all, by those that were within less then a mile of that house.
And some people that were in the Yards belonging to that house, and to the
houses near it, saw (as they affirm) a Ball of Fire fall upon the house, which
raised and brake some of the Tyles, shivered a Sparre in the Garret into forty
shivers, rent some of the Studds of the house, brake through, or otherwise found
its passage into the Chamber over the Parlour, and there tore the Bed-posts and
back of the Bed into many pieces; and fell into a hole of the boards, and brake
through the Seeling into the Parlour, where the Gentlemen were; Sir John Rous
sitting at the end of the Table, and Mr. Tyrrell by him at the side thereof,
with the Window just behind him, and Mr. Breame and his Brother by Mr. Tyrrell,
Captain Lemon at the other end of the Table, and Mr. Blowgate at some distance
from them. And the sulphurious Vapor (like tearing Granado) or rather as much
transcending it, as Nature does Art, or the more immediate work of the God of
Nature, does the work of Man) dispersed it self in the Parlour, without any
fire or flash of Lightning seen by any of the company; and in an instant struck
Mr. Tyrrell dead as he sat, beat down one of the Breames upon the floor, and
threw the other upon the Table, lifted Mr. Blowgate out of his Chair, and cast
him upon the side of the Table, but did not carry him out of the Parlour to the
top of the Room, and then cast him upon a Table (as the non-sensicall
Pamphleteer asserts in the Title of his Libell) and him Captain Lemon helped
into his Chair again, though he was not at that time sensible of that
kindness; Mr. John Lemon was struck down flat upon his back as he was coming
into the house, and taken up dead, but being presently carried into the open
air, he soon revived, and was so well, as that, according to his intention, he
began his Journey toward London the next day, but Mr. William Tyrrell never
recovered. The Woman of the house, being in the next Room with her Children,
saw (as she says) a flash of fire glide through the Room, and shoot out at the
Door, which she thought would have done much mischief in that Room also, had
not the Door been open. And it is said by others that were abroad, that they
saw another flash of five fly out at that Window, against which Mr. Tyrrell
sat: in the Chamber there was found a corner of a Window so displaced, as if
it had been forced out with some difficulty, and the end thereof, as if it had
been black't with a Candle: And there was all that Evening, a very strong smell
of fire and sulphur in the house. But blessed for ever be that Almighty and
most merciful God, that is slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy; yea, that in
his wrath remembers mercy, Sir John Rous, the principal man aimed at by the
Phanatick Libellers, and some of his company, and diverse in the same house, had
not, that I can hear either from their friends or enemies, the least harm; but
were as miraculously preserved, as one was strangely slain, and others more
gently smitten. And this is the full and clear truth of the business, so far
as could be collected from persons so astonished and amazed, as those were that
were most concerned; and from the testimonies of such sober and discreet
persons as were either sad spectatours of it, or serious enquirers into it.

And though this bare Narrative be a sufficient discovery of the malicious Lies
and Slanders of the Libellers, yet seeing they have not only published their
malicious Lies and Slanders in Print, but have Commented thereon with as much
artifice, as that darkness, which they call the Light within them, would give
them leave to use. I hope it will not be thought unworthy of my Profession, or
unbeseeming that service and gratitude, wherein I stand obliged to Sir John
Rous, to make some animadversions upon the whole matter, as they have
represented it, and to give Sir John, and his Friends and Servants, which were
either untouched by those fiery Darts of God, that so strangely flew up and
down amongst them, or were but gently smitten by them, some becoming advise for
their making good use of that their miraculous deliverance.

First then, take notice that he that attests the matter of the Libell, is
ashamed of his own name, Daniel Ewin; and therefore he borrows the name of John
Gibson to subscribe it. And indeed he might well be ashamed to set his own name
to it, he having been such a known Liar, so notorious in that service of his
Master the Devil, and such a plunderer of the Goods, such a pillager of the
Estates, such a depraver of the Names, and such a persecutor of the Persons of
all faithful and loyal subjects, that his hands or tongue could reach; that
had the name of Daniel Ewin been set to it, all that know him would have
suspected that little truth which he relates, because so lewd a Liar related it:
and his many lies intermixed with it would have been immediately thrown in his
face by all his neighbors about him, with such detestation and abhorrencie, as
that he must have fled his Country sooner then he intends (though it is
believed that his place of abode will spue him out very suddenly) or else have
endured a storm, as hard to be endured by him, as that which the persecuted
Persons, through Gods unspeakable mercy to them, were enabled to endure.

In the next place, give me leave to inform you of the transcendent malice of
this Daniel Ewin, who because Sr. John Rous, according to his duty incumbent on
him, as one of the chief Commissioners in the Militia, and now one of his
Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Suffolk, had curbed the daring
insolences of the said Ewin and some of his fellow-Phanaticks, and
disappointed and suppressed some of their rebellious designs, he took now this
opportunity to bespatter, as much as he could, Sr. John's unspotted name, as
being no other way able to asperse him. And being made foreman of the Coroners
inquest, he labored according to his little wit and superabundant Villainy,
(wherein he had been a long time practiced) to have made the death of Mr
Tyrrell, murder: and when he found that to be too gross and ridiculous even in
the apprehension of the meanest Juror, (though to the shame of those that are
entrusted with impannelling of Juries, they that serve upon Juries of life and
death, are too often none of the wisest of the Country) he then thought that
the suggestion of intended drunkenness or excessive drinking, would be the most
easily insinuated into those of his own fraternity, and stick fastest upon
those of the Royal party, amongst whom Sr. John Rous was a Gentleman of no
little eminency. Wherefore he adds in his information, that Sr. John Row, and
Mr. Torrill, and Mr. Brom (as he miscalls them; for either he could not spell
their names aright, or else his brother Phanatick, that composed his Libell for
him, had not the true key or character of his lying letters) and his brother,
Mr. Lemon and his brother, Mr. Blowgate and Mr. Robert Brown servants to the
said Sr. John Row, with diverse other Gentlemen, (that were there invisibly, for
he had named the whole company, only he thought there yet wanted some more to
make what follows the more probable) met on purpose to drink out a Barrel of
March beer; the Kennel-defiling Rythmer scores it up a Pipe of Beer. Whereas,
neither was there any meeting at all assigned many minutes before, (as was
before declared by those Gentlemen but they met all accidentally, neither did
they, when they met, meet with any such provision as a Barrel of March Beer or
a Pipe of other Beer, but the Gentleman that gave them that little drink which
they drank, did in probable civility give them the best that he had, whether it
were Beer or Ale, of March or any other month; and they in good manners did
not inquire into the age of it, as it seems the foreman of the Coroners
Inquest thought fit to do, or rather adventured to report it, to make way for
his comment of inflaming and intoxicating. Only I wonder that Ewin, the Brewer
or Brewster of that Lie of March Beer, should so much forget the anagramme of
his own name, as not rather to have told us of so much wine that was sent in
before hand from Blithborough, from whence he borrowed the name of John Gibson,
or that his Bartholomew-faire Ballad-maker should so mistake, as to call a pipe
of Tobacco a pipe of Beer; But let such Liars beware that when they have thus
aspersed sober and worthy persons with drinking of what and as much liquor as
they please, their own tongues set on fire of hell (as St. James speaks) do
not one day, when it will be too late, cry out, for a drop of cold water to
cool them.

Take one thing more from the Foreman of the Jury his attested relation. He
tells us, that the force of the thunder came in at the window against which Mr.
Torrill was sitting; and yet some very few lines before he says (and it is in
a manner the only truth in his relation) that the force of the thunderclap
fell upon the tyles of the house and broke into the Parlour chamber and from
thence fell down into the Parlour where the Gentlemen were sitting. A Liar, you
see, had need to have a better memory then the foreman in this Lie, had: and
he says he was both an ear and eye witness thereunto, which I confess I do
not understand how it was possible; unless he saw the Thunder that came in at
the Parlour Window, and heard the Thunderclap that fell upon the Tyles, and so
through the Parlour Chamber into the Parlour: and indeed we men of carnal Eyes
and Ears do not know (as they often tell us) what such sanctified Eyes and
Ears, as Ewin and such Phanaticks have, can see and hear. But this I am sure,
Ewin did at this time very much oversee what he was summoned to view and
observe; and is one, that constanly hears as ill, as any man in that County:
and both he and his Pamphleter deserve to loose their eyes and ears too for
abusing so many thousand eyes and ears as they have done with their
Hypocritical Lies in print, which minds me of speaking something to their
Hypocrisy as well as to their Lying.

That prediction or prophecy of the spirit of God. 1 Timoth. 4. v. 2. That in
the latter times some should depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in hypocrisy, having their
conscience seared with an hot iron; is not more truly and exactly fulfilled in
any, then in the Phanaticks of these times. and the hypocritical Canting of
those Phanaticks, which I am presenting to you, will witness as much.

The greatest thing (says the Libeller) that we can desire (next to the glory
of God) is our own salvation; and the sweetest thing we can desire, is the
assurance of our salvation. And in this life we cannot get higher, then to be
assured of that which in the next is to be enjoyed. These are the charming
terms, with which the composer of the Libell would lull you a sleep, whilst
he poisons your faith with a most venomous and false suggestion of the
forenamed Gentleman's excess in drinking at their meeting. Oh the matchless
boldness of phanaticall impudence! could nothing, but the lifting men up with
the thoughts of salvation and the assurance thereof, be thought on as a
delusion strong enough to persuade them to believe a lie? Certainly where
salvation is but hoped for by any, all Lying, and especially the belying and
slandering of others, is abhorred and detested: for as all lying lips are an
abomination to the Lord Proverbs 12.22. So he that speaks lies in the name of
the Lord, is so abominable unto men as well as to the Lord, that his own father
and mother that begat him, shall say unto him, thou shall not live, Zack. 13.3.
And if whosoever loves and makes a Lie shall not be suffered to enter into
the gates of the heavenly Jerusalem Revelat. 22. v. 15 and chap. 21. 27. much
less shall they be admitted to enter, that not only make lies, but make use of
the talking of Gods glory and the assurance of man's salvation, to make way for
their Lies to enter the more smoothly and undescernably into men's hearts.
Excess of drinking is exceeding sinful; and, praised be God, there are many,
very many, of the Kings faithful and loyal subjects, that hate it in
reallity, as much as any of your Phanatick crew do in pretense. But withal we
acknowledge, that we think it far worse to be drunk with malice and envy, with
disobedience and rebellion, with violence and blood, with oppression and
sacrilege, with dissimulation and hypocrisy, with error and heresy, then
with wine or beer, or any other liquor. And therefore if ye would be saints
indeed, as well as so reputed, let drunkenness and other foul scandalous
sins be abhorred of you, because they are sins, and abhorred by God, and
then you will abhor lying and dissembling as well as the rest; and do not
think your selves, or rather call your selves Saints, (for surely ye cannot
seriously think your selves so) because ye abstain from those sins from which
the Devils themselves abstain, and in the mean time delight in those, in which
they most delight, and particularly in that sin of falsely accusing your
brethren, from which the Devil has his name Diabolus, Devil, Revelat. 12. v.
10.

But to trace this Libeller a little further. He tells us of two heavens and
that some saints enjoy a heaven while they are here on earth: and that all may
enjoy two heavens, is (as he says) the project of his discourse, and that this
project may be published, he would lay down some cautionary motions for
preventing excess in drinking; considering the late, sad and heavy judgments
that befell diverse Gentlemen in Suffolk, as they were drinking of healths etc.
O rare projectour that has found out two heavens, and that the Saints enjoy
one of those heavens here on earth: I confess the Scriptures make mention of
three heavens the first the aereall heaven, which is the next above the earth:
and from whence the birds and fowls; that fly therein are called the birds and
fowls of heaven, and the clouds, the clouds of heaven; the second the starry
heaven, under which name is comprehended not only the orbs of the planets, but
that orb also where the fixed stars are and so all the whole extant from
above the clouds, to that which is the place provided by Christ for the blessed
for ever to remain in, and from it the Stars are called the Stars of heaven
etc. And then the third heaven, as St. Paul calls it 2. Cor. 12.2. and is that
heaven, into which Christ is according to his body ascended, and of which he
says, that the Angels do always behold the face of my father which is in
heaven; and he taught us to say. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
But all these three heavens are above the earth; only our earthly Dreamer (as
S. Jude calls such) has dreamt of another heaven upon earth, which some whom
he calls Saints do enjoy: whereas those that are true real Saints indeed, do
here on earth find rather an hell then a heaven, by the reason of the many
temptations and persecutions, the miseries and afflictions, the fightings
without and the fears within, the wrestlings and other incounters, that they of
all men are daily either oppressed with or exercised by: insomuch that if they
had only hope in this life in Christ, they were of all men the most miserable,
But it is well for such Saints as the Libeller and his fellow-brethren, that he
has found out for himself and them an heaven on earth; for now perhaps, he and
they, that have their portion in this life, may entitle themselves to that
newfound heaven: for as for heaven above; if all his lying Pamphlets were made
into a paper Kite (which the boys about the city, as well as they love such
toys will scarce take the pains to do, knowing a more proper use for them, by
throwing them downward) yet they would not mount him or his name, above the
highest of a pillory, and for his poor soul God be merciful to him, unless he
do in time repent of his lying and slandering, of his hypocrisy and
counterfeited sanctity, it will need no other filth to clog its wings from ever
soaring nearer the highest heaven, then that heaven where the Prince of the
air is sometimes permitted to revell in; and such projectors as he, may for a
time be allowed to breath in.

But who told him that the Gentlemen, met at Wangford were drinking of healths,
and that in excess, when the late sad and heavy judgments befell them? There
is no mention of drinking healths, or drinking in excess, in all the relation
attested by Gibson alias Ewin: but that they met to drink out a barrel of
March Beer; which was also a loud one, as has been already shown, but suppose
they were drinking of healths, or did otherwise drink in excess, (which is the
mere fiction of the Libellers own Phanatick brain and that whereby he carries
away the whetstone from Ewin himself) how dares the Libeller be so bold with
with God and his judgments, which are so unsearchable as well as terrible, as
to apply Gods judgments to any persons whatsoever, so as to say, or suggest by
way of intimation, that for this or that cause, God sent such or such
judgments upon such and such persons; unless God did, by those judgments
upon those persons, indigitate those causes so evidently, as that their sin
might be visibly read in the marks and characters of those judgments. And then
too, men ought to be very wary and tender of judgeing others, lest God himself,
who is the Judge himself of all men, Judge them also for usurping his Throne,
and peculiar Prerogative, by Judging of any of his: especially so as to think
them the greatest sinners, on whom God lays the sorest judgments, when he
spares others. Remember those Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their
sacrifices: and those eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell and slew them,
Luke 13. Christ himself assures you, that they were not sinners above all the
Galileans, nor above all the inhabitants of Jerusalem that escaped those
judgments: but the prime use to be made by those that escape Gods judgments,
when others suffer under them or perish by them, is (as our Savior there
intimates) to repent of their own sins, lest they also perish. Besides, so much
did God magnify his mercy at that very time, in preserving so many alive, and
some of them untoucht, when he took away only one of their company, and smote
some of the rest with so gentle a stroke, that their very preservation rather
speaks their freeness at that present from any such foul crime, as the
Libeller would fain fasten upon them, than give any just occasion to any to
suspect them guilty thereof.

But the Libeller goes on, You must, you will say drink the Kings health; and to
show his Logic as well as his Rhetoric, he refutes the doing so, thus: Is it
congruous in cups of excess to drink the Kings health, when he preserves his
health by little drinking? surely the man thinks, that they who drink the Kings
health, do not only wish or pray for his health, or otherwise honorably
speak of him; but they mingle his health in their Cups, as they do Sugar, or
some other ingredients: or else what congruity is there in that pretty knacking
saying of his? But who (I beseech him) are they, that say, they must drink the
Kings health? did those Gentlemen say so? The Foreman himself affirms no such
thing: and if they did drink his Majesty's health, might they not do it
without drinking it in Cups of excess, and so preserve their own health as
well as drink his? It is beyond the limits of my vindication, to determine the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of drinking the Kings health; for the Libeller
quarrels only at the drinking of it in Cups of excess, and so far all sober
men concur with him: but it may well be suspected, that if he loved the King
or his health so well as he should, he would not have crowded that passage into
his Pamphlet so incongruously and impertinently: but calumny knows nothing of
congruity or pertinency. The thing that he aims at, is questionless this, To
have the world believe that such a sad and lamentable judgment fell such a
time, upon such and such Gentlemen for drinking of the Kings health. And
whether this does not smell strongly of the Phanatick humor, let himself
judge; though I presume the Phanaticks will not thank him for one observation
of his a little before, viz. That Wine or Beer in a drunken excess, inflames
the heart, intoxicates the brain, and turns all Phanaticks: But truly I thank
him for that saying; for, by this I conjecture, how he himself became so
inflamed as he is, and his brain crows so much as it does, and so he is turned
all Phanatick; the poor man had taken a cup or two of excess. Alas poor heart
and weak brain, beware how you meddle any more either with drinking or
scribbling a little too much: for you then throw about your Ink, you care not
how, nor upon whom, but bespatter those whom either you know, or at least dare
not let them know your Name.

He gives you a caution also against Oaths and Execrations; which he forces
into his Libell by head and shoulders, and all to throw more dirt into those
faces, which either he never saw, or knows them to be such, that the least spot
cannot stick upon them, especially them that he chiefly aimed at.

At the last he whines out something that might from another mouth, be thought
to savor of Loyalty; and therefore as the Philosopher, when he heard a very
bad man speak a very good sentence, entreated an honest man that stood by, to
speak that sentence over again, for that it would sound much better out of a
better mouth: So I could wish, that those good words, which this wicked
Libeller has let fall concerning our Gracious and Dread Sovereign, and the
temperance and devotion, with which his good Subjects should as good Christians
rejoice, for his return and reestablishment amongst us (which I understand by
that expression of his, Let us all heighten the joyful shout of a King amongst
us) I could wish, I say, that some honest and cordial Loyalist had uttered
those words, and they would have souned much sweeter, and not so hollow and
cracked as they do. But Saint James has much abated the wonder of an evil
tongue speaking sometimes good words; when he says, James 3. Therewith bless
we God even the Father, and therewith curse we men, which are made after the
similitude of God. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing. And
so this Libeller might by chance at the last speak well of the King, though he
had all along spoken evil, and that most maliciously, of some that are his most
faithful Subjects.

And to those faithful Subjects do I now for a conclusion of all address my
self, humbly beseeching, and earnestly entreating both you my most honored
Patron, and the rest of those Gentlemen, that were so mercifully and
miraculously preserved, to spend your preserved lives the more piously and
religiously in Gods service, because they were so precious in his sight, as to
work so wonderfully and graciously in the preservation of them, when they were
so near unto destruction. It is the Lord that gives life unto all, Act. 17.25.
And it is the same Lord that has redeemed your lives from destruction, and
crowned you with loving kindness and tender mercies, Psalm. 103.4. And
therefore what can each of you say less, then that which that Psalmist there
says, in contemplation of those mercies, ver. 1.2. Bless the Lord, O my soul:
and all that is within me, bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my soul:
and forget not all his benefits. And what can ye do less, to show that you
forget them not, then that the remaining course of your preserved lives be
answerable in some good measure to the mercies and miracles of their
preservation. And to mind you the more of Gods mercies and your duties, let me
beg of you, what I hope you are already resolved on before I mention it to you;
That you would not fail to observe the last day of July, as a solemn day of
Thanksgiving unto the Lord all your lives through; it being a day, wherein God
(as Lot said when he was delivered from the Brimstone and Fire of Sodom, Genesis
19.) did magnify his mercy which he showed you in saving your lives; and that
too, from the unspeakable violence, and irresistible force of the most dreadful
instruments of his wrath and fury, his right-aiming Thunderbolts, that from the
clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, fly to the mark, as they are elegantly
described, Wisdom 5.21. as also from those mixed sulphurious, fuliginous,
conglutinous, fiery vapors, that they were, and constantly are wrapped up in;
and which are Gods Arrows as well as the Thunderbolts, Psalm. 77. v. 17. Here
both Philosophy and History would furnish me with a very large discourse of
the nature and effects of Thunder; But Job's Question takes me off from meddling
much with the nature of Thunder, by saying, The Thunder of hi^ power who can
understand? Job. 26.14. Let it therefore (...) you, that it is the Thunder of
his power; and remember, as oft^^ you hear it, or ought spoken of it, that on
the last of July 1661. God himself, by his own power, and of his own free
mercy, delive^ed you from that otherwise merciless power of his Thunder, that
passes all man's understanding; and that will help you the better to understand
the loving kindness of the Lord in your deliverance, and provoke you to be the
more thankful to him for it. And for the effects of Thunder, you have seen and
felt so much, that I presume, you need not to be informed of any more, for the
inciting you to that duty, which I am now minding you of. I shall therefore as
to this particular, refer you only to what holy David has left recorded
concerning the effects of Thunder, Psalm, 18. and 29. where Thunder is called
the voice of the Lord, and that voice is said to be powerful, or (as others
read the places) mighty in operation. And some of those mighty effects are
there named, and the lesson recommended to all men from the consideration
thereof, is the same that I am now recommending to you. Namely, Therefore to
give unto the Lord glory and strength: yea, to give unto the Lord the glory due
unto his Name, and to worship him in the beauty of holiness, or, as it is in
the margin, in his glorious Sanctuary.

In the next and last place, When you are praising God for his delivering you
from the power of his terrible Thunder, forget not to give him thanks also, for
his delivering you in his due time, from the power of a malicious and
slanderous hypocritical tongue; which, as it does in many respects resemble
Thunder, viz. in its irresistible smiting, indiscernable piercing, and visible
besooting of those persons it lights on, according as they are tempered or
disposed, as also in the nimble flying, and sudden and unwarned hitting,
wounding, and killing, and the like: So it does in diverse respects transcend
it: For Thunder falls most upon Beasts, and Trees, and Buildings, and seldom
upon Men, as Pliny and Scaliger have observed, and our own experience
witnesses: But an evil tongue falls wholly upon Men, and often upon the best
of Men. Again, Thunder, when it does light upon Men, it spares often times
their lives, and when it does kill, it kills only their bodies; but the lying
malicious hypocritical tongue, spares nothing that it can hurt, and strikes
both bodies and souls, and endeavors often times to take away men's goods also,
and what is more precious, their good Names as well as their lives. Besides (as
the same Scaliger and Casaubon have from others, that are far more ancient,
tell us) when Thunder have slain any man, All men did generally carry some
sacred, though superstitious kind of Reverence to such a body, and would
neither bury, nor burn it, nor take it from the place where it was smitten, but
there intomb it, and thought the very place sacred, and accounted the body so
smitten to be void of corruption. But the lying, malicious, slanderous tongue,
so smites and kills, as that it rests not there, but labors to render those,
whom it so deals with, most odious and contemptible to all men: and then it
pursues them to their graves, and will not suffer them to remain quiet there,
but spits its poison into their very ashes. And therefore, if when any such
tongue has smitten any of you, whom God himself has spared, or shall further
persecute those whom God has smitten, and talk to the grief of those whom he
has wounded (which is a true mark of a merciless wicked man, Psalm. 69. v.
26.) God shall then please, by any unworthy Servant of his to vindicate your
Honors and Credit. Let the Son of Syrach's Eucharisticall expressions upon a
very suitable occasion, Ecclesiasticus 51. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. be each of
yours, and say with him, I will thank thee O Lord and King, and praise thee, O
God my Savior, I do give praise unto thy Name. For thou art my defender and
helper, and have preserved my body from destruction, and from the snare of a
slanderous tongue, and from the lips that forge lies, and have been mine helper
against mine adversaries, And have delivered me according to the multitude of
thy mercies, and greatness of thy Name, from the teeth of them that were ready
to devour me, and out of the hands of such that sought after my life, and from
the manifold afflictions which I had, and from the choking of fire on every
side, and from the depth of the belly of hell, and from an unclean tongue, and
from lying words. And this will be amongst many other comforts to yourselves,
an ample reward to him that has adventured the censure of malicious evil
tongues, to vindicate you from the malice and evil of the tongue.

FINIS.

