THEOREMS; Evincing, That the Subject of the Fourth and Fifth Chapters of the
REVELATION, is the Church of ENGLAND, B. L. E. With ANSWERS to OBJECTIONS.
Humbly offered to the Serious Consideration of All ENEMIES of the Church of
England, DISSENTERS and SEPARATISTS. By Wall. Garrett, Rector of Everly in
Wiltshire: Sometime Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.
Who has Believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord Revealed?

Esai. liii. 1. The Harvest is Plenteous, but the Laborers are Few,

Mat. ix. 37. I Have Already (by God's Assistance) Giv'n-forth an Exposition of
Every Particular, in the Fourth and Fifth Chapters of the Revelation; and now
come to Evince the CERTAINTY of it: by laying down such Theorems, or
Propositions, of Unquestionable Verity, as will serve at Once both to Establish
my own Exposition, and to Refell All Others Whatsoever.

(I.) The Church Described in Rev. iv, and v. was not in Being, when St. John
Received the Vision. For the Vision is Expressly Entitled by the Spirit Himself,
Chap. iv. 1. Things that must be HERE AFTER. (II.) The Throne in those Chapters
therefore, is not the Throne of God, in the Highest Heaven; nor the Sitter on
the Throne, God Almighty Himself in Person; (for These were not Things to Come,
but have been the SAME from All Eternity:) but the Sitter on the Throne, is God
Ruling in and by some Earthly Potentate; and his Throne is a Throne on EARTH.
And Consequently, The Church in which this Throne is Set, and over which the
Sitter on it does Preside, is a Church on Earth. (III.) Whereas they are said,
Not to Rest Day and Night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty; Which
Was, and Is, and is to Come: It cannot hence be Concluded, That they should
Never take any Rest in Sleep; nor that Always, when Awake, they should be
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. but that they should Say it Every Day, and Every
Night; or Every Morning, and Every Evening; and That, Often at Every Time; and
very Observably; or to Some Such Sense, as That is. As, when S. Paul enjoins
Every Christian, to Pray without Ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. v. 17. So, Ephesians. vi. 8. Act.
xx. 31. Romans i. 9. 1 Thessalonians. i. 3. For it is a very Common Phrase; and Can Mean
no other, but Constantly, at certain Returns of Time; or some Such Thing. (IV.)
Neither ought it hence to be Inferred, That this Church was to make use of No
Other Words, in her Addresses, but Holy, H, H; L, G, A, etc. But only, That she
was to Use a Constant FORM, of Prayer and Praise; in which, One of the most
Remarkable Things should be, her Glorifying the Blessed Trinity Only. For that
this Church is here set forth, as Using a FORM, is Undeniable. And therefore No
Church that does not use a Form, of Glorifying the Blessed Trinity; (Nay, that
does not use it Much, and very Observably,) can be the Church here Described.
For, How Odly would it look, to pretend to Give an Idea, of a Church that is a
Professed Enemy of Forms; or that hardly Ever Mentions the Trinity Distinctly in
their Prayers, by telling us, That they Rest not Day, and Night, Saying, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which Was, and Is, and is to come? As on the
Other side, it is the Very Characteristic of Our Church's Service. Insomuch
that I cannot Forbear to say, That to him that is in Search, after the Church
here Prefigur'd, That One Circumstance is Sufficient to Fore-stall his Judgment
for the Church of England. (V.) There is No Necessity, That they should use
Those Very Words neither; It is Enough, if the Words be LIKE them. For Identity
is not Required in Visions, but Likeness Only. Thus a City, in Prophecy is
called a Woman; a Tyrant, a Beast; etc. Because of their Near Resemblance, as
to those Things the Prophecy Respects in them; as, the Parturiency of the One,
and the Savageness of the Other. It is therefore, for the Fulfilling of the
Prophecy we are Speaking of, Sufficient, if the Church gives Glory to the
Blessed Trinity in Words LIKE These, Holy, H, H; L, G, A: Which Was, and Is,
and is to Come; Such, for Example, as are These of Our Church, Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; As it Was in the Beginning, Is
Now, and Ever shall be, World without end. Where we see the Words [As it Was,
Is now, and ever shall be,] Perfectly to Correspond to Those in the Type,
[Which Was, and Is, and is to Come.] And (in the Former Clause) Father, Son,
and H. Ghost, Answer as Directly to Lord, God, Almighty; and Glory, to
Holiness. For God is said to be Glorious in Holiness, Exodus xv. 11. For as the
Usual Notion of Holiness in Scripture, is Separation: So the Glory of God is,
that Nothing can be Compared to him, Esai. xl. 18. xlvi. 5. (VI.) The Sealed
Book is That, whose Visions are Distinctly Set-down, in the Sixth, and
Following Chapp. This is Plain to Sense (VII.) By Opening the SEALS of this
Book, is Meant Explaining it. There is No Other Sense of Opening the Seals of
Any Book, throughout the Scripture. For Sealing Always singnifies Concealing
the Sense of a Mystery; and Opening is Explaining it. For which, see Dan. ix.
24. and xii. 4. Esai. xxix. 11. Luke xxiv. 32. Acts xvii. 3. And I am very well
Assured, there is No One Place to the Contrary. I do not say, That Barely to
Open a Book, is to Explain it: but to Open the SEALS of a Book; or to Open the
Text, or Writing, of a Book: for the Seals are Always upon the Text; and Not
upon the Cover, Paper, or Parchment of a Book. And if the Book we are speaking
of, had been Sealed only with Wax, Lead, or Ir'n, etc. What Needed All That
Ceremony, (Setforth so Particularly, and Pompously, in the vth. Chapter) about
the Loosing of its Seals, when Every Mechanic could have done it? But it is
There Affirmed, That No one in Heaven, nor in Earth, nor Under the Earth, could
do it. What? Not Break, or File, or Cut, or some way or other Get-off, a Seal
from a piece of Parchment? That Is strange indeed! (VIII.) It is not God's
Giving his Son the Revelation, that is Described in Rev. v. For That was Done
Before the Vision was Exhibited to S. John. But the Vision of Rev. v. is
Manifestly a Part of those things, which the Spirit Entitles, Things that were
to come to pass AFTER Chap. iv. 1. (IX.) The Vision therefore of Rev. v. is a
Prefiguration of the Circumstances, that were to Accompany the Explaining of
the Said Book; when the Time was Come for it. Which is an Indisputable Result
from the Two next-foregoing Theorems. (X.) The Precise Time for the Fulfilling
of Rev. v. 5. is That, wherein the First Notice was to be given, of the True
Way of Expounding the Book. For when upon Loud Proclamation made, No One in All
the World was Found Able to Do it, to the Great Grief of such as Earnestly
Desired it, Weep not, (sa^s one of the Elders;) Behold, the Lion of the Tribe
of Juda, etc. has Prevailed to Open the Book; that is, He has Op'n'd it by
Me. For if he meant Only, That Christ Could Do it, if he Would; it is Gratis
Dictum. And one might as well say, of the hitherto-Unintelligible Parts of
Ezekiel, That Christ has Prevailed to Open Them too. But we are never the
Wiser for it Yet. The Elder's Meaning therefore must be This; Behold, The Lion
of the Tribe of Juda, etc. has Instructed ME to Open the Book, and Loose its
Seals. (XI.) Mr. MEDE is the Pers'n, that gave the First Notice of the Book's
Opening, Anno. 1632. and made a very Considerable Progress in it. And is
Consequently That Elder Spok'n of Rev. v. 5. For This, we have the Testimony of
Mons. Jurieu, Accomp. of Scrip. Proph. Part. I. Chap. VIII. Joseph Mede, in my
Opinion, is the First that Understood Any thing of the Sealed Book. We have
also the Concurrent Evidence of All Protestant Interpreters (excepting H.
Grotius, and Dr. Hammond, Deserted by All Protestants, and Rejected even by
Monsieur de Meaux Himself, in his Explication of the Apocalypse, Pref. page 62.)
that have Joined their Suffrage with him. But This Proposition can be No
Otherwise Demonstrated, than by Aswering Any Man's Objections, that Dissents
from us, which he will find Enough, that will be Ready to Engage in. But Thus
much is Certain, That, (if Mr. Mede be not the First;) Whoever Is, or shall be
the First, is the Elder There Mentioned; I Mean in Rev. v. 5. And Consequently,
of the Number of the 24 Elders, Rev. iv. 4. And the Church, he is a Member of,
is That, whose Establishment is Predicted, Rev. iv. (XII.) Before the
Reformation No Man Understood the Book. This is So Apparent; that the Contrary
is not, I believe, so much as Pretended by Any Man whatsoever. (XIII.) The
Sealed Book therefore, whose Opening is Prefigur'd, Rev. v. Said to be Writt'n
Within, and on the Backside, is a Book in the Form We Now have them; and Not,
in a ROLL; as Books were Wont to be Made-up in S. John's time. Of which Book,
the Outside-writing is the Text; as it lies before Us in These Days; and is
Read by Every Child at School, as soon as he can Speak. But the Sense contained
Under That, is the Inside-writing; which is Found Only in the Skilful
Interpreter. The Seal is the Mysterious Expression. And whereas the Whole Book
is indeed but One Continued Mystery All along; the Holy Spirit, by Dividing it,
(as his Usual Manner is) into Sev'n Parts, makes, as it were, Sev'n Mysteries
of it; which He Calls, (according to the Use of Scripture in Such Cases,) Seven
Seals. This I Observe, with respect to the Learned, and Ingenious, but yet
Needless, Fancy, of those, who have taken the Pains to Excogitate a Way, How a
Roll might be Sealed with Sev'n Seals, so that the Opening of the First, might
not at the Same Time Disclose the Vision of the Second. As if, at the Time,
when the Vision was to be Explained, the Fashion for Books, was to be in Rolls.
(XIV.) The Lamb Revived after Slaughter, Standing in the midst of the Throne;
who Came, and Took the Book, out of the Hand of the Sitter on the Throne, Chap.
v. 6, 7. Cannot be Christ in Pers'n, who Comes not to Any Earthly Throne, (as
the Throne we Speak of is;) but it is Christ, in Some Good King, who was to be
Slain, as was his Master; and to Rise again in a Figure, (as Isaac is said to
have Done, Heb. xi. 19.) and as our Good King Charles the Martyr Did, in his
Son of the Same name; when he was restored, as it were to Life again, Anno,
1660. Such kind a of Resurrection, is No Stranger to the Prophets; for which
see Ezekiel. xxxvii. 11.-14. Romans xi. 15. Now Whoever First was to Open the Book,
his Performance was to be Seconded with such a Resurrection, Rev. v. 5.6.
Which, as it Never Happened in the World Before; So we may Hope, that there
will Never be Occasion for Such Another. And if there should Not, the Book must
have been Op^n'd Before the Restoration of King Charles The Second. (XV^.)
Also, Before the Opening of the Book, there was to be a Loud Proclamation, by a
Strong ((...), Mighty, or Powerful) Angel, for Any one to come and Open the
Book, that Could. Which, Before Mr. Mede's Opening it, was made by King James
I. According as I have Showed at large, in my Exposition of Chap. v. All which
things, with a Great Many More, Conspire to Fix the Honor, of Showing the Way
to Open It, upon Mr. Mede; and Consequently, That, of being the Church
Prefigur'd in Rev. iv, and v. upon This Church of Ours. For indeed (to Sum-up
All in short) upon This Hypothesis, not only the Exposition of the said Two
Chapters; but also, of the Three Foregoing ones, and of Every Particular in
them, Runs Strangely Smooth, and Natural, and Every way Unexceptionable; as I
have made Appear, by a Thorow-Exposition, I have Published, of them. Which, if
the Hypothesis had been Wrong, would have been As Impossible at least, for Me
to have done; as it has been for All Other Interpreters, (Men of as Great
Learning, Wit, and Fancy, as the World afforded,) who have Proceeded on a Wrong
Hypothesis. But instead of That, I have Shown the Sev'n Epistles, and the
Fourth and Fifth Chapters, to be a Prophecy of the Church, from the Beginning,
to the Times We live in, by Such a Clear, and Solid Explication, of Every Type
and Passage in them, as may Defy All Opposition; and which Cannot Reas'nably
be Ascribed, to Any thing but its TRUTH.

The Only Objections, worth the Mentioning, that are come to My Knowledge, are
These. Obj. 1. We have No Nocturnal Service; and therefore cannot be said, not
to Rest Day and Night, Saying, Holy, H, H; etc. Ans. 1. We account, as from
Midnight to Noon, Morning: So from Noon to Midnight again, Night. Thus, at Any
Time After Noon, we are Taught to Pray, Light'n our Darkness, etc. and Defend
us from All Perils and Dangers of This NIGHT. Ans. 2. By Day and Night (as by
Evening and Morning, Genesis i. 5, 8, etc.) in sensu Conjuncto, by a Hendiadis,
may be Meant a Natural Day of 24 Hours; Called also (...), 2 Cor. xi. 25. And
so the Sense will be, That Every 24 Hours, (or Every Day,) they Fail not Oft'n
to Rehearse the said Hymn.

Obj. 2. Neither is England Large enough, nor the Pers'ns, I mentioned as
Concerned in the Prophecy, of Eminent Regard enough (for Grandeur, Fame, or
Piety,) for the Spirit to Intend in This Admirable Vision. Ans. Then Ought it
to be shown, That I have either Misinterpreted, or Misappli'd the Words, or
some Considerable Part of them. For if, Without Either of These Faults, the
Words be Granted to be Well Adapted to a People, that was not Intended by the
Author; Whose Honor, pray, will That Reflect upon? Such Objections therefore
as These, that have No Foundation in the Prophecy, are Mere Prejudices. For,
Why is not the Church of England Large enough? Only because we Fancy so. For,
Where does the Prophecy Require, either a More Extensive Church, than This of
England, to be Fulfilled in? Or, more Eminent and Renowned Pers'ns (in their
several Stations) than were Queen Elizabeth, King James I. King Charles I. and
II. and (for an Elder) than Joseph Mede? But Particularly, as for King Charles
II. it is Plain, that He had Piety Enough, to Answer All His Part in the
Prediction, to the Full; and with That, let Every one, that pretends to Reas'n,
Rest Satisfied. For it cannot be Denied, but that King Charles II. with All his
Faults, was, in the Hands of CHRIST, a Noble Instrument of our Political
REDEMPTION. And if we think his Private Conversation to have been hardly
Suitable to That High Character; yet since, at the Same Time, we Cannot but
Confess the Prophecy to be Accomplished in him; give me leave to Remember you,
That God sometimes, in the Unsearchable Depths of his Wisdom and Justice, is
Found to have made, of the Chief Stones in his Edifice, Stones of Stumbling; at
which however, it Becomes not Us (nay, it is very Dangerons for us) to he
Offended. From which Danger we can only be Secure, in Taking our Measures from
the Word of God; and Not from our Own Delusive Fancies and Prej^dices. And, May
Our New Jerusalem, in This, take Warning by the Old one. For it is grown too
Plausible and Popular a Humor (because so well Attemper'd to Most Men's
Capacities, or Designs) to Vilify Prophetic Speculations, upon Affected
Ignorances, and Misappresions. Wherein we are not a little Uncharitable, upon
many Accounts. But Especially, in respect of Those, who Otherwise might be
Converted by them, from the Error of their ways. As, in Particular, in respect
of Non-Conformists, and Separatists; to whom it would be a Singular Piece of
Service, to have it Made-out Clearly to them, That the Church of England, By
Law Established, is the Church Predicted of in the Fourth and Fifth Chapters of
the Revelation: That they Perish not in their Dividing Practices, and
Unchristian Strifes, and Emulations. For Our Sectaries do More than cry, I am
of Paul, and I of Apollos, etc. And yet even That, is by the Apostle Termed
(...), Division, Sedition, Faction; Envying, or Emulation, Strife, Contention,
1 Cor. i. 11, 12. iii. 3, 4. and Said to be (in its Own Nature) Damnable, Gal.
v. 20, 21. Accordingly the Same Apostle lays a Grievious Curse upon Such
Makebates, 1 Cor. xvi. 22. If Any Man Love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him
be Anathema, Maran-atha. For he had most Earnestly Besought them, Chap. i. 10.
BY THE NAME OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, to Speak All the Same Thing; and that
there be No Divisions among them; but Perfect Concord, in the Same Mind, and in
the Same Judgment. With respect to which, in the end of the Same Epistle, (as
is said Already) he, in his Zeal for the Churches Unity, does Solemnly Denounce
Anathema, Maran-atha, upon all Those Pers'ns, with whom, for want of LOVE to
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, his Obtestation should prove Ineffectual.

I am not therefore of Their Mind, who give-out, That the Fomenters of
Unreas'nable Divisions, may be Saved: Grounding themselves upon 1 Cor. iii.
12,-15. For the Apostle does not say, (as They Imagine,) That the Builders of
Ill DOCTRINS shall be Saved; but, of III Pers'ns. For the Building he is There
Treating of, are Pers'ns. He Explains himself so, Expressly, ver. 9. YE are
God's Husbandry: YE (Pers'ns, Not Doctrines.) are God's Building. Agreeably in
the Next Verses, CHRIST (says he) is the Foundation. The Foundation therefore,
we see, and Whole Structure, are not Doctrines, but Pers'ns. Whereof Some are
Gold, and Some Stubble. But though the Stubble be Burnt, yet the Builder shall be
Saved; if he were not in Fault. But This, in Building of Dividing Errors,
(which is indeed, Destroying, or Pulling-Down, and Not, Building,) Cannot
Rightly be Affirmed. I am Sure S. Paul, in That Place, is very Far from So
Saying. Be Zealous therefore, Brethren, and Repent; and Join your selves, with
All Alacrity, to the Communion of That Heavenly Church, which, in the Fourth
and Fifth Chapters of the Revelation (and I might Add, the Tenth, and Many
More, as will Appear Hereafter,) is Adorned and Honored with So Glorious a
Testimony from the Spirit of Prophecy.

Lastly, Even such as will not Believe without a Sign from Heaven, might hence
Receive Incredible Satisfaction. For the Revelation, Set in its True Light, (as
Now it is,) What is it but A STANDING SIGN from Heaven, A PERMANENT and
PERPETUAL MIRACLE? For therein is Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory,
Conspicuously Revealed from Heaven, for Sixteen Hundred Years ago, to have set
in Order, the Grand Affairs, and Revolutions, of the most Considerable Parts of
His Empire in the World; from its Beginning, to our Own Times, Inclusively.
Which Considered, with What Conscience can any Man Deny the Being, or the
Providence of God? or, that the Scriptures are his Genuine Oracles? (among
which he finds the Revelation, to be So ((...),) Self-Evident, and to Carry the
Authority of the Others, Shining in it;) or Call in Question Any Point, or
Article (Especially of the Prime, and Fundamental ones) of Our Religion? For it
is not Possible to be Objected against the Revelation, (as was of Old, by
Porphyry, against Part of Daniel's Prophecy,) That it was Composed After the
Things were Done. Hieron. Praef. Com. in Dan. And yet it is as Plainly, and as
Fully Accomplished, as if it had been So Indeed; or, as if the Histories of More
than 1600 Years, had All been Writt'n Purposely, in Favor of a Prophecy but
Newly Understood; and yet in Every bodies Hands So Long Before.

And Can we make a Trivial Matter, Sirs, of Such Discoveries? Which are, in
True Esteem, the Glory of Christianity; and which, if Duly Cultivated, and
Improved, (as they both Might, and Ought to be,) would Equal the Condition of
Our Times, to That of the First Ages of the Church; as to the Certainty, that
we might Gain Thereby, of our Religion; and the Proof, they would enable us to
Make of it. And let No Man Here Cry-out upon the Strength of Imagination; till
he has Well Weighed the Assertion, and Knows himself Able to Confute it. For,
How Easily are the Mists of Fancy, Dispelled by the Light, and Warmth of Sound
Reas'n? For My Part, I am very Sensible ^ (I Bless God for it) That the Wisdom
of the Spirit, has So Contrived the Texture of This Prophecy, that a Foreign
Exposition of it may as Easily be Blown away, as a Loose Feather. A Lock, with
so Many Substantial Wards to it, is not to be Picked. Which is the True Cause,
that not One of the Admirers of H. Gr. or Dr. Hammond, has at Any time
Appeared, in Vindication of Their Expositions; they are so Manifestly, and so
Grossly Faulty. And so All Others Needs must be, that Err, (as They do) in the
Main Subject of the Vision. For a Conclusion therefore of this Paper, I
Heartily Commend it, to the Good Blessing of the Great God our Savior; To Whom
be All Glory for Ever. Amen.

LONDON Printed and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster.


