Noun chre theasathai. Euripid.

A DISCOURSE OF Artificial Beauty, In point of CONSCIENCE, BETWEEN TWO LADIES.
With some Satirical Censures on the Vulgar Errors of these Times.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane. M DC LXII.

THE PUBLISHER To the Ingenuous READER.
READER,
THIS Discourse (of which (as I am certainly informed) a Woman was not only
the chief occasion, but (the Author and Writer) coming to my hands, and seeming
to refer only to some ornamental toys, fitter for Ladies Cabinets and
fingers then for the rougher hands and severer eyes of this Martial Age, I had
almost condemned, upon the view of the Title, to eternal silence; partly out of
a Principle of Piety, as loath to add to the vanity of a very vain Age; but
chiefly out of a worser temper which I had of a long time contracted, by reason
of many popular prejudices and sinister censures, which had vehemently set me
against all things of Art used by any women, whereby to repair or advance the
quickness of their Complexions, or beauty of their Looks, beyond that portion
which God and Nature had given them. Not that I am a Cynical or Stoical enemy
to that softer Sex, (which tempers humane spirits and societies with so much
sweetness and civility:) but (I confess) I was so perfectly scandalized against
all Auxiliary Beauty (which applies any coloring or tincture to set off the
Face) that I condemned this piece (after the mode of vulgar and precipitant
Zeal) unread and unheard, to be burned, as Judah did Tamar, Genesis 38. 24.
concluding it to be the Essay of some wanton wit and idle pen, which was more a
parasite to Female fooleries and vanities, then a lover of pristine gravity and
sobriety.

Yet by a principle of innate Justice which I owe to Self-preservation, (making
me very loath to be hanged without a legal trial) I was secretly ashamed to
condemn it till I had made some examination of its guilt. Hence I ventured the
loss of so much time as to arraign and read it. Which act of high Justice
(before I had far advanced) taught me, to my great reproach and shame, how
unjust Judges, how cruel Tyrants Prejudice and Custom are, which condemn all
they disaffect, and disaffect before they understand, and are loath to
understand contrary to prepossessions; like Procrustes, either cropping or
stretching all new comers to the stinted measure of their wonted fancies and
opinions.

But not trusting to the Balance of my own judgment (which now began by a
secret charm to be strongly inclined to approve the whole Discourse, for its
manner Ingenuous, and for its design Innocent) I put it to the Test of two or
three severe Censors, persons of Socratick brows and Catonian looks, wholly
bred up in Academical Shades, and no way partial to the delights of Women.
These having at first (as I did) with very much coyness and prejudice begun to
peruse it, yet, upon sober and second views, they laid aside their ponderous
brows, and exchanging their terrible frowns for unaffected smiles, with joint
and liberal suffrages they assured me, That never any thing on so slight a
Subject was discoursed and written with more ingenuity and elegancy: That
although it undertook fairly to discuss things which were but skin-deep and
superficial; yet it brought them so home to a profound and notable case of
Conscience, that it could not justly be denied its weight and place among the
more serious Discourses of this Age, and the more meritorious pieces of that
Sex; having that in the Floridness, Candor, and Acuteness of its disputation,
which might more then compensate the seeming slightness and inconsiderableness
of the things disputed; endeavoring by a gentler kind of Piety and civiler
Sanctity (then were heretofore used in England) to reconcile Ladies
Countenances with their Consciences, which some either more rustic or rigid
spirits have (a long time) sought to keep at most deadly fewds and implacable
distances, condemning all women (without miraculous help) for ever to lie under
the burden and discountenance of either natural or accidental defects, not
allowing them to use the least relief, never so obvious in Nature, and not less
innocent then easy in Art.

The justice or injustice of which severities is here so soberly and
impartially considered, that I do not only look upon it as a noble Essay what
great wits can do in small matters; but (in good earnest) I esteem it a very
necessary debate in a case so much (they say) practiced by many women of
unspotted worth and honor, and yet so much censured as sinful and abominable
by others of very warm and commendable piety.

This Discourse (as an impartial glass) lets the world see what oppositions and
what solutions may be made in point of Conscience, as to any artificial helps
of handsomness; that accordingly every one may practice, either cheerfully and
discreetly using them as other innocent ornaments, if hereby satisfied of the
lawfulness, or wholly forbearing them if they find the Objections overweigh the
Answers. It is pity sober women should be denied such reliefs and advantages as
God's indulgence allows them: And it is a shame they should use them (though
never so privately and undiscernably) if God has in Scripture or Nature and
Conscience forbidden them.

Besides this great design of stating Ladies Consciences in a case so much
concerning their Faces and Looks (which they cannot but highly consider while
they see themselves, or appear to others) some (it may be) will be pleased (as
I was) at that generous freedom and civility in it, which dare encounter and
discuss so popular and prevalent an opinion as that is which (among us) denies
all Subsidies or aids to women's beauties or complexions.

Lastly, finding it was none of the most dangerous Problems which the audacious
liberty of these times has ventured upon, I conceived it might be as worthy of
sober persons leisure to read it, as of my pains to publish it. These three
motives, Conscience, Civility and Gain, meeting together, tempted me beyond all
resistance to make it what I am,

Ingenuous Reader, Yours to serve you.

The Objections contained in this Book.
OBject. 1. Against all Painting the Face as unlawful. P. 1. Object. 2.
Jezebel' s sad fate urged against all Painting the Face. p. 7. Object. 3. Other
places of Scripture urged against Painting the Face. p. 18. Object. 4. Urged
against all superfluous Ornaments of women, and so against Painting. p. 33.
Object. 5. Painting the Face against the Seventh Commandment forbidding all
Adultery. p. 44. Object. 6. Painting the Face argues an heart unsatisfied with
God's works and disposings, Jam. 4. 7. p. 66. Object. 7. Painting the Face a
badge of Vanity and appearance of evil. p. 101. Object. 8. Painting the Face a
mark of Pride, Arrogance and Hypocrisy. p. 126. Object. 9. The Fathers and
modern Divines much against all Painting the Face. p. 138. Object. 10. Painting
the Face very scandalous, and so unlawful. p. 178. Object. 11. Painting the
Face a thing of ill* report, and so not to be followed. p. 194. Object. 12.
Painting the Face unlawful, because doubtful at best, and not of faith. p. 228.
Object. 13. Of Peter Martyr against Painting the Face, from many Scripture
instances. p. 247. The moderate and charitable Conclusion of the Dispute. p.
258.
Eccles. 9. 8. Let thy garments always be white, and let thy head lack no
ointment.
Prove. 31. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that
fears the Lord she shall be praised.
A DISCOURSE OF Artificial Handsomness, In point of CONSCIENCE, between two
Ladies.
OBJECTION I. Against all Painting the Face, as unlawful.
MADAM,
I Am not more pleased to see you look so well beyond what you were wont, then
I am jealous (to be free with you) lest a person so esteemed as you are for
modesty and piety, should use some color or tincture to advance your
Complexion; which indeed I take to be no better then that odious and infamous
way of Painting, every where in all ages so much and so justly spoken against,
both by God and good men; being a most ungodly practice, though generally (as
they say) now used in England (more or less) by persons of quality, who not
content with Natures stock of Beauty, do (not by a fine, but filthy, art) add
something to the advantage, as they think, of their Complexions; but I fear, to
the deforming of their Souls, and defiling of their Consciences.

ANSWER.
I Do not only approve your Ladyships friendly freedom, but I take it as some
degree of special favor that you speak your thoughts to my face, and not after
the secret censurings or backbiting whispers of some, who (less able to
confute what they blame, then to justify what they suspect) arraign before the
rash Tribunal of their judgments every face whose handsomness they either
envy, if natural, or grievously reproach, if they think it has any thing
artificial beyond what themselves are wonted to or acquainted with; who (yet)
in other things do as much contend against the defects, deformities and decaies
of nature and age, as may be, by washings, anointings and plasterings, by many
secret medicaments and close receipts, which may either fill and plump their
skins, if flat and wrinkled, or smooth and polish them, if rugged and chapt, or
clear and brighten them, if tanned and freckled: only in the point of color
or tinctures added in the least kind or degree they are not more scrupulous
then censorious; as if every one that used these had forsaken Christ's banner,
and now fought under the Devil's colors.

Your Nobleness (Madam) is more just and civil, in giving me opportunity to
answer for my self, that either I may confess and forsake what you suspect, if
you convince me of the evil of it; or continue with a good conscience to do
what you are jealous of, if I can assert it to be lawful and good.

First then, if I should deny what your Ladyship suspects, it would be very
hard to prove it; since what you fancy as additional, is not beyond the
ordinary proportion of what is natural to my age and complexion. Besides, the
looks (you know) of our Sex, as to paleness or redness, admit as many changes
as the Moon, by natural variations; which are many times in women not more
sudden, then much to their injury or advantage: So impertinent must they needs
be, whose eyes are overcurious to find fault at Art there where they have no
cause but to commend Nature, unless they were made women's Confessors, which I
believe few are in this case; so that they must needs blame most-what rashly,
and often unjustly, because they only guess uncertainly.

But because I perceive your Ladyship has a great zeal in this particular,
(which I must interpret a commendable and Christian tenderness against any
thing suspected for Sin, which cannot be small to a gainsaying conscience,
whose eye will not endure the least mote any more then the heart can the least
wound) I will deal so liberally with your Ladyship as to grant you this
supposal, whereupon to fix any discourse which may (as you think) batter down
with a mighty Engine all auxiliary Beauty or additional Handsomness.

And truly it is not my fear, but my request to you, (of whose pious abilities
the world has a great and just account) that your Ladyship would let me see,
by rational and clear arguings, what you have against it, beyond those vulgar
flashes and easy flourishes of some great sticklers and declaimers against all
such female arts; (to which I have been much wonted) who with shame and folly,
as Solomon says, (even Prove. 18. 13.
sometimes in the Pulpit as well as in the Press) resolve of matters of sin and
cases of Conscience, before they consider or understand them, calling for fire
Luke 9. 54.
from Heaven upon all they dislike, as the Disciples did, without ever advising
with Christ: which confidence has made many well-meaning people very much
startle at and condemn all such complexionary adornings, as if they impudently
outfaced God and man, as if they fought with an high hand and brazen forehead
against Reason and Religion, Nature and Grace, Humanity and Christianity. After
this rate of bold Oratory many women have been more scared then convinced, more
distracted with scruples and terrors then satisfied with truth, as to the
nature of many things pretended to be sins and violations of Conscience; which
must be measured not by the bulk, but weight, not the noise, but force of men's
words: It Is not the cry, but the fleece, which sober persons regard.

But I will in this rather suspect at present my own incapacity, then any want
of solidity or charity in the Sermons and censures of so many as bitterly
inveigh against all Artificial Beauty; hoping to learn from your Ladyship what
may, upon just grounds, make me subscribe to their and your severities in this
point: Though, I confess, after some diligent search into other books, and
chiefly the holy Scriptures, I am as yet so remiss and charitable in my censure
of those little artifices used by many sober persons, that, as I will not
undertake to justify all those that use them, so nor dare I condemn all who
may use and do the same things with far different minds and to very distant
ends.

OBjECTION II. Jezebel's sad fate urged against all Painting the Face.
TRuly, Madam, I absolutely think (without any mincing or distinction) all
color or complexion added to our skins or faces, beyond what is purely
natural, to be a sin, as being flatly against the Word of God; which I suppose
you grant to be the indispensable and unchangeable Rule of all moral Holiness,
from which we may not warp in the least degree upon any pretensions to advance
our Honors, Estates, Healths, or Beauties.

First then, if your Ladyship look into 2 Kings 9. 30. you shall see wicked
Jezebel, though a Queen, yet not tolerated or excused, but foully branded and
heavily punished, for painting her eyes or face: for which she was afterward,
by a most deformed destiny, justly devoured of dogs; as the most Reverend Lord
Primate of Armagh observes in his larger Catechism upon the 7th Command.

Which fearful stroke of divine vengeance, and censure of so Learned and Pious
a person, (making that her painting a most meritorious and principal cause of
her so sad destiny) are sufficient, I think, to scare the most adventurous
woman from any such sinful and accursed practice.

ANSWER.
MAdam, as I allow your Rule, the Word of God, which is the only balance of the
Sanctuary where sins are to be weighed; so I am not ignorant of that story to
which your Ladyship (as all others in this dispute) does much refer: nor am I
a stranger to that gloss or observation thence made against all painting or
tincturing of the face by that most worthy Prelate, with whose so quick and
sharp a stroke I was (at first reading that passage) so startled, that I had no
rest, till I advised with another person of great judgment and sober piety,
who made it clear to me, That that excellent Bishop, however then he thought
fit (after the wonted oratory and freedom of some of the Fathers) to make a
popular pass or stroke of his potent pen against what he might suspect to be
then much used, and abused too, in the English world; yet (for certain) he was
too wise and judicious a Divine, to fix that signal and heavy judgment of God
only, or chiefly, (or indeed at all) upon Jezebel's painting, which was an
after-act, and as to that time or instant in the story, comes at least 14.
years behind that dreadful doom which was by the Prophet Elisha foretold upon
the score of Naboth's blood unjustly shed, and his inheritance cruelly usurped;
which is 1 Kings 21. 23. So 1 Kings 21. 23.
that her painting her eyes or face, mentioned in the place you urge, is indeed
(among other occasional circumstances) recorded, but to a far different end
or use, then either to lay the weight of the subsequent punishment, or the
guilt of any sin, upon that act more then upon the other concomitant actions
therewith recited.

Among which this of her painting is indeed set down chiefly, to show, That no
advantages of outward Beanty, natural or artificial, (though set off with the
curiosity and Majesty of a Queen) are sufficient to make any person the object
of either love or pity, where foul and enormous sins have so debased and
deformed their Souls to God, as Murder, Idolatry and Oppression had done
Jezebel's; for which sins (as is expressly said) that Tragedy befell her (which
was foretold long before she is brought in so dressed and adorned.) Which
thunderbolt of God's vengeance she in vain sought to disarm or avoid by using
any charms, attractives or lenitives of outward beauty, if that were her
design: which truly is not very probable, at her years; and toward Jehu, a
declared enemy. Nor do indeed the actions of Jezebel signify (as that gentleman
tole me) any amorous intention whereby to allure Jehu; since her words reproach
him with so just and bitter a Sarcasme as that is, Had Zimri peace who stew his
master?

So that Jezebel at this time seems rather resolved not so much to court, as to
scorn, Jehu, disdaining to deprecate her ruin, or owe her life to such an
enemy: and therefore she puts her self into a posture of Majesty; as showing
that height and greatness of Mind, which could own her self in the pomp and
splendour of a Princess, even then when she expected her enemy and her end; that
she might at least perish (as she thought) with the more reputation of a comely
person and undaunted spirit, which abhorred to humble and abase it self, after
the manner of fearful and squalid suppliants, in sackcloth, or to abate any of
those accustomed ornaments with which she used (as a Queen) to entertain her
self in her prosperity.

So that my learned friend concluded (in my opinion very rationally) that the
Lord Primate's inference (for which she was justly eaten up by dogs) may no
more be applied to this particular of Jezebel's painting her eyes or face, then
to her adorning or dressing of her head, or her looking out of a window, or her
speaking such words as she did to Jehu's face: all which are recorded in the
same story, immediately before her precipitate ruin. Which actions in
themselves cannot be branded for sins, nor are they noted there for such,
further then they may be relatively considered as to the mind and end of the
doer or speaker, whereby to gratify pride, passion, or any other wickedness.
And in this respective consideration, not only Jezebel's painting and
dressing, but her very eating and drinking, her sleeping and clothing, her
native strength and beauty, her civil honor and power might be relatively sins;
as the Scripture tells us, the plowing of the wicked is sin, and his Prove. 21.
4. Prove. 28. 9.
praying is abomination; so his prosperity becomes a snare, and his plenty a
poison to his Soul, when the good gifts and creatures of a good God are by evil
minds perverted to be weapons of unrighteousness, and instruments of sin, to
satisfy those lusts, whose inordinateness, 1 Pet. 2. 11.
and not their desire, fights against God and the Soul.

So then your Ladyship cannot be so blind, as not to see that the bare
historical narration of Jezebel's painting her eyes, among other actions,
(which you confess to be innocent in themselves, and whereof you make no
scruple) if it did refer to any wanton design (which is very unlikely at that
time, in a Queen whose proud and violent spirit might (now) justly be carried
away with other passions and transports then those of Lust,) yet it does no way
argue or import the use of that or other things therewith mentioned to be in
themselves any sins to all that then did, or after should, use the like
applications, words or actions, out of far different minds, and to far
different ends; which are beyond all dispute the proper grounds and rules of
all moral denominations as to good or evil, in those mediate actions, agents
and instruments, whose freedom in nature falls not under any special restraint
of God's command, forbidding them by any positive Law: (as he did many things
in point of food, clothes, fashions, and other civil actions among the Jews.)

It is a gross mistake in Architecture, to think that every small stud bears
the main stress and burden of the building, which lies (indeed) upon the
principal timbers: And it is an horrible wresting of Scripture, to make every
recited circumstance in any place to bear the whole weight of the story and
event.

You cannot think that Dives went Luke 16. 19.
to hell only because he was a rich man clothed in purple and fine linen, and
faring deliciously or sumptuously every day; all which things many persons of
as good as great quality, of no less virtue and piety then honor and estate,
daily enjoy without any blame. Nor was it Lazarus his poverty and dunghill, or
his sores and the charitable tongues of the dogs, that brought him to heaven.
The luxury, pride, and uncharitableness of the one; the patience, humility, and
sanctity of the other, made that grand discrimination of their fates.

Nor may your Ladyship think, that the beheading of John Baptist is any Matthew.
14.
valid argument (however it be popularly used by some) against all Dancing, as
if it were absolutely evil and unlawful in it self; not only mixed of both
sexes, but alone and single, as that of Herodias was, who is said (there) to
have danced, not with, but before Herod and the company, (which yet I know your
Ladyship and other sober persons, not only use themselves, but also approve,
as to the breeding and behavior of their children.) That sad event (which is
odiously, but fallaciously, laid to the charge of Dancing) was the proper
effect not of the orderly motions of Herodias her feet, but of the inordinate
strokes of her affections; her wanton pride and impious despite against not so
much the person as the doctrine of that holy man, who never reproved (that we
read) hers or others Dancing, (as to the civil custom of the Country or
Court) but her adulterous compliances with Herod's lust: John was not a
stumbling block to her feet, but an eyesore to her eyes, and a corrosive to
her ears, by his chaste monitions and holy severities.

So Herod's sudden crumbling into Acts 12. 22.
worms, may be justly urged against the pride and arrogance of any mortal in
God's sight: but it is misapplied against the purple, Thrones and orations of
Princes. In like sort I believe Jezebel's painting, and otherways dressing or
adorning her self, set down in that place, to be no more prejudice in point of
sin, against a sober, modest and ingenuous use of those things, then Leah's
bargaining with Rachel for her sons Genesis 30. 15.
mandrakes was any charm or cause of her conceiving that night with child by
her hired husband.

If all that Jezebel, or other notorious sinners mentioned in Scripture, did at
any time, in order to accomplish any evil design, is therefore to be branded
and avoided as a sin, we may not call a solemn assembly or keep a fast, because
Jezebel did both, in order to palliate 1 Kings 21. 9.
with shows of Justice and prefacings of Religion her detestable murder and
dis-inherison of Naboth. Nor may we use fair words and affable gestures,
because Absalom's ambition did 2 Samuel 15.
abuse those popular arts. We must not kiss or embrace a friend, because Joab
did so when he basely killed both Abner and Amasa; as also Judas did when he
betrayed Christ: nay staves, and lanthorns, and torches must not be Joh. 18. 3.
used, because they sometime waited upon that ungrateful Traitor. We may not
weep, because Ismael's treachery did Jer. 41. 6.
so when he intended to slay Gedaliah. In all which cases the designs were
apparently wicked and base; yet are not all those concomitant actions such,
much less these here recorded of Jezebel: whose aim (certainly) was not any
allurement, but a defiance and affront to Jehu, showing how little she was
terrified by his presence, power, and success, at which she appeared neither
dejected nor deformed, after the manner of those squalid suppliants, who poorly
and pitifully stoop below themselves to beg their lives; which she scorned to
do, by any the least diminution or abatement of her wonted grandeur, glory, or
splendor. As the mentioned circumstances receive no credit or honor by
Jezebel's name, so nor any disparagement, since different minds make the
difference of manners: Nor is it strange for the wicked to do the same things
that worthy persons do to diverse ends.

OBJECTION III. Other places of Scripture urged against painting the Face.
BUT Painting the face (good Madam) is mentioned in two other places of
Scripture, as the practice of lewd and wicked women, and justly falling not
only under the reproach of the Prophet and all holy men, but under God's
dislike and displeasure, who not only abhorres to see the deformities of our
hearts, but also of our looks and outsides, when they are altered by any art
from what God and nature have made them, whose works must needs be best, and
beyond man's amendment. You see Ezekiel. 23. 40. how with Ezekiel. 23. 40.
a sacred taunt and irony the Spirit of God reproves the Jewish Church in her
lewdness and Apostasy: Lo, they come for whom thou did wash thy self,
paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thy self with ornaments, and satest in a
stately bed, with a table prepared before it. So Jer. 4. 30. Though thou
clothest thy self Jer. 4. 30.
with crimson, and deckest thy self with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest
thine eyes (or face) with painting; in vain shall thou make thy self fair, etc.

By which expressions, alluding to the customs of those times, the Lord seems
extremely to blame and abhor those practices there mentioned, among which
that of painting is expressed.

ANSWER.
IF these places be all the strength your Ladyship can produce from Scripture
against any coloring of the face, or helping of the complexion, because this,
as other usual ways of comely, curious or stately adornings, are there
mentioned as the practices of wanton and imperious women; yet your Ladyship
will not hence conclude, That only such women did then use those things, who
are always so cunning, as not to render themselves notorious by any such
outward differences from grave and sober women (as they say the common
curtisans of Rome are commanded to do, for distinction sake:) but rather you
must conclude, That wanton women did cast themselves into the same outward
mould or civil garb and fashion wherein persons of honor and good repute
appeared, not with more beauty, state or comeliness, then with chastity,
gravity and virtue. For sin is generally so apishly crafty, as to hide it self
under the colors and masks of goodness and honesty; as well knowing that it is
not only deformed, but very fulsome, if it appear impudently like it self.

Besides, if your Ladyship thinks the sharp style of that place strikes so
severely against all painting and complexioning as a sin, why may you not also
by the same severity destroy and disallow all other things there expressed in
that same tone and tenor? as dressing and decking your self with any costly
and comely ornaments, all sweet perfumes, all sitting on rich and stately beds,
with tables before them, etc. From all which I do not find your Ladyship or
others do abstain, either as to your persons or your houses; who yet with great
eagerness single out and hunt to death that one particular there mentioned, of
painting the face, which seems to have no worser marks on it then the rest of
the herd or company, which you are content to spare and preserve for your use.

But (Madam) it is unworthy of your candor and discretion thus to rack and
disjoint Scriptures, whose sense for the most part is not to be taken in the
broken parts and severed or distracted limbs, but in the juncture and
intireness of the whole discourse, which shows the scope and design of the
Spirit of God; which is not either to condemn or commend every particular
mentioned in the procedure of any place, where yet the main design is to
commend or condemn something there eminently proposed, and chiefly aimed at.

We read our Savior Christ commending the providence and self-preservation
Luke 16. 8.
of the unjust steward; but not his falsity and injustice: which yet is there
brought in as the fraudulent method of this worldly wisdom and forecast. So
Jacob by his mothers Genesis 27.
craft and imposture obtained the blessing from his cheated and aged father
beyond any revocation; yet the sinister arts there used are not to be imitated
or approved, however the desire of a paternal blessing (which was then solemn
and Sacramental) might be as commendable in him, as the undervaluing of it was
a profane temper in Esau. If commendable ends do not justify Romans 3. 8.
evil means in any, no more may evil ends in some blemish the use of lawful and
permitted things in others, who apply them to sober and good ends.

These places are very general and loose arguments to condemn all ingenuous
arts and helps of handsomness, either to the face and other parts of the body,
or to the adorning of civil state and Majesty. Nor do they any way amount to so
much as a positive Law, either Ceremonial or Political, such as those were
against linsi-woolsie garments, Levit. 19. Levit. 11.
sowing with diverse seeds, abstaining from swines flesh, and other beasts,
birds, or fishes, which yet in their nature are not unclean or unlawful. Acts
10. 15.


How much less can your Ladyship or any other, by the Chemistry of your wits,
extract from these places any drop or quintessence of a moral command, which
shall be ever binding to the Conscience, as from sin?

Truly, I cannot but believe that the most holy God, who has not been wanting
to reveal his whole will to his Church in his written Word, so far as is
necessary for faith and good manners, who even in very small matters gave an
express law to the Jews in things less pleasing to him, not in their nature,
but in their use or significancy among the Jews, such as were, the not cutting
the corners of Lev. 19. 27. Deu. 14. 21.
their heads and beards, the not seething a kid in its mothers milk, the not
cutting 20. 19.
down fruit trees in a siege, the not 22. 6.
taking the old bird with the young, she not leaving their excrements
uncovered, 23. 13.
etc. I cannot (I say) but believe that this gracious God would either in the
Old or New Testament have positively and expressly forbidden all such
additionals to Beauty, or helps to handsomness, both as to the face and other
parts of the body, if they had been in the use and nature of the things as
abominable to him as Idolatry, Theft, Lying, Murder and Adultery; which some
men have passionately, but very impotently, pretended.

Certainly his goodness would not in a case of sin, and so high a sin as some
clamor this to be, have only made such oblique and general reflections upon it
in this and other places, not as a thing any where forbidden, but only as a
general custom, used by many, and abused by some; not perstringing the nature
of that more then other things there mentioned, but only setting forth how
far vain and vicious minds were prone to abuse those things to God's
displeasure, which virtuous minds (no doubt) did according to the modes and
civil customs of the times and places use soberly, without any offense to God
or man.

Who doubts but Queen Esther, a Est. 2. 12.
devout and gracious woman, might lawfully use, as we read she did, all those
purifications appointed her? that she applied to her advantage all the
attractives of sweet unguents and perfumes, of costly raiment and beaitiful
colors, of rich and accurate dressings or lovely adornings, such as were usual
to the Persian delicacy, softness and luxury, hereby to win and confirm more
the Kings affection and sensual love to her? Her using all these was so far
from being her sin, that it had been so far a sin not to use them, as she had
rather tempted God then pleased him, by neglecting to use those means which
might (most probably) in ordinary providence conduce to those great and good
ends which her holy, chaste and charitable heart intended to God's glory and
the Churches good.

We read Rebekah (in the primitive Genesis 24. 30.
plainness and shepherdly simplicity of those times) accepted bracelets and
other ornaments to be put on her arms, neck and ears, without any
disparagement to her Virgin-modesty: so Solomon's chief wife and Queen,
Pharaoh's Psa. 45. 9.
daughter, turning proselyte, is brought in as a type of the Church of the
Gentiles espoused to Christ, and adorned with all princely riches and costly
curiosities, that the king might take pleasure in her beauty.

That good and lawful things, both in Nature and Art, have been and daily are
abused by evil minds to evil ends, is no doubt or wonder, since wherever God
has his hand, the devil seeks to set his foot: and in that sense or aspect
both the things themselves, and the abusive use of them, may be branded with
marks of God's dislike. But this rather justifies and approves the sober and
honest use of them, as the right end of God's creation and donation for man's
use. Our Lord Jesus bidding us beware lest our hearts Luke 21. 34.
be overcharged with eating and drinking, and his Apostle forbidding us wine
wherein is excess, also unlawful dalliances in chambering and wantonness; Romans
13. 13.
yet they do not hereby deny the lawful and loving sportings of Isaac with Genesis
26. 8. Prove. 5. 18.
Rebekah, or the rejoycings with the wife of ones youth, or the moderate use of
meats and drinks, even to a festival mirth and satiety of wine; which Christ's
presence and bounty at a wedding John 2.
feast, supplying, by a miracle, great quantities of excellent and inviting
wines, (after men had well drunk) to an holy superfluity, do sufficiently
vindicate, as allowed to Christians, notwithstanding the morose and cynical
severity of some spirits.

The Jews are indeed blamed for Isa. 22. 13.
their unseasonable gluttony and Epicurean profaneness, under the reproaches of
joy and gladness, slaying of oxen, killing of sheep, eating of flesh, drinking
of wine, and singing to the viol; Which iniquity (says God) shall not be
purged from them till they die. Yet were not V. 14.
these things in themselves unlawful, but therefore evil because unseasonable,
and used by unsanctified and impenitent hearts, then when God called for
fasting and mourning, for sackcloth and ashes: which outward forms and signs of
penitence and humility there required, are yet otherwhere taxed and highly
blamed, when they were but the masks and visards of hypocrisy; as in Ahab and
other Jews. Isa. 58. 3, 4, 5.


If we should therefore think all things unlawful to be used because they have
been, or are abused, (which is a most pitiful piece of vulgar sophistry and
superstitious fear) the devils and wicked men's encroachments would wholly
abridge us of all God's bounty and Christian liberty. How have the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, yea almost every creature on which are any remarkable characters
of the Creatours goodness and glory (in their beauty and usefulness) how (I
say) have they been ravished and abused by Idolatry or other sensual excesses?
Yet must not wise and good men be therefore wholly divorced or estranged from
them; which were as fond and irrational a part of superstition, as to forbear
to eat beef and veal, or their sawces, garlic and onions, because the
Egyptians worshipped the Ox and those herbs, as the Jews did their golden Calf
after that example. Upon this principle all must abstain from marrying, because
some husbands and wives have adulterously profaned that holy covenant, and
broke Mal. 2. 14.
the vow of God which was upon them.

We shall never be able to reconcile the clashings and diversities of the
Scripture style and expressions, sometime complaining of, otherwhile commending
the same things, unless we distinguish of the same things in their several uses
and abuses, as it were into their cross and pile, their day and night,
according as the mind of the user or abuser either lightens or darkens them.

For you cannot but read in Ezekiel Ezekiel. 16. 9, 10, 11, 12.
that God (on the other side) sets forth his transcendent favor and bounty to
the Church of the Jews under all those names and notions, by which either a
fond parent or an amorous suitor are wonted to express their loves to any
daughter, or spouse and mistress; by bestowing on them all the accomplishments
and treasures of amorous delicacy, as sweet washings, anointings, clothings
with embroidery, silk, fine linen, forehead Jewels, earrings, bracelets,
neck-lace, crown, works of gold and silver, precious in nature, (at least in
humane esteem) and rare for art or workmanship: by all which additional
beauties provision was made to hide deformities, supply defects, and set off
the comeliness as of other parts of the body, so of the Face also:

Which is the chief Theater, Throne and Center of Beauty, to which all outward
array is subservient; every part of the body studying as it were to pay (by
adorning it self to its best advantage) some tribute of comeliness as an homage
to the face: which is not only the Queen and sovereign of humane and visible
Beauty, but the Regent and directrix of the whole bodies culture, motion, and
welfare.

In that place then of Ezekiel, your Ladyship sees the rich Cabinet of feminine
ornaments and additionals of Beauty set forth as the fruit of divine
munificence, and this under the Character or test of God's approbation; who as
he has made all these things (both for their substance and accidents, their
matter and their forms, their mass and their colors) good in their nature or
kind; so, as to their use, he has fitted mankind with invention, knowledge,
fancy, skill, curiosity and art, many ways to apply and improve them: which is
also a good gift of God, and peculiar to mankind, unto whom God has thus
manifested, both by nature and art, his special love and indulgence, inviting
them by an holy use of his bounty to praise and serve him, as his children,
with all faithfulness and cheerfulness, even in this valley of mortality, which
is the Churches continual infancy, and a Christians momentary minority.

Nor do we find the Jewish Church blamed there, or elsewhere, for using and
enjoying all these divine donations, even to the renown of her comeliness, and
to a perfection of Beauty; but only for that self-pride and pomp which drew
her to trust in her riches and comeliness, so as to seek other lovers, and play
the harlot against God.

OBjECTION IV. Urged against all superfluous ornaments of women, and so against
Painting.
BUT we read the same God, in the third of Isaiah, with displeasure reckoning
up those many arts and instruments of dressing and adorning, which either
ingenuity and civility, or delicacy and luxury had found out, and fashionably
used, to gratify the curiosity, pride and petulancy of the women of Jerusalem,
only with those additional ornaments which do not pretend to be natural, as
all paint and complexioning does; wherewith we may very well conclude God is
much more displeased, then he is with any of those things which were but
professedly artificial additaments to nature, and not counterfeits of nature.

ANSWER.
IF the Lord had a greater displeasure against the use of any coloring or
complexioning of the face or skin, it is strange that it is not expressed in
this place, which is the Bill of women's ornaments, (and with some special note
of dislike) when in all probability the women of Jerusalem did as much use that
as any other thing, as more nearly contributing to their Beauty; which appears
by those other places you formerly alleged. So little reason you have to
suppose it more offensive then those other things here mentioned, that I may
better argue, It is not at all offensive in it self, because not at all here
expressed, where you think God purposely and particularly quarrels with all
things that were offensive in feminine curiosity: this of complexioning being
therefore not mentioned, because it may be used by many as an help of
infirmity, without any pride or vanity.

But I will not make any advantage of God's silence in this particular, but
rather answer with more certainty, That God in this place enumerates all those
particulars, not as absolutely finding fault with or forbidding the use of
them, but as reproaching the ungrateful pride and abuse of them in those to
whom he had indulged so many superfluities. Therefore the Lord, to prevent any
mistake, first gives the account of his displeasure, verse 16. Because the
daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched-forth necks, and wanton
eyes, etc.

Therefore, that is for their haughtiness and abusing of God's bounty in nature
and art, he threatens to punish them by depriving them of those things, as he
does otherwhere of his Hos. 2. 9.
corn, wine, flax, and oil; which the divine indulgence had afforded, not to
pamper wanton and proud minds to rebel against God, but to serve either natural
necessities, or civil conveniences, or ingenuous delights, or modest
decencies, or honorable state, as befitted mankind in their sociable, orderly
and religious living, to their own content, to others benefit, and to the
Creators glory.

God would not have threatened to deprive those women of all those things if
they had been evil or poisonous in themselves; for then it had been a mercy to
take them quite away, and a punishment to have continued them. Nor is the
menace of stripping them of all those ornaments in order to scare them wholly
from the use of them (which are otherwhere, as I showed you, allowed) but to
teach them how to prize and use them with more humility and modest piety, as
things appointed to far better uses then to serve sensual, impudent and
impious either minds or ends. God asserts his right in all these (even so small
bagatellos or toys comparatively) that we may learn to take heed not to
misapply these, or any other the least of God's creatures, to perverse and
sinister ends, of which a sober and good use may be made to God's glory as well
as our own delight and content, while we own him in all, and bless him for all,
even the least help and ornament of life.

It is an undoubted Maxim both in Reason and Religion, That the Devils or
wicked Men's usurpation is no prejudice to God's dominion or donation, nor to
that right use and end of all things which he has granted to mankind
throughout the whole latitude and empire of his visible works. If all things
are therefore vain, sinful and unlawful which vain and wicked minds have or do
abuse, what I pray will there be left for sober and virtuous persons to use or
enjoy? They must neither eat, nor drink, nor clothe, nor dress themselves to
any decency, sweetness, costliness, or delight. Tamar an harlot will dress her
self with a vail of modesty, as well as chaste Genesis 38. 14. Prove. 7.
Rebekah. The wanton and cunning woman, whom Solomon describes so to the life,
decketh her self to all extern advantages, applies with all amorous
civilities, perfumeth her bed and chamber, pretends great love, offers her
holy festivities and peace offerings; at last wipeth her mouth with great
demureness and sobriety: Yet may we not think all these actions are hereby made
scandalous and unlawful to sober women, to chaste and loving wives. We may as
well forbid the use of a staff and a signet to honest men, because Judah in
his Genesis 38.
blind and extravagant desires pawns them as pledges of his love to a woman
whom he took and used as an harlot, not common, but incestuous.

Youth, Riches, Honor, Beauty, Strength, Policy and Eloquence might be all
arraigned and condemned before such unjust and unjudicious Judges, who would
cry down all use of things because of some abuses, which flow not from the
nature of the things abused, which are good, but from the malice of the persons
or minds abusing that native good which God diffused to every creature.

Nabal's churlish Covetousness, Absalom's beautiful Rebellion, Achitophel's
politic Treachery, Joab's valiant Cruelty, Jehu's zealous Ambition, Tertullus
his eloquent Malice, are all carried upon the wings or wheels of God's gifts
and framing. Who sees not that the corrupt hearts of men often turn God's streams
to drive the devils mill? What Truth so glorious which has not been sometime
sullied and eclipsed by the smoke of the bottomless pit, the prejudices or
scandalous imputations of some black or foul mouths? On the other side, what
Error is so rotten and putrid which some Oratorious varnish has not sought to
color over with shows of Truth and Piety? It is a great part of calm and sober
wisdom to resolve all things into their rational and pure principles, of which
this is one, That whatever is in nature, is good in its kind; That the goodness
of all things in nature is reducible to a good end in Reason and Religion; That
no person is abridged in a right and holy use of things by another abuse of
them; That the just use of things may be restrained, though the abuse calls for
reformation, and the excess for moderation; That since God does not annihilate
what he has made (as all) good in nature because of man's abuse of things, no
more have we any cause to annul or deny our sober use of any thing for others
petulancy and abuse: What things vice or vanity are most prone to usurp, as to
the most sweet, fair and inviting delights of life, no doubt virtue and modesty
may lawfully challenge, and vindicate to their propriety.

We must not pull out our Eyes, because some men's and women's are, as S. Peter
says, full of adultery; not 2 Pet. 2. 14.
think Sight and Light unlawful to be enjoyed, because some employ them only to
objects of sin and vanity: But we must the more cautiously set holy bounds to
all our thoughts, desires and actions, which may have their occasion and fuel
from the ministry of the Eyes, but their kindling and flames are from the
inward inordinacy of the Heart, where sin is (as our Savior tells Mar. 7. 21.
us) first conceived and brought forth, before it is nourished, suckled, or
swadled in the gifts of God, either natural or artificial. Heal that root and
fountain, there is no doubt but the branches or streams flowing either from or
to will soon be pure and healthful. Whatever God's indulgence offers us in art
or nature, ought to put us in mind to ask that grace of God the giver, which
may give us the right use of all his sensible gifts, so as not to hinder us of
his spiritual and eternal gifts.

Thus have I (good Madam) with all plainness, freedom and integrity, furthest
from any thing of fallacy and sophistry, answered as I could what you were
pleased to urge from Scripture-instances, which obviously mention painting or
coloring the eyes, among other customary ornaments of those times and places,
but with no token of God's dislike as to that particular, more then of other
wonted adornings of the head, face, and the rest of the body, whereof your
Ladyship makes no scruple, as to any sin: So that whatever frown may seem to be
in the face of the words, does fall only on the abuse of that, as other things,
to sinful excesses and inordinate satisfactions, beyond the bounds of civility,
modesty and honesty. But this does not amount to the force of any positive
command forbidding the use of that and other helps to handsomness: nor does it
import any dislike of outward comeliness when joined with humility and
holiness, conform to the divine mind, or will; which must be the only
touchstone of sin, and test of Conscience, wherein no great curiosity is
necessary to discern God's meaning as to things importing sin or duty.

Which are (I think) always set forth in the holy Scriptures, not by dubious
reflections, oblique and obscure intimations, but by such clear direct precepts,
and authoritative sanctions, (in some place or other) as becomes the majesty of
the King of heaven, and is most proportionate to the dimness and infirmity of
humane understanding; who shall never be charged for that as a sin, which he
could not either by innate principles of moral light or by Scripture-prescripts
evidently see to be such. Nor is there almost any thing of gross impiety which
does not discover to us its offensiveness against God by that check, regret,
and disgust which it often gives to our selves either before, in, or after the
sin done: which I believe this never did or does to any modest and judicious
users of it, unless they be more scared and guided by the ignis fatuus of
popular superstition then the clear and constant light of true Religion, which
moves not by Fancy and Opinion, (as Puppets do with gimmers) but by Reason and
divine revelation, as the Body does by its living Soul.

OBJECTION V. Painting the Face against the Seventh Commandment forbidding all
Adultery.
BUT, Madam, I have been informed by some Divines and other godly Christians,
that all painting the face, or adding to our handsomness in point of
Complexion, is directly against the 7th Commandment, which forbidding to commit
adultery with others, as the highest ascent or degree of sin in that kind, does
also forbid all Means and occasions, either necessarily tending to, or
studiously intending, that evil End; all leading others, or exposing our selves
into Temptations of Amorous solly, by adding to our comeliness then, when
either God in our formation, or age and infirmity, have brought us as it were
into the safer harbor or retreat of deformity, either natural or accidental.
What folly is it to seek to rig up our crazy vessel, or to expose our selves by
art on new hazards, by putting out again to that tempestuous and (often)
naufragous Sea, wherein youth and handsomness are commonly tossed with no less
hazard to the body and Soul too, then S. Paul's voyage was to Acts 27.
the lives of himself and his company? What true-hearted Israelite would have
returned back to Egypt, when God had brought them out into the wilderness,
whose barrenness was compensated with Safety and God's society; as Egypt's
plenty was corrupted with Servility, Luxury and Idolatry? Deformities may be as
great blessings to our Souls, as bolts and bars are to our Houses; which keep
thieves not only from rifling, but from attempting those that are thus
fortified with lessinviting looks.

Besides, if all Adultery and adulterating arts (as injurious to others) by the
rule of equity and charity are forbidden to us, how much more any such plots
and practices as tend to a Self-adulterating, while we disguise and alter our
faces, not only as to God's and man's aspect, but even as to our own? so that
we are not what we seem to be to our selves; and being once altered by Art from
what is native, we must look for another face, before we can find or see our
selves in that glass which at once flatters, upbraids and deceives us, while it
represents our looks other then God has made them and us: whereas the wise
Creator has by nature impressed on every face of man and woman such characters
either of beauty, or majesty, or at least of distinction, as he sees sufficient
for his own honor, our content, and others social discerning or difference,
whereby to avoid confusions or mistakes; so as there shall not need any further
additionals of Art, which put a kind of metamorphosis or fabulous change on
God's and Natures work, whose wisdom and power (yet) purposely (no doubt)
orders some to be less well-favoured, that they may be as foiles to set off the
beauty he bestows on others; as we see leaves are to the brighter flowers, or
clouds to the Stars. Thus he makes black Night to commend the lightsome Day,
the Winters horror to double the Summers welcome sweetness and serenity. So
that in that variety which God has chosen to set forth his noblest Creatures
in (which are after his own Image) even mankind, (in a kind of checquer-work of
some handsome and others unhandsome, some pallid and others ruddy) every one (I
think) ought to content themselves with that color and complexion, as well as
feature, which God has given them, not only in order to their particular
subsisting, but as to the general symmetry of his works; in which he has (as
skilful Painters do in their pictures) set forth his more quick and lively
colors (which are in some faces) by those deep and darker shadows which are in
others. If the most accurate pencils were but blottings which presumed to mend
Zeuxis or Apelles works; who may presume to add any thing where God has put
to his last and completing hand, which is both able and wise to do what he
sees best?

ANSWER.
I Most willingly grant that the same pure and perfect God who has forbidden
all evil ends, or sins of the ripest age and highest stature, has also forbad
all means desired by us to those ends, as to the immorality and perverseness of
the agents mind and intent, whose first fancies and most infant conceptions of
sin are sinful, if designed, approved, or delighted in; notwithstanding he has
no power either to act, nor yet any matter whereupon to work, for the
accomplishing or carrying on of his sin, but only from the power, bounty and
goodness of the Creator, who is good in all his works: though we have evil
hands or eyes, yet does not God tempt us to evil, by giving us those good
things which we abuse to sin by the inordinateness of our minds, more then the
activity of our hands or outward enjoyment?

It is indeed a great Truth your Ladyship urges, but very little to your
purpose, as I conceive; yea it makes directly against you. For if it be (as it
is confessed) most unlawful to abuse good things to evil ends, or to gratify
any desire in order to violate God's express Command: then where the heart is
upright, without any sinful warpings as to piety, purity and charity, it must
follow, that the use of any thing God has made and given to mankind must needs
be good and lawful, both in nature and in art. Neither natures bounty, nor the
additions of modest and ingenuous art can be blamed, or so much as questioned,
where the heart is sound and honest; as in those loves or complacencies whose
Chastity uses all kinds of ingenuous Elegancy.

If nothing can be materially evil, either in nature or in art, but only as
related to the inordinacy of the mind, will and intent of a voluntary and moral
agent; it must necessarily follow, that as to the use of color and complexion
to the face, there can be no evil in it as against the 7th Commandment, where
no adulterous, wanton or evil purpose is harbored in the Soul of those that
use it, but it is (as all things ought to be) kept within the bounds of Piety
to God, Purity to our selves, and Charity to our neighbors. Which holy limits
must be precisely set, as in the use of this, so of all other ornaments and
enjoyments afforded us by the Creator's indulgence in nature, which are as
prone to be abused to Adulterous incentives as this; yea far more, as being
more inviting: yet are they not forbidden to be used or enjoyed, but only
confined to honest, pure and holy ends; not only the last and highest, of
God's glory, but also those of the creatures life, health, delight and
cheerfulness.

That in many Countries, and almost in all ages, something which your Ladyship
would call painting or complexioning, as washings, anointings, fomentations,
tinctures and frictions, etc. have been used by very sober, chaste and virtuous
persons, both maids, wives and widows, I think your Ladyship is not so
uncharitable as not to grant; since even whole nations (not only the Jews of
old, but Christians also) have and do at this day by customary and civil
fashions use it, without any reproach, scruple or scandal of sin, any more then
it is to wash their faces, to comb their hair or to braid it, to anoint their
heads and faces, to perfume their clothes, etc. which things do neither
necessarily tend, nor are studiously intended to any sinful end.

The Greek Churches generally, and most of the Latin Casuists (as I have heard
from Learned men and Travelers) do allow even this complexionary art and use
of adorning by some light tincture the looks of women eminent for virtue,
modesty, piety and charity, when they are not recluse or votaries: And yet even
these are not denied (as I suppose) those things which may innocently please
themselves even in their retirements; where every one is yet a Theater and
society to themselves, and cannot willingly live at any odds with their looks,
or dislike of themselves.

Some use these helps who are rarely seen of any men; others of none but their
husbands, in reference to whose honest satisfactions they use these customable
adornings of the Country as a testimony of their love and respect, besides as
an attractive or conservative of their affections, which never receive greater
Checks then when they meet with any object that represents either sordidness,
negligence or undervaluing. Your Ladyship cannot think it unlawful for wives to
please and gratify their husbands, no less by quickening their complexion then
by hiding any other defect and deformity, or using such ways of sweetness,
neatness and decency (which are potent Decoyes to love) as may best keep their
husbands from any loathing or indifferency, also from any extravagancy.

To which end I have heard that S. Austin's civility allowed those feminine
ornaments and elegancies of fine clothes, sweets, dresses and anointings to
wives, or such as would be wives, as far as the limits of chaste and conjugal
love extended. All which S. Jerome's rigor (who they say more loved then
favored our sex) would less approve. Sure if lewd and wanton women find the
use of such adornings to be advantageous to vicious ends, (which make all
things so applied unlawful) I see no cause why sober and modest women should
despair, or be denied to turn them to a better use and honester account; since
they are as apt for the one as the other, and fall as much under the power of
good as evil minds to have them.

If that oracle hold true (as it must, because Divine) in all things of free
and indifferent natures and use, (that is, upon which no restraint of God's
special command is laid; as none is upon the Churches Christian in outward
things) That to the pure all things are Tit. 1. 15. Romans 14. 14.
pure, and, That nothing is unclean (that is, morally and sinfully) in it self,
as the blessed Apostle was persuaded by the Lord Jesus; these will include in
their large circumference whatever is used to advance the complexion, or hide
the defects of the face, as well as any other parts of the body, both as to the
nature of the things used, and the Conscience of those who purely use them:
since we see that the highest abuse of God's creatures to Idolatrous services
and sacrifices (which was the most provoking sin) did no way prejudge or hinder
the liberty of a believer to eat or drink of those things to far different
ends. As there was no Idolatry in eating things offered by others to Idols, if
there was no regard 1 Cor. 10. 25, 27.
to the Idol, whose it properly was not, but to God, whose rightly it was; so
nor can I see any Adultery in the use of those helps to handsomness where there
is no adulterous intent or evil thought in the heart, whose prime motor or
spring (as to its end and purpose) being set true to the measure of God's will,
the outward wheels, motions and indications cannot go amiss; since the end of
the command in that, as in all things, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
is a pure heart, faith unfeigned, and a good Conscience.

What your Ladyship objects, That the use of any artificial beauty may be an
occasion to another sin, a snare and temptation to them; Truly so may all
outward adornings (which have something in them of a complaisance and
takingness) yea and the most innocent native beauty may be made a bait to the
devils hooks: Yet do I not think your Ladyship will therefore either deform
your beauty, or not both own, esteem and improve it to your civil advantages;
else in vain had handsomness been given by God as a favor to so many sober
women, who were as conspicuous for their beauty as their virtue, being every
way completely lovely, like apples of gold set in pictures of silver: Such were
Sarah, Rebekah, Esther, Job's daughters, etc.

Thus I have (I hope) answered the Weight of your Ladyships Argument drawn from
the 7th Commandment, which forbids only the abuse of things by depraved and
adulterous minds, not the use of them to sober and civil ends.

As to the Wit of it, which makes all mending the complexion or looks of our
faces to be a kind of Self-adultery, a metamorphosis of God's work, a confuting
of his distinctions set upon his creatures, a re-kindling the fire which God
has quenched, and adventuring again into the storm whence one is happily
escaped, etc.

My first Answer is, That it is hard to extract one drop of spirits or
quintessence of reason and right argumentation (as to point of sin, and stating
the Conscience) from many handfuls and heaps of Rhetorical flowers and
parabolical allusions, which are but light skirmishings, and not serious
contendings in matters of Religion: Such sparks and flashes of Oratory (which
are the main stock and strength of most opposers in this case) are rather like
the hedge-creeping light of glo-worms, then that celestial vigor of divine
Truth, whose beams have a star-like sublimity, and constancy of shining.

As to the change and Alteration which is odiously called a Self-adulterating;
It Is true, there is some little change of the complexion from a greater degree
of pallor to a less, possibly to some little quickening of redness; yet not so
as to make any greater change on the face or cheeks then is frequently made by
the blushings of those that are of most modest looks and tenderest foreheads.
This makes no more a new face or person, (so as to run any hazard of confusion
or mistake) then usually befalls women in their sicknesses and ordinary
distempers, incident both to single and married persons; who sometimes appear
pallidly sad, as if they were going to their graves; otherwhiles with such a
rosy cheerfulness, as if they had begun their resurrection: so that this
artificial change is but a fixation of natures inconstancy, both imitating its
frequent essays, and helping its variating infirmities.

Nor does all this so terrible a change amount to more then a little quickness
of color upon the skin; it alters not the substance, fashion, feature,
proportions, temper or constitutions of nature; which is often done, or at least
endeavored, by several applications, both inward (as to physical receipts of
all kinds) and outward, by more gross and mechanic arts, which strive by many
ways to conceal, cover and supply natures grosser deformities and defects, even
as to the very substance of parts, no less then to the additions of borrowed
ornaments. Thus the baldness, thinness, and (as both men and women think) the
deformity of their Hair, is usually supplied by Borders and combings; also by
whole Perukes (like artificial sculls) fitted to their heads. Some highly
please themselves in those artificial Eyes, Hands, Legs, Noses, Teeth and
Hair, which make up those breaches of the body which age or sickness or other
accidents have occasioned, either to the inconveniency of motion, or the
deformity of their aspect. How many both men and women, who pretend to high
piety and strictness, do (yet without any scruple) by a thrumm'd stocking, a
bumbast or bolstered garment, by iron bodies and high-heel'd shoes, endeavor
to redeem themselves from that may seem less handsome, and (vulgarly)
ridiculous or antic; levelling hereby the inequality of crooked backs and
crump shoulders, setting up one foot parallel to the other, filling out the
leanness of their dwindled legs, and the like? wherein Art studiously and
speedily either encounters Natures enemies, or fortifies its outworks against
all assaults, or repairs its breaches, and every way kindly comes in as its
Second and Auxiliary to assist it against all infirmities original or
accidental.

Yet this Quantitative Adultery, which by such patching and piecing of the body
makes far more gross alterations and substantial changes of nature, your
Ladyship and all persons of sound senses do allow in their daily use, (as much
as the Romans did Julius Caesar's wearing of a Laurel Coronet, to hide the
baldness of his head) without any reproach to any ones honor, chastity or
piety: yea, how many grave and godly matrons usually graff or reimplant on
their now-more-aged heads and brows the relics, combings or cuttings of their
own or others more youthful hair? Whence the weakness and self-confuting
invalidity of this flash or flourish against all use of art to the face
appears; as if there were more adulterating in colors then in features, in
quality then in quantity, in a little tincture then in solid composures. Truly
(Madam) a smile or silence were the best and justest confutation of such
partial allegations, which allow the greater, and yet scruple the lesser
changes.

Nor is there more solidity as to matter of Sin or Conscience in the other
popular terror, of adulterating God's and Nature's workmanship to his
diminution and reproach: For ingenuous Artifices, honest applications and civil
alterations to the advantages of humane nature as single or social, in things
placed under our natural power, and left free as to our religious or moral
power, (that is, where no divine prohibition intervenes) these are no more to
be called or counted any adulterating of God's works, or reproach to his power
and wisdom, then it is to die woollen, linen or silk, out of their native
simplicity; or to wash that scurf and filth off which rises naturally from our
bodies by sweating or evaporation; or then the polling of men's hairs, and
trimming of their beards, or paring their nails, which suffers not natures
excrescencies to run out to that horror and uncomeliness (like Nebuchadnezzar's
when he had run long at grass) to which they would grow; where Art (we see)
does daily turn, according to the several fancies and various fashions of times
and Countries, those things which are but excremental, to be ornamental to our
bodies.

The same Sarcasm of adulterating nature may be as justly used against all
sweet smells or sents applied to our hair, clothes, bodies, or to our breath;
not only as a delight, but as a remedy to the native ranckness or
offensiveness which some persons are subject to both in their breath and
constitutions; which not to cure or alter by art is to condemn such persons
(otherways not ill company) to solitudes, by reason of those ill savours, which
make them fitter for cells then for society. How impertinent and ungrate must
that superstition be, which out of a needless nicety of offending the God of
nature, (by altering any Characters or Impressions he has set on our bodies,
in color, favor, or feature,) dreads to use even those helps and remedies
which both God and Nature have prepared and liberally offered to our both civil
and religious use of them; not more to our own pleasure and innocent
advantages, (besides others social content) then to the glory of God? So far
is the use of such helps from any detriment or diminution to the Creators glory
or work; who often suffers Nature in its ordinary road or tract to err, or fail
of those proportions which are most perfect and agreeable, purposely to incite
and exercise those gifts of art and ingenuity which God has superadded in
reason to mankind, above all those second causes and effects which are moved by
more blind instincts and confused impulses. Nor is the wisdom, power and
goodness of God less manifested at the second hand by humane operation upon and
alteration of some works of Nature, then in the first productions of things:
yea that rational empire, liberty, dispose and use wherewith God has invested
mankind over all his works, in the inventions of art and manufacture, does more
magnify and set forth the munificence and indulgence of God, then that
substance and subject matter which he offers to us, as to other creatures, in
all those things whose grosseness and confusions are only to be polished,
distinguished, improved and disposed of by the art and industry peculiar to
man: wherein if children of the world and darkness are so polite, ingenious and
industrious, in order to obtain evil ends; how much more may the children of
God use their Fathers liberality in order to their own and others honest
complacencies and compleatings?

Certainly, true piety permits us to pay an honor, love and reverence to our
selves, as well as to others; and to our bodies, as well as to our Souls: Nor
is the face more to be unconsidered or neglected then other parts of our
bodies; which we generally either protect from injury and contempt, or supply
their wants, or help in their infirmity, by whatever art and means we can learn
to be proper for their relief, without any fear or suspicion of sin.

As to the jealousy of baiting anew the devils hooks, or leading our selves and
others into fresh temptations, when women seem to be in point of Beauty faded
and almost out of date; as to the fear of raising up new storms, when the
amorous tempest of youth is well allayed; Truly these are as babies or
children, rather pretty then strong objections, and are then easily answered
and fully confuted, when the heart meditating no mischief yet studies
comeliness. The honestest beauty in its native simplicity may be as a bait;
though it must not purposely set the devils traps or snares: Nay, on the
contrary, the use of some pretty artificial reliefs to nature may be a great
means to keep, as our selves from the temptations of envy and discountenance,
(which is always attended with discontent) so others too, whom these honest
frauds and pious guiles may hinder from those by-ways and extravagancies to
which more curious eyes and touchy tempers are prone to run, if they be not
happily deceived, and so confined to sober and holy affections.

So that I do not see but that in the ingenuous use of color and complexion to
the face, there may be the wisdom of the serpent, without the least of its
poison; where the Dove-like innocence of the users mind preserves not only the
native goodness which is from God in all things that can be used, but also the
civil and moral goodness of their use, from all contagion of sin, while the
heart is kept within the confines of virtue and civility.

Though some vain and wanton minds may turn this, as all things, to a Serpent;
yet others of modest tempers use it as a staff and stay both to their own
minds, and others, whom they most value, and to whom they endeavor to give all
ingenuous content, even to the extent of their curiosity, without being any way
injurious to God, themselves, or others.

OBJECTION VI. Painting the Face argues an heart unsatisfied with God's works
and disposings.
BUT (good Madam) laying aside the flourishes of wit and colors of speech,
(whereof I am not prone to be guilty) in plain English, ought not a Christian
to rest humbly content and satisfied with the will of God, submitting James 4.
7.
thereto without any such contending in patching and painting ways, which show
a mind so far unsanctified, as it seems unsatisfied with what God has ordered?
Can it be other then an insolence and impatience flowing from a refractory and
rebellious spirit, which seeks to cure, remove, or cover what God sees fit to
inflict on us and expose to others sight, thereby (as by the man born blind) to
set forth his John 9. 3.
glory in our deformity or defects? which to remedy what can it be but flatly
to resist and contradict his will, to run counter to God's providence, which is
his real word, and as it were an Eventuall Oracle, which is sealed with the
signet of his hand, which is armed with power, and guided by wisdom? Which
considerations may seem sufficient in reason and religion to forbid all
face-repairings to any alterations in any kind and in the least degree, if
there were no Scripture-testimonies flatly against those arts, which our
blessed Savior intimates to be beyond the moral or lawful power of any one;
since he tells us we cannot Mat. 5. 36.
(that is, we may not) make one hair of our head white or black. If power of
alteration be not granted us over hairs, how much less over our cheeks or
faces, our skins and complexions? Again, he tells us, that we cannot add Mat.
6. 27.
to our stature one cubit; intimating that we must rest content with that size
to which God has seen fit to confine us in shape, stature and feature, since
God does all things in number, weight and measure.

ANSWER.
IT is most true, that a good Christian, who remembers himself to be as clay in
the hands of the potter, ought to carry in all things either a thankful
contentation, or an humble submission toward the will of God, (not only in
their natures, constitutions and beings, but also in those external
contingencies or events which are as it were the voice and dictates of
providence) so far as not to use any means forbidden by the written Word of
God, whereby to remove or alter what God has so inflicted upon them either in
mind, body, or estate.

But yet (dear Madam) this patience or contentedness of spirit, which only
forbids us all unlawful remedies, or wicked endeavors for relief, is no
hinderance to pious and ingenuous industry, by which we not only may, but ought
to use all those means, spiritual, natural and civil, (as prayer, good counsel,
physic, and the like applications, which are as holy as they may be wholesome)
to remove or remedy any pain, sickness, maim, misfortune or inconvenience which
happens to us in our health, strength, motion, or estates; and why not (also)
in our looks or beauties and complexions, wherein women do think themselves as
much concerned as in their riches, health, or almost life it self; so that many
had as lieve dye as be much deformed, and would as willingly part with their
bodies as their beauty, which is as the soul of the face and life of women's
looks? Certainly those honest endeavors which in fair ways study to relieve
or supply our wants in any kind are no rude contestings with God's Providence,
nor are to be called crossings or opposings of his will; but rather they are
servings and obeyings of it, in those dictates of reason, prudence and
discretion, which God has given to mankind (as he has the various motions and
instincts to other creatures) in order to preserve our selves from any evils,
either falling or resting upon us: which voice of God within us, sounding with
both Reason and Religion, is to be listened to and followed, no less then those
silent intimations or blinder characters we read in providential events, which
may admit of various interpretations or readings; but never such, as either
cross or put stop to those divine directions or permissions which are given us
both in prudence and in piety for our ease and help. Else we may not by a
sacrilegious soberness seek to cure those whom God has seen fit to afflict
with the highest temporal misery, which is frenzy or madness, which deprives
them of the noblest jewel and ornament of the Soul, Reason; nay, we must not
restrain them from any of those desperate extravagancies to which their
distemper (which is natural and providential) does dispose them: which were
indeed to be more mad then those poor creatures are; while having Reason beyond
them, we scruple to apply those means which are proper for their good and our
own, merely for fear lest we should contest against God, and contrariate his
providential will.

So by this paradox of superstitious submission, a sick man must lie and
languish under his sickness, sending a bill of defiance to all Physicians,
Chirurgions and Apothecaries, as so many bold Giants or Cyclopick monsters, who
daily seek to fight against heaven by their rebellious druggs and doses,
prescribed in strange affected terms of art and ill-scribled bills, which seem
to be as so many charms or spells and conjurations. So lame men may not either
use crutches to supply the weakness of their legs, or to shore up the
tottering frame of their body: nor may they, as the poor man in the Gospel,
John 5. 3.
covet to have the benefit of any suppling and healing Baths, which would by
this argument rather seem enchanted by some evil spirit or Demoniack
Water-nymph, then moved by the healing virtue of any good angel.

By this soft and senseless fallacy of resting so satisfied with the events and
signatures of Providence, as to use no lawful means or industry that may seem
to traverse the sentence or present decree, we may not rise out of a ditch or
pit when we are once fallen into it, nor so much as cry to Jupiter to help us; we
may not quench those fires which casually seize on our houses, nor extinguish
those flames which Incendiaries kindle of Faction and Sedition in Church or
State; we may not row against any stream, nor ascend by any ladder upward, when
our native tendency is downward: we must not repair our decayed houses, nor
mend our torn garments, or honestly seek to recruit our decayed estates; but
content our selves with our ruined and illustrious houses, we must wrap our
selves (as we can) in our lazy rags, with the sluggard Prove. 6. 6.
turning upon the hinges of holy idleness, as those that are providentially
condemned to eternal and irreparable poverty.

After these methods of holy ill husbandry, we must let our fields and gardens
lie oppressed under the usurpations of brambles and the tyranny of all evil
weeds, which are the products of providence as well as the best herbs and
flowers; yea Nature seems rather a stepmother and dry nurse to these then to
the other: nay, you may not by the inventions of artificial day supply the
Sun's absence with Candle or Torch-light, nor dispel the horror of that
darkness which providence brings over the face of the Earth in the night: you
may not seek to obtain your liberty, if once cast into prison, which cannot be
without a providence, since a sparrow falls not without it upon the Mat. 10. 29.
ground, as Christ tells us.

So many absurd and indeed ridiculous consequences do follow the fondness of
this argument, (that we may not seek to mend what God has made, nor alter what
he has ordered) that it is best confuted by continued sickness, lameness,
beggary, baldness, and deformity; under which not to have any sense, or having
a quick sense not to desire and endeavor any remedy and redress, were such a
super- Stoical piece of Philosophy as is not at all of kin to Christianity,
whose complexion is of a far more soft and tender skin then that of the
Stoic, Cynick, or Epicurean; nor does Religion require stupor, but only a
patience, so far as is not transported beyond the holy and allowed bounds
granted to humane and Christian industry, to relieve it self by God's
permission and blessing.

The Providence of God however it declare at present his will and pleasure to
us by those events which are naturally less welcome and pleasing to us, yet it
does not so confine and determine either it self or us, as not to admit us to
use lawful means of honest variations and happy changes; which your Ladyship
sees are not more frequently applied by us then prospered by God with desired
successes. So far is it that we should by any sad events be confined only to
a silent and passive submission, (which is necessary and just indeed when our
afflictions exceed the help of second causes) that we are rather obliged, both
in Reason and Religion, to use those means which may obtain blessed recoveries,
without violation of good Consciences, which are not injured but there where
God is disobeyed. Nor is the divine Goodness less to be seen, venerated and
praised, in those emendations which follow to our ease and comfort the lawful
applications of art and ingenuity, then his Power and Justice (or possibly his
special displeasure) may sometimes appear in those unpleasing events which some
would fain set up (beyond God's intent) as Idols, to such an unmovable
fixation, as if it were impious to endeavor to remove them, because Providence
has once permitted them to take place amidst the changes and contingencies
incident to this mortal and mutable state.

There may be holy contradictions and humble contraventions, (as to God's
silent providence, so to his declared will) either discovered by effects, or by
his express word. Thus Jacob wrestled with the Angel, and would Genesis 32. 24.
not let him go (when he desired) till he had by a pious importunity and holy
insolence extorted a blessing from him. So Moses prays with extraordinary
Exodus 32. 10.
fervency, when God had bid him Let him alone. Hezekiah, though Isaiah 38.
under the declared doom of his instant and approaching death, yet is not more
bold then welcome, when by prayers and tears he seeks to repeal, or at least
reprieve, the sentence already passed upon his life by the Prophet.

Religion is no friend to Laziness and stupidity, or to supine and sottish
despondencies of mind, under the pretense of compliances with Providence, as
afraid to remove the crosses or burdens incumbent upon us, (wherein the
sluggard might have some plea for his sloth:) For these befall us many times
(as indeed all necessities of life do) not more to exercise our patience, then
to excite our inventions and industry. Nor does the infirm life of man require
less active then passive graces; the one to remedy what we may, the other to
bear what we cannot cure.

But (Madam) in vain do I listen to your words, when I see your contrary
actions, by which you give your self the fullest answer, and save me the
labor. Who (I beseech you) is more speedily, curiously and earnestly
solicitous to encounter the afflictions and cross events of providence then
your love and care is, when any thing threatens or urges upon the health,
strength, sight, hearing, shape or straightness of your children and nearest
relations? yea how auxiliary are you to your servants and neighbors? how
importunely do you pray for remedy? how are you (as Martha) encumbered with
receipts, plasters and medicines of all sorts, which you think most potent and
soverain to remove any pressure or danger?

Yea, as to those helps which are most mechanic and artificial, having nothing
of native virtue, but merely such a formal application as makes but a show of
help to natures defect; whom did your Ladyship ever blame (if in other things
unblameable) for using a glass Eye, which is but an honest mocking of the
world, while it pretends to the place and office of a natural one, which God
saw fit to take away as to our own sight and use? But he did not withal take
away either our wits, our hands, or our freedom, to make and use; if we list,
a Crystal, painted eye, both to hide our own defect and deformity, also to
remove from others the less pleasing prospect of our blemish. When was your
Ladyship scandalized with any grave and sober matron, because she laid out the
combings or cuttings of her own or others more youthful hair, when her own (now
more withered and autumnal) seemed less becoming her? How many both men's and
women's warmer heats in Religion do now admit not only borders of foreign hair,
but full and fair Perukes on their heads, without sindging one hair by their
disputative and scrupulous Zeal, which in these things of fashion is now grown
much out of fashion? Your Ladyships Charity does not reprove, but pity, those
poor Vulcanists who balance the inequality of their heels or badger Legs by
the art and help of the shoemaker; nor are those short-legg'd Ladies thought
less godly who fly to Chopines, and by enlarging the phylacteries of their
coats, conceal at once both their great defects in native brevity, and the
enormous additions of their artificial heights, which make many small women
walk with as much caution and danger almost as the Turk danceth on the ropes.
Who ever is so impertinent a bigot as to find fault when the hills and dales of
crooked and unequal bodies are made to meet without a miracle, by some iron
bodies, or some benign bolsterings? Who fears to set straight or hide the
unhandsome warpings of bow Legs, and baker Feet? What is there as to any
defect in nature, whereof ingenuous art, as a diligent handmaid waiting on its
mistress, does not study some supply or other, so far as to graff in silver
plates into cracked sculls, to furnish cropped faces with artificial Noses, to
fill up the broken ranks and routed files of the Teeth with ivory adjutants or
lievtenants?

Yet against all or any of these and the like reparative Inventions, by which
art and ingenuity studies to help and repair the defects or deformities which
God in nature, or Providence is pleased to inflict upon our bodies, no pen is
sharpened, no pulpit is battered, no writ of Rebellion or charge of forgery and
false Coinage is brought against any in the Court of Conscience; no poor
creature (who thankfully embraces, modestly uses, and with more cheerfulness
serves God, by means of some such help which either takes away its reproach,
or eases its pain) is scared with dreadful scruples, or so terrified with the
threatenings of sin, hell and damnation, as to cast away (much against their
wills) that innocent succor which God in nature and art had given them; from
which they part with as much regret, as the poor man did from his darling lamb,
which the rich man's insolence, not his indigence, not his want, but wantonness,
forced from him. Rather we are so civilly pious in these cases, as to applaud
others no less then please our selves in those happy delusions, whereby we
conceal or any way compensate those our deformities or defects in any kind,
which seem to us less convenient, or to others less comely, in this our mortal
and visible pilgrimage.

Only, if the face, (which is the Metropolis of humane Majesty, and as it were
the Cathedral of beauty or comeliness in the little world or Polity of our
bodies) if this have sustained any injuries (as it is most exposed to them) of
time or any accident, if it stand in need of any thing that our charity and
ingenuity in art can help it to, though the thing be never so cheap, easy and
harmless, either to enliven the pallid deadness of it, and to redeem it from
mortmain, or to pair and match the inequal cheeks to each other, when one is as
Rachel, the other as Leah, or to cover any pimples and heats, or to remove any
obstructions, or to mitigate and quench excessive flushings, hereby to set off
the face to such decency and equality as may innocently please our selves and
others, without any thought to displease God (who looks not to the 1 Samuel 16. 7.
outward appearance, but to the heart,) what censures and whispers, yea what
outcries and clamors, what lightnings and thunders, what Anathemas,
excommunications and condemnations fill the thoughts, the pens, the tongues,
the pulpits, of many angry (yet it may be well-meaning) Christians, both
preachers and others, who are commonly more quick-sighted and offended with the
least mote they fancy of adding to a Ladies complexion, then with many Camels
of their own customary opinions and practices? Good men! though in other
things, not only of fineness and neatness, but even of some falsity and
pretension, they are so good-natured and indulgent as to allow their lame or
their crooked wives and daughters whatever ingenuous concealments and
reparations Art and their purses can afford them; yet as to the point of
face-mending, they condemn them like Paul's Church to sink under everlasting
ruins.

The most of your plainer-bred and as it were homespun Professors and
Preachers, who never went far beyond their own homes, can with less equal eyes
behold any woman, of never so great quality, if they see or suspect her to be
adorned any whit beyond the vulgar mode, or decked with feathers more gay and
goodly then those birds use which are of their own Country nest. In which
cases of feminine dressing and adorning, no Casuist is sufficient to enumerate
or resolve the many intricate niceties and endless scruples of Conscience which
some men's and women's more plebeian Zelotry makes, as about Ladies cheeks and
faces if they appear one dram or degree more quick and rosy then they were
wonted; so about the length and fashion of their clothes and hair. One while
they are so perplexed about the curlings of Ladies hair, that they can as
hardly dis-intangle themselves as a Be engaged in honey; otherwhile they are
most scrupulous Mathematicians, to measure the arms, wrists, necks and trains
of Ladies, how far they may safely venture to let their garments draw after
them on the ground, or their naked skins be seen. Here, however some men can
bear the sight of the fairest faces without so much as winking, (where the
greatest face of beauty is displayed) yet they pretend that no strength of
humane virtue can endure the least assaults or peepings of naked necks, if they
make any discovery or breaking forth below the ears. Not that any modest mind
pleads for wanton prostituting of naked breasts, where the civiller customs of
any Country forbids it; but some men's rigor and fierceness is such, that if
they espy any thing in the dress, clothes, or garb of women, beyond what they
approve or have been wonted to, presently the Tailours, the Tire-women, the
Gorget-makers, the Seamstresses, the Chambermaids, the Dressers, and all that
wretched crew of obsequious attendants, are condemned as Antichristian, and
only fit to wait upon the whore of Babylon. Nor do the poor Ladies (though
otherwise young and innocent, though as virtuous as handsome; or if possibly
elder, every way exemplary for modesty, gravity and charity, yet they do not)
without great gifts and presents, (as by so many fines and heriots) redeem
themselves from some men's severe censures: and if they do take any freedom to
dress and set forth themselves after the best mode and fashion, it costs them
as much as the Roman Captain's freedom did him; when indeed they are (as S.
Paul pleaded) freeborn, Acts 22. 25.
not only in nature, but as to grace and the new birth, which is no enemy to
what fashions modesty may bear, and which decency, civility and custom do
require.

Yet your Ladyship has often heard some persons in point of clothes as highly
incensed against all such fashionable alterations and various adornings, as
Saul was against Jonathan's tasting 1 Samuel 14. 29.
a little honey; as if all these things of feminine culture, art and invention
were no less under a curse or execration then Readiness rash vow and devotion had
made that Honey, the tasting of which enlightened Jonathan's eyes, and the
liberty of eating it might have refreshed the wearied spirits of his wandering
Soldiers.

Truly in these quarrellings of some severer spirits against all auxiliary
beauty and helps of handsomness in women, I observe that commonly what they
want in force of arguments, rational or religious, they make up in clamor and
confidence. As the Pope is said to have expressed in his Bull against the
Knights Teutonick or Templars, when he confiscated their estates, Although of
right and justice we cannot, yet out of our plenary power and will we do
dissolve them: so these many times in stead of convincing the judgments of
sober persons (like learned Divines and serious Christians) fall to cavillings
and menacings, to bitter and scurrilous reprochings, imagining that what
bumbast stuff or voluble rattling will serve to scare the superstitious and easy
vulgar (who have always an envy and malignity against their betters) will also
serve to resolve more serious judicious souls of those persons who are blessed
with better breeding and exacter understanding.

Such was that Sarcasm which your Ladyship may remember was used by a witty and
eloquent Preacher, whom we both heard at Oxford, who speaking against (not the
absolute use, but) the wanton abuse of women's curiosities in dressing and
adornings, instanced in Jezebel's being eaten up of dogs; as showing, says
he, that a woman so polished and painted was not fit to be man's meat. Which
expression had more of wit and jest in it then of weight or earnest, and might
seem to repress either fondness or impudence abusing such ornaments, but it was
not valid as to the conviction of any sin in the use of them. Which many boldly
assert, raising strange terrors and most Tragic outcries, as if every touch of
coloring added to the cheeks were a presage of hellfire, every curled hair or
braided lock were an Emblem of the never-dying worm: Medusa's head is not
pictured more terrible with her snaky tresses, then these men would represent
every Lady (never so modest and virtuous) whose either hair, or complexion, or
tiring is not natively their own.

Yea so angry or envious is the rusticity or simplicity of some against all
that either soberly please themselves, or civilly appear less unpleasing to
others, by the help of any artificial beautifyings, (though with never so much
discretion and modesty) that when they have nothing to object against the
Intellectuals or Morals of women, they vehemently quarrel with their
artificials, their dressings, clothes and fashions, their looks and complexion,
if they list but to suspect them to have any thing adventitious to them, liking
them the worse because they look well, and censuring them for evil hearts
because they aim at having good faces; as if the Heart received sinful
infection by any color or tincture put to the face, more then it does moral
defilement by any thing that enters into the mouth: against which error our
Savior expressly teaches us, counting Mark 7. 18.
those but Pharisaical fools and supercilious hypocrites who judge and teach
men otherwise; as we read, Mark 7. 18.

Yet by a like magisterial rigor do some men seek to confine all women to their
pure and simple naturals: as if Art and Nature were not sisters, but jealous
rivals, and irreconcilable enemies against each other; whereas indeed they are
from the same wise God and indulgent Father, from whom comes every good as well
as every perfect gift, James 1. 17.
as S. James tells us; who has given to mankind, as he did to Bezaleel, Exodus
Exo. 31. 3.
31. 3. the invention and use of many curious arts, that man might know how
with most discretion and advantage to dispose of and improve the great variety
of God's bounty, which is first set forth in Natures either plainness or
beauty, so as to court and please every of our senses, and to accommodate every
of our occasions, in those several ways and methods which man's industry likes
best: who, although he cannot create the matter and inward essence of things
(but works only upon God's and Natures stock) yet he is in some sense a
superficial Creator of several outward forms and shapes, of various use and
applications of things; far beyond that rustic grossness, primitive
simplicity and confusion, which either is in the first rudiments or in the
effects of Nature, before its materials are subdued, softened and digested by
Art, which is as much the good gift of God, and tends to his glory, as Nature,
and which to deprive mankind of, is to reduce them from the politure and
improvement of aftertimes and long experience to their first caves and
cottages, their primitive skins and acorns.

Nor may we think, that the God of Art and Nature, (who gives us liberally 1 Timothy 6. 17.
(without any envy or grudging) all things to enjoy in a virtuous and sober
way, that is, to good ends) has so curbed us up by religious severities, as to
forbid us the use and enjoyment of the fruits of his wisdom, power, and
paternal bounty, so as may best please our selves and others, without
displeasing him, who is to be glorified even in that sensible glory of beauty,
feature, color and proportion, which is but superficial, and must be done away
when a more durable and eternal glory shall appear; of which it has some
emblem, type and prefiguration, as the Tabernacle had of Solomon's Temple.

All which superstitious rigor and preciseness is not more contrary to God's
munificence and indulgence, then to the very nature and fancy of mankind, which
is so set beyond all creatures, that even grace and virtue themselves receive
some varnish and gloss, a kind of silent commendation, by the cleanliness and
comeliness of our outsides; yea, we think to do an honor to Religion in its
public services, by putting our selves, even as to our vestures and gestures,
into those forms and fashions which we think are most civil, reverential and
comely. As nothing is more humane then the delight in handsomeness; so it
cannot be either irrational or irreligious to hide those our deformities and
defects, which we think are prone to diminish us in the eyes and acceptance of
those with whom we do converse, either as to civil or religious society.

If a civility both to the living and the dead invites us to wash the bodies
and faces of the dead (as they did Tabitha's) Acts 9. 37.
(to which custom of being baptized for the dead the Apostle seems 1 Cor. 15.
29.
to refer, 1 Cor. 15. 29.) as forespeaking and hoping for an
after-resurrection of the body to an eternal purity and incorruption; also we
close the eyes and compose the countenances of our dead friends, so as may most
remove them from that ghastly and unpleasing aspect which is in the vale and
shadow of death: what (I pray) hinders, while we are living and among the
living, but that we may study to adorn our looks so as may be most remote from
a deathfulness, and most agreeable by their liveliness to those with whom we
live?

If it was piety of old to repair the Temple of God, and is still good
husbandry to mend the decaies of those houses of clay in which our bodies
dwell; why should it seem Sacrilege to relieve these Tabernacles of our
bodies, which are the Hosteries of our Souls and Temples of the holy Ghost, so
long as they may be in any decorum serviceable to them both?

Not that I am for those gross Soloecisms of Art, which by unseasonable and
unsuitable affectations (as so many pitiful props and underpinnings) strive in
vain to skrew and set up lapsed and tottering age to the semblance and prospect
of youthful beauty and vigor; when old women, and men too, with the great
neglect of their Souls adorning and preparation for Heaven, seek, as it were by
Medea's charms, to recoct their corpse, as she did Aeson's, from feeble
deformities to spritely handsomeness. When gray hairs are here Hos. 7. 9.
and there, it is fit the more to lay to heart our frail estate: but when the
pillars of the house do fail, when loud Eccl. 12.
summons of aged Infirmities call loud upon poor mortals to make haste for
heaven and eternity, to prepare to meet their God, and adorn their souls (with
aged and devout Anna) for their spouse Luke 2.
and Savior Jesus Christ, in all those gracious augmentations of piety and
holy improvement of virtue which may make them beautiful and lovely in God's
sight; there is then no place or season to be curiously patching and
superfluously mending, to be painting, polishing and pruning (beyond a matronly
comeliness or gravity, which is always lawful while we are alive) our
Gibeonitish carkases, those rotten posts which are mouldring themselves away:
It Is impertinent to trim our cabin with cost and pains when we are upon
shipwrecking, or poorly to furnish a room when the whole house is shortly to be
pulled down. To be deploredly old and affectedly young, is not only a great
folly, but a gross deformity. It Is ridiculous to spend much of a moments
remnant in contending with the invincible wrinkles and irreparable ruins of
old age, which nothing but a vizard can quite hide, or a miracle can wholly
overcome. It is fit for us humbly to yield to those decaies and oppressions of
time to which sinful mortality has exposed us. Many times we must be content
to be first buried even in the rubbish and ruins of our own vile bodies, whose
sad decaies, incurable diseases, and irreparable deformities, ought to serve
rather as foils, the more to set off, and less to hinder our meditations of
eternal life, health and glory; not impediments or bluntings, but rather as
Whetstones, to set an edge on our desires after higher and more permanent
beauty.

My plea (Madam) is only so far as Nature and years may both sutably and
seasonably bear those discreet and ingenuous assistances of Art, which may give
a decency and conformity to our education and other proportions of civil life:
where specially there may be some such decaies as are precipitant as to years,
and exorbitant in one part beyond all the rest, through natural infirmity
resting thereon, or by some outward occasion that has befallen us. Who doubts
but if by the numme palsy one leg or arm be as it were mortified, while the
rest of the body is yet strong and vigorous, we may by fomentations and other
convenient means seek to revive and recover it? Who scruples but that if one or
two or more gray hairs grow up on a youthful head (as is frequent in some
colors and constitutions) by an over-early nonconformity to the rest of our
hairs that are round about, who (I say) scruples but that they may lawfully be
plucked out? I confess I am prone (civilly) to gratify sober and virtuous minds
as long as they live, with those ornaments to their outsides which may keep
them in all civil comeliness and cleanliness; which to preserve is not only
great discretion, but even good conscience; at least in Wives, who ought not to
be either prodigal or negligent of themselves as to outward decency, so far
as it may prudently be obtained, and modestly maintained.

To these (I humbly conceive) that indulgence in point of artificial
handsomeness may be allowed, which was permitted by S. Paul to Timothy as to 1 Timothy 5. 23.
drinking a little wine for his often infirmities: yet am I herein as far
from indulging vanity, pride and wantonness, as the Apostle is there from
encouraging riot, excess and drunkenness.

Nor would I only vindicate the innocent use of auxiliary beauty from the
unjust suspicions and rash censures of being absolutely and in the very nature
of the thing a sin, (which some assert, beyond what I can yet see by my own
eyes, or the best spectacles they afford me) but my design is to have it so
used, as may no more blemish a modest woman's discretion then burden her
conscience; that she may be not only commendable for the innocent purity of
her heart, but unblamable for the elegancy and decency of her hand, which uses
these, as all things, not only lawfully, but expediently, piously and
prudently, conscienciously and becomingly, only to conceal or supply such
defects as, you confess, may in many other cases admit the help of art without
any sin or shame.

As for the words of our Savior Mat. 5. 36.
which your Ladyship cites, when forbidding us to swear by our heads, he
signifies how little power we have of them, since we cannot make one hair white
or black; his meaning is, not either to show the impotency or unlawfulness of
all humane skill, as if man could not or might not by any art change the
outward color of his hairs, which is daily and easily done: but our blessed
Lord truly urges, that as to the inward temperament we cannot make one hair
grow otherways then it does, either black or white: All dies and tinctures do
but alter the outward form or color, by hiding what is native, from an
internal and (by us) unchangeable principle, which is out of the reach of Art.
So when our blessed Savior tells us we cannot by our taking Mat. 6. 27.
thought add to our real stature one cubit, he does not hereby deny the
possibility or lawfulness of setting our selves higher then naturally we are,
either by the heels of our shoes, or by patens, or seats, and the like
inventions, which seek to give an advantage of procerity and comeliness to our
stature; which if shrunk to a dwarfishness and epitomized to a Decimo-sexto,
makes the persons of men and women subject to be as little in the eyes and
esteem of others as they are in their own inches or size. Nothing is more
obvious then for tall Goliath to despise little David. But as to the augmenting
of our seeming height and stature either by heels, or high-crown'd hats, or
seats, none are (I think) so silly as to be scrupulous. Nor do I think it much
to be doubted, but if in our youth by sickness or fear (in one night, as I have
read (in Master Howell's Epistles) befell a youthful man in the Low Countries
upon the false terror he had of being the next day executed by the command of
the Duke of Alva) our Hair should turn white, (like snow in Summer falling on
green and florid trees) to a kind of monstrosity and deformity; such an one (I
doubt not) might lawfully redeem himself from the uncomeliness of such untimely
accidents, either by dying his hair, or by using a Peruke suitable to his graver
years, without any enterfearing with our Savior's meaning, which only shows
the unchangeable bounds and principles of Nature as to God's fixation and
providence in all things, but not to forbid the ingenuous operations of humane
art and invention, to which the works of God in Nature are subjected, so far
as they are manageable within the limits of moral intentions and religious ends.

So that I see no reason or authority, Madam, that the preciser ignorance of
any has from heaven to set either our Legs in the Stocks, because we wear
Polony heels, or it may be Chopines; nor yet to set our Heads in the Pillories,
either because we wear Hair which is not natively our own, or use, it may be,
some little color and tincture which is not more adventitious to our natural
Complexions, then utterly a stranger to all wicked and unworthy intentions.

And thus I have not more largely then fully (I hope) answered this objection
your Ladyship was pleased to make against all auxiliary Handsomness.

OBJECTION VII. Painting the Face a badge of vanity, and an appearance of evil.
I Do not (indeed) deny but that in many cases, as lameness, crookedness,
blindness, baldness, want of teeth, and dwarfishness, the defects or unwelcome
deformities incident to our bodies may be artificially repaired or covered, to
the best advantages of our motions and civil conversations; wherein the
practice of very grave and godly Christians, no less then the approbation (or
connivence at least) of the best Ministers, do confirm me: And truly it were as
uncharitable to deny these innocent and ingenuous reliefs to them, as to deny
an alms to a poor man, or crutches to one that is lame.

But as to the helping of the color or complexion of the face in the least
degree, as I do not see it any way necessary or convenient upon a virtuous
account, so nor can I think it tolerable for any modest and gracious women, who
profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which your Ladyship knows is a doctrine of
such singular purity and modesty, that both the Apostle of the Jews, and the
Gentiles, (S. Peter and S. Paul) enjoin those holy severities 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1
Pet. 3. 3.
even to women, as allow them none but modest apparel, with shamefacedness and
sobriety in their looks and gestures; forbidding them broided or well-set hair,
also gold, pearls, and costly apparel. How much more, may you infer, do they
forbid all painting, patching and powdering, which become none but proud, or
light and bold women, who proclaim to the world that they are not yet redeemed
from their vain conversation? 1 Pet. 1. 18.
Whereof these inventions of artificial beauty seem infallible badges, as being
servient and accessory to all other vanities; from all which we must needs be
divinely forbidden by the force of that one Apostolical Canon, of abstaining
from all appearance of 1 These. 5. 22.
evil, which may cast any blemish or reproach on the modesty, purity and
sanctity of Christian religion; which (as Truth) needs none but its own native
beauties, but teaches us to turn (by an holy and humble Chemistry of patience
and contentedness) the very deformities and decays of the outward man 2 Cor.
4. 16.
to the advantages and daily renewings of the inward man.

ANSWER.
MAdam, I will not captiously reply upon your Ladyship, by putting you to plead
for your own and your childrens wearing of well-set, curled, gummed, braided
and powdered hair, according as the fashions vary; nor will I retort upon your
gold- jewels, earrings, and costly apparel: in all which your Ladyship, with
many other persons of honor and piety, seem either to have some dispensation
for the use of those things, which (by your own allegation) are more expressly
against the letter of those Scriptures then any thing you have yet urged
against tincture or complexioning, which you so much dread and abhor:

Or else you must interpret those and the like negative places in a soft and
right-handed sense, not in a severe and sinister meaning: not as absolutely
forbidding all those and the like things of riches and ornaments to all
Christian men and women, (for so even putting on of apparel would seem
prohibited, and we must run to an Adamitick nakedness or madness) but the
injunctions or exhortations are only comparatively, so as not to make them the
objects of their chief study, desire and delight, to the undervaluing and
neglect of those gracious and internal ornaments which only beautify the Soul,
and are of great price in the sight of God, who only esteems those things as
our moral, full and real beauty, which do most assimilate us to himself in true
Holiness. Not but that his bounty has given, and his indulgence allows us, all
things of outward splendour, riches and ornament, as tokens of God's munificent
goodness to us; also as ensigns of civil honor, and notes to distinguish the
places and qualities of persons; yea further, to conciliate hereby from the
vulgar something of majesty and reverence to their superiors, either Princes or
Priests.

So that since all wise and holy men have granted thus much as to the lawful
and civil use of those things that are for fine clothing or costly adorning our
bodies, (notwithstanding those prohibitions, which are only limited and
respective as to the main end and design of a Christian) truly I see no cause
why they may not with as favorable an indulgence permit to women those modest
and discreet helps of beauty as to the face; since there is no letter of the
New Testament which bears any show of forbidding these more then those, which
by a just candor of interpretation are allowed.

Yea in particular, as to the advantaging of our faces, and adding to the
luster and beauty of our looks, our blessed Savior we see is so far from
being against the Eastern custom of anointing the head and face, (which Mat.
6. 17.
doubtless added something to the visible beauty and shining of the
countenance) that he bids the Jews even in their fastings to use it as at other
times, not peremptorily and absolutely, but rather then, by Pharisaical and
affected abstinence from washing and anointing the face, to belly a fast with
hypocritical sadness and sowreness of Isa. 58. 5.
looks, which are not accompanied with humble and contrite hearts.

That these anointings of the head and face were apparent, and tended to set
forth the beauty and cheerfulness or serenity of their faces who used them, is
most evident, by Joab's forbidding the widow of Tekoah to use it when she 2 Samuel 14. 2.
was to personate a suppliant or mourner; and by Naomie's advising Ruth to Ruth
3. 3.
use it in order to conciliate the love of Boaz to her.

Yea, although it is evident in Histostories, both sacred and civil, that the
custom of anointing, (oftentimes, no doubt, mixed with such tinctures as did
color or paint the face and body) was usual among all Nations, civil and
barbarous, Greek and Roman, Southern and Northern, East and West Indians,
insomuch that the Picts here in Britannie had their Names from their being
painted; (not only as a terror to their enemies in War, but as an ornament
in peace) though (I say) this fashion be almost epidemical and connate, or at
least customary, to all Nations (to which the Grecian and Roman Luxury added
(no doubt) whatever wit and art could devise, in order to the setting off of
their beauties and handsomeness, according as each Country fancied;) yet we
never read either the great Doctor of the Jews, or Gentiles, any where giving
any dash of their Pens against these customs, which were so frequent; no, not
there where regulations are set to feminine coverings and adornings.

Nor do we find that in the great Acts 25. 23.
pomp or Princely parada used by Queen Berenice and her train of women, (among
whom, no doubt, all the Roman and Asiatick fashions of improved beauty did
appear, as S. Luke intimates) we find not the blessed Apostle either at all
taken, or scandalized with that exquisiteness and glory, of which he wisely
takes no notice: so far is he from finding fault or expressing any dislike,
thinking it more becoming the Apostolic gravity to preach those great points
of Christian graces and duties, in righteousness, temperance, and judgment to
come, then by impertinent and unseasonable severity to declaim against such
civil and venial vanities as women use; which are such, not absolutely in the
nature and use of them, but in the mind and intention of the user of them.

Agreeable to which methods of Apostolical prudence, I think the heats of some
Preachers in their Sermons and writings were far better spent in urging the
great things of the Law and Gospel (which have moral and clear foundations in
Scripture, and so make both easy and potent convictions in Consciences) then
with a looser zeal and blinder boldness to inveigh most impetuously against
those things of extern mode and fashion, which will either cease to be doubted
of and used when once they appear to a gracious heart any way evil, or else
they will cease to be suspected for evil when once they are found to fall under
the lawful use and management of an heart that is truly good in its holy ends
and gracious habits, doing all things, as in the fear of God, so far as it
sees God allows, so also to the glory of God, as giving him thanks for all
things in Nature and Art which are afforded to our necessity, or delight and
ornament; securing it self in the use of all these things by those two great
assertors of a Christians liberty in use of outward things; the one of the
Apostle Paul, who assures Romans 14. 14.
us that nothing is of itself unclean, as to any moral defilement; the other of
our blessed Savior, who tells us, that Mat. 15. 11, 17, 18.
no extern applications to our bodies defile us, but the inward fedities of the
heart only; whose emanations if poisonous, poison all things through which
they pass, but if pure, they purify all things that come within their streams.

As to that dash your Ladyship gives to this quickening of complexion, as if it
were an infallible token of a vain mind by this vain conversation; it will then
be best taken off, when we both understand what the Apostle means by vain
conversation. For either you must interpret it for flatly vicious and wicked;
or so impertinent and extravagant as is not to be reduced to any rules or
bounds of reason and religion, no, not under any intentional piety and habitual
or dispositive holiness, to which a gracious heart can and will refer all
things, even of superfluity, civility and decency, which are still within the
general order and proportions of Reason, and no less within the skirts and
suburbs of Religion; being then kept from the blemish or brand of any such vain
conversation as is vicious, when they are short of sinful intentions, and hold
within the compass of ingenuous recreations and pleasures.

On the other side, if your Ladyship opposes vanity to mere necessity or
fancy, that by that expression of being redeemed from vain conversation we are
forbidden all things of cost or comeliness, of bravery and elegancy, of
pleasure and recreation, beyond what the mere necessities or rigidest
conveniences of humane nature and life require; if this be your sense, truly I
think (under favor) the spirit of the Gospel is not so Cynical: God treats his
children with more indulgence. Besides, your Ladyships own conversation makes
me believe this is not the meaning of vain; for then you are apparently guilty
of as many forbidden vanities as you have superfluities of cost and care, of
dressing and lacing, of curling and pleating; you must abate much in your own
person and your childrens, in your clothes and furniture; in your buildings,
gardens, etc.

But truly I think piety has so much candor in it, (especially out of cells and
cloisters) not only in Kings courts, Mat. 11. 8.
but in meaner persons houses, as to admit of costly and gorgeous apparel, of
fine linen, and other things at that rate and proportion, as to the beauty,
ornament and elegancies of life: Which things (even of a light and lesser
nature) though they be not of the immediate substance of Religion, or solider
parts of piety and virtue, yet they are as the fringe and accessaries to them;
like the feathers and colors of the Psa. 68. 13.
Dove, which add indeed nothing to its internal innocence, but something to
its outward decency; from which Religion is so far from being an enemy in
civil conversation, that the Apostle exacts order and decency even in 1 Cor.
14. 40.
religious duties and devotion. True Piety is not pleased with sordidness or
sluttery; nor is God's Spirit grieved with modest care and sober study of
outward handsomeness in all kinds.

So that it seems to me no better then a streight-laced superstition which thus
pinches God's bounty and a Christians liberty, which makes Christianity such a
captive to unnecessary rigors and pedling severities, as if it were never in a
due posture and habit till its nails be pared to the quick and its hair shaven
to the skull. Many things certainly are allowed to those that are godly, in
this life, not as they are God's children so much as they are the children of
men, that is, in a condition of frailty, a kind of infancy and minority; in
which God (as Jacob) clothes his Joseph's, and his spouse too, not only Ps. 45.
14.
with garments of necessity, but of beauty, variegated and embroidered. And
this he does, as to the honor of his bounty, so with no blemish to his love,
nor diminution to his childrens holiness, of which outward ornaments or
sordidness are a very false measure; though some silly souls are prone to place
much piety in their mawkingly plainness, and in their censoriousness of others
who use more comely and costly curiosities.

It Is true, Solomon's (now more severe, refined and sublimated) wisdom passes
his penitential censure upon all things under the Sun, to be vanity Eccl. 1. 2.
of vanities; that is, apart from and in comparison of that true and eternal
light, life, beauty, riches, strength, love, honor, glory and happiness, which
are only to be enjoyed in a nearer union to and communion with God the supreme
and incomparable Good. Yet he was far from diminishing or reproaching the
Creators power, wisdom, bounty and providential disposure of all things; who
made them all very good, in their forms, use and ends, however the sin of man
has drawn over them a black shadow of vanity, and of misery upon himself,
until he be redeemed by Christ from that vanity of vanities, Sin, which makes
all to be vanity and vexation to impenitent sinners, while such, but not to an
humble and holy Christian, who sees and adores God and Christ in all things,
and no less in this, which may add to the momentary comfort and content of its
looks, then in other things, which are not therefore sinful vanity, because not
of absolute necessity.

As for the last place your Ladyship voucheth, of Abstaining from all
appearance of evil, which you think as a large net must needs include in its
capacious bosom all these modes of auxiliary beauty; even this, as all other
Scriptures, must be seasoned with the salt of a right and restrained sense,
lest it be corrupted by a loose and false interpretation: else we must call no
man Mat. 23. 9. Mat. 6. 25. Joh. 6. 27.
master or father, nor take care for to morrow, nor labor for our livings, etc.

It cannot be meant that we must abstain from all those actions or things
wherein evil minds do often appear, as most studiously, so most wickedly, while
they appear under the mask, colors and pretensions of piety, virtue and
sanctity, by most affected and rotten hypocrisies: this were to forbid us all
those appearances which most become us: for there is no form or fashion of
holiness so severe, demure and precise, but it often falls under the devils
counterseit and imitation. We must not abstain from being and appearing as
Angels of light, because Satan transforms himself 2 Cor. 11. 14. Mat. 5. 16.
Isa. 5. 20.
to that appearance: our light must shine before men, though some call their
darkness light, and put the beams of light on their darkness. The Pharisees
pride and hypocrisy appears in Moses Mat. 23.
chair, in long prayers, in fastings and Chapter 6.
alms; we must not therefore wholly abstain from these: The sheep must not flea
off his skin because the wolf many times puts on its fleece. No, our Savior
teaches there to add sincerity to the solemnity, and the power of godliness
to the form.

I remember in my small reading of the Ecclesiastical stories, both ancient and
modern, that the holy severities of watching, fasting, hard lodging, course
fare and homely clothing, used by Orthodox Christians, were usurped by most
damnable Heretics and desperate Schismatics, the better to cover over their
rotten manners and pernicious doctrines; they will often give all away to the
poor, in order to get greater estates by rapine; they will be, like John of
Leiden, Reformers of Church and State, that by sacrilegious arts and rebellious
crafts they may mend their own fortunes: Yet these fallacious appearances must
not deter good Christians from real charities and just reformings.

So then, those appearances of evil from which we are bidden to abstain are
such, wherein sin and vice do generally appear as in their genuine and proper
colors. A Christian must not only avoid gross sins with open and impudent
foreheads, but also keep aloof from the very suspicion of those pregnant sins,
as well as from the spot; as Caesar required of his wife.

Further, the Apostles meaning may be this, that we must abstain from all sin,
which is notoriously and confessedly such, whatever fair semblances and
appearances it makes; where sins are so putrid and unsavory, that no fair
pretensions can so perfume them, as to make them pleasant to Christians, that
have their senses awake and exercised to discern true holiness.

As to this duty then of abstaining from all appearance of evil, Christians
must be first wisely and exactly informed, as of the natures, so of the
appearances of sins; that they be not gulled and deluded with the devils baits
and shows, nor yet scared with every scarecrow, and take every boil for a
plague sore, or every scab for a leprosy: which superstitious fancies are prone
to mistake, not grounding their fear upon judgment, but guiding their
judgments by their fears; not therefore abstaining, because God has
forbidden, but therefore imagining God has forbidden things, because they have
been accustomed to abstain from them.

Whence arises not real and true, but false appearances and misprisions of
evil, which fall not under the Apostles caution, whose aim is to deter
Christians as well from misapprehensions of good or evil, as from
misapplications to them: nor would he have us to abstain from other then those
appearances, wherein evil commonly appears like it self, in its proper colors,
not only as to its malice and mischievousness, but also as to its disorder and
impudence. For to avoid all those customs and manners, civil or sacred, in
which sin and superstition may and often do appear, we must either go out of the
world, or not at all appear in it. As all is not good which good men do or
say, so nor is all evil which wicked men make show of: As infinite shadows make
not up one substance, so nor many appearances only make up one sin. It Is not
what superstitiously appears as evil to weak and simple eyes, but what really
is and so appears evil to serious and judicious minds, which we must avoid;
else ignorance, superstition and hypocrisy will (as I said) obstruct and put
in a prejudice against all things, under the seemingness or appearance of evil,
which are not only allowed of God, but necessary in the outward shows and
expression of either civility or religion.

As in all other cases (then) so in this of Auxiliary beauty, it must first be
convincingly proved that all use of such helps is in its nature a sin; that
none can use them in any case, or the least degree, without either breaking an
express command of God in right Reason or Scripture, or without a secret
purpose and sinister intent to sin; that there must be either a sin in use of
the nature of the thing absolutely prohibited, or in the inevitable
depravedness of the users intention, if in nature it be allowed. For the nature
of the thing, it is in vain cried down for sin, when nothing is produced
against it in Reason or Scripture; nor more pretended against it then may as
well be urged against the use of many other things, as helps to natural
defects, or ornaments to civil life, of which they make no doubt who most deny
this of tincture and complexioning. So that either they must condemn other
things (with this) which they approve, or approve this with other things which
they do not condemn or disuse.

As to the end and intent of the user, I presume your Ladyship and others too
have so much charity, as not to censure or condemn all those for wicked and
wanton who use any help to their complexions; nor can you justly blot out or
forget all the piety, charity, modesty and gravity of those who (otherwise
constant and conspicuous for those graces and virtues) have yet either
undiscernibly as some, or suspectedly as others, or declaredly as many,
(according to the general custom of countries) used such additaments to their
faces as they thought most advanced the beauty or comeliness of their looks.

And however it be true that a tender conscience is prone to a commendable
jealousy in the point of sinning against God, (whereof a good Christian cannot
be too cautious;) yet it is as true that in the Church of God there is so clear
a light and constant a rule to discern good and evil, sin and no sin by, that
there is not any thing really a sin but it is easily demonstrated to be such,
by such pregnant and constant testimonies of moral light or divine truth as our
own consciences must needs consent unto them. Nor is it easy to elude the
pregnant convictions of immorality, which appear in all gross sins, either as
injurious to God, or our neighbors, or our own souls: Against none of whom (as
far as I can yet find) this use of any relief or additament to our colors
and complexions can or does offend, more then other things, of which no doubt
is made, so long as the heart is holy and the mind pure; which yet are either
ingenuous reparations of Natures defects, or concealments of what we think
deformed.

Nor can I see any cause why we should think God less allows us any advantages
for our looks or faces, then for other parts of our bodies: since the greatest
sweetness, honor and agreeableness, as to humane society, are (as waters in
the Sea, or light in the Sun) gathered together by Nature, and bestowed on the
face of mankind; where to appear lovely or comely is no appearance of evil in
nature, nor more in art, which keeps the decorum and ends of God and Nature,
which I am sure are always good: Nor would God have made any faces beautiful,
if there had been evil in beauty, which yet evil minds may abuse, as other good
things, that are the fruits of God's bounty and indulgence in Nature and Art.
Which is all I have to reply as to these cautious scruples of vanity and evil,
which your Ladyship makes against all Artificial beauty or helps of
handsomness, by way of color or tincture, rather, I suppose, from vulgar or
common jealousies, then your own convictions.

For sure if it had been so gross and palpable a sin as some suspect and
report, it would not have been hard for so many learned, wise and holy men and
women to have proved it to be such by undeniable arguments: whereas your
Ladyship shall easily perceive, if you look near to their discourses upon this
thing, that generally those who vehemently fight against Ladies faces, crying
down all auxiliary or artificial beauty, do it more by their Rhetoric then
their Logic; they rather strike them upon the cheeks with their palms, then
under the eyes with their fists: they make them blush, but not black and blew,
by specious more then ponderous arguments, showing themselves in this point
(for the most part) rather pretty Orators then profound Divines; using not the
sharp two-edged sword of God's word, but the blunt foils of humane fallacies
and declaimings.

All which amounts to no more then a kind of verbal painting, or oral
coloring; which may be more dangerous to truth and conscience then that which
they inveigh against can be to the faces or complexions of sober and modest
women, while they slide from the abuse of things to decry the use of them;
drawing conclusions from suspicions of evil, jealous of the honesty of all
minds, because of the pravity of some; denying all ingenuous liberties, because
of some persons licentiousness: which is a vile and weak way of searching or
discovering sin; especially, when it is, I think, a most infallible Truth, That
whatever may be abused, may also be well used; what is good in nature, may be
so in art: since all things are in their kind, they may be so in their various
applications, which is their end, and best serve by the aptitudes which are in
them for such ends and uses.

OBJECTION VIII. Painting the Face a mark of Pride, Arrogance and Hypocrisy.
BUT (good Madam) though you may avoid other strokes made against all
artificial beauty as to the nature of the things so used, yet as to the mind of
the user it is not to be denied, but all adding of color and complexion to the
face comes from Pride, though it do not tend to wantonness, having its rise and
temptation from that height of mind, which thinks we deserve more handsomeness
then God has thought fit to give us, glorying inordinately in that which is
indeed below the greatness of a Christians spirit and ambition. If it be
allowed us to take any humble and modest complacency in those outward gifts and
ornaments which God has bestowed on our persons, to which we have a good title
of divine donation, as natively and properly ours; yet sure it cannot avoid the
brand of arrogance, as well as hypocrisy, to challenge and ostentate that
beauty or handsomness of complexion as ours, which indeed is none of ours by
any genuine right and property, but only by an adventitious stealth, a furtive
simulation, and a bastardly kind of adoption. So that if painting be not rank
poison, yet (as mushromes) it seems to be of a very dubious and dangerous
nature; and (to be sure) it cannot be very savoury, wholesome or nutritive to a
good Christian: If it be not in the pit of hell, it may be on the brink; if it
be not the house, it may be the threshold of death; if it be not of an
intoxicating nature, yet it seems to be as a bush, or red latice, which gives
neither honor nor ornament to any beyond the degree of a Tap-house or a
Tavern. If nothing else could be said against it, this is enough, that it is an
Emblem or token of Pride and Self-conceit, which is bar sufficient to all
grace, and overdrops all true virtue.

ANSWER.
It Is true, nothing less becomes Christians then pride, since they profess to
follow the example of an humble Savior, who was content for our sakes to have
the beauty of his face Isa. 5. 3.
marred, and to appear without form or comeliness, to expiate the spiritual
deformities which sin has brought on our souls, and bodies too. Yet since
Christ came to repair nature, and not to destroy it; since his main design is
to reform our inward decays, without any wast or reproach to our outward
comeliness; since to be godly it is not necessary to be ugly, nor does
deformity add any thing to our devotion; I see no reason why we should imagine
that God's mercy to our Souls denies us due care and consideration of our
bodies: or that, while he forbids us to be proud, by an overvaluing of our
selves or any thing we have beyond our and their due proportion, that he
requires us to be so abject and neglective of the outward man as not to know,
value and use the gifts he has given us for his glory and our comfort of life;
which none can thankfully and rightly do, who do not see or dare not use what
God in nature or art has afforded to them. So that it is not pride, but
justice and gratitude, that owns and improves to right ends the fruits of God's
bounty: not a resting in them, or boasting of them, as our chief blessings and
happiness, but referring them as subordinate to superior ends. It does not
grieve God to see us pleased with our selves and what we use of his creatures,
provided we abuse them not: there may be humble self-complacencies without
pride; nor have we cause but to joy in our selves, and what we do, at all
times and in all things, except then when our conscience tells us we offend God.

Nor may the least suspicion of pride fall upon many women, who while they
modestly use help to their complexions, are the more humbled and dejected under
the defects they find of native beauty or lively color: the remedying of which
by artificial applications can be no more temptation to pride, then the use of
crutches or spectacles to those that are lame and dim-sighted, or the
applications of other delights and ornaments to our outward man or senses, with
an humble agnition of God's bounty and indulgence to either our necessities or
infirmities.

Nor may it more justly be taxed for pride and arrogance, because in the matter
of beauty we challenge to our selves something as contributive to handsomeness,
which is not ours by a native, personal and individual title; since many things
belong to the use and service of mankind which are forain and besides himself,
not as usurped by his arrogance, but as accumulated upon him by the Creators
bounty, who is willing mankind should serve themselves of all his creatures
various excellencies, in their strength, weight, light, sweetness, warmness,
tinctures, beauties, and colors, not only to necessity and plainness, but
also curiosity and gayness.

Otherwise, I know neither your Ladyship nor any others who are so severe
censurers of all extern helps to beauty, would be so partial to your selves in
other things, as to allow your selves without any blame or guilt of pride many
ornamental actions as well as materials, both private and public, whereby to
set off your self in a far different posture of neatness and handsomeness, of
beauty and majesty, beyond what you have or are in the native desolation and
simplicity of your persons.

Else, why do you (without any scruple) choose such Stuffs, such Colors, such
Tailors, such Laces, such Tires, such Fashions, as you fancy best become you?
You never are jealous of scarlet, crimson, or purple tinctures in your clothes,
wherein you please your self at present more then in any other deader colors,
as best becoming you: only you are scared with the least touch of such orient
colors on your face, though they become you never so much, and though you
think you need them not a little. Can such tinctures and colors of light be
honorable and graceful to your body, and only shameful and disparaging to
your face, when they are but the simple juice or extract of some innocent herb,
leaf, flower or root, of which no other use (in food or Physic) can be made,
as we see in many things of Natures store, whereof no other benefit can be made
but the extracting and communicating of their tinctures and colors, whereto
Nature does invite Art and ingenuity?

Nor is indeed any thing (as I have heard) more easy and cheap then those
applications which advance or quicken the ruddy life of the face, which is done
with very little expense of time, without others pains or our own labor; and
no doubt both may, and very often is used to very sober ends by humble minds, who
venerate God in this, as all his creatures, whereof he has given man the use
and command in all honest and virtuous ways.

And however God challenges his own right and propriety, where wicked minds
sacrifice to their own net, and glory in God's flax, and wine, and oil, Hos. 2.
5.
and corn, as if it were their own merit or acquisition, forbidding us
ungratefully or excessively to use these his gifts to his dishonor and the
detriment of our souls, while we pamper our bodies and our sensual lusts; yet
where the heart is pure and grateful to God, he no where commands nor expects
we should neglect the body, (which is God's too) in the culture of it, for
nutriment or ornament, for necessity or decency, so far as we make these no
hinderance of holiness, and no designed occasion to sin.

Nor do I see any reason why this help to complexion or beauty in the face may
not be used, as far short of any sinful pride as any other adorning your
Ladyship uses, who, though plentifully furnished with Natures stock of beauty,
(of which (like the rich man's barns) your Ladyships face has great store laid
up for many years) yet as I think you are not proud or conceited of it, to any
ungrateful neglect or affront to God the giver; so nor do I believe you are so
great an undervaluer or slighter of it, as not to preserve it tenderly and
thriftily, but fence it against Sun, dust, air, and fire, by masks, fannes,
scarfs and hoods; yea, if you find any decaies by wrinckles or roughness, by
freckles or tanne, you speedily endeavor by unguents and washes, by
forehead-clothes and cereclothes to clear and smooth your skin, to recover your
fresh and orient color, and to fetch back that Angel which seems to have fled,
or to be flying from your face, which even sober and modest women are as loath
to let go, as Jacob was that Angel with which he wrestled, because they think
it (and not unjustly) a great blessing among these little momentary ones which
our dust is capable of.

Yet in thus doing, endeavoring and desiring to preserve or recover your
beauty, neither your own heart nor any others tongue is so cruelly austere, as
to smite you or accuse you for any pride or arrogance, nor yet for any
inordinate esteem of this fading blossom, beauty. And truly since your plenty
and liberty exempts you from all envy of others handsomeness, why should you
deny your pity and charitable indulgence to those that do want native color,
or forbid them the ingenuous use of artificial complexioning, which may
innocently relieve them, without any sin or shame? since God and Nature have as
it were offered such helps, which are obvious, cheap, easy, and every way safe.
I do not believe your Ladyship wishes all your neighbors poor, that they may
the more value, set off and admire your riches. There may be greater pride in
the want of charity, and in severe censuring of others for pride in that which
they use, as from God, so in his fear and to his glory. It is good to look to
the beam in our own eyes of rashness and censoriousness, which is an high
arrogating of God's judicial power, and ascending up to his Throne or Tribunal,
before we quarrel too earnestly with the mote in another eye.

Why should any be judged of Pride for that wherein he owns and venerates God,
praising him for his bounty, and keeping within his bounds? Since God's eye
has been good to poor mortals, not only in native gifts, but in artificial
and adventitious supplies, why should any Christian's eyes be evil, repining at
or disdaining another benefit, who want what God has not denied? which is as
if one should grudge them a plank to save themselves who have made shipwreck.
It Is possible for Diogenes his Cynical slovenliness to trample on Plato's
splendid garments with more pride then Plato wore them. Nor is it any strange
effect of pride, to deny others that which may make them any way our peers or
rivals in handsomeness; which is as strong a leaven to puff the mind as any
thing, and no less fermentive when natural, then when artificial. And indeed
artificial helps of beauty carry with them their own antidote, while they are
monitors of our wants and infirmities, which (like the swallowing down the
stone) keep us from surfeiting of the Cherries we eat.

We read no where in Scripture that the beauty and bravery of colors is either
forbidden or reproved, unless unseasonably worn, when God calls for sackcloth
and blackness of faces. Lydia, a seller of purple, (whose dye Acts 16. 14.
or finer tincture was of more worth then the substance or stuff it self) yet
is not forbidden, when she was converted to be a Christian, either to dye or to
sell any more of that rich and orient color.

Since other diseases or distempers incident to our faces are industriously to
be cured without any thought or blame of pride, as flushings, redness,
inflammations, pimples, freckles, ruggedness, tanning and the like; what
hinders, that paleness, sadness and deadness may not be remedied? since God
has given to mankind not only bread to strengthen, and wine Ps. 104. 15.
to cheer man's heart; but also oil and other things proper to make him a serene
and cheerful countenance. And where oil is not used, other things may be,
according to that virtue and property is in them to such an end. Against which
honest liberty I see nothing wars so much as prejudice, and a kind of
wontedness to think the contrary, because they never knew how innocent, as well
as convenient, the use of such helps is to sober minds and more pallid looks.

OBjECTION IX. The Fathers and modern Divines much against all Painting the
Face.
BUT (good Madam) although you may safely contend with my weakness of
understanding and want of memory, which are prone to betray the strength of a
good cause; yet I beseech you beware how you dash against that great rock,
which I confess gives me such terror as I dare not touch it, any more then the
people or beasts might Mount Sinai: I mean the uniform judgment and concurrent
Testimony of very many learned and godly men, both the holy Fathers of old, and
the most reformed Ministers of later times, who (as I am informed) almost with
one voice absolutely cry down and even damn to hell all painting or coloring
the face in order to advance the beauty of it, as a sin not small and
disputable, but of the first magnitude. Which dreadful censure my self have
read (not without some horror) as in others of our English Divines, so
especially in Mr. Downam's Downam's Christian Warfare, c. 14.
Christian Warfare, the first Book and 14th Chapter; where from the Fathers
sense he calls painting of the face, The Devil's invention, absolutely a sin,
not only in the abuse, but the very use; in the nature of the thing, and not
only in the intention of the doer: that it is utterly wicked and abominable,
against the law of God, the light of nature, against self-shame and conviction;
a reproach of God, a perverting of his works in nature, a cheat of others, a
lure and bait to sin, a fruit of pride and vanity, poisonous to the body, and
pernicious to the Soul: That it is the proper practice of harlots and lewd
women; that it is inconsistent with a Christian profession and a good
conscience.

He brings Tertullian arguing against it, as the Devil's counterfeiting and
mocking of God, by seeking to mend his works, as if God needed his enemies help
to complete his creatures. So he cites S. Cyprian, telling the veiled Virgins,
that the devil by these arts does but distort and poison what God has made
handsome and wholesome. He might have added many more, as I find otherwhere in
our English Authors, who produce the authority of S. Ambrose, S. Austin, S.
Chrysostom, and S. Jerome, against all additional beauties.

Thus I perceive English Divines (for the most part) are as Boanerges, sons of
Thunder, against these Complexionary Arts: nor do I find any (almost) that are
Barnabasses, or sons of comfort, as to the use of it in any kind, at any time,
or by any person that pretends to piety. Which makes me wonder how your
Ladyship has the courage and confidence to encounter such an host of Worthies,
men of renown; or whence you are furnished with such Arms both offensive and
defensive in this contest, beyond what I have heard or read from any one, in
defense of Auxiliary beauty; which must not seem to me any beauty, since to so
many pure eyes it appears deformity; so that a painted Lady is to be looked
upon rather as some Spectre or Empusa, then as an handsome woman.

ANSWER.
THis black and ponderous cloud of witnesses which your Ladyship produces
against all artificial beauty, from the suffrages of ancient and later Divines,
did, I confess, a long time so scare me, that I feared a Deluge of divine wrath
in no case to be more unavoidably poured forth upon the Soul then in this of
giving any assistance to the face and complexion; so terrible presages of
storms did the thunder and lightning give both from the Press and Pulpits of
grave and godly men. No soul was more shaken then I was, in the minority of my
judgment; when I had more of traditional superstition then of judicious
religion, and valued more the number of men's names then the weight of their
reasons.

But at length, finding by my greater experience in the world that many, if not
most, women of more polished breeding, every way virtuous, and most commendable
for all worthy qualities, yet did use more or less (privately, and it may be
less discernibly to vulgar eyes) something of art to retard age and wrinckles,
to preserve or recover a good complexion, to quicken that color which is the
life of the face, and to dispel the death of an excessive paleness,
notwithstanding what was with so great zeal and terror urged by some against
all such practices, which are not the less evil because less discovered; I
began seriously to examine the grounds of their opinions who were such enemies
against it, and what dispensations in private those virtuous and modest women
had, who more or less used some art, without which their beauty and good
complexion would be much abated, if not quite destroyed.

And now out of that nonage and minority which kept me in the wardship and awe
of men's names and numbers, I considered, that these alone signify no more to
make up any reason, or to prove any thing a sin, (in point of conscience) then
so many ciphers can make up a sum which have no figure before them.

In matter of godliness, as to intellectual light and darkness, or moral good
and evil, it is not to be regarded who, or how, or when men affirm or deny any
thing, but why. This made me at once curious and serious to examine what strong
reasons were alleged by them, and on what grounds a thing so small, easy,
cheap, safe, and for the most part both inoffensive to and undiscerned by
others, should merit so bitter and odious invectives, so as to be banished from
all Christian society; which yet admits so many curiosities, elegancies,
superfluities, ornaments and delicacies of life, in clothing and dressing, in
building and Cookery, in gardening, and all adornings by hangings, pictures,
carvings, guildings, and tincturings.

And truly, Madam, after the best search and examining I could make of all that
was written, preached, or privately discoursed of by any men against Artificial
beauty, (as now by your Ladyship) it seems very strange to me how, if the case
were so clear as to a notorious sin and so flagitious a crime, (which not like
the sly fox crops the grapes, but like a wild bore roots up the very plants of
all piety and virtue) how neither your Ladyship from them, nor any of them from
one another in a continued track, do ever produce such valid Scripture reasons
or grounds of Morality (as to piety, equity, charity, or purity) as may make up
one solid and pregnant demonstration, rather then multiply long and specious,
yet dubious, declamations; which are like ropes drawn out to a length, but not
bound or girt about things; having much in show and extention, nothing in the
binding or convincing power.

And such (I must freely tell your Ladyship and all the world) are all those
sharp, satirical and popular invectives which hitherto I have met withal any
where; to which your Ladyship has given as much (or more) edge and smartness
as ever I found from any. For otherwhere one shall find, that those good men
(without any new strength of arguments) commonly use the same borrowed phrases,
those wonted flowers of Oratory, one after another, as so many corresponding
Echoes; by which they make loud and fierce Declamations against all artificial
helps to beauty rather in a sequacious and credulous easiness, then after the
rate of any persuasive strictness, either from principles of right Reason, or
from Scripture precept and authority, with which your Ladyship began discourse
upon this subject between us; where I think your Ladyship found no such
penetrating and confounding thunderbolts as were vulgarly imagined, to be cast
in the faces of all women that any way helped the defect of their beauty by
ingenuous and modest arts.

So soft and good-natured, for the most part, are good men, as to be easily led
away by the authority and reputation of other men's names and opinions, which
(under favor) is but a credulous kind of superstition and presumption, the
sap, not the heart of Religion, whose grounds as to matters of conscience,
binding or loosing the soul from sin or to judgment, are not the fancies,
conjectures, or oratories of men, but the mind, will and oracles of God, whose
rule is, To the Law and to the Testimony: Isa. 8. 20.
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them; if they speak not contrary to these, there is no sin or darkness in them.

I do humbly acknowledge, it becomes not the weakness of my sex to contend or
argue with those holy Fathers of old, men of incomparable learning and
sanctity, whom I wish I could as well study and read in their own writings as I
do highly venerate their names, for that great authority which they have justly
obtained in the Church of Christ, by their zealous and industrious pains to
deliver to us the great things of God, and those weighty matters of Religion
which are necessary to salvation.

Yet I know they were so holy and humble men, as not to think themselves
infallible, nor to obtrude their opinions as dictates, or their Commentaries
for sacred texts, and their writings for indisputable oracles upon the Church
of God, or any believers conscience. Who is there in these days of so observant
a respect to the Fathers, as to forbear as sin all they forbad, or to perform
as duty all they then required? I have heard and read that every one of them
had their Errors, greater or lesser, even in points of greater concern then
this of Ladies beauties: that most of them were Antagonists in some point or
other against some other of like piety and learning with themselves. Good and
great men are not set beyond mistakes. Nor is it seldom that passion or
prejudice or custom biasseth their judgments wide of truth: Like Eli, a grave
and 1 Samuel 1. 14.
venerable person, mistaking that for drunkenness in Hannah which was devotion.
S. Peter was dissemblingly divided between scandal and conscience from off the
Jews and his judgment, Gal. 2. 11. Acts 10.
in point of eating meats and conversing with the Gentiles, till God better
informed him. The primitive Christians were dubious and abstaining from many
things under the notion of sin, till they were better informed Acts 15. 20.
of Christian liberty. It Is as easy for the conscience to shrink to an
over-nice and rigid strictness (as, Touch not, taste not, handle not,) as Col.
2. 21.
to be dilated to an over-stretched looseness.

But saving the merited honor and respect I bear to those holy men, what wise
man now urges all the primitive rigors of Discipline, yea or all the tenets of
Doctrine which the Fathers sometime imposed on Christians as their several
judgments? No doubt, the Fathers of the Church, after the severity of those
times when Christian Religion was most-what in or very near to the furnace of
persecution, did worthily study the extern honor and gravity of it, so as to
decry all those costlinesses, delicacies and softnesses bestowed on clothes, or
houses, or bodies, or heads and faces, (which must daily prepare to marry with
the flames and fagots) as superfluous and less seasonable, and so no way
suitable to that Christian simplicity, mortifiedness, modesty and humility which
those times required, which gave daily summons to mortification by the sad and
frequent alarms of others sufferings, and their own being exposed to like
hazards of death or persecution. So this of auxiliary beauty (among other
things) they might possibly then decry and deny with some vehemence to
Christian women, not as absolutely evil, and in it self unlawful at all times,
but as inexpedient and needless at those times, when (as precise virgins) they
had more need prepare the lamps of their heart for Christ, then the beauty of
their looks and faces for their suitors or husbands. Things may be less
wholesome to some tempers and constitutions, which yet are not in themselves
poisonous or pernicious.

How zealous were some of them for vowed and perpetual Virginity, even so far
as sometime to speak less honorably of Marriage, yea to some bitterness against
second marriages? How do they exclaim as against false hair or Perukes, so
against braiding or laying forth, and powdering or coloring their hair; some
against cutting or shaving close the beard, against cost, splendour and
curiosity of clothes and diet? etc.

Not that they thought these things evil in themselves, but they observed many
Christians made an evil (that is, a scandalous and unseasonable) use of them,
the abuse of which was not so easily regulated, as the use was utterly decried.
Nor do they (as far as ever I could perceive, by what is urged out of the
Fathers by our English Writers) oppose things of this nature argumentatively so
much as oratoriously; not denying the nature and use of them to some persons,
in some cases, and at some times, but only that usual pride, levity or
impudicity which they observed or suspected in many, who (as they represent it)
used then such gross and dangerous dawbings of black, red and white, as wholly
changed the very natural looks and difference of the person. Nor did it seem to
them only vain and superfluous in most, also irreligious in many, but very
fulsome, and even uncomely, in all that used so loathsome fashions.

Besides, the greatest strictness of those holy Fathers seems to have been to
Votaries or resolved Virgins, in whom they thought it a kind of Apostasy to
return to those secular toys and curiosities of extern ornaments, and study of
worldly beauty, when they made a profession to abandon them, and to live far
above them, as studious not to please men, but God.

Nor is it strange if those men who generally chose celibacy or single life,
were more tetrical or less indulgent in such things to women, whom they most
feared, because they less loved or used their company, yea whose conversation
they sought wholly to avoid, casting what damps they could on their own
inclinations by their distances from them, and Declamations not only against
all feminine arts and ornaments, but even against the very Sex. Yet in their
more calm temper there is no question but they made great difference as to
times and persons in the use of the same things.

As the several censures and opinions of the Fathers must give way to the
Scriptures authority (out of which nothing of validity is produceable against
Auxiliary beauty:) so they may (without injury) be looked upon as far
inferior to the joint suffrages or resolves of Councills; without whose
concurrence with the Fathers sense, I can hardly think any thing a sin, or
violation of that modesty required by Ecclesiastical Canons and the Discipline
of the ancient Churches, from whom I find nothing ever cited by any Writer
against the use of these feminine helps of complexion, as by a joint suffrage
and determination of the Church against them; either looking upon such toys as
below the animadversion of so venerable Assemblies, or leaving them to the
freedom of every one, whose virtuous or vicious minds best resolved the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of them in particular cases and consciences, whose
nature and use in general was (as all outward things) indifferent. I find no
woman (otherwise unblameable) either censured or excommunicated for her
coloring and dressing: nor did the ancient Confessors or Casuists (any more
then at this day) either examine or condemn the use of tincture and complexion
to the face as any sin in it self, but only in reference to the mind and end
of the use.

Private men's opinions may not charge the Soul with sin in things of outward
use and fashion, where Scriptures and Councils are silent.

Nothing is more usual then for single persons (otherwise very learned and
godly) to be strangely wedded and vehemently addicted to their own wonted
modes, their customary opinions and fashions; of which they at length begin to
make some conscience, as if they ought ever to approve and never to recant what
they have long liked or disliked, esteeming those things next to sin which are
new and unwonted to them.

Which temper (I think) was not only observable in many of those holy Fathers,
whose venerable ashes I leave to their rest, (hoping to find them more friends
and suffragans to the virtues and modesty of sober women, then enemies to their
beauty, or condemners of those things they sometime innocently use, to conceal
the defects or help the infirmities of their faces in point of beauty:) but (I
am sure) nothing has been more frequent then such high and affected severities
taken up by some of the later and lesser edition of Divines, who would be
counted great Reformers of the times, because they were vehement censurers and
condemners of whatever they listed to dislike or not to fancy. Thus many of
them have not only followed the tract of some of the ancients, in their
strictnesses urged upon women as to their dresses, fashions, clothes and
adornings; but they have horribly inveighed (at first) against many other
things of new, yet civil and convenient, use, as against starch, especially if
yellow, (as if there were sin in that color more then in white or blew) to
which at length they were so reconciled, that they affected to use nothing more
in their ruffs and linen. How earnest were some Preachers against careless
ruffs, yea and against set ruffs too? Both which they (at length) came to wear,
rather then pickadilloes (which they thought had too much of the Courtier) or
little plain bands, which they liked not because the Jesuits wore such. How
was Tobacco mistaken by many great Masters of the Pulpit and peoples ears,
before they generally fell to taking of it themselves, fancying (at last) that
they never had more devout meditations or sharp inventions then those which
were begotten, or at least brought forth, by the midwifery of a pipe of good
Tobacco; which at last perfumed their clothes, their books, their studies, and
their Sermons? What enemies were some Ministers to Perukes, to high-crown'd or
broad-brimmed Hats, to long Clokes and Canonical Coats, and now to long
Cassocks, since the Scotch Jump is looked upon as the more military fashion,
and a badge of a Northern and cold Reformation?

How have some cried down all Dancing, which most sober persons now use? Many
are at discord with all Music and Singing with art and curiosity, in sacred
psalmody, from which neither David nor the devoutest Jews of old, nor the holy
Christians of former times did abhor; yea they highly adorned it, and devoted
it to God's glory, as one of his special and diviner gifts to manking, which
the Church knows best how to improve.

How bitter have some been against all lusory use of Lots, or any play with
chance; so against all playing at Cards, though merely recreative, as Bowls and
other sports are? Lastly, against all Usury, or profit upon interest from dry
money, how vehement has the torrent of some men's judgments been? which yet
others reconcile of late (by some distinctions) with God's Laws and a good
conscience, as finding that civil commerce cannot else be well carried on.

Some can digest the first fruits of a simple usury upon the principal, but by
no means use upon use from the same hand; which yet is but the same thing with
the first, unless it alter the case to put out the interestmoney to a new hand,
or continue it in the old.

Such hasty and over-early blossoms of precipitant censures and preposterous
zeal do often arise in very godly minds, out of a principle not only venial, but
so far commendable, as it argues a cautious tenderness of offending God:
which blossoms yet do often fall off in time upon further trial of truth, as
abortives to truth, never bearing ripe fruits as to any thing of grace and
virtue, though they flourish (for a while) in the warm opinions and devout
fancies of some Ministers and others, till time correct and cool them, or
contrary custom prevailing confute them, as to those clamors they made against
them for sins, and a good conscience; when indeed the chief thing that moved
their passion and prejudice was but unwontedness and tradition, with want of
due consideration.

And certainly, if those eminent Heroes of Religion, (the ancient Fathers) will
give us leave to stand as Pygmies on the shoulders of such Giants, that we may
the better take a free, full and advised prospect of their private opinions;
much more freedom may I or any one take to examine the magisterial censures
and Anathemaes which those men use who are of later edition and lesser print,
who bear themselves in some things (as in this case of aiding the complexion by
any tincture) as much upon the name and authority of the Fathers, the Fathers,
as the Jews did upon The Temple of the Lord, the Jer. 7. 4.
Temple of the Lord; when yet they urge neither pregnant Reason, nor any
Scripture Proof from the storehouses of the Fathers, but only follow them
more by a credulous easiness of spirit then by any discerning or convincing
power, using their bows and powder rather then their arrows and bullets, more
repeaters of their popular Oratorious vehemencies then urgers and confirmers of
their argumentative strength, which either they find not in those Fathers who
have been vehement as to this point, or else they cannot tell how to manage it.

Yea I am informed by a person of learned integrity, with who^ I conferred often
in this case, that one man of great repute, namely Peter Martyr, is so partial
an enemy against what he calls painting of the face in any sort or degree, that
writing upon the occasion of Jezebel's Peter Martyr Comment on the Kings.
fate against this practice in women, he not only urges, but stretches to a
falsity, a story out of S. Jerome, as if it were a dreadful hammer by which to
demolish all painting: when indeed S. Jerome does not in that place so much as
mention painting the face; when he tells Laeta (in order to her daughters
education, becoming an intended Nun or Recluse) of a woman who, having designed
her daughter to be a votary Virgin without her husbands consent, was by the
husbands command moved to alter the child's veiled dress and over-grave habit,
to the wonted fashion and civility of other young Gentlewomen, as to clothes,
hair, gemms, etc. For which deed (says S. Jerome; for painting her daughters
face, says Peter Martyr, besides the text and story) the mother was the
following night terrified with dreams and visions, and threatened with speedy
death, if she did not restore her daughter to the former mode of votal
habiliments.

Truly the report seems fitted to the pulse and bent of those times, which were
high venerators of vowed Virginity: But it is strange that a wife should be
threatened by God with death for obeying her husband in such a thing, the
contrary to which ought not to have been carried so far on without or against
the husbands and fathers will. But for the more odium of the business, this
story is brought in by P. Martyr against all painting of the face, under the
name, but not from the true authority, of S. Jerome.

Your Ladyship farther instanceth in one of our later English Divines, to whom
I am no stranger, Mr. Downam, a person of primitive piety and great learning
(no doubt;) whom who so shall read, in the place you cited, crying down with so
great fervor all painting the face, (for so he calls and counts all helps to
complexion) must needs be (as I was) much startled, fearing lest so great
Ordances discharged with so much noise and terror should be laden not with
powder only, to scare poor souls, but also with deadly bullets, to daunt and
destroy them. Yet with the peace and favor of so good a man, even my
simplicity can easily discern (having often seriously perused that his vehement
discourse and rough Satyr against all helps of beauty) that there is more of
sound and terror then of force or execution in what he there says against them.

The good man rather took it for granted and indisputable, then seriously
pondered the grounds of other men's and his own heavy censures, which rank it in
the number of absolute and utter sins of a gross nature; never so much as
distinguishing between the thing done, and the end or mind of those that do
it: as if the sober relief of a pallid infirmity, or the modest study of
outward decency, were the same things with levity, pride and wantonness. At the
same rate he might have inveighed against quenching ones thirst, or drinking to
cheerfulness, because of the sordid consequences of drunkenness, riot and
debauchery.

This worthy man (after S. Cyprian) calls all painting or coloring the face an
Invention of the devil: but he proves no such thing by any due reason or
authority, only he seems in this case to believe (what otherwise he wholly
disbelieves) that old fabulous fancy, which they say some of the Fathers had
from the Jews, of Devils being Incubusses, and that in their courtships to
women they gratified them with these inventions which might help their decaying
beauties, and make those wanton devils still inamoured of them. Which frivolous
and odious reflection (fitted to vulgar passions and capacities) has, as no
certainty, so no weight of truth in it; unless he fondly imagine with some,
that the race of the Giants before the flood were of this progeny, which (it is
said) the Sons of God (whom Genesis 6. 4.
he must interpret Devils) begat of the daughters of men, whom they took,
because they were fair, and to whom they contributed (it seems) this rare art
of painting the face to keep them lovely. What sober person can dote so far
as to allow any such monstrous fictions, and more monstrous productions?

As for the rarity of these Inventions which by any color or tincture serve to
help the ruddiness of the face or the liveliness of complexion, neither Mr.
Downam nor the Fathers needed to rake the Devils skull to find them. Alas! it
is a most easy and obvious thing, both as to the things used, and also as to
the fancy of applying them to the skin or face, as well as in any other
ordinary ways of dying, coloring or painting of things. Nothing is and ever
has been more natively common (as I formerly told your Ladyship) to all
Nations in the world, then men and women painting and adorning themselves with
several colors, juyces and tinctures, being an ordinary custom, and as
exposed to humane art and experience as the staining or dying of any clothes,
the making of any pictures or statues; to which the various and communicable
colors afforded by Nature in feathers, flowers, roots, herbs, beans, stalks
and wood, in flies also and fishes, do daily invite mankind to the exercise of
their art and fancies in applying of them.

But (Madam) how sad a thing is it to see grave men urge in matters of sin and
cases of conscience those putid fables and ridiculous fictions which themselves
do not believe? What is this but like the rattling of hail upon tiles, which
neither wets with moisture, nor pierces with its strokes and noise? Such downy
feathers as these will never make up the ponderousness of a millstone; and such
as every gross sin must be (which sinks to hell) both by its offense against
God's will, and by that shame, guilt or conviction which rises in our own
consciences either before, in, or after the commission.

His other heap of arguments are only assertory, not probatory: As, that it is
an absolute sin in the nature and use of it; which he should have made good by
some plain proofs and pregnant instance of right reason or God's word against
it: which he does not so much as offer at in the least kind; when we all know
that the formal malignity or evil in all sin is from the pravity or contrariety
of our wills against the holy will of God, either as revealed in Scripture, or
by the common light of Nature.

In which last what he seems to urge as to the reproaching and mocking of God,
the deception of others, and the belying our selves, I have already answered,
when your Ladyship instanced in them; showing your Ladyship, that there is no
more done in this mending or aiding of the complexion by sober minds and modest
persons, then is done in many other practices of humane art and invention,
which help crookedness, lameness, dimness of sight, or any other defect and
deformity in nature; which no man is so foolish as to impute to the devils
invention, or to count them any hurtful imposturage, injury or indignity
against God, our selves, or others.

For his fear lest women should rather poison or mar their faces, eyes and
teeth by the use of such things as help their looks; his care and charity to
women in this is not so great, as his ignorance is of those innocent and
harmless applications, which are far enough from what rustical jealousies
might possibly fear and imagine, as if women were so mad of a little color,
that they will venture upon uncorrected Quicksilver, untamed Mercury, the
invincible Aqua fortis, or any such pernicious drugs; which yet (sure) may be
used in their several kinds and qualities without sin, if they had a
face-mending virtue in them. But it is certain that tincture which women
generally use to quicken their complexion withal, is as safe and inoffensive
to their own health as any flower. So that from this error can be no true
ground against it, as if it were selfindangering, and so offensive both to God
and man.

Lastly, for his censure, that all are proud, lewd, vain and wanton women who
use it in any kind, to any end; truly it is as harsh as rash: nor is it to be
justified as to the truth of the assertion, if any ever did use it soberly and
modestly; least of all can it hold in Christian charity, unless he had known
the hearts and intents of all those that ever used it to be such as he there
expresses, when (alas, good man!) it is very probable he knew very few, it may
be not any one, that used it; possibly he, with other men of the same brow and
severity, might suspect some unjustly, (which is ordinary in those that cannot
live well without censuring others for something evil.) No doubt, he highly
approved others for very virtuous and good Ladies, who used some art and
quickening, while he was never the wiser, nor they the worse, either in his
opinion or their own innocent intentions.

So that leaving the cloud and crowd of Authors and Writers, of Fathers and
Preachers, whom I shall ever respect and value according to what I find of
godly wisdom and Christian charity in them; your Ladyship must give me leave
rather to look to the more sure word of God and that light of right Reason
which enlighten every man, one in the world, both in the Church, as to the
knowledge of good and evil, sin and sanctity, vice and virtue. If Fathers or
others speak not according to this light, all their Oratorious polishings and
shinings are but false beams, as the glistering of Glo-worms, from humane, not
divine authority, which only can set a stamp of sin upon our actions. Neither
the wit nor tongue of any or many men can be a mint capable to coin the least
farthing sin, much less so large a piece and medal as this man pretends to make
of any helping our complexion; which seems to him to be as the talent of lead
cast into the Ephah, Zach. 5. 8.
where the woman sat, when truly he proves it not by any weight of arguing
(and bare words are but as wind) to be so much as the dust of the balance. And
truly I cannot yet see but that in the height of religious severity it may be
put among those venial vanities of humane life, of which no stricter account in
point of morality need to be given or exacted, but only that divine indulgence
by which God in innocent freedoms, as a father to his children, gives us leave
to adorn and please our selves, without any of his displeasure.

Nor may the violence and bitterness of some good men's censures against all
auxiliary beauty seem strange to us; for nothing is more easy and frequent
then antique and popular errors, which either cry things up or down as some one
or more persons of eminency first fancied and opined; from whom, without any
further trial, many receive for current all that is stamped with their name:
Thence it grows so common and customary, by the authority of time and
multitude, that even learned and sober men in following ages are content to
swim down the common stream, rather then trouble themselves to cross or
question such vulgar, and therefore authentic, Errors.

Which, I remember, my Lord your Brother, in one of his many excellent
discourses (meriting a far better memory and tongue then mine) observed to be
so frequent both in politic and pious affairs, in things Civil and
Ecclesiastical, because very few examine the marrow and inside of things, but
take them upon the credit of customary opinings: and what they hold even in
capite and cord too, is more by a superficial tenure of credulity, then any
pregnant proofs and good evidences of Reason or Religion.

Which easiness if it be excusable to humane infirmity in lesser matters, where
there may be an adherence in persuasion or practice to either side without any
sin or notorious error, yet in things highly charged with sin, even to a more
facinorous and notorious degree, (as this of any painting and complexioning the
face is by this worthy man and others) grave and godly Divines should be very
wary what they affirm or deny; lest they be over-righteous beyond what God
imposes, Eccl 7. 16.
or severe beyond God's smitings, or uncharitably lay either heavier pressures
on the consciences, or harsher censures on the actions of others, then God
himself does.

Men of never so eminent learning and piety may not either add or detract from
the word of God, lest they be found liars, as Solomon speaks Prove. 30. 6. Nor
ought they to multiply sins by unreasonable and unseasonable severities, beyond
what God has done. For such passionate and precipitant ways of censuring and
condemning in case of sin (where pregnant convictions in Reason or Scripture
are wanting) besides that they are most unworthy of a cautious and well-advised
Divine, (who, being in God's stead to people, ought not to pretend God's
authority where he can produce none) do not only charge the consciences of
Christians with needless burdens, and bind them to unjust bondages, but they
very much (also) baffle the credit or honor of Religion, highly diminishing the
reverence due to the Ministerial profession, as to that binding and loosing
power of the Mat. 18. 18.
Keys which is principally committed to them. For nothing makes people less
prone to observe, or more ready to disbelieve their words, as to the avoiding
real sins, then when they find them so loose, superficial, and but verbally
imperious in feigned and forced enormiries, which are not convinced to have in
them (if rightly tried and stated) any iniquity against God or man, being
injurious to neither, where the heart is upright, as it easily may be, and no
doubt always is, in modest women, who generally use in some degree or other
(as they best fancy) some things that they think best set off their outside and
handsomeness to the world.

Furthermore, from such magisterial rigors infinite doubts and scruples are
raised among weaker consciences, who dare less trust to their own judgments,
while they doubtingly use or do those things which they are loath to want, and
against which they see nothing proved as evil; yet are they scrupulous and
afraid to use them, because of so much prejudice and clamor against them: So
that hence grows their snare and sin too, while they want that faith in using
them which is necessary to justify, not the nature of the thing done, but the
conscience of the doer; as the Apostle requires, Romans Romans 14. 23.
14. 23. Whereas, in reference to the nature of the thing done, the Apostle
assures us, that the Kingdom of God, as Romans 14. 17.
to gracious power and peace, consists not in any of these things of external
use (as meat or drink, and so clothes, colors, etc.) nor ought the conscience
in these to be set upon the rack and tainter, but rather acquainted with its
liberty, which being kept within the bounds of modesty, sobriety and innocence,
needs not be scared with the scruple of sin.

And indeed in this very case of Complexioning, I have heard that many learned
and wise men, both at home and abroad, who are more remote from vulgar easiness
and credulity, do forbear to condemn (as sin) the use of those things that are
ingenuously and innocently helpful to the beauty of modest women; but they
rather examine the true state of things, both in the nature of what is used,
(which must needs be good, as in the order of God's creatures) also as to the
mind and intent of the doer or user of them: accordingly they determine, That
all colorings added to the face are so far sin or not sin in the conscience
of the doer, as their minds are morally and intentionally disposed either to
modest and ingenuous decency, which is commendable, or to lewdness, pride and
lubricity, which are blameable: And as they find the things used to be in the
cabinet or storehouse of nature; also the use of them to be no where forbidden
in Reason or Scripture, as a relief to such defects or infirmities of beauty as
may befall the face; so they resolve that according to the qualities and
aptitudes which are seen in those things for such ends, they may lawfully be
used with humility, charity, purity and thankfulness, without any offense to
any relations wherein we stand obliged to God, our neighbors, or our selves.

We see in many cases that time and calmer considerations, together with
different customs, which (like the tide or flood) insensibly prevail over both
manners and minds of men, do often take off the edge and keenness of men's spirits
against those things whereof they sometimes were great abh^^^ers, reconciling
their mortal feuds, and wearing off their popular prejudices. Few men's
judgments are so died in grain, but they will fade and discolor, being
most-what only dipped by vulgar easiness in common opinions: Nor do I see any
thing unlikely, but that upon second thoughts and more exact view, a fair
moderation and civil atonement may be mediated between Ladies Countenances and
their Consciences, by the intercession of judicious and religious persons, both
Ministers and others, who dare to be wise beyond the vulgar, and who have
patience to consider better of this case then has been wonted.

It will (no doubt) appear how little or no ground there has been for so great
reproaches or terrors of sin, in a case no way more dangerous to the Soul or
body of a virtuous woman then all other civil and allowed Ornaments are; where
by adding a little quickening and luster to her looks, she is no way hindered
from the Love of God or her neighbor, in chaste and charitable ways: That
where no cost is lavished, no time-wasted, no good duty neglected, no vice
nourished, no Virtue depressed, but only a civil decency studied (which was
never denied to holy women in ways agreeable to nature) there can be no enmity
to Grace; nor compliance with sin.

OBjECTION X. Painting the Face very scandalous, and so unlawful.
BUT (good Madam) suppose Artificial beautifying of the face be not in it self
absolutely unlawful, but may in some Countries and some cases be used by some
persons privately and soberly, without the confidence of sinning against God;
yet what shall we say to the Scandal and offense it gives, when known to many
zealous Preachers and Professors here in England, whose spirits are much
grieved and offended if they do but suspect (how much more if they palpably
discern?) any Lady or Gentlewoman professing godliness to use any paint or
tincture to help their complexions? Ought not (I beseech you) all worthy women
therefore to abstain wholly from it, because it is a thing prone to grieve the
spirits of good people, although they do not think it absolutely a sin? Is it
not better to want a little color in the cheeks, then to damp God's Spirit in
any ones heart; or to offend Mat. 18. 6.
one of those little ones, as Christ speaks, by abating that good hope and joy
they had in our graces?

The Apostle's rule is, even to those who were (as he was) fully persuaded of
the lawfulness of many things as to their consciences (that they were of free
and sinless use in themselves) yet (says Romans 14. 15.
he) if thy brother be grieved, or stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak by
the use and exercise of this thy freedom, Charity here forbids thee to use
this thy liberty, lest thou destroy by it those for whom Christ died. Though
things are pure and lawful in their nature, and in God's general permission,
yet they become then evil and unreformed when they give uncharitable scandals
to others: So that the point of scandal (which is in this very great and
ordinary) seems bar sufficient to keep off all painting or artificial
tincture from the faces of pious and charitable women.

ANSWER.
THE point of Scandal, (which your Ladyship now makes your refuge in this
dispute) either given or received, has, like a Labyrinth, so many windings and
turnings, so many perplexed cautions and distinctions, that it seems rather a
maze to lose the mind in, then any fair retreat where judgment and conscience
may repose and secure themselves. None is so simple a Sophister in disputing
about things of dubious and indifferent nature, but when he is driven by Reason
and Scripture from his strong holds of prejudices and confidences, when he sees
the thundering Cannons of his censures and Anathemas dismounted or cloyed, he
then retreats to this of Scandal, and earths himself in this borough, pleading
that he is scandalized with what you do, (or if he but suspect you do it)
though he give you no reason against what you do, nor can indeed prove that
you do what (it may be) he suspects. Thus Ignorance, Superstition and
Suspicion, will be ever over-awing Truth and Christian Liberty, both in private
persons, and in public Societies or Churches, imperiously injoyning others to
forbear the use of their liberty, merely because this or that poor soul says
they are offended, though they give no reason why.

Thus the pleaders of Scandal, like soldiers of Fortune, are engaging in every
quarrel, where they stake nothing against the liberty, peace, order and decency
of others, but only their private fancy, opinion and dislike; who yet are many
times most prodigal in giving others great and public Scandals, by using or
disusing such things as others no less quarrel at, often denying Obedience to
public and lawful Authority in those things of which they make any scruple,
imperiously challenging this liberty to themselves, yea glorying in their
scandalous refractoriness to public order and constitutions: yet they deny
this liberty to others in the same or like cases, about things dubious and
indifferent, concerning which there is no precise or express will of God
declared, but they are left to prudential freedoms as to private men's use, till
the consent and wisdom of the public has confined and determined them to one
way for order sake and uniformity, whereto private freedom (still free as to
the opinion of the nature of things) ought yet humbly and charitably to conform
it self as to public practice, for the avoiding of public scandal and
dissension by reason of their difformity.

Between superstitious and insolent spirits, (who either dislike all that
others do different from them, or enjoin others to tread in none but their
steps and to dance after their pipe) true Christian liberty (as between two
thieves) is crucified; between the upper and the nether millstone, of Scandal
given or taken, it is (together with Christian Charity) so ground to powder,
that a sober Christian has little left him to do, say or enjoy, whereat some
or other will not take offense.

Not only bad things or doubtful, but even good things, and the very best, are
sometimes to some persons scandalous: So was the believing, yet ceremonious,
Jew to the believing Gal. 2.
Gentile, and the believing, but inceremonious, Gentile to the believing Jew.
Christ himself and the whole tenor of the Gospel was a stumbling block to the
1 Cor. 1. 23.
Jew, and foolishness to the Gentile. Papists are offended with many things
which Protestants hold and do; and contrarily Protestants cry out of the
scandals Papists give them. So the most Factions and Schisms in the Church
shelter their rents and dissensions under the shield of Scandal by them taken,
less minding the scandals by themselves given to others; by which (as madmen
with swords) they lay about them, and smite all that come near them.

There is nothing so sober and modest, so civil and decent, so sacred and
solemn, at which ignorant, or capricious, or proud and imperious spirits will
not take offense, who like nothing in use and custom, never so ancient and
innocent, unless they have first enacted or settled it: they must be fathers or
godfathers to it, either begetting or confirming it, else they will cry it down
as scandalous, spurious, impious, Popish and Antichristian; pretending they
have more cause to be scared with other men's shadows and ceremonies, which they
fansy to be shaped like Bears and Lions, then others have to be offended with
their paws and jaws, the sharp teeth and nails of those real beasts and birds
of prey which they carry about them; calling their own rapines religious, and
their very Sacriledges sacred, yet highly offended if others do by word or deed
vindicate their own liberties, customs and constitutions, never so decent and
ingenuous, against the rude novelties and riotous invasions of the others
supercilious fierceness and injuriousness. One is scandalized at my using my
liberty, though without any prescribing, urging or injoyning upon them: I am no
less offended at their invading my liberty by needless strictnesses and
uncharitable censures, which though they wound not my conscience, yet they seek
to weaken my credit.

Out of which perplexity or streights of scandals both on the right and left
hand, I know no shorter or safer way to redeem a sober Christian, that desires
to live void of offense before God and man, then seriously to consider every
thing (before he either practice it himself, or censure it in another) by the
true notions and internal principles of good or evil, as morally and
conscientiously considered. The only way, as David tells us, to cleanse Psa.
119. 9.
our own (or others) ways, is by taking heed to God's word, regarding what in
his precepts negative or affirmative either pleases or displeases him, whose
revealed will is a sufficient and infallible rule of all requisite holiness:
According to which, as I have just cause to be offended with my self and others
in what I see my self or they do against the express will of God; so where
this does not appear by any Scriptural reason and demonstration, I have no
cause either to scruple in my self, or to suspect as a scandal in others, that
against which I see nothing declared by God, but a natural, civil and ingenuous
liberty left me and others, which is always to be kept within bounds of modesty
and discretion; which sober and unblameable conversation is enough to satisfy
minds truly humble and charitable, who love not as Salamanders to live in the
flames of contention, or like Caterpillars to make their cobwebs on bushes and
thorns.

And however, in things assuredly lawful, (as to my private conscience) a
charitable and discreet tenderness becomes the modesty and gentleness of a
Christian toward others, in those things which have possessed and persuaded men
either by contrary customs or prejudices, and (it may be) by temporary
precepts of God; as in the case of Jewish ceremonies and extern observations,
(of whose abrogation some were not soon or easily satisfied;) also in the case
of eating things offered 1 Cor. 10.
to Idols, (which some scrupled out of an abhorrence of all Idolatry) which God
had strictly forbidden: in these and the like cases (I say) a condescending for
a while, and private forbearance for fear of giving scandal, is very fit, till
I have used those means which might best convince and instruct them of mine and
their liberty given us now by God. Yet if they carelessly, proudly, peevishly
and obstinately resist or repel the pregnancy of my reasons, without giving
any valid answer to them, or producing ought of right reason or Scripture for
their continued scruples, scandals and jealousies, they are henceforth to be
looked upon and treated, not as weak, but wilful.

Nor can I think it the duty of a Christian, for ever to indulge their folly,
fondness and pertinacy, of such forbearing to use those things for which he
brings many pregnant reasons, from the nature, end, and aptitude of things,
from their own want and capacity, also from God's permission, of which I
presume where I find no prohibition; whenas they produce little or nothing
beyond a blind credulity, a bayardly confidence, or an imperious insolence,
which delights to find fault with others, and to domineer over them in some
petty things, for which at best they urge passion, prejudice, custom, other
men's opinions, or such popular stuff of which there is no end, in which what
Reason cannot at present, Time will afterward easily confute that crosness and
peevishness which often transports men against many things beyond the measure of
Reason or true Religion. As I have heard for certain of a Minister of no small
print and repute among the people, who took great offense at the great sleeves
of a Ladies new-fashioned Gown, calling them antichristian, ungodly, strange
apparel, and such as the Lord was displeased with; yet within one year this
good man's wife was in the same fashion, without any scandal to her supercilious
husband. So crasie are some men's judgments, and so easy their censures, as to
matters of Scandal, where Novelty or wontedness sway more with them then either
Reason or Religion. Nothing less becomes a grave and godly Christian then to
multiply needless scruples and scandals.

As to the pretended scandal which some say they take from women's use of any
Auxiliary beauty, truly where modest and sober persons use it discreetly, the
scandal cannot arise either from the nature of the thing done, or the mind and
manners of the doer; (which in all things appear worthy of a good Christian)
nor can it arise easily from the certainty of their knowledge who are offended,
but only from their impertinent curiosity and suspicion. As the first is rude
and unwelcome; so the other many times false, always unnecessary. It is
seldom that any owns their art to them, nor is it often that these inquisitive
pryers can certainly conclude that to be used which they are so jealous of. So
that if they could forbear their uncomly inquisitiveness and impertinent
curiosity, their scandal taken would soon cease; which is more in their own
eyes then others faces, where any such thing is soberly and discreetly used,
without any haughtiness and affectation of looks, or wantonness of manners. I
believe for the most part such things are so used by all ingenuous persons,
that these morose Inspectors of Ladies faces are never the wiser, unless they
have more perceptive eyes then ever I had. But if it were owned and confessed
to them, what I pray are they the worse, or why offended? since neither have
any of them as yet proved it to be a sin, either from any positive Law of God's
word, or from any necessary inordinacy and immorality of mind inseparable from
the use of such things: nor are they by another use of it either urged or
tempted to use it, further then they want or approve it. As for that
depravedness of mind which they fear may attend the use of these helps of
handsomeness; it is as objectable against all those things which either native
beauty or art afford, whereof no wise man makes any scruple, yet may they be as
much occasions to sin as this whereof they are so cautious. Evil minds, as foul
stomachs, turn the best food to corrupt humors. But we must not therefore
starve our selves, by forbearing good victuals.

The work then that grave Ministers and other sober Christians have to do in
this and the like cases of extern use of things is, not presently to cry down
every thing as wicked and abominable. because they are at first through
inconsideration or unwontedness scandalized at them, but seriously to examine
what cause they have to be so scared and scandalized, as from any moral evil
pregnant and inherent in the nature or use of things; and accordingly to state
both their own censures and others consciences. If nothing be found justly
offensive, they may not from fancy or custom call that unclean which God Acts
10. 15.
has made clean; but rather banish away those finister and silly scandals
which arise from the darkness, weakness, or wilfulness of their own minds,
which are no just bars against another liberty in things lawful, at which no
wise person will be, nor good body ought to be, offended.

And in cases of so private and retired use of such things as these are by
which women preserve or advance the handsomeness of their looks, wherewith none
are acquainted, and of which none can be assured, unless they list who use
them, as I see no cause to own the use of any such thing to them whom I find
not to have judgment or charity sufficient to interpret or bear such things
well, so nor have I any reason to ask their leave, nor more to be shaken with
these scandals which are needlessly taken by them, not willingly given by me.
Though others, rather out of obstinacy then scrupulosity, out of peevishness
more then tenderness, do pretend scandal more then they prove it; yet my care
must be, in the use of such things seriously to assert my own freedom as to my
confcience, by being rightly persuaded both of the lawfulness of the thing, and
looking to the innocence of my own intentions in the use of it. Thus the
Apostle tells us, some Christians lawfully might observe a day to the Lord, and
eat meats offered Romans 14. 5, 6. 1 Cor. 10. 25.
to Idols, as to their private practice, notwithstanding others doubted, and
would be offended, if they were acquainted with their so doing: which yet was
no hinderance to another private liberty, grounded on God's grand Charter and
donation, which is, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. Nor is any
thing in nature denied us where the use of it falls under the regulation of
Reason, Grace and Virtue, which in these things of artificial beauty, as in all
extern ornaments and enjoyments, are strictly required, and being exactly
observed, do abundantly vindicate both the goodness of the things in nature,
and the lawfulness of them as to mine or any others use of them.

OBJECTION XI. Painting the Face a thing of ill report, and so not to be
followed.
BUT suppose (Madam) these artificial helps of women's beauty should not be in
the nature and use of them absolutely sinful, so as to violate the conscience;
yet since it cracks women's credits, and exposes them to reproach, which the
Apostle calls the 1 Timothy 3. 9.
snare of the devil, it ought to be wholly avoided, not only as to others
scandal and perception, but also as to our own private use; since the Apostles
tenderness bids us not only provide things honest before all men, but also to
follow things of good report; that we Phil. 4. 8.
may not only be good, but preserve the fragrancy of a good name, which Prove.
22. 1.
gives a great sweetness to goodness, and is as perfume to a good garment, or
as incense to the Temple: consequently we ought to avoid those things which are
under any cloud of infamy, or blasted generally with an ill report, (though not
so notoriously convicted of immorality.) I am sure the art and mode of adding
any tincture or color to the face or complexion generally hears ill with us,
though it shows never so well done; and is not so much to the advantage of
women's aspects, as to the disadvantage of their reputation and honor, which is
and has been the sense almost of all people in all times that had any remark
for civility and piety; yea the vulgar simplicity is every where severe against
those that are but suspected to use any such arts. No Lady or Gentlewoman is so
commendable for her piety, chastity and charity, but this comes in as a dead
fly in a precious confection, Eccl. 10. 1.
when it is suggested, O but she painteth. A little false color, though but
fancied, discolours all her other luster; because it makes such generally
esteemed as the cheats, deceivers and impostors of mankind; the greatest
Hypocrites and Jugglers, because they use artifice and falsity in that which
they pretend, not to say or to do, but to be. What credit can they deserve in
other things (which are far inferior to themselves) when they are not
upright or sincere as to their very Being, but by such disguises and
dissemblings make themselves a real and visible (though a silent) Lie? Although
their tongues do not speak untruths, yet their hands make lies, Rev. 22. 15.
and their faces proclaim falsehood, which is abominable to God; yea as the
Prophet speaks of other Idolaters, Isai. 44. 20. so these self-Idolaters, when
they take the fucus or false colors to sacrifice to the Idol of their looks,
may justly say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? No person but concludes
that if God threaten to punish strange apparel, he will not spare strange Zeph.
1. 8.
faces, which in spite of God and Nature will pretend to handsomeness, and make
that to be which is not.

Yea, the self-guilt of every one that uses such arts, though never so soberly
and discreetly, (as you advise) is such, that they retire and hide themselves
from the sight of others while they apply their face-physicks, by a strange
riddle being ashamed to be seen doing that which they purposely do to make
them more worthy to be seen of others. If it be a practice of honesty or
ingenuity, why is it attended with shame and self-guiltiness? which are black
shadows following sin and unworthiness, justly meriting to be entertained by
others with reproach and disrepute, when they are self-discountenanced and
condemned. As worthy actions bring forth honor, and are accompanied with a
generous boldness, so also they are followed with good report and clear
reputation, which attends virtue as light does the Sun. If the light then of
Scripture were less clear against all painting the face; yet the rule of
reputation, which is common fame, the law of honor and light of Nature, seems
to discover the uncomeliness and dishonor of this practice. The voice of people
in this and many other cases is as the voice of God, which is often to be learned
from the common notions and suffrages or sense of mankind, which the Apostle
owns in the case of women's habits and adornings, as the law and dictate of
Natures teaching 1 Cor. 11. 14.
them, where Scripture is less evident. None but persons impudent or foolish
will neglect what is generally said of them: next our Consciences and our eyes
our credit should be most tender; especially in our Sex, who have always a hard
task to play a second or aftergame at reputation: if a woman once dash upon
this rock of Reproach, she hardly ever recruits her credit (as a grave, sober
and modest person) though she should not absolutely shipwreck her conscience
with God. And truly, Madam, this sense of common fame and repute has always in
the case of Ladies complexioning arts so overawed me, that I neither durst
ever use it, nor take their parts or excuse those (otherwise very good women)
who did or were but thought to use it; yea it seemed a note of godliness to me,
to declaim bitterly against both the thing, and the persons suspected or voiced
to use it; when indeed I had no cause to conclude that any such thing was
practiced by them, further then I heard it from more prying eyes and censorious
tongues; which as it had been hard to prove, so it may be there was no such
thing: only in this, as other cases, fame often over-balances the truth of
things; and our credit depends not on what we do, but on what others list to
think of us or impute to us: which should make all wise women the more cautious
how they occasion any sinister reports of themselves, which (like evil spirits)
are easier raised then allayed; one spark oft-times kindles that fire which
many tuns of water cannot quench.

ANSWER.
MAdam, I find your Ladyship, as a wary combatant, reserves your main forces to
the last, that so you may with the greater ease and advantage overcome your
now-tired and least-suspecting adversary, who might hope your strength had by
this time been well-nigh quite spent and exhausted. Truly your Ladyship seems
to have laid more in this last Objection then in any one you at all urged
before, both as to the weight and acuteness of what you allege against all
acquired or artificial beauty.

Yet since it is now brought up to so great a case and dispute of Conscience,
whether a sin or no sin, it is fit seriously to examine whether the strength of
your Ladyships arguments do answer the show and pomp of them. Many things are
more specious then solid, having, like vermin, a pretty kind of nimbleness,
which comes far short of that real strength or useful activity which is in
more noble and solemn creatures. I read there were many seeming spots and
appearings of leprosy, which upon the Priests due examination were not found
to be any Leprosy of uncleanness Levit. 13.
or infection. As I am well pleased to hear the freedom and force of your
Ladyships Objections, who omits nothing (I think) that can with any reason be
objected; so I shall be more pleased to find my self in a capacity of giving
your Ladyship those sober and solid Answers which may give you most
satisfaction; since nothing is more uncomfortable in cases of Conscience then
to leave the mind tottering and unresolved.

First, your Ladyship urges against it the evil report it generally has among
people: which I confess may be so far true, as you only listen to what is
reported and censured here in your own country among the mean and inferior
sort of people, for the most part; or those that are either leaders or
followers of the popular genius, who are commonly Giants in talk, and Pygmies
in judgment. One wise and serious man overweighs thousands of them, not in
bulk, but in value; as one good Diamond does many loads of pebbles. Vulgar
minds will easily cry up to heaven or down to hell any thing, either as they
have been accustomed to practice, or as they take it upon trust from those
Masters who often symbolize and comply with the vulgar humor and opinion in
lesser matters, that they may have them their disciples and abetters in greater
interests and concernments.

A little matter will lure or scare the common people into civil and religious
fashions, if they have easy leaders and bold dictators.

I have formerly told your Ladyship, as to Starch and Tobacco, so to black
Hoods and all foreign fashions, what potent and popular declamations were used
by some persons against them. So in religious forms, what ebbings and flowings
have been and daily are, as to the vulgar opinion, report and practice of
things, sometimes seditiously destroying, otherwhile pertinaciously retaining
Images in Churches? So about Caps and Hoods, Vestures and Gestures, Music and
Organs, Crosses and Weathercocks, Steeple Houses and Churches, what fierce
conflicts and Counterscuffles have been among people of various minds? one side
giving a good report, the other imputing evil report to the same things. Yea
the use of public Liturgies or solemn form of Common prayers, singing of
Psalms, the recitation of the Creed, and concluding with the Lord's prayer,
these are fallen under various reports. There are that cast so evil report on
them, as they are not pleased, scarce patient, to hear them used by others.

If one had as many ears as Argus is said to have had eyes, they would not
suffice to hear the various reports which at several times in several Countries
are given about the same things; yea the same men and women alter their minds
and reports with their age, humors, interests, company and adherents,
according as the wind blows either for or against any thing of civil or
religious use.

What an ill report do some give of Episcopacy, others no better of Presbytery,
and some worst of all of Independency, when yet each of these has some great
sticklers for them and applauders of them? Many men, yea most, are as prone to
speak evil of what they understand not, as dogs are to bark at what they see
not, only because they hear others of their kind do so.

Therefore the Apostle (who knew well how to pass through good report 2 Cor. 6.
8.
and evil) does in that place not only bid us follow what things are of good
report, but also what things are just and true: for as a false report (though
good and favorable) cannot justify that which is truly evil; no more can an
evil report justly blast that which is in it self true and good, more then the
shout and suffrage of the Jews could make the golden calf a God, when they Exo.
32. 4.
unanimously cried, These are thy Gods, o Israel.

So little heed is to be taken to the vulgar opinion or report of things, as to
the motions of the winds and clouds, Eccl. 11. 4.
which he that will sow, Solomon tells us, must not regard. Popular lungs are
seldom sound, or their breath sweet: Their tongues may sometime hit on the
right, as Balaam's ass once spoke Numb. 22. 28.
reason when it met with an Angel; but commonly the herd brays rudely and
ill-favouredly, with as little reason, order or civility, (I need not say
piety) as those Ephesians cried up their great Diana: as if mere plebeian Acts
19. 34.
noise, dust, clamor, credulity and confidence were enough to make a Goddess,
or sufficient either to consecrate or execrate any thing as divine or devilish.

So that the wise and holy Apostles direction, to steer a Christians
conversation by good report, is not to set up any popular vote or vulgar
suffrage for a Christians card and compass, which he had found to be
vertiginous, heady, inconstant, and for the most part erroneous, one while
crying him up for a God, and presently stoning him for a Acts 14. 11, 19.
malefactor; in both extremes injurious and false.

But his meaning is, that in things of less pregnant demonstration or rule for
their morality and piety, Christians should follow in point of credit and
reputation of Religion the test or suffrage of wise and good men, though never
so few, and possibly overborn by the number of others who are weak and wilful
opiners, but not just arbitrators, of good or evil report, which must be
reduced to the standard of learned, judicious, and unpassionate men's suffrages;
who give not their verdict of things as good or evil, till they have duly
considered the nature of them, apart from vulgar prejudices and surmises, or
obloquies and reproaches, with whom Crucifige is as obvious as Hosanna. The
rabble, as we read, gave a better report of Barabbas Joh. 18. 40.
then of Jesus. The way of Christian Religion was at first every where spoken
against, as a novel and pestilent heresy. The Apostle Paul heard no very good
report of himself from some people who cried, Away with him, he is Acts 21. 36.
22. 22.
not fit to live.

The later ages reformation of Religion in these Western Churches had from the
most people no very good report (at first,) though never so just and orderly
and discreet, but followed the fate of all things and persons that endeavor to
rectify or reform vulgar errors, which is, to be evil spoken of when they
offer the greatest good.

Christians and Christianity were to be martyred in their names as well as in
their persons and lives. Christ denounces a woe, when all men speak well of
them, and a blessing, when all men Luke 6. 26.
speak evil of them falsely. If evil report, Matt. 5. 11.
as from the vulgar, (who are very superficial judges of things, like cork
always swimming on the top, never sinking to the bottom of things) is to be
much regarded; for what monsters should the primitive Christians have been
looked upon, capable to scare all modest and sober persons from coming nigh
their doctrine, sacraments and manners, when they were reported to kill and eat
children, to worship an Asses head, to have early and incestuous mixtures in
the dark? All which were as false as they were abominable.

If the Echo of common report be so often false in the greater matters of
Religion, where it concerns men to be most accurately informed what they
believe or report; how little heed (I pray) may be taken to the common speech
and persuasion of people in lesser matters, and in this one particular, which
is but a toy or mote in comparison, take it in any natural, civil, or moral
notions? only the clamor and severe censures of some men have made it so
considerable, because they urge it so highly upon the consciences of women both
as sin and shame, that truly it now merits exacter scanning then (it may be) it
ever had, either by the vulgar, or those who are their most plausible teachers
and instructers.

And I believe, Madam, that upon review of the evidences of Reason or Religion,
whereupon the verdict or report of wise and conscientious Christians should be
built, you will find that the plebeian report and ordinary sense of all
artificial beauty differs from that of the more grave and better advised sort
of the world; yea and from the sense of the more serious and better educated
part of the people in this Church or Nation.

As I have been informed of those learned Divines, Schoolmen and Casuists
beyond Sea, so I am persuaded the ablest Churchmen in England, in their most
deliberate sentence, dare pass no other censure upon those customs (which are
so frequent among persons of more elegant culture and fashion, for the advance
of their beauty) then according to the true measures of morality and honesty,
which are the mind and end of the doer. Nor will righteous judges pass any
other report on those ingenuous artifices which are auxiliary to the faces
adorning, more then they do upon those that adorn the head, hands, feet,
shoulders, or other parts of the body, according to their several infirmities,
necessities or conveniences; namely that they are then good when done to good
ends, and evil when to evil intents. According to these moral and internal
principles of good or evil, the censure, judgment and report of things in
their nature and use ought to be given, without any regard (in point of
conscience) to what the vulgar easiness and prejudice or wontedness either
opines or declares.

Nor is the report and judgment of all wise and every good man always to be
taken as authentic, by their Oratorious heats and popular transports, (when
possibly they would deny or discountenance an abuse, which is most unnecessary
in those things that at best are not very necessary, but only tolerable and
convenient) but by their calm and sedentary determinations; not as standing
before the tribunals of humane opinion and applause, but as appealing to God's
judgementseat, which is to be set up in every ones Conscience.

So that the Apostles direction, to attend what report or same things have, is
to be understood cautiously and strictly, not loosely and vulgarly. People,
like unskilful Apothecaries and Mountebanks, often put the titles of Antidotes on
poisons, and poisonous inscriptions on wholesome Antidotes. Neither this nor
the like places in Scripture which concern good manners are to be swallowed
without chewing; we must not devour Scripture kernels with the husk or letter
unbroken and entire: for by such a fallacy I might find (hard by your place
alleged against them) a like place in favor of these feminine artifices,
because the Apostle commands Christians to follow all things that are lovely or
comely; among Phil. 4. 8.
which rank and number many esteem these helps to their complexion, else
certainly they would never use them. But this were rather to play with
Scripture then to apply it seriously, and to make those holy directions rather
as Tennis-bals tossed to and fro in idle disputes, then as nails fastened by the
masters of Assemblies.

But your Ladyship endeavors to give an account why these complexioning arts
justly fall under such evil report, or so general an infamy, among the meaner
sort of people; as being esteemed a cheat and cosenage, a making and acting a
lie, a self-Idolatry, a Christian personated with a Comical face, fitter for a
stage then a Church; that from a self-shame and secret guilt it affects
secrecy; that as a dead fly it corrupts the greatest commendations and
perfections of any woman.

These are still but sparks of odium and scorn which fly from the vulgar anvils
and hammers, which commonly both over-heat and over-labour what they undertake
to forge or reform.

First then, as to the Deception, which you call a Cheat; truly it is not so
much in this of helping the paleness or adding a quickness of complexion to the
face, as it is in other things of lameness and crookedness, etc. there the
substance (as it were) and figures, here the color only is a little altered:
yet these are used without any such odious clamors and imputations, yea they
are allowed and commended as indulgences of humane pity and charity, to cover,
conceal or supply any defect or deformity in the outward man. Which even Mr.
Perkins himself allows, who (yet) as to the Perkins Cases of conscience.
point of complexioning (which he calls painting) cries it down after the
wonted rode, in few words and fewer arguments, as against the Laws of Nature
and Scripture; but of which he produces nothing but that circumstance of
Jezebel's story, which I have answered. And indeed that worthy man seems in
this, as in some other Cases of Conscience, rather to pass them over with a
popular and plausible easiness, then to examine the true grounds, or to state
them after the proportion of that great learning and piety which were in so
excellent a Preacher: yet should not any thing (next clearing and stating the
saving Fundamentals of Religion) be more accurately done then this work of
resolving cases of Conscience. Many make pretty Preachers, who come very short
of profound Casuists or exact Confessors: to both which works he was rarely
fitted where he attended the controversy, and made the Scruple his business;
not contenting himself, as in this, with easy and ordinary answers, which have
their authority from wontedness more then truth, and from men more then God.

All ingenuous concealings or amendings of what is originally or casually
amiss, or seems so, in our bodies and outsides, deserves not the least touch,
much less those black brands of cheating and lying, when only decency and
civility are joined to modesty and humility, which in this case may as easily
be done as in any, without any indignity to God or injury to man; yea every one
is well pleased, as in themselves, so in their children and relations, to be
thus cheated and deluded, by the handsomeness of such a disguise which seems
most native. The blessed Apostles piety justifies that laudable civility 1 Cor.
12. 23.
of bestowing more abundant comeliness (by art) there where Nature has
bestowed least on the parts of the body: Nor is it any reproach or insolence to
God's workmanship thus to say or thus to do. Though, properly speaking,
nothing in pure nature is uncomely which God has formed even as to our vile
bodies, since every part has its form and aptitude to the good ends appointed:
yet since sinful infirmities have befallen our bodies, they are many ways
subject to diseases, defects and deformities, and nothing is denied us in piety
and civility which may best rectify, remove, hide, or dissemble any such
natural or accidental pravity. For God has not so confined us in religious
modesty, as not to give us leave to marry Art to Nature, and to use both those
portions and stocks which he has given us to his glory and our own or others
sober and chaste contentment. Nor is it other then rustic or Adamitick
impudence, to confine Nature to it self, and to strip our bodies of all the
additaments of fair vestments or other ornaments of humane art and invention.
Such naked and forlorn Quakers act a part much more cunning, false and
histrionical, then those that least affect such pitiful simplicities.

To call every thing a Lie which we make show of beyond the native propriety of
things, is such a gross and ridiculous severity as deprives us of all we wear
besides our native hair and skins: All colors and dies given to clothes of any
sort are also lies; all pictures and statues lively representing the originals
are lies; all Parables, Metaphors and Allegories in our speech must be called
lies, because they are one thing in the native phrase or letter, and another in
their applied sense or meaning: yet are not these thefts, but borrowings; not
delusions, but allusions; not impious falsities, but elegant flowers of speech,
to which the nature and resemblances of things, as well as humane fancies, have
an aptitude and invitingness.

Such ridiculous austerity would be a Satirical Critic upon the very
Scriptures, upon the Parables of Christ, and Apologies of many holy men, upon
the raptures of Moses, Job, David, and others; which ascribe to God all humane
senses and passions, who yet is one simple and essential perfection. It Is not
more ridiculous then insolent to deny the truth of the Scriptures in their holy
Tropes and Hyperboles, when it says the mountains skipped, and the sea was
afraid, or the valleys Psalm. 114.
did sing and clap their hands, etc.

How supercilious a piece of pedantry were it here to cry down the manner of
such expressions, because not native, but adopted to things? Nor does it in my
judgment argue much more gravity and discretion, (I need not say piety and
religion) to calumniate those things for frauds, cheats, lies and hypocrisies,
which art, ingenuity and manufacture have invented, whereby to adorn nature in
ways consonant to modest ends and intentions, which are the holy measures and,
I think, the only confinements of all things both in nature and in art.

As to the cheat which your Ladyship may fear should befall any man when he
thinks he wooes and weds a native beauty, (when it is artificial in some
degree) if your Ladyship thinks it not only fit but necessary in all other
additional supplies or concealments as to the bodies defects or deformities, to
make such ingenuous discoveries of the truth as may afterward give least cause
of such exception or complainings (as Jacob used when he found Genesis 29. 25.
Leah in stead of Rachel) truly I most willingly advise and assent that such as
use such helps to their complexion would use the same freedom in telling it to
those whom it only concerns to know it. As for others curiosities, there is no
injury done if they be ever kept ignorant of that which to know would do them
no good, nor yet any harm, if they were as charitable and discreet as
Christians ought to be.

The retirement or privacy used by sober women here in England, when they apply
any thing helpful to their looks or complexions, is no argument of any sinful
shame; but of modesty, civility, and that discretion which commands us to do
many things apart from any witnesses or spectators, which yet are no sins, but
only sensibleness of and reflections upon those infirmities to which our vile
bodies are subject; of which having no cause to boast, we rather choose to veil
them with secrecy, then to expose them to common view or knowledge, and
censure: few persons being of so equal and humble minds as to bear their own
praises and perfections without pride, or another diminutions or defects
without scorn. Evil and envious minds are prone to turn many things to our
reproach if they discern them, of which being ignorant they are also silent.

Furthermore, although in England a commendable discretion is used by women in
concealing both their native defects and their artificial additaments of beauty
or complexion, (of which many persons are more severe censurers, after the
vulgar vote and road, then judicious examiners;) yet in other Countries nothing
is more frequently done and freely owned: insomuch that the whole culture and
office of women's adorning is with some expressed by this, My Lady is not yet
painted; that is, she is not completely dressed, or ready. Few women that value
themselves are willing to be seen in any discomposure or defect, especially if
conscious to any defect, or so habited as they think less becomes them: which
affected privacy and obscuring of themselves is no stroke of vanity, much less
of sin; but is rather imputable to that prudent modesty which so much becomes
every sober woman, that my advice is to them never to be seen by strangers or
domestics in any way to their disadvantage, by discovering either their
defects or their reliefs.

Nor may this be called an histrionick parada, or stagely visard and
hypocrisy, while women seek to appear advantaged in stature or in beauty and
handsomeness so far as modesty and virtue permit, by those borrowed
additaments which Art lends to Nature. What is there in any civil order, either
of Church or State, which does not put on something Theatrick and pompous,
beyond that simplicity and plainness which Nature has put upon the persons of
men or women? Both civil and religious actions study to conciliate to
themselves a majesty and reverence by habits and ornaments, by comely robes and
costly vests; which though they are not of the internal and essential glory
which is in Magistratick or Ecclesiastic power and order, (which are both
Divine) yet they are so far not only convenient, but almost necessary, as
they help to keep both Laws and Religion from contempt, and from that vulgar
insolence to which seditious and Atheistical humors are subject.

Yea, who is there, or what is there almost in humane society, which does not
(in some sense) adorn a theater or scene of life upon the stage of this world?
Who is so open-hearted and simple, but they either conceal their defects, or
ostentate their sufficiencies, short or beyond what either of them really are?
Who does not as well advise for his fame and credit as for his Conscience? Who
is there, if they were anatomized, and every way exposed to others censures in
what they are or do or pretend, but would come many degrees short of that show
they make? As there is no necessity to confess many sins to any but to God, to
whom only they are known; so in modesty there is no reason for us to own our
infirmities to others, or the helps we use for our relief, when no person is
injured by what we do, nor at all concerned in it.

Lastly, as to that diminution of honor and esteem which your Ladyship says
commonly follows, as a black shadow, the most virtuous woman, if this be added
after the catalogue of her virtues and good works, O but she paints, she uses
some art or wash to her face and complexion; it is first a very partial
censure, befitting vulgar and gross minds, (not wise, grave and impartial
persons) in other cases of helping or hiding any natural defect (as by false
hair, a glass eye, bolstred shoulders, heightning heels, sweet smells and the
like) to charge no reproach upon any persons, otherways sober and modest, and
yet to do it only in this to those who are every way of unspotted virtue and
goodness, which receive no more prejudice or abatement by what show is made (by
art) of ruddiness in women's complexions, then of tallness or straightness in
their stature and feature, when naturally short or crooked. Who is so
impertinently severe, as to detract from any woman's honor and virtue by saying,
O but she wears heels or shoes a handful high; she seems indeed tall and
straight, but is really low and crooked, etc? Nor does it set off from the
score of any man's worth to allege, O but he uses a peruke, or uses such
sweet smells as are not natural to his clothes or body; from which occasion
Isaac took his rise to bless Esau. Or if this be childish and ridiculous upon
these accounts, truly they are no less in my judgment as to this of complexion
which we now dispute.

Nor is this black tail of detraction less unjust then partial; since no
justice will allow us to abate of the merit and honor due to many constant and
remarkable virtues, (which are evident and unquestionable tokens of worth)
merely upon the suspicion and jealousy (for so it is for the most part, vulgar
censures in this point of complexioning being rarely upon any certain
knowledge) of doing that with all modesty and privacy, which is at worst very
disputable whether it have any sin at all in it, or be beyond a venial and
civil vanity. For your Ladyship sees learned men in several ages and countries
differ as to their judgment of it: And truly those seem to me most masters of
Reason, who own the nature of the thing, as all other things, to be good in it
self, as God's creature, and measure the morality or immorality of the use or
abuse of it by the universal standard and rule of all humane actions, which is
the mind and end of the doer, either conform or disform to the holy revealed
will of God; who has no more declared any positive law against this, then
against all other ornaments of our bodies and lives, either natural or
artificial.

As for the commonness or vulgarity of these censures (which are, you say, so
usual among the meaner sort of people, or those who are of their size and
last) what wise man or woman does not know that nothing is more sly, touchy
and boglish, nothing more violent, rash and various, then the opinion,
prejudice, passion and superstition of the Many or common people? How are they
swayed even in their loves and hatreds, their persuasions and pieties, their
esteem or disesteem, most-what by custom and prepossession, or by adherencies
and admirations of men's persons? How do they love an easy and superficial
censuring, rather then an industrious and strict scrutiny of things? How is
their ignorance an enemy to the knowledge of their betters? How does their
meanness, plainness and rusticity bear a constant antipathy to the politeness,
honor and splendour of others? How are they naturally of levelling humors, and
envy others whatever they enjoy of estates, houses, or ornaments of life,
beyond their tenuity and cottagely obscurity? He or she lives nearest the
confines of Reason and Religion too, who is most remote from the charms and
snares, the sense and censures of the vulgar; into whose minds and over whose
consciences many things make intrusions and usurpations, which have no right or
title to that power and authority they exercise over themselves and others.

No wonder then if those that are so subject to err customary errors in
greater matters, do so in this which is so little and inconsiderable. We see
that wontedness makes even Blackmores seem handsome to one another; and by
using to look on themselves in their glasses, even hard-favoured faces grow
reconciled to themselves so far as to think themselves tolerable, yea and
handsome too, by an happy heresy.

So little regard is to be had in cases of Conscience to the dashes of vulgar
tongues and pens; since we see that when nothing of consequence was objectable
to Christ, the community of the Jews and supercilious Pharisees find fault with
his disciples gathering ears of corn on the Sabbath Day as they passed through
Mar. 12. 1.
the fields of corn and were hungry; so for his and their eating with unwashed
hands. Many things not only innocent, but commendable, sometimes fall under
the reproach of people. As there are factions and parts-taking in religious
forms, so in civil uses; every one seeking to advance his own side and way by
depressing all others with reproachful censures.

Thus have I given your Ladyship the best answer that at present and thus on
the sudden I am able, to every particular touch or stroke of your last
Objection, which was twisted or combined of many smaller cords or threads,
which I have by unraveling so weakened, I hope, that they will no more hamper or
bind a judicious conscience then the Philistin's withes or cords could do
Sampson while his strength continued. Keep but the heart from sinful
intentions, that purity and integrity, as Sampson's locks, may be preserved
unclipt or unshorn by any sinister and sordid lust; I do not see how using such
sober, modest and discreet helps to women's beauty and complexion needs more
fear the terrors of some men's censures, then that holy Giant needed be troubled
at the alarms given, The Philistines are upon thee, Sampson: who rowsing
himself up in his mighty and miraculous strength, defied or scattered them all.

OBJECTION XII. Painting the Face unlawful, because doubtful at best, and not
of faith.
I Must confess (Madame) your Ladyship says more in vindication of these
Artificial helps of handsomness, and better avoids all those odious objections
made against them by my weakness, then ever yet I heard or read; nor can I but
agree with your Ladyships just sense and expressions how partial unjust judges
of things, how petulant and passionate censurers of persons and actions common
people are, and those masters of them who have most of a plebeian stroke in
their temper and education, or who affect a vulgar empire by vulgar easiness
and compliances. It Is true, they frequently save or damn as they are swayed,
not with judgment and charity, but with prepossession or fury, being content
to opine not with the wisest, but the most, glorying more in the number of
their abetters then in the strength and weight of their reasons.

But yet in this case, so much controverted and so often concluded against your
sense by learned and godly men, I know your Ladyship is so humble and modest as
to consider, that your thoughts are but the thoughts of a woman, who is the
weaker vessel, of greater frailties and less capacity, therefore not to be laid
in the least balance of contradiction against those many worthy and famous men,
who very probably had more strong reasons and Scripture-instances for what they
thus eagerly and bitterly decryed, then either they have expressed by writing
or we can now comprehend: nor is your Ladyship in any sort to measure the
validity of their Arguments against it by the infirmity of later allegations,
either by others or now by my self, who like Ruth have not so much as the
gleanings of those Boazes large fields and plentiful harvests.

And yet, in the general prospect of the whole matter, does it not seem very
strange and improbable to your Ladyship that so many holy men should have been
without due cause so severe and so cross against our Sex, in those ornaments
and reliefs of beauty, the concessions of which (though with all those sober
and moral restraints which are justly imposed in all other enjoyments) had been
a very great indulgence and ingratiating to women of greatest quality and best
breeding, who might the easier have been wone to greater rigors of Religion if
in this they might have been allowed, with the credit of Christianity and peace
of their Conscience, what they generally so covet for the advantages of their
looks and countenances?

I have observed in my days, that many Preachers (otherways very commendable)
are less acceptable to Ladies of quality and Gentlewomen of the noblest and
fairest editions, because of their severe and damning rigors frequently uttered
against all auxiliaries of beauty, or set-offs to handsomeness; so scandalized
at Ladies powdering, curling and gumming their hair, so jealous of their using
any quickening to their complexion, though neither they nor any other know of
it, so impatient of any black patch, though it be but a plaster to a pimple,
that they degrade those from all degrees of grace and virtue, modesty and
chastity, whom they find or suspect guilty of these in the least kind.

I am sure some of them thunder against all these and other like ornaments of
women with the ancient terror; though, as your Ladyship thinks, they do not
shine with the potent convictions and lightnings of the Fathers (but make their
Auditors more afraid then hurt:) yet ought we not by an implicit credulity
ascribe that honor to the Fathers and their followers, as not to doubt or
contradict their judgments, though we see not their grounds or reasons? And
will it not (at best) seem too great an arrogance for your Ladyship or any of
our Sex to contend in a case of Conscience with so many of our own later
Reformed Divines, who have one from another taken this point to be so clear and
granted as a gross sin, that few or none of them ever went about seriously to
discuss it, or solidly to prove it to be any sin at all?

However (Madam) in the last place, since it is a disputable point, and so
dubious as to conscience and practice, is it not wisdom to follow the safest
part, which is not at all to use any such toys and tinctures? In which
negative of abstaining there can be no danger; which may be great on the other
side of using, if either it should be a sin in it self, or at least go under
such scruples and uncertainties as can hardly be cleared or avoided as to the
conscience of the doer. Where the opinions of so many eminent persons make (as
you see) such potent batteries against it, what shield of persuasion can be
sufficient to defend us from great shakings and some impressions of terror?

ANSWER.
MAdam, what validity your Ladyship is pleased to impute to my answers, is not
from any strength or merit of my particular opinion or expression, but from the
force and pregnancy of those truths which are (it may be) a little retired from
the superficies of vulgar fancies and conceptions: possibly some neither search
nor discern them; others that find them, yet are hindered most-what and even so
overawed by popular fears and prejudices, that they dare not own or express
them, as loath to seem wiser then their fore fathers, or themselves in former
times, when (for want of better matter) they sometimes wast their glass and
fill up their hour with bitter invectives against Ladies painting, patching,
curling, powdering, perfuming and complexioning; which may have less evil in
them then some Authors they study, and not so much vanity attending them as
does the long hair, the loose cuffs, the large bandstrings, and other fine
things with which some of these so rigid, yet very spruce and Lady-like,
Preachers think fit to gratify as their own persons, so their kind hearers and
spectators; somewhat wide of those pristine severities which I have been told
were required of the Clergy, who by the Canons of the Church and customs of
ancient times were denied to wear any silk or softer garments, not because they
were sinful in themselves, but less suitable to the strictness of that
discipline which in those times holy men saw fit to exact, especially of
Ecclesiastics, as most exemplary for the restraining of those prodigalities
and luxuries which in both Clergy and Laics would soon exhaust that charity
which was then most what expended in relieving the poor, in building and
adorning Churches, in redeeming captives, and the like.

I do not less willingly own my weakness then my Sex, being far from any such
Amazonian boldness as affects to contend with so many learned and godly men who
have, and daily do, express in this a contrary sense to mine: yet I think it
very venial for me to assert, if I can, both the ornaments and liberties of my
Sex, (as to their persons and consciences) by answering specious fallacies and
producing stronger arguments: to which I doubt not but all serious and
impartial Christians (not captives to custom, prejudice and popularity) will
at last subscribe; not as to the sense of a weak woman, but of omnipotent
verity and victorious truth, which though late, yet may at last be redeemed by
the help of a woman from that long captivity wherein both it self and many
worthy persons consciences were unjustly detained.

God often discovers as female softnesses in some men's hearts, heads and hands,
so masculine and heroic strength in some women's. We read of two women famous,
the one for her Judge. 10.
conduct of the war, the other for her consummating it, by destroying Sisera
the chief leader of a great army. Another woman dashes out the brains of Judges
9. 53.
King Abimelech; another saves by her loyal prudence the city Abel from 2 Samuel
20. 16, etc.
the miseries of a long siege, and those punishments which justly prosecute, as
the heads, so the abettors of Sedition against Lawful Sovereigns.

I know God has given both Reason and Scripture to women as well as men; nor
have we less liberty granted to traffic in all truths both humane and divine:
though our talents and treasure may be far less then the mass of many men's
readings, yet they may be as refined and digested; our two mites may not be
despised which we offer to God's Temple, if they have God's Image and
superscription on them, coined and stamped in the mint of all religious Reason,
the word of God, whence all things that concern Faith or Manners (as to
Salvation and Damnation) receive their authoritative stamp and value.

It is time for us at length to get beyond that servility and sequaciousness of
Conscience, which is but the Pupillage, Minority and Wardship of Religion,
inquiring and heeding, not what says the Lord, but what says such a Father,
such a godly man, such a Preacher or Writer. It is the privilege and honor of
Christian Religion, for which the Bereans are commended, to Acts 17. 10.
search the Scriptures, and examine by them even the Apostolical doctrines. Nor
does our Reformed Religion (where it most merits that name) unjustly glory in
that freedom, by which (as to matters of truth or error, of sin or no sin) it
is redeemed from the slavery of man's private Traditions, and confined to the
oracles of God; to whose general rule, sense and Analogy, all Catholic and
unwritten Traditions, as to the practice, discipline and order of Religion, do
agree, without any enterfearing with the holy Scriptures, to which in matters
of internal holiness we are confined, though in things of extern decency the
wisdom and custom of the Church is a safe and wholesome rule; to which as we
are by Scripture commanded obediently and unanimously to conform in things
honest and by general precepts allowed, so in matters of saving faith and holy
life we must neither believe nor act by an implicit faith and twilight
credulity, but from a well-informed and rightly-convinced conscience, that
forbids us to be either profane or superstitious, either over-righteous or
overwicked. Eccl. 7. 16.


Solomon tells us, that the whole duty Eccl. 12. 13.
of man is to fear God and keep his Commandments: Christ tells us, it is but a
Pharisaick pride and vanity to teach Mat. 15. 3.
or urge humane traditions or opinions for God's Commands. And truly, after all
that your Ladyship has smartly urged in this case, I cannot but wonder that
neither Solomon in his various sentences of the Proverbs, nor in his holy Satyr
against humane Vanities in Ecclesiastes, no nor yet he that was greater then
Solomon, either by himself or his Disciples, should ever particularly instance
against all or any painting or complexioning of the face; no nor God by Moses:
where so many lesser precepts are expressly given, surely they would not (all)
have omitted this so wholly, if it had been what some pretend, such a flat and
downright sin, considering how obvious in all eyes and nations the use of it
was and is.

Sure, learned and godly men ought not in wisdom, justice and charity, to
extend the cords or curtains of duty and conscience beyond the stakes and
pillars of Religion, which are fixed by the word of God, whose service and
glory needs not the fancies, fallacies, or flatteries of man's inventions, more
then a royal robe needs a beggars patch. It is not for sober men to enlarge the
Phylacteries of their own Opinions beyond God's precepts, nor to comment by
false and specious glosses either against or beside his holy will in the Word;
which must needs be a far greater sin then any light applying of some
quickening wash or color to the face, inasmuch as it is more dangerous to
injure the Conscience then to alter the skin. Ministers ought not to be as
hard-hearted and rude-handed Surgeons, who make their Probe a Poniard, and will
rather make a wound where they search for one, then lose their labor, or seem
to want either skill or Patients.

As to that practical faith or assurance of the lawfulness and liberty granted
by God, both as to the thing done and the doer, I presume my grounds are safe
and good, since I find that God has given us, as men and 1 Timothy 6. 17.
Christians, all things richly to enjoy; that no creature is forbidden (under
the Gospel) to the pure of heart; that there is neither moral light nor
Scriptural precept against the ingenuous and modest use of this, more then of
otherhelps of any bodily infirmity or deformity; since it may as well as any
thing be used soberly, thankfully and harmlesly, without any impediment to
grace and well-doing, also without any advantage or intentional occasion to sin.

So that I cannot but vehemently suspect (I leave it to wiser persons
peremptorily to conclude) that the dreadful rigors of some Ministers and others
have in this case of Artificial handsomeness been too magisterial: Their
Divinity relishes too much of inhumanity, and their Piety carries with it too
little Charity; while they state a case of Conscience more by the wills, fancies
and passions of men then by the word of God, whose thoughts are Isa. 55. 8.
not as man's thoughts, nor his ways as our ways. Many things are highly
esteemed of men as sanctities, which God despises; and many things are 1 Cor.
1.
lightly condemned by man's imperious rashness, which God does not condemn:
hence the lawful use of many good things is denied by man's severity and
transport, where God's benignity only forbids us the abuse of them, and in so
doing establishes the lawfulness of the use, which may in this, for ought I
yet see, as well consist with a good Conscience, as it did with Solomon's
wisdom (amidst his domestic 1 Kings 10. 22.
and native plenty) to send his navy upon long and foreign voyages for gold, and
apes, and peacocks.

Besides this, I cannot but observe the self-confuting severity of these men of
later and lesser Editions, who put such strict restraints on women's beauties
and adornings, when yet they allow the spiceries and curiosities which
merchandising brings from far, rather to gratify luxury then relieve
necessity: Nor do they quarrel at superfluous tables (unless they have but
puling stomachs) with the various arts of cookery, which like another Proteus
turns the native plainness of things into infinite forms and relishes, to
please and invite the palate, as Rebeccah did Isaac's blunt aged taste by the
savoury Genesis 27. 14.
meat she made for him, which it is said that holy man loved. Nor are these
Masters such batterers or demolishers of stately and elegant buildings, they
can be friends with goodly hangings and rich furniture, with accurate
plantations and harmonious gardens, with picturings by pencil or embroideries,
also with the wearing of silks, linen and woollen of various and orient
colors; nor do they frown to see women wear rich Jewels of all colors, as
Cornelians, Rubies, Saphirs, Emeralds, and Diamonds, on their breasts, necks,
ears, wrists and fingers, of which there is no other use in nature, but only
the borrowing and ostentating of their several beauties and colors, by which
to render us more conspicuous or comely. As these fixed gemms have their
aptitudes for our use on other parts of our bodies; so truly have other
diffusive tinctures and colorings their fitness and almost propriety for the
face, if they be discreetly applied.

For both these (as all things else of extern ornament) may be so grossly
handled and laid on, as they shall seem no more to ones advantage either of
comeliness or discretion, then a Jewel in a swines snout, (as Solomon speaks.)
Persons of worth and prudence will in the first place keep their hearts in the
use of all such things from offending God; next they will preserve themselves
from being ridiculous among discreet persons: as those may easily be who know
not how to distinguish a civil quickening or cheerful enlivening of the face,
(as of old times was done by their anointings) and a slovenly besmearing
themselves, like Bartholomew-babies, with fulsome dawbings, which proclaim,
though not foul, yet foolish hearts.

As for those causless curses and Anathemas, that God cannot or will not know
them, that no painted face shall see the face of God, or the like, which as
blind thunderbolts some men by a Papal authority or popular facility
promiscuously cast upon all never so modest, humble and virtuous women, who use
any relief to their looks: I believe, as Solomon tells us, they shall not Prove.
26. 2.
come upon the heads of those who using this, as other creatures of God, for
those ends to which they have an aptitude in nature, do yet so watch over their
hearts, as not to suffer any outward momentary adornings whatsoever to leven
them with any thing of pride of sinful vanity, but always keep within the
bounds of modesty and chastity, to which cleanliness and decency are no
enemies. And even in these solemn terrors, by which some men seek to terrify
poor souls, they run more upon the stock of Satirical wit then solid arguments:
as if Conscience were only to smell on nosegayes or flowers, and not to be fed
with serious and divine truths, which are the food and physic too of the Soul.

By the same fallacy they may urge that God will not know elderly men in their
juvenile perukes, in their shaved cheeks and bald chins, (which affect youthful
smoothness when gray hairs and wrinckles every where call for gravity of aspect
as well as manners, of which a fatherly, prolix, and reverential beard is a
solemn sign and majestic Emblem.) May it not as well be said, God will not
admit men or women to heaven with all their pomp and cost of apparel, since he
made them naked, and yet not ashamed? Genesis 2. 25.
Yea may they not cry down eating, drinking, sleeping, marrying, recreation,
yea even that part of humane nature which is flesh and blood in us, because
none of these things (either of vital use or infirmer nature) shall enter 1
Cor. 15. 50.
into the kingdom of heaven, or come into the presence of God, when they shall
indeed be superfluous through the bodies higher glory and perfection, which
shall then exceed the shining of Moses his face, and equal the transfiguration
of Christ?

Yet are not these sinful enjoyments or unlawful ornaments in this state of
mortality and infirmity, to which mankind is now subjected by reason of sin:
different states admit of different things: many toys (in comparison) are
allowed us by our heavenly Father while we are children here, which shall be
put away when we come to perfect age and stature in heaven. Though the whole
need no physician, yet the sick may lawfully use their skill and applications
to remedy their infirmities, not only as to health and strength, but also to
the vigor and color of their looks; else, such as have the Green Sickness,
pallor, or the Jaundise either black or yellow, or any such deformity, may not
use means to cure themselves, both internal and external: for as neither of
them are forbidden, so I suppose both to be lawful in their kind and use.

Like to the feebleness of such men's reasonings against all artificial beauty,
are their impertinent and wrested allegations of Scripture, whereby to justify
their severities: which no doubt your Ladyship has observed as well as I have;
though your discretion thinks not fit to urge them, being as easily answered as
they are fallaciously alleged.

OBJECTION XIII. Of Peter Martyr against Painting the Face, from many
Scripture-instances, Answered.
SUch as those which I have read in an Author of no mean note or obscure name,
who dreadfully and purposely inveighing against all use of art to advance the
beauty or color of the face, with great gravity and vehemence tells us, as
from the Apostles mind, that we cannot be the servants of the Gal. 1. 10.
Lord, if we seek to please men: therefore women may not use any such
complexioning to please their own, or their husbands, or others aspects. O
weighty and profound Divinity! by which neither wives may please their
husbands, nor children their parents, nor subjects their Princes, nor servants
their masters, nor tradesmen their customers: but, like the serpents teeth,
Christians must rise up to a constant antipathy and mutual displeasings of each
other, else they cannot please God. What can be more absurd in Reason, or
ridiculous in Religion? When the meaning of the Apostle is, if by any ways
displeasing to God I seek to please men, or if I so seek to please men as I
neglect God, I cannot be God's servant. But in all such lawful ways as were
neither against piety, nor truth, nor charity, no man was more a pleaser of all
men, to whom he became 1 Cor. 9. 22.
all honest things, that he might gain some.

So again he brings, that Christians must keep the Passover, which is 1 Cor.
5. 8.
the feast of Christian conversation, in which we partake of Christ, with
sincerity and truth; therefore we may make no simulations or shows of any thing
that is not really true, and such as we make show of: which not only debarres
us of all helps of art against paleness, but of whatever may remedy baldness,
blindness, lameness, crookedness, and the like, which are at once both helps
and hidings of our infirmities. Which gloss is far wide of the Apostles
sense, who tells us what leaven must be purged out (not of all art and
ingenuity, of decency and civility) but of malice and wickedness, of hypocrisy
and uncharitableness, which may very much embitter and abase the spirits of
Christians even there where their looks, words and gestures are composed to
most cynical clouds and Pharisaick frowns. Where the heart is pure as to all
maliciousness against God and man, there all outward things are pure and lawful.

He adds, since God in the old Law Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
forbad to disguise the sex by clothes, he (consequently) forbids to disguise
our persons by any change of our faces or complexions. It Is true, the God of
order forbids the first, so far as it breeds those confusions and reproaches
in humane life and constant converse which are attended with very foul and
wicked consequences: But in cases either of declared mirth or necessary safety,
which draw no injury, indignity or disorder of life after them, but are only
occasional and innocent, I do not think that Text ought to be urged. To make
such a change of our faces as we cannot be known to be the same persons (which
yet is often done by sickness or distempers) as I think it not lawful in ordinary
conversation, so no wise woman does ever aim at it, so as not to be known to be
her self, but rather to be known as her self, with some advantages only for
complexion, which alter not the feature, but only quicken the color. But in
case of life and escape, I believe this good man would not deny an innocent
person leave so to disguise his looks by visard or color as might best deceive
his guard or keepers; which yet he might not once do, though to save his life,
if it were an absolute and gross sin in it self, as some pretend.

He further instances, that every one ought to glorify God in their bodies; 1
Cor. 6. 20.
which (says he) no woman can do that uses art to her complexion. This is
easily said, but never proved, against those modest and sober women who
glorify God in a thankful, humble, chaste and virtuous life, as well when they
use this as when they use any other helps or ornaments to their outward aspect
and comeliness; not abusing these by doting on them or resting in them as the
highest beauty and ultimate glory of a Christian, but using and referring all
to a higher end and glory.

Lastly, he very gravely and sadly tells us, as we may not make any members 1
Cor. 6. 15.
of our bodies (which are Christ's) the members of an harlot; so nor may we make
our faces the faces of harlots, whose property (he says) it is to paint their
faces, if they think they need such helps. The answer is, that it is no
prejudice against honest women's use of things, that dishonest use them; that
helping the complexion, and setting forth the looks to the best advantages by
ingenuous arts and adornings, is not the property of harlots, but the study and
care of virtuous women, though accompanied with, and inferior to, that care
they have of their Souls adorning. I believe this good man, whatever he boldly
guesses at, knew fewer dissolute then sober women who used such helps, far
enough from his scandal or perception. Nor can he say it is the property of
lewd women, unless he knew none other used it, or could by better arguments
then by begging the question prove it to be so by God forbidden, as no gracious
woman can lawfully or modestly use it; which he neither does, nor endeavors to
prove, either by apposite Scriptures, or pregnant reasons from the nature of
the thing used, or the necessary pravity of the mind using such artificial
beauty: one of which at least (if not all) should have been proved; which
neither he nor any man else, that ever I saw or heard, has yet done;
contenting themselves with strong presumptions and weak probations. Which
poverty and tenuity of argumentation in a matter pretended to be a gross and
notorious sin, is no way becoming learned and grave Divines, who ought not to
play with cases of Conscience, nor adventure to create sins, calling light
darkness, Isa. 5. 20.
or darkness light, evil good, or good evil.

How much more worthy of their holy calling were it for Ministers to meddle
less with Ladies faces, and more with their hearts; rather encouraging them to
study all the holy ornaments of grace and virtue; also confining them to the
undoubted limits of Sanctity, Modesty, Chastity and Humility, (which none is so
impudent as to dispute against or question) rather (I say) then by little
Oratorious circles and sophistries to seek to ensnare their Consciences, and
discourage their spirits by endless and needless severities against these petty
ornaments, which may (no doubt) be as easily kept in all sober, civil and
harmless bounds, as any other things by which Art assists Nature, and adds by
clothes, colors, jewels, and many curiosities, to the advantage of humane
honor, beauty, and majesty?

The mischief is, not so much that many women are denied by these rigors the
use of such things as would please and become them in an innocent cheerfulness;
but all that ever was said against these helps of beauty seems to many wise
women so weak and sinnewless, that being not convinced of any sin in the use of
them, they venture to use them privately, (yet not wholly without some doubt
and scruple, arising from the confidence and clamours of some godly men against
them:) hence they are uncomfortably divided and perplexed even in their
greatest purity of mind and holiness of life; while on the one side they are
shaken and terrified by what such men forbid them, on the other side they see
not but God and Nature allow it to them. Nor do even virtuous women contentedly
want (while they are capable of them) those things that may render them most
acceptable to their own and others eyes; being loath to draw the curtains of
obscurity or uncomeliness quite over them till it be dark night, when they must
hide their faces in the dust, in hope to recover that perfect beauty which
shall admit no decaies, and needs no repairs.

What your Ladyship intimates in the last place, that it is safest in a case
disputed or dubious, rather to abstain then use what many deny, though many
allow, since there is no necessity of using it at all: I answer, there are many
things which are not absolutely necessary, which yet we would be loath to part
with or be disputed out of under the pretense of superfluity and sinful; since
God allows us, not with niggardly restraints, but with liberality worthy of
divine benignity, all things richly to enjoy, even to delight, convenience,
elegancy and majesty. Nor are we in cases of Conscience or scruples of sin to
tell noses, or mete by the pole, how many, but value upon what grounds men
affirm or deny things to be lawful or unlawful. Errors and Idols have many
times more eyes and hands lifted up to them then truth or the true God. One
Athanasius is recorded to have sustained the truth of Christ's Divinity against
the sea and moles of all the world, pressing against him, as great waters upon
a firm sluice. Truth is not less it self because in solitudes; and Error ceases
not to be Error amidst crowds and multitudes. If any be so weak, as to be
swayed and divided more by numbers and Oratorious fervors then by clear and
potent reasons; the penance they must do for their want of judgment is, to be
deprived of those things they doubt of, yet would willingly use, and do desire,
if they thought them lawful. But those who are by a clear light of Reason and
Religion redeemed from these scrupulosities, so as to see and enjoy the
freedom God has given them, as in the nature and fitness of his creatures, so
in the indulgence and silence of the Scriptures (which have set us under the
Gospel only moral and internal bounds of holiness, by which the heart
circumscribes and limits the outward man in the use of all things, not as to
their nature, but their ends) these (I say) may as freely use their affirmative
freedom of using and enjoying according to their conscience, as the other do
the negative, who therefore forbear to use them because they either doubt, or
conclude against their unlawfulness. For as no man's dissenting may hinder the
stating of my judgment, according as truth appears to me; so no more may their
different practice hinder me from doing and enjoying agreeable to my judgment.

The moderate and charitable Conclusion of the Dispute.
THus have I endeavored to give your Ladyship a full and good account of my
thoughts in this dispute or case touching artificial helps of beauty, such as
humane invention has many ways found out; whereto as your Ladyship has given
the occasion, so I wish I were so happy as to afford you any satisfaction:
which if a weak woman may in any degree be able to do in so disputed a point,
how much more may you hope for from learned and able men, if they have but
courage to declare their judgments in it?

As for your Ladyships particular, however you shall not need to think (yet) of
borrowing any helps from art, either to preserve or repair your beauty, (being
blessed with a great and lasting stock of handsomness, for which you have cause
humbly to thank God;) yet (possibly) by what I have answered to your several
Objections, (not wholly void, I hope, of Reason and Religion) your Ladyship and
others by your candor will be more favorable in their censures of those whose
infirmity may invite them soberly to use what they do not find God has denied
them; who (yet) had rather choose the most sad and sordid deformities (as Job on
a dunghill putrefying in his own sores) with a good conscience, then the
greatest pomp and beauty of Queen Esther, or Berenice, with the sting and
plague of an evil conscience. Nor do I doubt but many worthy women, who
discreetly use these little private helps to their looks, are very far from
that ungrateful impudence which dares to displease God, by any thing his
indulgence allows them to please themselves withal in sober and ingenuous
ways.

To the favourableness of your Ladyships future censure (of those who with
modesty and discretion use these helps to complexion, by which neither
themselves nor others are hurt) be pleased to add the favor of your pardon to
the length of my Answers, which, conscious to their weakness, I have sought, as
we do with lesser threads, to wind them the oftener about, that their length
may make some amends for the want of that strength in which they come short of
stronger twisted cords. If I may obtain the one or both of these requests, I
shall not think my time, or your Ladyships patience, wholly lost; though I am
not so vain as to boast of any victory, or peremptorily to decide the
controversy on my side, which I leave to your Ladyships and others better
judgment.

MAdame, I must not only grant you your so-well-merited requests, which you
shall find have with me the power of commands, being so just and ingenuous: but
I must add those most hearty thanks which I owe you for the generous freedom
of your discourse, which has the courage and ability to bring to the review of
Reason and true Religion a case of Conscience which few dare touch or try,
contrary to the common vote and credulity, which (for ought I see) may in this,
as in other things it often does, prove a common error: wherein you deserve the
more applause, because in this I do not think you are any way partial to your
self, or so much pleading your own cause, as civilly affording a charitable
relief and protection to others, whose infirmity may require or use such helps.

For my self, as I wish I may never need any such aids, so truly I should not
scruple to use God's and Natures indulgence with those cautions of modesty and
discretion which are necessary to accompany all our actions natural, civil, and
religious; which falling under the Empire of our will and choice, are subject
to the Judicature of God and of our own Consciences.

Mean time your Ladyship has by the clearness and force of your Reason
redeemed me from that captivity wherein, by a plebeian kind of censoriousness
and popular severity, I sometime delighted, to disparage and lessen those who
are reported or suspected to use any auxiliary beauty, notwithstanding I saw in
all things else their worth and virtue every way commendable, imitable, and
sometime admirable. So much have you made me a cheerful Conformist to your
judgment and charity, which I find follows not easy and vulgar reports, but
searches the exacter rules of Reason and Religion; which lights, as they now
shine in the Church of God, I do not think have left mankind in the dark as to
any thing morally and eminently either good or evil. In the discerning of
which, so as to follow the one and fly the other, I pray God ever guide us by
his truth and grace.

Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure; but to the defiled and
unbelievers nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled.
The End.

