A SERMON PREACHED In St. Paul's Church London, before the Right Honorable the
Lord Major, Lord General, Aldermen, Common Council, and Companies of the
Honorable City of London February 28. 1659.

BEING A day of solemn Thanksgiving unto God for Restoring of the Secluded
Members of Parliament to the House of Commons: The Common Council: And
preserving the City, and a Door of Hope thereby opened: The fullness and freedom
of future Parliaments: The most probable means under God for healing the hurts,
and recovering the health of these three British Kingdoms.

By JOHN GAVDEN, D.D.

Ezekiel. 21.26, 27. Thus says the Lord, Remove the Diadem, and take off the
Crown: this shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase him that is
high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until
he come whose it is, and I will give it him.

Restat ut pauciores pluribus cedant: hoc uno stant popularia imperia, aliter
casura.

H. Gro. Hist. Bet. l. 17. page 150. LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, at the
Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

Aleyn Major.
A Common Council holden the 29. of February 1659.
Ordered that the thanks of this Court be given to Dr. Gauden, who preached
Yesterday before them at St. Paul's Church. And that he from this Court be
desired to print this Sermon.

SADLER.

To the right Honorable THOMAS ALEYN Lord Mayor of the City OF London. THE
Court of Aldermen and Common-Counsel.
AS by your Desire I was induced to preach the following Sermon; so by your
Order in Common Council I was requested to print what I preached; I have obeyed
you in both, and supererogated in the later: adding something prepared, but
omitted for want of time, and a respect due to your expectation of a second and
better course on that Festival. This I have done not only as compliant with
your Christian Commands, but as solicitous to conform all my endeavors to the
public Good of your City, and our common Country; which a great part of the
Church of Christ, and many precious souls, as well as men's bodies, Lives,
Liberties, Honors and Estates are embarked: All which have for our sins been
long engaged in a tempest of War and sea of Blood; nor have they been able to
make any fair Port or happy Haven these many years, since they lost their
Pilots and Compass, their King and Parliaments, by the various Euroclydons of
men's passions, Lusts and Interests; which have tossed them to and fro with
every wind; and made great waste of all that is precious for Religion, Justice
and Honor, besides Estates and Lives of men in the three Kingdoms; threatening
all either with speedy and utter Shipwreck by foreign Invasion, or an
everlasting storm by domestic confusions; until the unexpected and undecerned
providence of God began to open to your and the Countries prayers some door of
hope, by the prudent, valiant and succesfull Conduct of the present Lord
General Monck: from whom all good men expect all good things: nor can he
deceive them without deceiving and destroying himself and his Country.

Your gratitude to God for this seasonable dawning of Mercy (which seems to
bespeak a great calm) occasioned your solemn Convention that day; and my
preaching to you. In which work you cannot wonder if I endeavored to show my
self a Workman that needed not to be afraid or ashamed; being very sensible
with you of the great, many and long hurts of the daughter of my people, both
in Church and State: I then freely declared them to you: I deplored them with
you; I proposed the methods of cure to you, as fully as the time will permit;
and as freely as became my duty to my God and my conscience. As I would not
injure any man, or fester the times: so I abhor to flatter them, which is the
greatest injury a Preacher can do to Church and State.

Some I hear were offended (then late of Christ's, of John Baptists, and Saint
Paul's preaching) at the plain dealing I used (which possibly was from their
overrawness and soreness, more then from my roughness) As I aim to do things
faithfully, personally, so decently and discreetly: Nor do I think I am to
learn of those Censorious Catos how to preach, any more then they will learn of
me how to buy and sell; or how to fight and war. No man may wonder if I dare to
reprove those sins which some dare to do, or approve, but dare not hear of, or
repent.

The parrhesie or freedom of my speech as a man, a Christian, and a Preacher
was such, as became my feeling of the public miseries; my desire of the
public tranquillity, and my sense of that fidelity I ow to God, to my Country,
to you, and to my own soul.

These are not times to palliate and speak smooth or soft things: Never age had
fouler humors or prouder tumors; more felt and more painful; more hard, and
less mollified; These I would help to cure, that so we might recover public
health, together with our wits, and reason; our Laws and Religion, our good
Confidence and Government: our Peace and Unanimity: all which we have lost,
since we lost our heads in Church and State. Our full and free Parliaments,
consisting of King, Lords and Commons; in which the soul and life, the honor
and happiness of these Nations are bound up.

And no part of it is more concerned then your famous sometime flourishing and
still populous City; in whose happiness the whole Nation will be happy, and in
its misery all must be miserable. Since London is not only as a ponderous Byas
to the great bowl, (which draws all parts toward it) but it is as the
Mistress, Lady or Queen, to which every Village, City and Country of the
Nation (as officious Handmaids) study to present all manner of costly
comlyness, not only feminine, as the superfluity of peace and plenty, but also
masculine; for London like Pallas is furnished as with men of Counsel and
Conduct, with Treasure and Strength, with all sorts of Arms and Aminition;
being a Camera Imperii Britanii, a vast Magazine of men and money, a nursery of
all Arts, Mechanic, Ingenuous and Military: a great entertainer of Learning,
and a noble encourager of Religion, wanting nothing to make it self and the
Nation happy, if it have such heroic minds and honest hearts, and become so
rich, so great, and so Christian a City.

It Is true, like plethorick bodies, great care must be had how ill humors, yea
and good ones too, are put into motion; since the first cannot well be long
kept in, nor may the second be purged out: The first threatening dangerous
inflammations; the second no less dangereus Evacuations. Here Prudence, Order,
Moderation, Confidence and Unanimity are required, besides Zeal and Courage, in
order to recover your and our former health in Church and State, which was made
up of an admirable temper and constitution, till sin, tumults, violence, and
war cast us into these Fevers, Convulsions and Confusions, with which we have
wrestled for many years. Indeed your City ows some Reparation (now paid it) to
the whole Nation: not only for the advantages it has from all parts, but for
the disadvantages which all have suffered: not from the ill intentions, but
from some tumultuating dispositions, which as Porpusses were pregnant in your
sea of people, when our troubles first began.

I hope God has prepared blessings for you, and by yours for the whole Nation,
by opening your eyes, humbling your hearts, disposing your minds, and exciting
your spirits to thoughts of Justice and Piety; of Repentance, Restitution and
Peace: We have had wounds and hurts enough; healings, and strong Delusions too
many. It is high time (if it be Gods time) to speak comfortably to Zion, and
tell her Warfare is accomplished; to pour in the Balm of Gilead by sober and
aquanimious Counsels, to bind up by orderly and just power, what has been long
broken; to make up the grand defects in our Government, and to lay foundations
of future peace and happiness in Righteousness and Truth: That the enemies of
our now Religion, and this reformed Nation may not rejoice in our continued
miseries, and say, So would we have it.

I have sought to do my duty: if some think I have overdone it. I must crave
your patrociny to assert that, which by your acceptance seemed to be your sense
as well as mine; and is, as I hope, the sense of all honest and judicious men:
For men that are fanciful and fanatic, we need them not, to make us happy: I
am sure they have made a shift to make us very miserable. And if God had not in
mercy set bounds to the rage of that sea, and the madness of that people, they
would have made your City an heap of ashes, and our Country a field of Blood;
It will be your Wisdom, Honor and Happiness to keep in the bounds of just,
moderate, religious and sober Counsels; to aim at legal, honest and tried ways
of settlement: to apply to such Physicians as you find most able and faithful
so will health and salvation break forth upon you, and the three Nations, which
is the earnest prayer

Of your humble servant in Christ, J. GAVDEN.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, etc. of London.
IER. 8.11. For they have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my people
slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.


BEing called to this public service by the piety and civility of this great
City (Right honorable and worthy Auditors) I could not well tell how to avoid
it, The Preface or Address.
because it seemed so good a work; nor yet (upon so short warning) how to
accept of it, being so great a work, if either I regard the importance of the
occasion, which looks like a door of hope opened to the healing of these
Nations, and composing of their sad distractions, by the counsels of a full and
free Parliament, and by the assistance of regular and orderly power:

The difficulty and danger of the work.
. Or if I consider (as I ought in prudence) the difficulty and danger of
touching, though in order to heal the old sores and fistulating ulcers of this
Church and State, which are now ( vetuscentia mala, and annosi morbi)
inveterate dolors, obstinate evils and pertinacious maladies; not only
impatient to be touched freely, and searched thoroughly, but are prone to plead
as the Devils in the Gospel (who had possessed the poor man now a long time)
against all health and recovery. Many men like Canters and Lazars are in love
with their wounds and ulcers, getting their living more easily by keeping their
sores open, raw and running, than if they should quite heal them up.

Touchiness of times.
. I am further conscious not only to the touchiness of the times, and the
tenderness of many men's minds, who are only for lenitives and oils, for soft,
smooth and supple applications, even to their most desperate hurts; but to that
my own native parrhesia, or freedom of speaking, which is both customary and
conscientious; not that I affect unseasonable severities of speech, and such
rudeness under the pretense of freedom, as rather exasperates the wound, and
inflames the humor, than purges, allays, or eases them.

Of free speaking in preaching.
. But I profess to choose not to preach at all, than to preach timorously or
precariously (Vt Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad aram) as if I should ask men
leave to be honest, or were afraid to speak the Word of God to them.

. When I am called to speak in Gods name, I must be Parrhesiastes as well as
Ecclesiastes; I am to do it as a workman that needs not to be ashamed, either
for his ignorance, or cowardice, or indiscretion; whether men will hear, or
forbear, the whole counsel of God must be delivered in its season, so as
becomes the words of soberness and truth; for the Church or Pulpit must not be
a sanctuary for insolency, or a burrow or a retreat for rudeness: No, however
men may become our enemies for speaking the truth, yet it is better so than to
have God our enemy for smothering it, when it is just and seasonable; and such
it is when necessary and sovereign to heal the hurt of a Church or State.

. Offense easily taken from free preaching
It has been my fate frequently to offend some men, when I have been most
intent to serve them, by Texts and Sermons, which I thought most apt, useful
and innocent. When I preached at the Court Anno 1640. upon that Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God:
When before the long Parliament, at its first convening, upon Zach. 8.19.
Therefore love the truth and peace: When at another great and epidemick
Assembly, upon 1 Cor. 3.19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God: Of all three, though wholesome and innocent Texts, and (I hope) accordingly
handled, yet I heard some unpleasing Echoes and reflections; 2 Timothy 4^.
the sore and itching ears of some men in all ages are such, that they will not
endure ((...)) healing or sound and wholesome doctrine, though the pain rises
from the soreness and inflammation in themselves, and not from the plaster or
hand which honestly applies it; yet they are prone as in fell boils, and acute
tumors, when touched, though but gently, to fly upon those that are next them,
and cry aloud O you hurt me, when the hurt is within and from themselves.

. Sound parts will endure free and rough handling; such as are unsound, do most
want it; and therefore if we will be faithful to God, to our own souls, and to
our hearers, we must not flatter their sores to their ruin; but rather choose
to heal them, Prove. 26.28.
though at present we be thought to hurt them; nor shall our labor of love be
in vain either in the Lord, or before good men; who at length will find by
experience, Honest freedom is best,
that the wounds of a friend (which let out the putrified matter of painful
tumors) are better than the kisses of an enemy, which do ( infidis cicatricibus
cuticulam obducere) skin over with unfaithful scars, the ill searched and ill
purged ulcers of men's hearts and lives, saying peace, peace, all is, all will,
all must be well in Church and State, when ( bona fide, or mala and misera
experientia) in true, but sad trial and sense of things, there is no peace,
inward, or outward, 2 Chronicles. 15.5.
to him that goes out, or him that comes in; no peace religious or politic,
civil or ecclesiastical, foraign or domestic, either to the Estates,
Liberties, Laws, honors or lives of men; nor yet to their opinions, doctrines,
devotions and consciences, in any rank or degree; but as the Prophet Isaiah
complains, Isa. 1.5, 6.
The whole head (if we have any head) is sick, and the whole heart is faint;
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is no soundness in
it, but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores; they have not been closed, nor
bound up, nor mollified with ointments.

. Yet there are that have cried amain Peace, Pretenders to peace and health.
peace; men that are either so merry or so mad in our common calamities, as to
command us to call our sicknesses health; our wounds, salves; our slavery,
liberty; our divisions, union; our deformities, reformings; our unsettledness,
settling; our sands and quagmires, rockie foundations; our wars, peace; our
oppressions, ease; our common woe, a Commonweal. The Prophet seems thus to
complain, That either Physicians of no value ((...)) many and unskilful
Empiricks have unfaithfully tampered with us, and ( dum vulnera publica in
lucra privata vertunt) while they make private gain by our public pains; they
have turned (ipsa remedia in morbos) our very remedies to new diseases, and
have kept us long uncured under pretense of cure; or else we are by the venom
of our own inbred and malignant humors become incurable; as ( immedicabile
vulnus, ense recidendum) a gangreen only fit for the saw and sword: and such
indeed do our proud and dead flesh (or proud minds and dead hearts rather)
portend our case to be, whilst so many tough obstructions, so many high
inflammations, such new tumors and cruel biles daily arise of various
interests; such a constant fall of ill humors, sharp and undigested, not only
upon the outward and grosser or more Mechanic parts of the body Politic, but
also upon the most vital and noble, the head and heart; where the counsel and
courage, the strength and wisdom, the best blood and spirits of the Nation are
or ought to be contained and exserted to the public welfare.

Mark. 5.26.
Although, as the woman in the Gospel, we have spent all, or most, or much of
our substance on Physicians, and their attending Chyrurgeons, on Counselors
and Soldiers, yet we do not find our selves any whit the better; still we are
scared and threatened by our sins which are Gods discontents; and our
unsettlednesses (which are the Nations discontent and sufferings) with daily
breakings out and angry tumors, with new purgings and loathsome potions, with
lancings and bloodlettings, with cuttings off and cauterisings, which will not
heal, restore, close and redintegrate the body, but maime, and defame, and
cripple it for ever.

The scope or design of the Text.
. To prevent which successive miseries (or the like) from the daughter of my
people here in England (as much as in me lies) I have sought to improve the
sanctity and solemnity of this occasion, this thankeful and hopeful opportunity
of future mercies, by presenting you with my meditations on this Text; because
it is not only ( querela de fallacia medicorum, and medelae mendacio) a just
complaint of the falsity of Physicians, and inefficacy of the past
applications, which some Medicasters had with great vapor and confidence
applied, as bold Mountebanks are wont to do, when they wound their slaves to
show their skill in healing them.

. But farther, the text is ( monitio de vera medendi methodo;) a direction for
the right method and honest way of curing an afflicted nation; It does not only
deplore the public maladies, but denotes their right remedies, which may
easily be known, and followed, if the healers were but honest; For the hurts
are not so fatal, necessary, Hurt of a Nation not fatal and incurable.
and unavoidable, that men should despair, and sink under them, Saying, There
is no hope, it is in vain to wait on the Lord any longer; God has condemned
and decreed us, as poor, diseased, and desperate creatures, to lie always in
the Hospital under sores and pains, expecting no cure but that of death, and
utter dissolution; If it were so, Ier 6.14.
God would not here and elsewhere greivously reproach and perstringe those
cheating undertakers, those false Quaksalvers, these wanton and cruel Leeches;
who did not want, skill, and knowledge, of what would heal Church and State, in
Law and Government, in true Religion and Justice, in Mercy and Humility, Which
are the best balsoms of both, and clearly revealed to them by the Lord; but
they wanted honesty and fidelity; therefore God pleads against them; Is there
no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician? etc. Ier 9.22.
Why then is not the hurt of the daughter of my people recovered? The question
(Is there no Balm?) is a vehement affirmation, a Satyrick asseveration; There
are ways and means (parabiles and ad manum) sufficient, easy, apt, obvious
and at hand to cure the wounds, or bruises, or tumors, or hurts of any nation;
if men did not either wilfully shut their eyes against them, and refuse to use
them, or if God had not for their hypocrisy, fraud and baseness, justly
blinded their eyes, and hid from them the things belonging to their own and the
nations peace, by leaving them to the mists and clouds of their own partial,
covetous and ambitious lusts; Then (indeed) nothing is to be expected, but
daily ( recrudescentia ulcera) relapses and recruitings of our wounds, until
God give us Physicians of better eyes and hearts, that may both wisely discern
our maladies, and both speedily and faithfully encounter them with seasonable
and fit remedies.

The hope and expectation of this day for our healing.
. To which posture of providence we are prone to hope that we are this day
restored by the valor, honor and integrity of those who now have the conduct
of power and counsel; I pray God we may have cause ( serio gaudere) to rejoice
long and in good earnest; for every days delay of our cure is a chargeable,
uncharitable, and painful delusion to the Nation, threatening such a consumption
of spirits, and such debilitation of the Nations strength and estate (besides
the debasing of its honor and reputation) as must necessarily (at last) betray
us with our posterity, with our Estates, Laws, Liberties and Lives, yea and
with our Reformed Religion (which ought to be dearer to us, as it was to our
forefathers, than our lives and estates) to that foraign invasion and Romish
superstition, which is the ((...)) the great design of the Jesuitick agitation,
whereto are subservient all the fanatic factions of those who are such enemies
to the just and legal closing, or composing of our hurts in Church and State.

. It will be found true by us at last (as well as hitherto some others have
felt it to their smart) That a Commonwealth, Mark 3:23.
as well as Kingdom divided against it self, cannot long stand; Et sero
medicina paratur, Cum mala per longas invaluere moras; in vain shall we at last
cry out, How have we been deluded? how have we despised counsel, and neglected
such plain and safe remedies, as would have cured us long ago! There want not
birds of prey (Eagles, Ravens and Vultures) that wait for the feebleness and
fall of this Church and State, that they may pick out its eyes of Religion and
Learning, of Law and Justice, the Universities and Inns of Court, that the life
and soul of Christian and humane Societies, Equity and Charity, Reason and true
Religion being departed, the ( cadaverosa Patria and Ecclesia) carcass of our
Church and Country may be their spoil and booty, which God of his mercy forbid.

. In the Text there are six things to be enquired. Division in six parts.


1. Persona laesa, icta, afflicta, the patient or afflicted; whom the Prophet,
yea God himself deplores and ownes; she is called the daughter of my people.

2. Plaga or laesio; the grief or malady, her hurt or lesure.

3. Ficta medela, or insana sanatio, the pretended cure or verbal healing; they
have healed, with saying, Peace, peace, slightly and superficially.

4. (...), or mendacium; the fallacy and cheat, when there is no peace.

5. Medicorum turba; the Physicians or Empiricks; They, great Statists, grave
Politicians, formal pretenders to do great feats, and miraculous cures in
Church and State, when really they are no other than imperious hypocrites,
magniloquent Montebanks, cruel and covetous, confident and careless Boasters of
their skill; but no way Effecters of a real cure.

6. Vera medendi methodus; the true way of curing a diseased Nation, a
distressed Country, a sick and languishing Church, which is implied and
supposed to be

First as evident in it self.

Secondly, As easy and as feasible by these Pretenders, if honest.

Thirdly, As it is necessary, apt and seasonable for the poor patient; hence
the great blame and reproach imputed to these Tamperers or Medicasters; They,
to their sin and shame: They, with their pride and policy; They, with their
cunning and cruelty; They more for want of honesty than ability, have thus
superficially skinned over, and perfunctorily healed the hurt of the daughter
of my people; saying, etc.

. Of these I intend by Gods blessing to speak, not as a Ruler or Magistrate,
nor as a Statist and Politician, nor as a Soldier and Commander, nor as a
Citizen and Trader, but as a Preacher or Minister of God to his Church: And
since we are excluded beyond all men in the Nation, from being chosen to meet
or advise in any other ways of public Counsels, Civil or Ecclesiastical; you
may not think much if as men and Christians, no less than Divines, we use the
freedom of this place to acquaint you with the sense and sympathy of our souls;
yea of Gods spirit, in and by the Prophet; when he was not a Spectator only,
but a joint sufferer (as we Ministers have been more than any order of men) in
the common hurts and miseries of Church and State.

1. I begin with the Patient, The Patient or diseased and hurt daughter of my
people.
who is called here both by God and the Prophet, The daughter of my people,
(...), That is gens mea, or populus meus:

First, In relation to God, 1. As related to God.
the people that I have bred up, with so much care and tenderness; the Nation
that has been to me as a Son or Daughter; the Vine that I have planted,
watered and fenced for my self; That Polity of Church and State to which I was
Lawgiver, the chief Counselor and Constitutor; the Supreme head and Governor;
the Captain, Shepherd and Bishop; their great King and Protector: My peculiar
people, whom I had preferred beyond all Nations, as a Theocracy or holy
Monarchy, and royal Priesthood; This is the Patient with whose hurts, sores,
bruises, wounds and sorrows, these practicants have most impudently padled, and
cruelly pleased themselves, in turning public miseries of Church and State to
their private advantages.

2. As related and indeared to the Prophet.
2. In relation to the Prophet; the daughter of my people, which are of the same
lineage and derivation; of the same Father and family; of the nearest blood,
both by parentage and alliance; with whom I have the same Laws and civil
immunities; also the same Religion and sacred communion; Natural, Civil,
Ecclesiastical kindred endears me to them; they are as flesh of my flesh and
bone of my bone; yea we are or ought to be of the same spirit and soul, as
having the same God and Savior, the same holy duties or solemnities, to engage
us in love and dearness as well as nearness to each other; so as the public
and common good should be the supreme good of every particular: We cannot be
happy or miserable alone; as members in one body, all our enjoyments are
social, and all our sufferings are sympathetick; This is the daughter of my
people, for whom I am so concerned and afflicted, that I preach and pray, I
write and weep, I wake and dream, lamentations and tears for her as a man, as a
Citizen, as a true Isrealite, or Jew, as a Christian, as a Protestant or
reformed Professor.

The importance of the Title, The Daughter of my people.
This Title of the Daughter of my people is so frequent in Scripture, that it
seems to importune the Reader to consider the importance of it; Isa. 1.8. and
22.4. Jer. 4.12. and 9.1. and 6.14, 19. Lam. 2.11. Zach. 9.9. So Daughter of
Sion, and of Jerusalem, or the like expressions.

First, To show, 1. Fertility.
not so much the fruitfulness of a Nation, whom God so blesses, that they
increase and multiply, as that softer and procreative or mother sex does, to
great numbers, which are as the off-sets or fruit of a pregnant womb; as the
people of God are sometimes called his first born, and his sons, Romans 8.23.
in respect of that masculine vigor and valor which was among them while God
was with them; so the daughter of his people, as apt to bring forth.

Secondly, 2. Tenderness and indulgence.
But further to express the tender care, and fatherly indulgence that God has
toward such a people as are called by his name, who have had the special
signets and bracelets, the jewels and ornaments of his favor, the glory of his
Ordinances and presence among them: God himself is afflicted in her
afflictions; such as torment her torment him; he feels her wounds, 3. Sympathy
in God and the Prophet.
and faints as it were to see her blood prodigally shed as water on the ground,
either by open enemies, or fallacious Physicians, and cruel Phlebotomists; who
(under pretense of healing the hurts, they have made, or festred, venomed and
inflamed) do cut, and lance, and sear, and lop, and purge and let blood, to
such evacuations and superfluity, as quite exhaust the best and vital spirits
of a Nation; bringing it to fainting fits and convulsions, to weakness and
consumption. As a Father would be affected to see his tender Daughter thus used
and abused (which cannot endure pains like the hardier and rougher sex of Sons)
so is God, and so his Prophet; and so is every good man and woman to the Church
and Country whereto they are so nearly related.

. God is so concerned and touched to the quick, Ier. 31.20.
that his bowels are turned within him; he deplores himself, as if he were a
miserable God, while his people, his sons, and daughters are miserable, either
by their sins or sufferings; God has his sympathies with them, his repentings
toward them, his returns with tears and kisses for them, as a compassionate and
good natured parent has toward his daughter when he has been forced to use
her hardly; and has in his anger either wounded, or bruised and hurt her.

. The kindnesses that in mankind are humane affections, in God are Divine
perfections: None can be so good-natured, so (...), as the good God is; if we
were not cruel to him and our own souls, he could never be other than most kind
to us; for he does not afflict us willingly; We compel him to be froward by our
frowardness, and to break upon us by rebelling against him; 2 Samuel 22.7.
we bruise our selves by dashing against that rock which would be our refuge
and shelter; we wound our selves by running upon that sword which would only be
our defense: God never cease to be our Father, till we cease to behave our
selves as his children.

. From the blessed God, the best men learn and derive this tender love, care,
Often he lo^^ due to our Country.
compassion and indulgence toward the Daughter of their people, both in civil
and sacred relations; the concernments or interests of both are great
endearments to gracious souls: hence as other Prophets, so specially Jeremiah,
becomes a man of sorrows; his eyes run down night and day with rivers of tears,
nor can he be comforted while Sion is afflicted; Though he be wel-nigh drowned
in his own tears, yet he wishes, Jer. 9.1. O that my head were a fountain of
tears.

His bowels, Ier. 1.19.
his bowels are pained within him (by that coarctation or compression, which
great grief, fear and horror makes upon (by the retirings of spirit and blood)
the lactes and smaller bowels, which are near the heart;) he is weary of life,
which does but daily torment him with so many sad spectacles, such dreadful
diurnals, such unwelcome news, of breach upon breach; such a dying and
self-destroying Church and State; all things growing worse and worse, and no
remedy: Still he the alarm of war, and sound of the Trumpet: The Church and
State Physicians are wholly for corrosives and no lenitives; for fraud and
force, not for Reason and Law; they pretend necessity, and pursue providence
till they are in a wilderness of woe and confusion; far from peace, Iam. 3.17.
health, salvation, and establishment; which are the effects and fruits only of
Righteousness and Justice, of Reason and Religion. Hence the Prophet with
vehemence demands, and demanding he deplores, and deploring he reproacheth the
folly and defect, the stupidity and cruelty of those in power; Ier. 8.22.
Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician? Why then is not the health
of the daughter of my people recovered?

The heathens compassion and courage for their Country.
The best of the Heathens had very quick strokes upon their heart strings, by
the love and care they had of their Countries; they thought it (dulce and
decorum pro patria mori) most worthy of a good man, not only to live, but also
to die for his Countries safety and honor.

. It argues minds without natural affection not to have compassion for their
Country, and more for their Church; They must be Clyclopick monsters of brutish
Barbarity, who can like Cannibals feed on the flesh and drink the blood of
their Country and neighbors, of their kindred, of their parents, and of their
children; yea of their very daughters, who have a privilege and plea from
their sex for greatest tenderness.

Our Country is both our Mother and Daughter.
. The daughter of our people, in respect of our posterity and descendents from
us, whom we leave to succeed after us, in our lands, houses and estates; is
also our Mother and Parent, communis parens, if we look backward, as we are
derived from our forefathers; Patria est and matter and filia; our Country is
our parent or mother, also our child or daughter, in different aspects, and so
requires different respects:

First, Of reverence, as to our ( majores, progenitores) Father or Mother, that
begat and bare us.

Secondly, Of Indulgence, as to our daughter or posteri, which derive from us:
In both, that love and kindness is expected, and by the Law of Nature (which is
Gods Law) so commanded; that they sin highly who are so cruel, as either to
sacrifice their sons and daughters, or their Fathers and Mothers, their Church
and Country, root and branch to the fires and flames of civil Wars and
dissentions, begun and continued by their sinful cruelty, and tyrannous
hypocrisy.

. Can a Mother forget her child, Isa. 49.15:
or a Father cast off his Son, or sheath his sword in the bowels of his
daughter, without the just imputation of madness and inhumanity? Judge then,
what men, yea what Sea Monsters they are, that can be studiously, designedly,
and industriously cruel to that Country wherein they were bred; and to that
Church in which they were baptized, to deform the beauty, and destroy the
blessings of peace, plenty, order, good Government, and true Religion left them
by their Progenitors, and to leave to posterity nothing but poverty and pain,
terrors and wars, blood and confusion, hypocrisy and cruelty, fanatic fury
and military insolency; nothing but either oppression or Anarchy; either the
cries of the oppressors threatening, pillaging and exacting as grievous
tax-masters, or of the oppressed, mourning and deploring their sad condition in
vain, while either the cords of unrighteous decrees do bind a Nation captive
to the lusts of unreasonable and merciless men, as to the rack and torture, or
such daily executions of violence, exasperation and rigor, as fills the land
with discontent, blood and tumult; the daughter of his people daily appearing
as the slain wallowing in their own blood; and her voice is as the groans of a
deadly wounded and dying man. Ezekiel. 30.24.


The dangerous and desolate estate of a Nation deprived other true Fathers.
Fourthly and lastly, this denomination or title of the daughter of my people,
imports, as the happy estate of any Nation, that is thus under Gods eye and
tender care; also under the protection or guardianship of wise Governors, of
just and lawful Magistrates, who carry themselves as Nursing-fathers and
Nursing-mothers to Church and State; Isa. 49.23.
yea as kind Husbands, and indulgent Spouses to their beloved Brides or Wives:
So it shows how sad, desolate and helpless, yea how dangerous and exposed to
miseries, both of dishonor and death, and all manner of hurts, incident to any
Church and State, the condition of any people is that is not under Gods care,
or is deprived by their sin and madness, of good Governors, of lawful
Magistrates, of able Ministers and Pastors; such a Nation or Church is as a
poor, weak, helpless daughter, that is an Orphan or fatherless, without any
friend, father or husband to defend and take care of her; she becomes as a
forsaken virgin, subject to all those insolences and indignities, to which her
own weakness, and the power of others lusts may expose her; nor can she have
any safety, health, honor, security, or handsome subsistence and defense until
she be restored to the care and protection of those, who under God, deserve to
be, and by law are Patres patriae, the true Fathers of the daughter of their
people; All others that usurp on a nation are, as unjust, so hard Fathers,
Fathers in law, because without and against Law, having neither the Law of God
nor man for their usurped authority, nor the Law of love and tenderness in
their stony hearts; but as Physicians (who unsent for, obtrude their visits and
practice, more for their fee and gains than for any love to their Patients
welfare) are most welcome when the patient is soonest rid of them, whose
project is rather to protract and perpetuate their patients afflictions, than
to recover them; nor are they afraid of killing them, further than their gain
may dye with them, and their pragmatick humor have less mischief to do.

. But I have done with the first particular, Conclusion of the first part in
the text.
the import of this style, and compellation, the daughter of my people; thus
God, and thus the Prophet, thus all good men, and all good Christians are
wonted to speak and think and act, to love, to pity, and to pray for their
country, both Church and Srate. What I beseech you must they be, who wound her
with the wounds of an Enemy, and smite her with the strokes of a cruel one, as
if all their policy, and power, served to no other use, but to execute
animosities, and exercise antipathies, against their country, to eat out (as
the generation of vipers are vulgarly said do) the bowels of their mother, who
pray not for the peace of Jerusalem, Psa. 122.6.
but seek to make a prey of her, both in peace and war, in things sacred and
civil, condemning her to everlasting enmities, wars, divisions, confusions,
taxes and exactions, which cannot be removed, till health is restored; nor can
this be, till the great wounds and wide breaches made and continued, yea
enlarged by some, are closed and drawn together; till there be a (redintegratio
continui, et reparatio disjuncti,) restitution of all noble parts that are
necessary for the public integrality and unity; its order and beauty, its
honor and safety; Which what they are and how to be done, I leave to wise,
honest and impartial men, who have counsel to guide their prwer, and power, to
execute or put in practice, their good and healing counsels, in spite of all
the Leeches and Empiricks, that would hinder public health, that they might
from the open Orifices of their bleeding Country suck more advantages for
themselves and their parties to the ruin of the whole.

2 Part* what the hurt or disease is.
Secondly, Having visited the Patient, and finding it to be our near relation,
as a Sister, or Daughter, or Mother, even our Country and Church; It is time
for us to consider its hurt or affliction, to see what it ails; what that
plaga, or vulnus, or laesio, or morbus is, wherewith it is so pained that it
cannot rest night nor day: Our work is not only to behold her a far off with
silence and stupor (as Jobs friends) in her grief and anguish, but either to
apply suitable remedies, or at least such prayers and words of comfort ((...)
to her heart) as may show our pity and compassion, which is some relief to
those that are in bitterness of soul.

The Hebrew word (...) (whence our English shiver may well be derived) is
rendered by the LXX. (...), and by the Latin contritio, which properly imports
some injury or hurt inflicted ( ab extra) from an outward agent, by violence,
so as to wound or bruise, or batter, or break, or tear; any thing that causes
( solutionem continui) separation or dissipation of parts which should be
united, and in whose right union is ease, as in their dissolution or
dislocation is pain.

. But the latitude of the word may well extend to the larger scope and intent
of the place and complaint; which is not only upon the account of outward force
and violent impression made upon Church and State, against all Reason, Justice
and Religion; but as in bodies natural, so in these politic (both Civil and
Ecclesiastical) there are many kinds of hurts or maladies incident to them,
both from within and from without.

. There are besides ( vulnera) or flesh wounds, 1. Of imbred hurts or
distempers.
and ( ulcera) which are inveterate sores; and ( gangrena) gangreens which are
deadly, if not speedily cured or cut off; there are pustuli, venomous tumors,
or angry biles, which arise from some putid or corrupt humors in the body; also
running issues and fistula's, which are most at ease when they have some vent,
and most dangerous when suddenly and indiscretly stopped; these are hurts too,
and very grievous ones, when times are such, by the discontent of men's minds,
by the dissolution of their licentious manners, by weakening the authority of
Laws, and overturning the course of Government in Church and State ( ut nec
morbos, nec remedia far possint; that either the pertinacy of customary
disorders and prevalent mischiefs, or the petulancy of people overgrown with
epidemical and tolerated diseases, will not endure fit remedies, yet are undone
if they linger under their distempers uncured.

Hurts by redundancy of humors.
. Sometimes a body grows plethorick, and is hurt by its excess of humors, crude
and indigested, which are prone to gather together and fall on any weak and
disaffected part; there to ferment and inflame, to high feavors and very great
anguish of the whole; so is it in a Nation when either over-peopled to an
indigence and idleness through want of work, or when grown luxuriant by long
peace and plenty, which runs to sottery in many, and at last to the armed man
poverty, whose free quarter pressing on people provokes them to discontents,
and so to design public troubles ( quia multis utile bellum) because they
have nothing left them but their carcasses, and their swords; dig they cannot,
to beg they are ashamed, fighting is their only fortune.

2. Of consumptive distempers by too great evacuations.
. Otherwhile a Nation may be too much exhausted by war, by exactions and
oppressions, by decay and want of trade, so as it becomes consumptive, weak and
languishing, either the ( humidum radicale) native moisture, oil and balm of
competency is wasted for want of encouraged industry and commerce; or the calor
naturalis, the spirits activity and generosity of a people are (as the modern
Egyptians) quite extinct; being either sottishly idle, or so cowed and
overawed, that they are crest-fallen, and below any gallant actions and
designs; living more like slaves under hard Masters, than like the Sons and
Daughters of a fatherly Prince, or a free and legal Polity; much as poor
Hospital wretches, who are condemned to live always under the hands of
Physicians and Chyrurgeons, kept down by Janisaries, and daily terrified with
either taxes or instruments of pain, or menaces of death. Certainly, as qui
medice, so qui militariter vivit, misere vivit. It is a kiling and dying life,
to live always under the Chyrurgeons lance, or the Soldiers sword.

. 3. Civil hurts or bodily distempers by Injustice.
The Hurts of a Nation may be distinguished into those that either disaffect
the body and outward man, by Tyranny, Injustice and oppression contrary to the
known laws, good constitutions and venerable customs of a people (which are the
native and self-healing balsom of those great bodies) pressing upon the
estates, properties, liberties, limbs, lives and honors of mankind; when either
Superiors, like the disaffected head distill too sharp and corrosive humors
upon inferior parts, or these send up (by a kind of circulation or exhalation)
pestilent fumes and vapors of mutiny and rebellion against their Heads and
Superiors; jealous of, and envying each others welfare, also withdrawing that
natural assistance from each other, which is indeed the support and health of
the whole.

. These hurts are very dangerous, and ought to be speedily composed to such an
harmony as is a tolerable state of health, by adjusting every one their rights
assigned to them by that Law, which so takes care and provides for the public
order, beauty, and welfare of all, that it permits no one private interest,
like a wen or leech, or Incubus to oppress, dreine and destroy another; for as
in Nature, so in States, the whole cannot be well at ease, if one part be
grievously pained or pierced.

4. Of violent rapes committed on the Daughter of my people.
. There are sometimes horrible rapes committed upon the daughter of a people,
while vile and violent men (sons of Belial) to satisfy their own inordinate
lusts of revenge, covetousness, pride or ambition, apply by force or fraud, or
both, to obtain that power and place, that favor and preferment in the public,
which they despair to get in fair and honest ways of worthy industry and merit.
These are like the incestuous ravishers of their own Sisters, or Daughters, or
Mothers; men that have much of Cateline in them, nothing of the true Christian;
nor are they to be envied, if they prosper for a time in their wicked devices
and endeavors, since this is all the shadow of greatness they shall ever
enjoy, while for a moments glory among a company of poor mortals they, venture
eternal debasement among the Devils; where such great sinners shall be greatly
tormented; nor will their prosperity procure their impunity; though they dye in
peace, yet they descend to an eternal war, which is ((...)) never to be ended
by peace or truce, nor yet by annihilation or extinction.

. 5. Spiritual hurts. 1. As to Religion.
There are also grievous hurts which may bebefal a Nation as to its very soul
and better spirits, that is, its intellectual powers and excellencies of
Religion and Learning, of rational and ingenuous improvements, most worthy of
men, of Gentlemen, and Christians.

These hurts are when true Religion which is founded on Gods Word, confirmed by
the testimony of the Church of God in all ages, fortified by good Laws,
regulated by good Discipline or Government, and supported by honorable
encouragements; when this is either corrupted in its soundness of doctrine, or
overgrown (as the head with a scald) by superstition, or broken by faction, or
bafled by vulgar insolency, or persecuted by misguided zeal, or oppressed by
inordinate power, or robbed of its just maintenance, or discomposed in its due
order and government, or despised in its best Preachers and Professors, or run
out to the itch and scratch (the scabies and pruritus disputandi, as Sir Henry
Wotton calls it) of disputing and jangling, which breeds uncharitable and empty
formalities; tending and ending in profaneness and Atheism, extinguishing truth
and love, sound faith, and sincere charity, which are as the oil and flame of
the lamp of Religion in any Church and heart; these are most dangerous
distempers, and hardly to be cured or recovered, unless such speedy cordials
and antidotes be applied by wise Magistrates, sober Ministers, and sincere
Christian people, as may recollect, refocillate and restore the power of
godliness, and spirits of true Religion, by dissipating and expelling those
noxious and pestilent oppressions, with which either Princes, or Peers, or
people, or preachers have pressed upon true Religion, by covetousness, or
ambition, or Sacrilege, or Schism, or popularity, or love of Novelty, or
Sedition, to the great disgrace of true Religion, and the best Ministers of it,
both Fathers and Sons.

. It is observed by Guildas and others, who give account of our English
subversions by Saxons and Danes (when we were Christian and civilized, but they
Heathens and barbarous) that nothing more presaged the deluge of those
miseries, which followed such invasions, than the great contempt and oppression
to which the Clergy and Religious Orders were brought; partly it may be by
their own sloth and luxury; but chiefly by the profane insolency of all sorts
of people; who were content to have all Religious cords broke asunder, that
they might enjoy the full sway of their licentious humors.

2. Hurts as to good Learning
. Again, when good learning (which is a most officious, useful and comely
handmaid to Religion) when humane Arts and Sciences (which are beams or
strictures of divine wisdom) when studies of good Laws, and due administration
of Justice accordingly, (which are the vital spirits of a Nation) when these
are vilified and outraged by the vilest people, by Jack Straws and Wat Tilers,
whose ignorance makes them enemies to knowledge, as darkness is to light (being
like Mastiffs the feircer for those dark kennels in which they are bred and
kept up.) When this ill kind of men cry down (like the Ephesine rabble) with
dust and clamor, more than any show of reason, Acts, 19.28.^
all Schools of Learning and Universities, that they may run after false
Prophets and Dreamers, whose simplicity is so impudent to pretend inspirations
and new lights, to so eagle-eyed and quick sighted a people as the English are,
till their delusisions and folly are manifested.

. These are as rough Satyrs, a kind of robust wild men, who trust more either
to their limbs and sinews, or to their wit and cunning, than to their
consciences, or our Laws, for the getting of their living; aiming to live more
like beasts by rapine, than like civil men and good Christians, by honest
labor, and ingenuous industry.

. Nor are they small hurts which the teeth of such Foxes, and tushes of such
Boars have given to any Church or State, where they have for a while prevailed;
being much fitter for Mohammedan conversation than Christian profession; for
there (among Turks) only force or fury makes men considerable; for they think
that their Princes and their mad men are highly favored and most familiar with
God and his Angels.

. These hurts on the mental spirits, or intellectual powers of a Nation, are
more dangerous than those that are incident by grosser wounds of outward
immoralities, which the Physic or dieticks of good Laws well executed, will
easily keep from predominating; but the hurts which fall on Religion and
Learning, on the Reason and Conscience of a Nation, are like frenetick
distempers, long a growing, and long a going; like the wounds on the head, or
cracks, as we say, of the brain, hardly ever thoroughly cured; when Heresy or
Schism, like a spiritual frenzy has seized on any people; as was evident in
the Maniches, Novatians, Arians, Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians and others,
of ancient and modern ages.

Public hurts from sins predominant and unpunished.
. There are further, plagae per peccatum, and proper peccatum; hurts from sin,
and for sin; the first hurts are by our own evil meritings, as the self wounds
of a drunkard; the second by Gods just inflictings upon malefactors; for he
will not always leave the public sins of a Nation, without visiting with sore
and public punishments.

. The first hurts are those from sins, when they grow great and masterly,
boisterous and imperious, either countenanced in Court, or indulged in City, or
prevalent and neglected in Countries; when profaneness, Ier. 27.10. Isa. 59.3.
Hos. 4.2.
and lying, and swearing, and drunkenness, and uncleaness, and murders or the
like faedities come to pollute a great or a considerable part of a Nation, so
as men make a mock of sin, and glory in their shame; when Rebellion, Perjury,
Innocent-blood-shed and Sacrilege are drawn on (like strait and pinching shoes
at first) with the shooing-horns of Religion and Reformation, of public
necessity, thrift and good Husbandry, with antipathies against Idolatry, and
abhorrencies of superstition; when Prince is bad and people worse, and Priest
or Prophet worst of all: Ier. 5.31. and 6.13.
When from the Rulers or Teachers of a Nation, wickedness as a plague of
leprosy, is spread over all the Land: When there is a loathing of the heavenly
manna, a contempt of Word and Sacraments, an indifferency to all Religion, as
little reverence in a Church at holy duties, as in a Playhouse, and far less
than in a Shire-house; these fiery darts of men's own wanton lusts and the
devils temptations do wound very deep; they at once pierce and sear, they hurt
and stupifie, they make men past feeling at length, and only fit them for
vengeance.

. The second hurts are propter peecatum; Hurts for sin by Gods infl^cting.
those which the just and angry God in his sore judgments inflicts on a people
now incorrigible in ordinary ways; Ier. 25.29.
and most severely on those that are called by his name, and owned as the
daughter of his people; so the Jews by various hurts and healings were objects
of Gods wrath and mercy, till they had filled up the measure of sin. See the
Eastern, Asiatick, Greek, Egyptick and African Churches; how famous, how
fruitful, how flourishing? till wounded with sins, overgrown with gross
heresies and schisms, noisome lusts, base opinions and bad actions; the sword of
Gods vengeance by the barbarous inundations of Scythians, Saracens, Turks, and
other colluvies or scum of people at last so divided them, that they are at
this day almost utterly destroyed.

. The arrows of presumptuous sins shot up against heaven, fall on the heads of
the shooters to their own hurt (as Lamech speaks) And as Solomon tells us,
Prove. 6.32.
wicked men sin against their own souls, and so against the peace, plenty,
honor, health and welfare of their Nation and posterity: Sin (as Pliny says of
Qucksilver) is (venenum omnium) the pest and poison of all things; it urges
God to be as a cruel one, 2 Ch^on. 36.16
it provokes till there be no mediation, intercession or remedy: when men
proudly and impenitently treasure up sin, they treasure up withal wrath against
the day of wrath, till judgment break in like the flood on the old world, or
fall like fire from heaven without any to help, or the earth open and swallow
men up quick as Korah and his accomplices.

. Here God is in Justice and Honor concerned to arise, Ier. 5.9. and 9 9.
to bend his bow, to whet his sword, to be avenged on such a nation, which is
grown wantonly wicked, which dares fight against God, yea and challenge him,
Psalm. ^0.11.
whether he regard iniquity or no, whether he be not such an one as themselves;
the wounds which men inflict on the Spirit, Grace and Glory of God, force him
to wound them; when there is no fear of God, no shame, or remorse, or
repentance for sin ( ideo conterimur quia non conterimur; ideo vulneramur quia
non vulnerantur, as St. Bernard) because our hearts are not broken nor our
Spirits contrite within us for sin, therefore the Lord of hosts breaks in upon
us, with one breach in the neck of another, with famine, plague, Isa. 27.1.
sickness and death; with intestine war, and 9.21.
divisions and endless distractions, till Ephraim rise against Manasseh, and
Manasseh against Ephraim, and Judah against both; to eat as Canibals one
another flesh, and drink each others blood, and thereby break the arm or
strength of the whole Nation; yea the very bones will be broken, as when one
choppeth wood; when the sinews are cut in sunder, all bonds of Law and
Conscience, of Reason and Religion, of Justice and Charity, of Unanimity and
Unity, Ier. 4 18.
are (like Sampsons withes) snapped in pieces. All these hurts men's own ways
procure to them, so that God appears either as a stranger and waifering man, or
an enemy, and 30.14.
yea as a cruel one in his sore judgments, which like waves of the sea pursue
one another.

. There is good in the evil of punishment outward.
Yet there was some mercy in this severity as to Israel and Judah a long time,
while God cut them short only, but did not utterly forsake them, or cast them
out of his sight: it may argue some hope, that a Physician yet vouchsafes to
mind and visit his Patient, to apply any causticks or scarifyings which by pain
may bring to sense, and so to healing.

But there are ( coeca and surda vulnera) silent, The worst hurts are unseen
and unfelt.
and unseen, and at present unfelt, yet very sore hurts and deep wounds
bleeding inwardly, which God may inflict, as upon a particular soul, so upon
the spirit and genius of a whole Nation, Hos. 14.15.
as to the generality of the people, by giving them over, Ier. 2.30.
by letting them alone; Why should they be smitten any more, Hos. 5.2.
being a rebellious, stif-necked and backsliding people! profound to revolt,
bold Apostates; Ier. 7.9, 10.
falling from their duty to God and man, yet glorying as if they were delivered
to do all this wickedness, by the test and approbation of providence,
discovered as they fancy in the prosperity of their impiety, for a season.

. Whereas indeed as St. Austin observes, Severisime punit Deus, cum paenalis
nutritur impunitas; There need no greater punishment of a gangrene, than to let
it alone, to leave it to it self; This ( crudelis misericordia,) severe mercy
St. Bernard passionately and wisely deprecates, (potius ure, seca, percute
domine, ne parcas, ut parcas,) Rather lance (O Lord) and cut and burn, by a
merciful cruelty, than so spare me, by a cruel clemency, as to spoil and damn
me for ever, says the devout man.

. There are spiritual maladies, and miseries too, which give a people over to
Dementation, and astonishment, Deu 28.34. and 65.
to blindness and madness, to seek after and trust in lying vanities and
desperate hypocrisies, to rest in the flatteries of successes, or the applauses
of the vulgar, who think every one that prospers to be a God or a good Angel;
and every one that is unfortunate to be a Devil, or a great offender, as the
Barbarians did St. Paul when the Viper seized on his hand, and he shaked it off
unhurt. Acts 18.3.


. Hence any Idol of Superstition, any meteor of Enthusiasm, any glowworm of
fanatic fancy and fury serves the turn, and instead of Gods candles and lamps
of pure Religion in well-ordered Churches, as golden candlesticks. God takes
away these burning and shining lights, and leaves a people to the sparks they
have kindled, Isai. 50.11.
to be satisfied with their own delusions, to believe lies, Ier. 16.5.
to rejoice and glory in their evil and perverse ways; and when God has taken
away his peace and truth from them both in Church and State, they will fall
under grievous violences, oppressions, and exactions of men whose mercies are
cruel, and their healings further hurts, which shall make their very souls bow
down to the ground, that proud men may pass over them; Isai. 55.23.
when nothing but fury and sedition at home; nothing but war and invasion from
abroad is in reason to be expected; yet then some people will easily smile and
fawn on their oppressors, they (poor wretches) being prone to believe (as
Country fellows do the Montebanks) that all is well and whole which powerful
hands undertake to touch; they will echo peace, peace in Church and State, and
cry up a Commonweal, when indeed it is a common woe, as to the grand interests
of the Nation, in the best and noblest, yea in the most of its parts and
members, which can never be fully happy, unless they be of one heart and mind,
of one Law and Religion as to the main.

. Which leads me to the Third Particular, 3. Part. The pretended Healing.
The Medela or sanatio; the seeming and pretended, yea professed and boasted
healing of the Nations hurts; They have healed with saying Peace, Peace, (...);
repetita, duplicata, firma and certa pax; nothing but peace enjoyed, and peace
to be expected, 1 Kings 2^.11. Ier. 28.15.
says Zedekiah and Hananiah the false Prophets, who lied in the name of the
Lord.

1 The craft of these Empiricks.
. We may observe the cunning of those Empiricks, those false Physicians, who
are of no value; they use this sweet welcome word of peace to the people, which
is a Catholicon, comprehensive of all enjoiments (for every want is a kind of
war) when they cry peace, and repeat the crambe of peace, peace, and sing this
song (or (...)) over and over again; Acts 19.35.
they hope, (as Demetrius and his fellow-craftsmen) by crying Great is Diana of
the Ephesians, even to a raving and hoarseness, to make the people believe that
the image which came down from heaven, was certainly a goddess; wih this
lullaby of peace, peace, do the Politicians and oppressors of a Nation seek to
quiet the trefe and wayward people, when they cry out of their ailes, and
oppressions, Judge. 17.13.
as poor Micah did, when the churlish Danites took away his gods and his
Priests, yet was he demanded what he ailed so to cry after them.

. So the great Artists of State, that they may the better set off their skill,
make (as Montebanks) larg Haranges, specious and popular orations, like Herod,
most artificial speeches, mixed with preaching and praying, and sprinklings of
Scripture, and Gods cause, as guiled or syrupped bitter pills, to give the
better gusto; still concluding with the Epiphonema of peace, peace, when behold
nothing but usurpation, and oppression, grievous exactions, and heavy loads,
bonds, and chains and prisons are everywhere prepared for those that dare cry,
or complain, or call for remedy; Pessimi medicastri impensius ostentant artem:
None make ampler prefaces, brags and spreadings of their skill, and salves and
rare feats than the most arrant Quacks and Cheats.

.. These, as the Magicians of Egypt, sometimes so enchant poor people, that
they believe all to be miraculous, at least innoxious, which comes from the
tongues and hands of those who possess them; as Heathens ascribed all blessings
to their Idols; the most crying Injustice must be thought the highest Justice;
the greatest contempt and curb, the strongest oppression and delusion of a
Nation, the wildest and most partial toleration must be voyced for liberties,
yea for precious Christian Liberty, purchased with much blood and treasure; the
grossest Anarchies, and most snarled misgovernments, whose wheels are often taken
off, and whose weight drives heavily over the very heads and bellies, Laws and
Liberties of the Nation (as that Roman Virago, Tullia Hostilia did her chariot
over her Fathers corpse) to the depression of the honor and freedom of Princes,
Peers, and best of the people, this is voyced peace, peace; the most
irreligious licentiousness in doctrine, opinion, speech and manners, must be
reputed freedom of spirit; the most novel and unjust just cause that ever was
on foot, must needs be cried up for the Good Old Cause; when it is indeed quite
contrary to the goodness of Equity, and the antiquity of truth.

The confidence and cruelty of false healers.
. Such monstrous soloecisms there are in the world between some men's words and
actions, between the credulity of cowardly people, and the reality of their
enjoyments: This is the cunning, this the confidence, and this the cruelty of
some State Juglers, and their Plebeian Parasites, to boast of all they do or
say, is in order to peace, paace; when by Peace they mean (as Salust expresses
it) nothing but the servility or the solitude of a Nation, that all interests,
sacred, civil and military, may truckle under their high and mighty power,
their tripple crowns; and submissis faucibus defer imperium: Isa. 29.21.
All that search and try their ways, or wounds rather, are offenders, even for
a word, if they dare speak, whisper, think or weep ought but peace, peace; When
such valiant, such succesful, such holy, such praying, such preaching, such
Saintly, such Seraphick men, have gotten power, and place, and plenty, and
palaces, O now all is peace, peace.

. And the better to color over the overthrow of three flourishing Nations
(which from the pile of three united Kingdoms are fillipped to the cross of an
ill sodered Commonwealth) some men must by all means pretend to set up (as John
of Leyden and his Accomplices did) the Kingdom of Righteousness, the Throne and
Scepter of King Jesus; Which is justly esteemed a Kingdom of peace, being
seldom or never advanced by an active war, but only by a passive; yet is this a
principal decoy to impose upon vulgar people; for who will not seem willing and
forward to submit to Christ's Kingdom, that he may rule and reign? But we are
not such children, nor have so learned Christ, as to expect his Kingdom to be
of this world; Ioh. 18.36.
though in it, yet not after its methods, of the sword, but by the word of
truth and spirit of patience; thus came the King of Sion; the other by the
sword of blood, is a rare project for Muncer and Knipperdolling, for Hacket and
Arthington, when they can be merry in peoples miseries, with (populus vult
decipi, decipiatur) people have a mind to be deluded, and it is fit they should
be so; when credulous people will believe in any spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.1. Mat. 24.23.
an hundred to one but some lying spirits and deceivers, false Christ's, and
false Apostles will come among them, who shall make them believe light is
darkness, and darkness light; that good is evil, Isa. 5.20. Rev. 3 9.
and evil good; that their iron chains are bracelets of gold; that factious
Conventicles are purest Churches; that Synagogues of Satan are the truest Jews,
or children of Abraham; that partial Conventions, and Senates, sifted, and
purged, affronted and bafled by tumultuary or armed force are full and free
Parliaments.

. The honor of Parliaments when full and free.
Which name and thing of Parliament every sober and understanding English man
justly venerates and highly esteems in their due and only true constitution; so
Parliaments are justly honored, as flos and corona gentis, the cream, flower
and crown of a Nation, the anchor and center (under God) of Laws, Liberties,
Lives, and honors, of all that is dear to us in this world, yea of our Religion
too: A Free and full Parliament is the very Palladium pacis publicae, the best
preserver and restorer of our peace, public health, and all honest interests;
the most august and honorable Assembly in the world ( Quo sol illustriorem non
aspicit, as Bishop Andrews calls it, in his Tortura Torti, page 291.) the best
tempered constitutions of spirits and humors, of power and counsel in a Nation;
the oracle of public wisdom, the magazine of public strength, the source
and fountain of public order and authority, the treasury of our riches, the
sanctuary of true Religion, the ark in which the Church of England is
embarked; the Conservatory of both sanctity and civility, the best umpire of
our civil differences, the most equanimous Censor and reformer of manners; the
grand Trustees of Church and State, when so full and free as becomes men of
conscience and honor; Who would not submit their honor, estate, liberty, life,
and all things temporal to such a Judicature of his Countrymen, such
Arbitrators of the public choice?

Isa. 1.5.
. But to cry peace, peace to the body, when the whole heart is faint; when the
whole head is sick, when the very brains are beaten out, when the vital and
best spirits of a Nation, are almost expired and exhausted, when the military
and pretorian insolence shall stand over the Senate or Parliament, as Hercules
with his club over Hydra's many heads; This partiality is such a tyrannous
imposition on reasonable men, as if they were commanded to believe and declare
that a part is equal to, or more than the whole; that glowworms are brighter
than the Stars, and Meteors or Comets more benign than the Sun and Moon; that
all the wisdom and piety of a Nation, were contained in a Knapsack, as the Holy
Ghost was carried in a Cloak-bag from Rome to Trent: Men need but count the
pole or tell noses, to tell what a free and full Parliament means, which
comprehends all the Representatives and Trustees chosen by the Nation, besides
the Peers, who were the great Council to the Prince.

. Peace, as health, includes the good constitution of the whole, but chiefly of
the most Noble principal parts; peace of Church and State, at home and abroad,
will be far from that Nation, whose public counsels are at variance, and
their chief Counselors are either fighters against themselves, or oppressors
of one another, to serve some partial (which must needs be a) Sinister base
and bad interest; for no counsel is good, in or out of Parliament, which is not
for the publicks good, in which every legal and just interest is contained;
Indeed its a mere cheat, put on the poor Patient the daughter of my people,
when vain and empty words of peace, peace, are used and yet either the sword,
or the exactor, or the oppressor devoureth every way, and every day, when God
and man* his word and the violated Laws, peoples sad experience, and tired
patience, their exhausted estates, and daily alarms proclaim, there is no true
peace, no honest and just; no safe and secure peace, which indeed is not to be
expected, while such Witch-crafts are imposed, and such wicked purposes
partially and violently promoted, utterly to deceive, undo, and destroy a
people; which brings me to the fourth particular.

4. The lie or fallacy of healing slightly.
. Fourthly, The (...), lie or fallacy, which the Spirit of God by way of Irony
expresses, they have healed, thus they pretend and brag: but slightly ((...)
super leve, ut leviculum, tanquam rem nihili, (...), LXX. despicientes,
vili-pedentes: cum illusione, Sir. cum ignominia, verbis mendaciorum suorum,
Chald.) Thus Translaters and interpreters, render the word variously, but to
the same sense, arguing the little respect of piety, honesty, equity, and
charity, or humanity, which was in these vain glorious and ungracious healers,
who either wanted skill, or will, or power and influence, or due authority, or
they were slighters and contemners of the publiques health, only intent to
their private wealth and advantages.

The fraud of such.
. They never searched the bottom of the Nations great crying sins, disorders
and sufferings, nor applied seasonable, just and meet remedies to either; yea
they festred and enflamed the lighter hurts, to grievous ulcers, small faults,
offenses, mistakes, differences, and jealousies, which did arise in Church and
State, they either dressed these scratches with Vinegar and gall only, with
sharp and picquent corrasives, without any lenitive or moderation; or else by a
dilatory negligence, and supercilious carelesnes, they let public distempers
and hurts run on, till they were less capable of any cure, or patient of good
applications; Yea, and by a superfluity of wanton cruelty, they either widened
the wounds, and made their probes their punniards; or else dressed them with
poisoned spunges, while they seem to purg them, as one that is killed by a
glyster or potion. And at best by a most impupudent hypocrisy, they have
skinned over the hurts, with some show of settling what was shaken, and of
reforming what was amiss; when indeed no men did more deform the beauty, or
ruin the welfare and hinder the healing of the public, than these Healers,
by their enormious sins, and outrageous lusts, by their unjust and violent
actions, by their partiality, and impotency of their passions, by their evil
eyes, their foul breath, and their rough hands; which are the instruments of
bad hearts, and base minds.

. Their Character.
Little or no public healing is expectable from men that are inordinate
self-lovers, covetous, 2. Tim 3.2^
bosters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, (natural, civil,
ecclesiastical) unthankeful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, in continent; fierce dispisers of those that are solidly,
sincerely and constantly good, Traitors, heady high-minded lovers of pleasures
more then of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power of it, as
the Apostle gives their character by an holy Satyr.

Despair of cure by them.
. And can any thing, that is good for the health of the daughter of my people,
proceed from such Galileans, such evil men, who meditate mischief night and
day, who decree unrighteous decrees, and act wickedness with both hands,
greedily. Who think themselves most hurt, if the State and Church should be
thoroughly and speedily healed; they fancy themselves undone, if any public
good be honestly done; it is pain and death to them to have the bones well set,
which by them have been broken; to see the ((...) rather than the (...)) gaging
wounds or gulphs rather closed up, which they have either made or widened, and
kept so open, that they threaten in a few years to swallow up all the wealth,
and peace, and honor, and strength, and happiness of the Nation and Church.

Their monopoly of healing.
. Yet these are the men that say peace, peace; that would be thought the only
blessed Peacemakers, the sovereign healers of the hurts of the daughter of my
people; such Monopolisers of all medicines and healing drugs, that they are
impatient any others should take the cure in hand, or have any thing to do in
Church or State, beside themselves and their applauders. They tell the poor
patient which is full of wounds and putrfied sores, that they will do her more
good with their tongues and lips, added to their lancets and swords, than the
best Physicians can do by their best unguents and sovereign balsoms; while the
poor, sick, wounded and languishing creature cries out for some ease, and pity;
yea roars for the very disquietness of its soul, Ier. 8.12.
and continued pains; yet without any shame or blushing, these Physicians of no
value, these miserable Mountebanks, affecting a supercilious show of sovereign
majesty, severely frown on the pitiful looks and tears of the daughter of my
people; with terror threatening her to hold her peace, to believe she has
peace, nay to say and swear it is peace, peace; yea and to abjure the use of
any other men or better means, which have been formerly very effectual for her
healing and recovery.

. Impost^rs provoke to just impatience.
Quis coelum terrae non misceat and mare coelo? Here patience it self is a sin,
and impatience a virtue: Who, not stupid, Isa. 1^2.
can forbear with the Prophet to cry out, Hear O heaven, and give ear O earth?
Was ever any Nation so tampered with, so pestred by a company of fallacious
Physicians; pretenders to heal, superficial skinners, dilatory Empiricks, and
miserable Medicasters who resolve small hurts into grievous ulcers; and green
wounds into virulent gangreens, and little bruises into fell and inflamed
tumors, yet cry peace, peace; and we have healed you; why do you yet complain?

. As if the Prophet should say, it is high time (indeed) after so many years of
wasting and wounding, of war and trouble, of death and bloodshed, of undoing
and destroying, of cutting and dividing the Body Politic, turning the
daughter of my people (as on the gridiron) from one side to the other, by
vicissitudes of burning Feavors, by continual tossings, and fits of high
distempers (between the wrath of God and heavy hand upon her, beside the fury
of men against her) yet to cry peace, peace to her; when as the Lord lives,
there is no peace; nor many steps between the patient and death; or at best
such a sorry peace as is no less chargeable, terrible and oppressive, than an
open war; Pax omni bello tristior, a peace patched up with popular pretentious
and impious injuries; as the body of Lazars; whose plasters rather hide than
heal their sores: What true peace can that be which is founded only on sands
and quagmires, on violence and exaction, daubed over with the untempered mortar
of policy and hypocrisy, which holds not one winter; built up with cries,
begun with violence, carried on with oppression, and ending in desolation?

Character of true healers.
. Peace, or health, and salvation are far from the ungodly; Psalm. 119.155. Isa.
57.22.
What peace can there be to the wicked Princes or people, Senators or
Soldiers, whose feet are swift to shed innocent blood? whose hand are full of
bribes, whose hearts are hollow and double minded, whose power is usurped,
whose decrees are unrighteous, whose mouths are full of fraud and flattery?
Isa. 32.17.
Peace and Establishment in Church and State with God and men, are the fruits
of Justice and Righteousness, of true Religon and good Laws, of just Magistracy
and legal Sovereignty, of fixed, free and united Councils, of wise and honest
Valor, Exodus 18.21.
the study, prayer and endeavor of men fearing God and hating covetousness,
men of true public spirits, who are not swayed by private interests and
passions to any novel designs and factious adherencies.

. Men of wisdom and honor fortified with just Authority, are only apt to make a
Nation happy by healing her, in those ways of honest decrees and impartial
dealing, which are legal and regular, not fanatic and extravagant, which every
night dream, and in the morning propose new receipts, Seraphick projects, and
untried medicaments, which sufficiently show, that such Chyrurgeons and
Physicians, are either ignorant or pragmatick or impertinent; either not
knowing what to do, or not willing to do what they know, but are resolved to do
any thing, never so foolish and pernicious, rather than sit still and do
nothing, or give way to better heads and hands, who have more authority from
God and man, and so may better expect a blessing.

. What peace can there be or true healing, while the most crying sins that
mankind are capable to commit or conceive, the deepest wounds and sorest hurts
from the hand of man that a Nation can receive are unpunished and unrepented?
yea unconsidered, yea encouraged, yea cried up by some for rare examples of
Justice, of Liberty, of Piety, of Sanctity? when neither the holy God ever
commanded, or holy men ever practiced any such thing?

. What peace can there be while fleshly lusts, and all manner of evil
concupiscence in Rulers and ruled, fight against men's own souls, against Gods
Spirit, and against the public welfare? while worldly lusts of pride, envy,
covetousness, ambition and Sacrilege daily supply matter for general
discontents, public wars, and perpetual woes? James 4.1.


. What peace or healing can there be in Church and State, while men of the same
polity are like Pikes in a pond, or fish in the sea, or beasts of prey in a
wilderness, pursuing and devouring one another? while neither the bonds of the
same Laws, nor the same oaths, nor the same covenants, nor the same Religion
can hold them? while they will not endure the same Magistrates, nor the same
Ministers, nor the same form of Church and State? while they have so little
equity, so no piety or charity to each other? while every petty person among
the Prophets and people aims to set up a party or faction, and every party
designs to subdue others, to set up it self, and to oppress the common liberty
and public welfare, which are only contained in those Laws, that are made by
the consent of all Estates in the Nation.

. What peace can there be where there are so many tumults and strifes, so many
whispers and jealousies; so many fewds and animosities in the breast and bowels
of the same Nation? for want of that rare Elixir of lawful and just government
which only is able to compose the distracted spirits, to give a just allay and
temperament to all humors and parts in their due places and porportions, except
they be such as are indigestible to any good order, and are better purged out,
than kept in the body?

. Alas these pitiful partial applications, these diurnal doses, these horary
medicaments, these slight and superficial plasters; these verbal and decretal
healings which some men have so gloried in, and vapoured of, are as ridiculous
as they have been inefficacious; unless these great Masters of their new arts;
these Galens and Hypocrates of Church and State were so in favor with some
Esculapius, as to partake of his Diety; and so by the words of their mouths,
or shadows of their bodies, or touch of their garments, to rebuke the Feavors
of the body politic, and immediately to cure, as by miracle, what they have so
long tampered about to very ill purpose.

. But as an ilfavored Physician is an ill omen to his patient, Luke 4.23.
especially if he look ill from his being ill; there being no great hope that
the Physician should cure others, who does not, or cannot cure himself; so the
busy Practitioners on the Daughter of their people, should do well, first to
commend their skill to the public, by giving some good experiments, on their
selves, by curing their own corrupt hearts, or crazy heads; by recovering
themselves from those vertigos, megrims, and falling sicknesses, with which
they have been so often afflicted; let them wash their own foul hands, and
cleanse their double minds, Isa. 1.16, 17.
let them cease to do evil, and learn to do good; James 4.8.
Let them do all things not arbitrary ( ad libitum, and libidinem) but as exact
Physicians, and Apothecaries, per pondus and mensuram, by weight and measure;
by the rule and standard of the Laws of God and man; which give, or restore, or
preserve to every one what is their own, by such purchase, donation, descent
and honest industry; wherein their rights are made good by Law; and which they
have no way forfeited by any injury to the public, of which the Laws of the
Land and lawful Magistrates, are the only lawful Judges.

Isa. 58.6, 7* 8.
. Let them not think by a little Fasting-spittle, to cure the hurts of Church
and State, nor yet by their solemn feasts; This is the fast, and this the
feast, the Lord has chosen, comely for true relion, and wholesome for the
Nation, To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo heavy burdens, to break
every yoke of unrighteous decrees and acts; to restore what is unjustly, that
is without law taken away from any man, to do as they would be done unto,
Micah. 6.8
to deal justly to all men, to show mercy, even in deserved Justice; and (after
all) to walk humbly with God, This do (O ye Physicians of my people) and you
shall live; This do, and the daughter of my people shall live; Zach. 13.6.
being thoroughly healed of the wounds she has received in the house of her
seeming friends; (For it was not an open Enemy of the heathens round about,
which has done her all this hurt: But her own Children,) Let them cease from
being rebellious Children, Isa. 1.23.
companions of Adulterers, Robbers, and Murderers, return to that duty, they
owe to their God and their civil Parents, to their Country, and their Church,
or to that pity and compassion, they ow to their Children and posterity, whose
teeth will certainly be set on edge by the sower grapes their fathers have
eaten. Jer. 31.29. Isa. 58.8.
Then shall health spring forth speedily, righteousness shall go before, and
the glory of the Lord be thy rearward. Then shall they be as Fathers and sons
too, of the Nation; who shall build the old wast places, repair the breaches,
and raise up the foundations of many generations, which have been overthrown,
overthrown, Ezekiel. 21.27.
overthown, after they had continued firm for many ages, as to the stability
of Church and State, under Gods indulgence and the care of good Magistrates.

. But since these Tamperers are so justly and severely reproached by God and
the Prophet, Particular instances of slight healing
for their slight healing, which was indeed none at all; the more cruel, by how
much they were more cunning, to keep the daughter of my people in continual
pain, and themselves in constant practice and pay; It will not be amiss more
particularly to examine in the sense of Gods Spirit and his Prophet, whence
this malice or mistake had its rise; how this slight healing did befall the
daughter of his people; and how it is to be avoided as much as death, and hell,
and devil.

First it comes by unskilful Empiricks, such as neither understand the Science
of Physic, 1. By unskilful undertakers to (...).
nor the Art of Chyrurgery; neither the cause, nor the symptoms, nor the proper
and specific medicines for such hurts and diseases as Church and State may
labor under; which possibly may be as many as the natural bodies of men are
subject to; if a man had a true Anatomy of the parts and constitution, with all
accidental distempers, incident to the body Politic, from within or without:
When men of little or no literature, of as little experience in matters of
policy and prudence, of mean capacity and education, of small minds and narrow
souls, do undertake the cure, who are easily deluded and gulled, biased and
swerved with fair words, specious pretenses, and partial, yea private
interests; (especially if these novel interests have any smack or tincture,
fucus or form of more than ordinary godliness) when these easy, 2 Timothy 3.5.
shallow and inconsultive men, of giddy heads and rash hands, full of childish
credulity, and popular formalty, come to the helm of Church and State, to rule
and steer all, they look more to the spreading of their sails, than to that due
balast and lading, or to that right cynosure and compass of Law and Justice
which God and their Country have prescribed.

, Gonsalvo, whom Guicciardine calls the great Captain of his time, was wont to
say, that a General, or chief Commander of an army, had need have thirty years
experience, to breed him accomplished to all the abilities, requisite to such a
place; on whose prudent conduct, the lives of so many men depend; Yea, and
whole Nations too; truly no less time is needful to train up a complete
Counselor of State, a meet Physician for the daughter of my people; It is not
a pragmatique forwardness, a bustling activity, or a projecting impudence, or
an unblushing ignorance, or a voluble impertinence of tongue, or a military
strength of hand, and robustness of body, which makes men fit to undertake the
healing of a nation; every fool and evil doer, is capable to be meddling, and to
do mischief, only the work of closing and healing, is expectable from wise and
good men, of ingenuous and learned educations, and of exemplary lives; Prove.
20.3.
and adorned with competent estates, men who know how to temper their Physic
and Plasters so, as are commensurate to the nature and degree of the disease,
to the spirits and strength of the patient, neither over-doing by precipitancy,
nor under doing by presumption; neither fearful to use tried and fit medicines,
nor rash to tamper with every new receipt propounded.

2. By unfaithful Empiricks, such as are crafty enough to do evil, 2. By
unfaithful.
but to do good they have no knowledge or honesty; they have heads able enough,
and hands active enough, Isa. 5.13.
but they have corrupt hearts and base ends; they can boast, Ier. 4^ 22.
as much as any of a public spirit, and the commonweal, or bonum publicum; but
while they look one way, they row another; the tide of private benefit secretly
carries them contrary to the sail and wind, with which they clamor amain for
the public good; full of pretended necessities, and impatience for an hudling
and preposterous Reformation in Church and State; and the work is well done, if
their crasie estates, and waining fortunes, or cracked credits be once well
recruited; if they find no gain in true godliness, yet they make good gains of
the form of it, having the Cretian faculty to speak lies in hypocrisy for
filthy lucre sake; Tit. 1.11.
every one looks to the profit which is to be made from their quarters; Isai.
56.11.
if their purse prosper, all is peace and prosperity; though all things public
are worse and worse, as to Religion, Laws, Liberties, as to freedom and honor
of public Counsels, as to trade and commerce, as to peace and concord in
Church and State; they care not how snarled the skain of things be, so as they
can draw some good threads out of it to stitch up their affairs, and mend their
rents.

. Though the daughter of their people have scarce rags to hide her sores of sin
and shame, to dry up her tears, or dress her wounds by reason of oppression and
anguish; yet these grand Geniusses of State (whose gracious nods are sanative,
and their touch or presence must be thought sovereign) must be clothed in
scarlet and fine linen; in robes of silk and embroidery, and fare deliciously
every day; that they may appear rather as Princes in splendour and majesty, than
as Montebanks and Quacks; who care not how little they heal their Patients, nor
how much they help their own purses; yea some of them are so false that they
conspire the total subversion and destruction of all the health and wealth of
the daughter of their people, which sat as a Queen among the Nations in former
ages; that they may either keep or increase the spoils they have already got,
and further hope for, from her final expiration and dissolutions; where from an
ancient, united and flourishing Kingdom, to a puny, peeled and divided
Commonwealth, 1 Cor. 15.
the change is not like to be (as that of our vile bodies at the resurrection)
from dishonor to honor, from corruption to incorruption; but from peace, glory,
plenty and renown, to eeverlasting war, dishonor, beggary and contumely; the
fruit and fate attending the silly or subtle tamperings of false more than
foolish Physicians, who are neither good for others bodies, nor for their own
souls; for while they through ambition, covetousness and unfaithfulness neglect
to heal the one, they damnably hurt the other. Certainly no want of honesty or
charity is more damning than that which is due to the public, but denied or
withdrawn, when it is in the power of our hand to do a Nation or a Church good:
Nor are any Traitors more dangerous and detestable, than those Lopesses, who
are rather carnisices than medici; Lopes was Physician to Q. Elizabeth and
suborned to poison her. Camden.
empoysoners, tormentors, and executioners, more than healers or Physicians;
then most betraying their trust, when most trusted, for the public welfare of
a Church and Nation, on which not only many thousand bodies but souls do depend.

3. When transported with passion and opinion.
When the pretending healers are either tainted with the contagion, and
leavened with the sowreness of other men's odd opinions and passions, or
transported with their own; sometimes Physicians are such Gentle Sirs, that
they symbolize too much with the humors of their Patients, and are so indulgent
to their diseases, or compliant with their ulcers, that they dare not tell
people their real dangers, and the tendency of their unreasonable distempers,
if not prevented and modederated; sometimes people love to have such
Physicians, Ier. 5.31.
such Magistrates, such Parliament Men, and such Preachers too, who shall speak
soft and smooth things, Isa. 3.9.
sow pillors under their broken bones, and bind up the unsearched sores with
silken bands; This is the way ( non sanare sed palpare morbos and vulnera; and
ipsa remedia in morbos vertere) not to heal but to humor an hurt; not to mend
it to the better, but to change it to worse; for an impatient patient many
times needs a plaster of moral Philosophy and Divinity, more than of Physic
or Chyrurgery; and stands more in need to have his passion than his sore cured;
which (as in bodies full of sharp humors) is worse by their fretting than by
the first wounding.

. Hence Patient and Physicians, like Idiots and Simpletons very gravely
conspire to lay aside all use of what things are known to be good in order to
health? out of a great zeal against the abuses some have formerly made of them,
and a like jealousy for hereafter.

The (...) or transport.
. Thus they transfer by an ((...)) impatience of prejudice and transport of
their own or others passions, the faults and frailties of persons to things;
condemning with the Turks all wine, because some men are drunk with its excess;
and all good cheer, because some are apt to surfeit, blaming the meat, when the
fault is in their ill stomach or digestion; hence they study so to dry up
Hydropick bodies, till they kindle in them calentures, and make them as tindar,
apt fuel for a Feavor; they draw away so much blood pretending it is bad, till
the Patient (Church and State) loses, withal, much of it best blood and purest
spirits; so falling at last into fits of convulsion, and such emaciatings as
betray to desperate consumptions: Thus they are prone totally to abandon a
good, an excellent, a long tried, yea and the only adequate way of Government,
that can be adapted to all just interests in Church and State, out of a popular
prejudice, against some misgovernments incident to the Governors, and to the
best Governments; which are sooner remedied, than a new one modelled and
fitted; as a crakt silver vessel, is sooner sodered and new burnished, then a
new one malleated out of the rough mass or wedge of metal.

. Thus (Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria currunt) for want of wise, honest
and steady Physicians) remedies over-driven prove worse than the diseases; and
a Nation is further off from cure after twenty years passionate practice, than
it was at the first cause of complaint.

. This false out, when Physicians, grow so sympathising, or symbolising, with
their patients pevish passions and humors, that they flatter their diseases,
and fear nothing so much, as to cure them, with that discreet severity and
moderation which permits not the outery, (when greater, than the grief) nor the
importune clamer of the Patient, either to keep him short, or carry him beyond
the reality of the disease; Since health of the body, as virtue which is the
health of the mind, consists ((...)) in the mean between extremes. It Is too
true, as in Patients, and Physicians, so in people, and Parliaments (perit
judicium, quum res transit in affectum) when Physicians so much mind their
patients distemper and clamor, that their minds contract a disease that sets
them next door to a kind of raving or madness, or dotage of which all men are
thought in some degree guilty, who either much over-do or underdo, what they
undertake to do; as he that broke the pitcher which he was to wash; and burnt
or pulled down that house, which he had commission only to sweep or repair;
and cut off that head for aching, which was only to be shaved, and fortified
with some defensive plaster, against the rheum; To these transports of some
men, who were much swayed by the passionate outcries of some people, we owe the
loss of our ancient Government, and have run the sad ventures, yea shipwracks
of Anarchy so long in both Church and State.

4. When they too much intend petty symptoms, and neglect the main distempers.
4. When these pretended healers look more at the lesser symptoms of the
diseases, or at the putid excresencies of the sore, than at the root and
fountain of the malady; when they regard more the sufferings of a Nation, then
their own or other men's gross sins, and are more sensible of man's prejudices
and displeasures, than Gods.

It is a rule in Physic (In complicatis morbis acutiori attendendum) In
complicated diseases the maine care must be to give check to that, which is
most accute, malignant and predatorious of the spirits; for if these fail, or
be not refocillated, both nature and art, (as Hippocrates says) must needs
fail; they are then very impertinent Physicians, who seeing a Patient in an
high feavour, are more solicitous to take away some cloths, or covering, which
seems too hot on them, than to mitigate the flames of that fevorish furnace,
which boyles within them.

. Here, by gross mistakes, some Physicians take ( non causam pro causa;) Angry
at some Ceremonies, and scared with mere shadows, more than with gross sins,
that are most immoral, and substantially evil (as I may say:) This runs even
reformation it self many times to a deformity, while Physicians look so much to
some apparences of evil, that they neglect what is most appearent evil. Thus
men quarelled (in their little cavils, The slight healing by taking away the
Liturgy.
at the Liturgy) so much about some things they less fancyed, or understood,
as to the antiquity, and innocence of their sense and use, that they never
regarded either the excellent matter and form of the prayers and
administrations in it, or their own dull, cold, and formal application to them,
when indeed they deserved for their divine truth to be believed, and for their
public use and charity, to be entertained with humble, intentive, fervent and
devout affections; the fault was not in the holy forms, but the unholy
formality; Nor (lastly) did they bethink themselves of the great want which
plainer people have of such wholesome, complete, wonted forms of public
prayers, and administrations, which they can best learn and understand, and
intend; for daily variety in religion, (such as some men affect) is almost as
inedifying, to poor country people as Latin service; nor is any Symbol of
Christian union more proper in any Church (and if it could be in all the
Churches,) then to have where ever they come, the same Summary, sense and
solemnity of holy mysteries; and such duties are ill left to all private men's
fancys, yea or to all Ministers sudden and extemparary abilities, though they
be able men.

Grand neglects, and petty severity.
. If lying and swearing, and riot* and luxury, if Schism and perjury, and
sacriledg, and Hypocrisy, and bloodguiltiness, if covetousness and ambition,
and immoderate revenge, if discontent and impatience against God and
Superiors, if malice and high uncharitableness, if bribery and corruption, if
popularity, formality, idleness, and debauchery in Ministers, if peoples
immoralities, and profaness, factiousness, Atheistical indifferency, and rude
insolences; if these and the like great hurts of the daughter of my people had
been cordially reformed, and by reinforced laws with due execution, of both
civil and ecclesiastical discipline, had been so purged out, or curbed and
abated, that the flagrancy and predominancy of them had been generally allayed;
doubtless, the public welfare, might have consisted with those other things
of convenient and comely use, in Church and State, at which some men's zeal did
so rise and overboyle, that it almost quenched all Religion and civility to
sordid confusions.

. 5. When these pretending healers, do either by immoderate tampering and
dilatoriness, 5. By immoderate and dilatory tamperings.
multiply diseases, or by stopping one orifice indiscreetly make a score, or
force ill humors to shift their seat, and transfer diseases (like the running
gout) from one part to another; from the head to the hands, thence to the feet
and at last to the heart; Of curing the hurt of Monarchy by Democracy, and
Episcopacy by Presbytery.
still the inward malady remains unpurged, the daughter of my people as to the
main is not healed; so to rectify the more feared than felt excesses of
Monarchy and Episcopacy, a greater Tyranny may be easily raised, not only in a
downright Anarchy, but there are tyrannous and tedious burdens to be feared
even in the best Democracy or Aristocracy that can be modelled for Church or
State: where, as the teeth of harrows are worse than the point of one sword; so
many Reguli or Masters are like to be more inaccessible, more untractable, more
intolerable, more chargeable to the people than any one can be; and no less
both severe and supercilious; besides less satisfactory and honorable; For it
is more ingenuous to be a Subject under some person of ancient honor and
eminency, than to have a snip of Sovereignty among others that are but upstarts
and equals.

. I believe the Peers and Gentry of England lived much more freely, amply and
magnificently, though Subjects under one Sovereign, than the best Here Is or
Burgomasters do among the Low-country-men or Swisses: And so did the Clergy of
England under excellent Bishops, beyond what they ever will under the rigor of
others who have their horns, though they endure no head; the little finger of
rigid Presbytery, has been heavier than the loins of moderate Episcopacy.

Of medicines become maladies.
. It is a Monstrous either want of skill, or of conduct, or constancy, for
public Physicians to let things run to such impolitick lapses, (under the
pretense of curing the hurts of the daughter of their people) as while they
sought to recover the frequency of Parliaments, (thereby to moderate all
enormityes, and remedy all burdens inconvenient in Church and State,) that (at
last) the public welfare should come to that sad pass or ill fare, that some
things called Parliaments, should be thought the greatest public grievance
(and what convention is there so illegal and contemptible, which some
flatterers of times and powers will not christen and consecrate with the
venerable name of that almost sacred Senate?) How desperate and sad a State is
it when any grievance should be called a Parliament, or any Parliament prove a
public grievance! as if Parliament had the name from (Parium and Populi and
Principis lamentum) the lamentation or complaint of Prince, Peers, and People,
or their contempt, till at length even military insolency dared to adventure
(as the requital of the long and great pay, which they as Soldiers had received
from their dear Countrymen) to garble and purge, to shufle and cut, to lay out
and take in Parliaments at their pleasure, like a stock at Gleek, yea and not
only to act against them, and without them, but above them, in a game of
Government, wholly new to England, called Stratocracy.

. Mean while (good God!) what became of the wits of some of our wise
Physicians, and our confident Surgeons! Could they not have foreseen and
prevented (by discreet counsels and moderate methods of seasonable applying
State Physic) those swoonings, and heart faintings; those convulsions, and
dyings; those groans and bleedings of Church and State, of Kingdoms and
Commonwealth, of Laws and Religion, of Magistracy and Ministry, which have all
suffered in twenty years of tedious attending their cure, more hurts than they
ever did for an hundred years by all the diseases that were pretended so
necessary to be cured, that rather than fail, all, even head and members, limb
and life it self must be ventured! where was the virtue of former oaths, of
late Protestations, of all their Covenants and Vows, the Antidotes which they
had taken or given against Anarchy and Apostasy!

. The lubricity and subtilty of ill humors.
Sage and well-advised Physicians must still consider, how subtle and
Proteus-like distempered humors and spirits are in a body that is foul; they
instantly, being moved but not removed, slide as from one part, so from one
disease to another; as easily transmuting interests and dangers, as the scales
of a balance go up and down when more weight is cast into one than the other;
it presently follows the preponderancy, and grows lower when heavier, which was
before higher, because lighter.

. So in public or epidemick distempers, preventive and prophylactick medicines
must be used as well as Cathartick and purgative; else things will by secret
and insensible steps, suddenly vary from one extreme and oppression to another,
as the cold and hot sits of a Quartane, especially if the grievances of sharp
and unseasonable remedies (like some corroding plasters) follow the grievances
of the sore and disease, so either stupifying instead of suppling; or
exasperating instead of mollifying; or cutting noble parts quite off instead of
reducing them to due temper and proportion: State Physicians must be as wary of
using too much of the salt of popular Proposals, and the niter of levelling
principles, as other Physicians are of using Quicksilver uncorrected, or
unmortified; for they are both most acute poisons if not well prepared and
aptly applied; by which either unfit, or unseasonable, or immoderate, or rude,
or forcible applications, men are quickly carried beyond their own duties, and
others deserts, for want of that caution, conscience, charity and discretion,
which is necessary for all those who meddle in matters of life and death; in
private, much more public healing and welfare; else the quick as well as the
dead flesh may be cut off and consumed; the vital as well as vitiated spirits
and humors may be exhausted. The very Arteries and Sinews of Government are
prone to be rotted, and the whole fabric of the body will fall one limb from
another.

Of violent ways of healing.
. Especially when by the fury or fear of Prince, or people, things are brought
to that pass, that all other medicines being laid aside, nothing is made use of
but the weapon-salve, that ungnentum armarium, the sword of war, which has
seldom the virtue of Achilles his sword, which was to heal as well as to
wound; hence follow those horribe healings, which like Simeons and Levi's cure
of the Sichemites when they were sore,) destroy both prince and people, Genesis
34.25.
Prove. 14.28.
either lopping off the arms, and legs of the body Politic, the strength and
multitude of the Nobility, Gentry, and Communalty, which is the glory of a King
and Kingdom, or else by a dreadful abscission, cropping off the very head of
Soveraginty, from the body of the polity; the first reduces a Nation to its
stumps, and makes it a cripple a long time; the other makes both its
appearance, and its motions, as monstrous and deformed, as if a body should
move without an head, (as it was in those days when there was no King in
Israel) or as the Giant Polyphemus did; Judge. 21.25.
when blind, he gropeth for Ulysses; so are a great people, when in the
darkness and confusion of Anarchy, they seek in vain for that order, wisdom,
and authority, which are the body, soul, and spirit of Government, and are
eminently comprehended in the head, with which the whole body best corresponds,
when happily compacted together. This principal part once taken away by
violence, the body (like fouls, whose heads are wrong off) may flutter for a
while, with blind inordinate and dying motions; but no better can be expected,
unless (as in Hydra) many heads could presently spring up in stead of one,
which is neither easily, nor suddenly done in Nations, whose native courage,
emulation, spirit and metal raises up many rivals for sovereignty, and as many
disdainful enemies against all, that either obstruct their pretended power, or
affect to enjoy it themselves.

Slight healers by new inventions and unexperienced applications.
6. When these pretending healers are much for a new Paracelsian practice, for
unexperimented applications or medicaments of their own inventions, which are
occasionally extracted and Chymically made (with sin and force) by themselves,
and such as are of their faction; but they do not natively flow as the balm of
Gilead does from the tree of good Government and polity, that is from those
Laws and constitutions, which have been long approved as most proper for the
Nations welfare, which (without doubt) are best able and most apt, both to
preserve and restore the health of the daughter of my people; no counsel,
practice, or power of Prince or Potentate, or Parliament, that are praeter, or
contra-legal, can be for long or sound healing, but rather proves more noxious
and infestive at last to the public peace: Law the most healing.
For the Law (which is power regulated by wisdom; and wisdom asserted by just
power; and both confirmed by the Parliamentary consent of all estates
concerned) this is the Radical moisture, or native balsome, by which the lamp
of life is preserved in the body Politic; as this decays, so spirit and
vigor, health, and harmony, peace and protection, love and life decays.

. Yea, where force is necessary to be used, yet it must be limited, and
commissionated by law; else it is but a Lion broke loose, or a ranging Bear, or
a ravening Wolf, or as a mutinied Army, no better then a tumultuary riot, and
violence, like the fighting of a body with it self in fits of the falling
sickness, such new pits and cisternes will not hold any water; for they are not
only cracked in the making, and marred upon the wheels, but they presently dash
against one another, as earthen pitchers; they are bypath of extravagant
power, and fallacious pretentions, Ier. 6.16.
but not comparable, in point of health and safety, to the good old way, ( and
bona, and antiqua, and probata) which long time had liked and attested to be
very good.

Such as put on in all haste Saul's Armor of Sovereignty, which they never
before essayed to wear, nor have shoulders fit for it, will soon find it not
only inconvenient for them, but combersom, dangerous, and in the end
pernicious; if they mean indeed to kill those Giants, those Goliahs of
uncircumcised enormities, which defy God and Law, it is better to take those
smooth stones, and that sling, to which as Masters of assemblies, or
Magistrates, or Parliament men, or Justices, they are wonted, according to the
Law, and the duty of their place, than to cumber and engage themselves in such
uncoth, high and heavy undertakings, which are seldom other than
disadvantagious, and destructive, as always dangerous to the counselors and
actors, no less than to the public peace and welfare; for as Tacitus well
observes, ( Consilia callida and inhonesta, prima front laeta, tractatu dura,
eventu tristia) new and illegal projects, are commonly pernicious, and crying
at last, however they smile and flatter at first; nor can any violence or
success heal a Nation or a conscience, where the Law smites by accusing, and
the conscience by condemning men for their wicked principles and unjust
proceedings.

7 Healing by charms and Parliaments.
7. When these pretended Healers, leaving all wonted and approved medicines,
which Gods word and the laws of the land, right reason and true religion do
warrant or allow, fly to their enchantments, as if they would heal by charms,
and cure by Philters or amulets, as by carrying Bibles in their hands, by using
much Scripture phrase and expression, by following sermons and fasts and
prayers, by affecting an odd kind of canting way of writing and speaking, by
zealous pretending of sanctity and Christian liberty, or through reformations
of advancing the cause of God, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, by crying up
providence, and successes, by conjuring up strange fears and hopes, jealousies
and expectations, like so many Ghosts and Goblins, to scare and amuse the
common people: Lastly by flying to raptures, inspirations, enthusiasms, holy
convulsions, and such like quaking and quacking tricks as pretend no less to
the skill of healing all the hurts of the daughter of my people, than Wizards
and cunning men do to cure all diseases of man and beast.

. Thus the Temple of the Lord, Ier 7.4.
the Temple of the Lord is urged, when they intend to destroy Church and State;
it is superciliously yea very surlily spoken, to persons much better every way
then themselves, Stand by, Isa. 65^5.
we are holier than you, we are Abraham's seed, and the true Israel of God. The
work of healing Church and State, is the work of Saints; as soon as they can
agree what way to take, what plasters to make, and what power to get into
their hands, that they may apply their rare Cataplasmes or Emplasters.

Thus some tell us there must be no King but King Jesus, Mat. ^0.22.
and themselves sitting on his right and left hand, in all power,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, judging the twelve tribes of Israel; for
they strongly fancy England to be Judea, or the holy land, and most of the
people to be of late turned Jews; Others will have no Bishops, The spo^les of
those Egyptians.
nor any thing that belonged to Bishops, but only their good lands and houses,
the spoils of those Egyptians; others will have no presbyters, nor tithes, nor
Temples, but arbitrary, and unmercinary Preachers, in occasional Barnes and
Stables, or ( sub dio) in open fields, who will do the work of Christ without
man's wages. It were well if their Soldiers would do so too, in their holy
wars, which are voted by some to be the work of Jesus Christ; some would have
they know not what themselves, but they attend further light, by which they may
better discern the way of healing the Nations, and their own hurts.

Isa. 5.20.
. Mean time they look neither to the Law nor the Testimony, neither to the rule
of piety, equity, nor charity, as if a little chattering of pious, or rather
impious nonsense, were sufficient to cast out the legions of Devils, or the
clay and spittle of their lips were able to cure the many distempers of these
Nations, especially when the blindness, boldness and folly of such Operators
and Circulators, is so manifest to all men that have eyes enlightened by reason
or religion, by Laws of God or man, that I hope it shall proceed no further.
Have we need of mad men, as Achish King of Gath, 1 Samuel 21.15*
speaks of David, disfigured to a frenzy! Are they likely to be healers of
others, whose diseases are so got into their crowns, that they are not only
fantastic but fanatic, to the tune of the Maniches and Circumcellians; that
is, people of no just and honest, of no settled or constant, no rational or
religious principles (morbus destruit artem) a good Physician is not fit to be
his own or others Physician, if he be distempered; much less these men, than
who no men have discovered more craziness of mind, and crookedness of manners,
having little fear of God, and less reverence of men; either their ambition, or
their indigence, or their idleness, or their Jesuitick juglings, or their
desperate designs to turn all into rapine, blood and confusion, makes them
impatient that any men of better skill, and honester wills than themselves
should come nigh the Patient, or apply those All-heals, or Panaces and
Catholicons, which are no where to be found in their Pedlars packs or
Apothecaries shops (where poisons are set off with the specious titles and
inscriptions of sanctity, and liberty and light) but in the known Laws of God
and man rightly interpreted and impartially executed according to Equity,
Order, and Charity; not in those godly formalities, or gracious extravagancies,
or illegal irregularities, with which some vaporers have made so great
flourishes for some years, and so long afflicted the daughter of my people; and
would for ever have done so (according to the method of those rare cures they
sometimes wrought in Germany about the 1530. by the seduction and slaughter of
an hundred thousand people in the Anabaptistick and fanatic ways of mutiny
and rebellion) if God in his mercy (as we hope) had not prepared to put the
Patient into better hands, which may be guided by wiser heads and honester
hearts, who will not so cry up Religion and Reformation, Rom 3.8
as to run out to horrid violence and crying injustice; nor fancy and teach
that any evil of sin and injustice may be done that a public good may come
thereby: One may as well expect to heal wounds by poisoned plasters or
venomous instruments: Men must not lie for God, Isa. 61.8.
nor commit robbery for burnt offering, nor do things unwarrantable or unjust
by man's Law, in order to magnify Gods cause, much less their own, though just;
and may they do it for causes wholly unjust? this is only to dash the two
Tables against each other at best, or to break them both in pieces against the
rocks of hard hearts, as is usually done when fantastic heads, and foul hands
dare without authority from God or man, to set up the golden Calves which they
list to Idolize, and which all men must presently fall down and worship; such
was that popular and plausible invention of the Jews at first, but it cost the
wickedly wanton people dear at last, Exodus 32.28.35
when their new Diety and rare invention was consecrated by the blood and death
of many thousand of the people; Nor was that fire of mutiny and rebellion with
Korah and his faction raised against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.7.
quenched at a cheaper rate, whatever they pretend of holiness. Yea St. Austin
observes in his 162 Epistle (ex poenae differentia peccatum censeri) by the
honor of that new punishment which fell on them one may easily see how the sins
of mutiny Rebellion and Hypocrisy being twisted together do outweigh any other
sins.

8. Slight healing for want of constant application of good prescriptions.
Lastly, Then they heal slightly, 1. When Physicians either give good words, or
make good salves, and spread good plasters, but never effectually apply them
to the Patient, or suffer them to be pulled off as their impatience lists:
When bones are broken, as well as the flesh deeply wounded, the ligatures and
splinters must be good as well as the plasters: There must be no dislocation
where we expect a perfect cure; Parts must be set and kept in their proper
places; else they either heal not at all, or to a great deformity and continued
infirmity.

Or 2. When both Healers and Patient, 2 Chronicles. 16.1^
For too much trusting to Physicians.
like King Vzziah, trust so much to themselves, to the skill of the Physicians
and Chrurgeons, that they less look up to God, and lean to their own
understanding: They will find the wisdom of the world foolishness, and the arm
of flesh an Egyptian reed; to lean so much on them as to neglect God, Isa. 17.5,
is not only a vain but a noxious and cursed thing; for God will bring to
naught the counsels of Princes, who begin not their wisdom and end it in the
fear of God; as the most pious and learned Primate Bishop Usher, Of Patients
idolizing their Physician.
in the beginning of the long Parliament would often with earnestness foretell,
That God would confute and punish the too great glory and confidence which
people generally had in Parliaments, as if the sins of the Nation could not
outvie all the care, skill and power of Parliaments; who may have their
infection and diseases too, if they do not exactly look to God and their
consciences, to Religion and Justice both; to duty more than applause or
reward, or success; which can never be good or comfortable, unless it be First
the fruit and effect of good counsel, (that is religious and legal;) Secondly,
of humble prayer to God; Thirdly, of a gracious submission to his will, when we
have done our duty; men lose themselves when they seek not God first in all
their public counsels. For the race is not to the swift, Eccles. 9.1^. Psa.
3.8. and 29.11: Psa. 47.1^
nor the battle to the strong, but the Lord gives the blessing of peace, and
health, and salvation to his people; He, as the sovereign Physician can best,
and only heal our public wounds, by making men to be of one mind in the Lord,
by pouring out his spirit of wisdom and moderation, of repentance and
compensation, of mutual pity and compassion, of Justice and judgment, of an
holy and happy reformation, which heals the hurts of men's hearts, and the
wounds of their consciences, and the running issues of their evil lives; these
are the happiest and surest methods of a Nations healing. We see in the often
relapses of the Jews, no sooner had they by sins of public scandal and
notorious contagion hurt themselves, but Gods hand smites them by famine or
plague, Ier. 2.30.
or sword, or war and oppression; no sooner had they repented and turned
solemnly from their sins to him that smote them, but God turned from his wrath
and healed the Land.

. We have had in England many days of humiliation, in order to our humbling and
healing, but hitherto we have been more and more hurt; because we fasted not
for sin, but to sin, Isa. 58.
as God reproacheth the Jews; for strife, and debate, and oppression, to smite
with the fist of violence, etc. We laid on a formal plaster of Reformation,
but we never thoroughly searched the wound, nor purged out the putid matter; yea
we multiplied the corruption, and added hypocrisy to former iniquity; the sins
of War and violence, of inordinate revenge and cruelty to those of peace and
luxury.

I find the Parliaments of England never thrived better, nor kept the public
in better health, 2 Parliament Prayers, in a Book called The ancient Prayers of
the Church.
than when those two excellent Prayers (lately reprinted) which very gravly and
plainly minded them of their duty in that place, were daily used among them;
which were much more significant, grave, and pertinent, than such Seraphick or
rambling, and loose or odd Expressions, as some men are prone to use either in
their affected varieties, or in their tedious Tantologies; which have often more
in them of Invention than Judgment, and stick more upon fancy and faction than
conscience and the common good. Certainly, where men are solemnly and jointly
to ask of God the same proper blessings every day, they may very well use the
same words and petitionary Forms, as Christ did thrice in his Agony; For Gods
immutability is not weary of any holy constancy, nor delighted with any
novelty, but that of a new heart, and new spirit, which I hope and pray he
would give both the Physicians and to the Daughter of my people: That neither
the later may be miserable, by not being well healed, nor the second blamable
for healing only slightly, and superficially; which is the fault here laid to
the charge of some persons, and leads me to the fifth particular proposed;
namely,

5 They: that is, Those public persons, 5 The persons charged for slight
healing.
who of right ought, or in fact do, or in their action may manage the Affairs
of Church and State; who have Councels, power, and Authority, interest, and
influence, fit to advance the public welfare; by correcting the distempers,
and reducing all to a due constitution of health.

Kings, and sovereign Princes slight heaven.
They: that is, 1. Those Princes or Kings, Judges and Chief Magistrates; who
being themselves vicious, or Idolatrous, or Hypocrites, or vain, (turning Piety
into Policy, and Religion into reason of state) not only infect the people by
the contagion of an impious example; but are willing the people should be as
bad as themselves; That, for their enormities being followed by their Subjects,
they may seem less by the Imitation, and, as it were, Approbation: Kings that
rule their people not by Law and Justice, but by will, Ephesians. 22.26, 27.
and Passion, more for their own pleasure, Pro. 28.15, 16.
than the public Welfare; that are great Oppressors, flaying as well as
fleecing their people; Micah. 3.2, 3.
yea, breaking their bones, and eating their flesh: Ruling men, not as rational
creatures of the same Creator, nor as brethren in the same Savior, sons to the
same Father of their Country; but as mere Slaves, and Vassals, forgetting,
that every King has a King in heaven above him, to whom he is subject, and
must give account, not only of the hurt he has done, and the wounds he has
made, on the souls and bodies, the estates and consciences of his people, but
also of their Health, and good he has left undone, when it was in his place,
and power, like the Sun in the firmament, or as a little God among men, to have
been ((...)) a Catholic good to Church and state, that thousands might have
been blessed by them in this world, and to eternity blessed God for them. Not
only the hands, but the mouths and eyes of Princes are healing of their peoples
evils, if they will but rebuke and reprove, frown upon, and discountenance evil
doers. Men's sins and Accounts enlarge according as their influence and
relations ampliate; which carry their obligations with them, to God and man.
Great place and power are of all things most to be avoided, if they only serve
to aggrandise a man's sins, either of omission, or commission, for to augment
his Judgment, and Eternal torment.

2. Those subordinate Counselors, 2 Counselors and subordinate Magistrates
slight Healers.
and inferior Magistrates who are under the command of man, and more of God,
these heal slightly, when they are not men of Integrity, fearing God, and
hating Covetousness, Exodus 18.^^.
but crafty Complyers with the inordinate lusts and passions, with the illegal
commands of either Princes or people, contrary to their oaths: so by flattery,
or faction to make way for their Ambition, and gain, by the undeserved favor of
either, or dividing one from the other, by a most unnatural war and jealousy;
Such as please man rather than God, Gal. 1.10.
and love themselves more than their Country, or the Church; such as prefer
their bodies and Estates before their souls: and put the healings of the
Church, and true Religion in the last place, or Rear of affairs: and when they
profess to heal the Irreligion of others by severe Acts and Ordinances against
Adultery, Swearing, Profaneness, debauchery, drunkenness, corruption, injustice,
etc. yet themselves are higher by the shoulders, than the most of the people in
these and other enormities: As if Peers, or privy- Counselors, or Counselors
of State, or Parliament Men, had a Privilege to sin more, or to repent, and
suffer less than other men.

Nothing weakens the credit and Authority of any public Laws so much as when
the Lawgivers least observe them, or are the first that break them: like
Physicians that prescribe strict diet to their Patients, but themselves indulge
all manner of Epicurisme: Here every one is prone to retort; Luke 4.23.
Physician heal thy self: The best things are commonly done by the best hands;
Religio medici, Conscience is here required as well as his Science: They will
hardly do their Country good, who care not, either to serve God, or to save
their own souls.

Men should make conscience of private actions, much more of public
adventures, which are of grand consequence (as the undertakings in war) and not
to be done rashly, slovenly, slightly, and indifferently. Nor may public
Counselors, or Ministers of State like Achitophel think they do wisely, or
safely, because they go with the vogue and stream of times, with the wind, and
tide, or humor of some people, in their prevalent Factions, discontents, and
clamors, by which vote Christ himself was crucified, Mark 15.13.

Common people in their Paroxismes, or fits of discontent, like sick and pained
patients, are ill Dictators to their Physicians; who must advise better for
them than they would for themselves; else they will heal their hurts very
slovenly, slowly, and ill-favouredly, to their own sin and reproach as well as
others pain and charge; Nor is it enough for Aarons excuse to say, Exodus 32.22.
The people are set upon mischief; when they would needs have him make them
visible Egyptian Gods, to go before them, under the figure of a golden calf, to
be instead of their true and invisible God: public Persons, and Honorable
Counselors, (as Joseph of Arimathea) must not go ( qua itur, Luke 93.51.
sed qua eundum) as peoples fury, or the prevalent Faction drives them: but as
the Word of God, and the Laws of the land direct them; else they shall bear
not only their own, but the iniquity of their people, who sin and suffer
unwarned and naked, hurt and unhealed, Ezekiel. 33.
upon the account of such cowardly Counselors, and corrupt Magistrates, or
Ministers of State; all whose wisdoms will come to naught; 1 Cor. 2.6.
and they will at length (like Achitophel) be snared in the halters of their
own twisting. 2 Samuel 17.23.


3. Those Priests and Prophets; those Pastors and Teachers, those Bishops and
Presbyters, 3 Priests and Prophets, Pastors and Ministers slight Healers.
who are in Public Place, and sacred Authority, as to the things of God; the
matters of Religion, and men's souls good: These heal slightly, 1 Samuel 2.22.
when they do the Work of God negligently; when they skin over scandalous
public sins, (as Ely to his Sons, with soft reproof; when they sow pillows
under Princes, Parliaments, and peoples elbowes, Ezekiel. 13.18.
when they fear the face and offense of men, more than of God; when they are
workmen that need to be ashamed, their Lives and Actions confuting their
Instructions; and their doing, making their Doctrine to blush; when they heal
public Enormities or calamities by I know not what novel Inventions, and
magic spells of fine words: which are no better than the powder of a post;
compared to the approved Catholic prescriptions of 1600 years, which were
sovereign for Clergy and Laity; to preserve order and unity; soundness of
Doctrine, and inscandalousness of manners in the Church of Christ, under
Christian Kings and Queens (who were bountiful nursing Fathers, and Mothers,
to the Church of Christ, and the Clergy): yet not by the Dominion and pomp,
luxury and tyranny of Bishops, nor yet by the Factious and refractory humors
of Presbyters; much less by the schismatic sauciness of people, who cast off
both Bishops and Presbyters; but by the fatherly gravity, prudence, and
Eminence of godly and Reverend Bishops; by the brotherly assistance, and
son-like subordination of sober and orderly Presbyters, by the service and
obsequiousness of humble and diligent Deacons; and by the meek submission of
Christian people, to the Care, Monition, Counsel, and respective Superiority of
every order; as sheep to their Chief shepherds, The Harmony which ought to be
in the Church, in order to Healing.
and their Assistants, or Attendants.

Divide this chain of Church-Vnion, Order and Communion, in vain shall we talk
of healing the Flock of its scabs and scratches, or hurts; I confess that I own
and ever shall do Primitive Episcopacy with Presbytery; so that, as St. Paul
speaks in another case, Neither of them should be without the other in the
Lord; Neither of them oppressed or extirpated, but so regulated and encouraged,
as I believe all moderate and learned men desire; if it be my fault and error,
that I prefer this Holy and Catholic Composition before any other late simple
receipts of Church Government, by which to heal any Church; Truly, I owe this
my Judgment to all the Councils, to all the Fathers, to all the Church
Historians, to be best witnesses of truth in all times, who have unanimously
conspired to lead me into this opinion; agreeable to the Word of God, the
example of Christ, the practice of the Apostles, and the parallel customs of
all Churches; which is, besides, mightily confirmed in me by the wisdom, piety
and prosperity of this Church under good Bishops since its Reformation, which
none in the world exceeded, for health and happiness, for sound and sincere
Christians, till some men's itching and scratching too much (even till the blood
came) and others either not applying seasonable Salves, or else sharper
Remedies than perhaps were necessary (or prescribed by the wisdom of our Church
and Laws) have festred the hurts and sores of Religion, that they now seem
almost incurable, till such hands are by Gods goodness applied, and such
Medicines used, as are most proper for a sick and diseased Church: which hands
and Medicines I cannot think ought to be Secular, but rather Ecclesiastic.

Such in a free Synod of learned Divines should, Of Ecclesiastical Council, or
Free Synods.
as a College of spiritual Physicians, advise and prepare; (for there is as
much need of calling for free Synods, as Free Parliaments) The want of the
former G. Naz. deplores as the occasion of so much Faction and Vexation in the
Church in his times. Laymen, though learned, able and honest, have enough to
do in Lay Matters. Churchmen, have nothing left them to do, as to Secular
Councels, or State Concernments, and therefore ought not to be excluded from
their proper sphere, Church affairs; being the best skilled of any men (else
they are ill employed in the things of God) for the searching, supplying and
healing the hurts of the Church and true Religion, in its Doctrine, Discipline,
Order, Unity and Authority; That maxim is true of the Clergy, as well as of
other Orders of men, Vnicuique credendum est in sua art, Every man is most to
be credited in what he is most skilled. I am sure (as to the point of
Physicians) no people that are wise, and would be healed in good earnest, but
are careful to get the best and ablest, unless they undervalue their health and
lives, and to save charges will venture to dye.

Soldiers and Commanders slight healers.
Fourthly, They; That is those Soldiers and Military men, Chief Commanders and
Others under them; these heal but slightly, when either they will be (as the
Clowns all-heal) the only Professors of State Physic, and undertake all cures
in Church and State, or else they think and act, as if there were no such way
to heal soundly, as to make greater wounds and bruises, by irreconcilable
distance, by preposterous power, and violent impressions, even on those that
both commissionate them, and recompense them.

They are Iron Heads, Brazen Faces, and Stony Hearts, who cry, that Might
gives Right; And all power is of God, (though unjustly gotten, and so used
against the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land: such is a commission the
Devil may boast of, as well as any evil doers, but little to the comfort of
either, when men's will is their only warrant in Law, and sad successes their
only security in Conscience; when Soldiers make their backs and bellies the
Commonwealth, putting their Interest of pay and power into the balance against
all others, when they are but as the dust of the balance to the weight of the
Nation, for number and estates. When men of War know not the way of peace, but
only to avoid it, seeking to make themselves necessary by keeping the wounds
open, and the sores raw of a Nation; pleading necessity and native Liberty, and
I know what Good Old Cause, or Metaphysical godly interests, unknown to our
Laws or forefathers; and it had been happy if we never had known them.

Lastly, When Military men are injurious, rapacious, and insolent, lovers of
themselves more than of God or the Church, or their Country; when they look
more to their Guns and Pistols than to God or godliness, to their swords than
to his Word, and to the Riddles of Providence more than the Rules of
conscience: resolved to sacrifice the daughter of their people, as Agamemnon
did Iphigenia, or Jephta his, on the Altar of the Military interest.

These will be smart and chargeable healers of the hurts of the daughter of
their people, when they shall be such as prepare War against any that speak
of Peace, when such as esteem the speedy healing of their Country, to the
public peace, to be their greatest hurt, when they grow so desperate, as they
had as live be damned as fairly disbanded, though in order to the public ease
and tranquillity.

When as no good Soldier that either fears God or loves his Country, or
reverences the Church, or hopes to save his own Soul, but will most seriously
strive to avoid the latter, and most willingly submit to the former, without
the sin of Rebellion or Mutiny, being content with his wages; and more, that
his sharp work is at an end, and no more need of cutting and lancing,
remembering that it is not multitude, or Power, or Armies, or Arms that shall
help injurious and dissolute Soldiers from the vengeance of God, when they
have deserved it by such wicked Counsels and Actions, as cannot be carried on
but with the Devils maxim (Scelera sceleribus tuenda) continued injuries and
cruelties to the daughter of their people, to Church and State, to their
brethren and Country men; yea, to their fathers and posterity.

But our hope is, that God has by his sore rebukes and defeats of some (who
trusted too much in the swords and spears, The present hope of better things
from Soldiers.
in their own Arms and their horses legs) taught others more wisdom, justice
and modesty; yea, and stirred up such a spirit of Christian valor, moderation
and honor in some gallant Soldiers of more just Principles and nobler
Spirits, that they will not rest till they have put the hurts of the daughter
of their people (which are now chronick or inveterate, of many years
continuance, and very deep, reaching from head to feet) into such a posture of
healing, and into such healers hands as may be best able and honest; on which
account as these Soldiers (who can do nothing against the truth and Law, 2
Cor. 13.6.
against Church and State but for them) will deserve great honor and rewards
from the Nation, and its Parliaments full and free: So people must blame
themselves, if they choose for Healers or Physicians such men as are neither for
wisdom and skill, nor for courage or conscience, nor for honesty or virtue, nor
for good example or reputation, or yet for well- gotten estates of any value,
or public interest, nor ever probable to heal others, since themselves are
sick and sore either of fear and guilt, or of Schism and Faction, or of
superstition and sacrilege, or of Rebellion and Anarchy, or of the itch of
novelty, and mange of popularity, or of the plague of immorality and
debauchery: From such Healers, both Civil, Sacred, and Military, so unhealed,
so unwholesome, so infectious, so destructive to Church and State, to Law and
Gospel, to Justice and Religion, good Lord deliver the daughter of my people.

5 The patient blamable for its own slight healing.
5 Lastly, Not only these unskilful, or unfaithful, or unwilling persons of
public influence, are blamable for not healing the hurts of a Nation, when
they have authority and opportunity as well as power: or for healing so
slightly, that things are never the better, nay worse and worse. But further,
there lies no small sin and blame upon the Patient, the people or community;
First, 1 By not carefully applying to good Physicians.
when they are not conscienciously careful, what Physicians or Surgeons they
make choice of, and put themselves with their lives and estates, liberties and
laws, bodies and souls into their hands, but adventure upon every pragmatique
Emperick, and confident Undertaker.

Next, when this is done commendably (as truly I am prone to believe it was in
the first Elections of the long Parliament, if they could have quietly kept
together without tumultuating factions and fatal divisions) for people then not
to acquiesce (as they ought under God) in their skill and honesty, only
following them with such modest Petitions, as are necessary, and such
complaints as are comely: also with their prayers to God for a blessing. But
for the populacy, then to cluck into parties and conspiracies, 2 By popular
conspiracies against them.
according to the cunning of some Agitators for novelty, and factors for
troubles, then to break out into tumultuary rudenesses and seditious menaces,
and at last to become dictators to their Physicians, and like gouty feet to
threaten the head and shoulders and hands, if they be not cured of their
anguish after their own fancy, not after the Rules of Art and Law of Health:
These are so far from being Healers, that they are the greatest hinderers of
their own and others public health in the world; yea, the venom and acrimony
of these fretting and turbulent humors, subtly diffused among the divided
vulgar, and by their means re-infused into the public hurts and real
grievances, cannot but strangly increase the malignity of distempers throughout
the whole habit of the body; The danger of popular distempers.
which (...) pestilent and depraved state of the generality of the people,
divided and distracted (like Demoniacks, or possessed) with fears and
jealousies, with envies and hatred, with hopes and other unreasonable passions,
is much harder to be cured, and more dangerous to the public than the
disaffection or inflammation; the discontent or ambition of any one part of the
body, which is easily corrected or counter-ballanced with the Antidote, as it
were of all other sound parts, which are far the major number.

Peoples due regard and submission to their right Physicians, full and free
Parliaments.
When therefore a sick Nation has done its duty, in the choice of its Healers;
The way is to assert the Honor and Authority of those orderly Physicians, not
to suffer any intruding Empyricks, or extruding Mountebanks, by fraud or force
to drive these away, that way may be made for their cruel activity and
unsatiable gain; It will prove an endless and costly cure, which permits it
self to every one that has a mind to be tampering: The best way is, patiently
to submit to their own Parliamentary choice, and to Gods dispensation by their
means: In this way there is hope, if people can be still, they may see the
Salvation of God: Patients will make mad work if they may control and cudgel
their Physicians.

Some sins may keep the hurts of a people uncured.
Although, it is possible that the crying sins committed in a Nation may be such
that no outward means can cure its sores, and maims; especially, if the
noblest, and most vital parts of the body being cut off, or grievously wounded,
there be a clamor of blood unjustly shed, crying to heaven for vengeance; which
vengeance if a Nation will hope to escape, and be healed, they must be sure not
to adopt the sin by after silence or Smotherings; But rather so publicly to
expiate it in ways of Repentance, as it may not be imputed to the whole
Nation, and their Posterity; As the desperate Jews imprecated, Luke 27.25.
His blood be upon us and our children, in the case of Christ's being put to
death, by envy and faction, by popular clamors, and Statepolicies, when against
all justice of God and man, yea, against the sense and conscience of Pilate,
none of the justest judges, he was condemned to dye, to gratify a popular and
military importunity; to which some Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, together
with some covetous and ambitious Priests, had exalted the credulous and cruel
common people, who are prone to triumph in the Tragic executions, and ruins
of their betters and Superiors; as a kind of victory over the others
greatness, and a levelling of eminent honor to their own meanness and baseness.

6. But, It is now time for me, in order, to give way to the pains of my
learned, and reverend Successor, Part. 6.
The true method of sound healing.
and to avoid the tyring of your patience, at the first Stage, when you are to
go a second; It is time (I say) for me to bring up the Rear, and to present you
in the Sixth particular, with the vera sanandi methodus, the true method of
public cures, of healing the hurts of the Daughter of my people, in Church or
State.

For the precipitant, preposterous, or presumptuous neglect of which, these
Medicasters are here blamed, reproached, and threatened by the Spirit of God;
with whose Philanthropy (as with every good man) that politic and indeed pious
(because charitable maxim bears sway; Salus publica suprema lex, The welfare
of the whole, in all its integral members, and essential parts, as compacted by
the constitution and order of the public polity, is the supreme Law, rule,
measure, and end of all just Councels and honest actions, which aim at the
health or healing of a Nation.

As (...) is (...), Beauty is the due proportion of parts, with decent color;
So (...) Health consists ((...) in the harmony, and orderly constitution of all
the humors, and parts of the body; That nothing necessary for the well-being of
the whole be wanting; That all grand defects be supplied: That what is weak be
strengthened, what is dislocated be restored to its place; That there be no
dividing of what should be united: That, what is divided be gently closed, and
composed; That there be no such redundancy, or overgrowing of any humor or
tumor in any part, as to rob and weaken others; or to swell and exceed in
themselves; or to deform and inflame the whole.

In brief, the true and safe method of healing effectually the hurt of the
daughter of my people, is,

1 By putting themselves into the hands of good Physicians, able and honest.
1. Medicos optimos accersendo, By calling to her help wise and worthy
Physicians, (as I have formerly touched); men of skill and experience, of
Honesty and Ability, of honor and conscience, who prize a public Good Work
above any reward; and think it the highest temporal reward, to do their country
good, in which they serve their God, and their Savior, the Church and State.
they must be Physicians that are not by much study and practice run out to
Atheism (as some corn in lusty ground does to straw and halm) but such as know
what belongs to ( Religio medici) the piety of a Christian, as well as the
mystery of a Physician; my meaning is, people must take special care in their
choice of Parliament Men, that they be not Mechanic, or Mercenary, or Military
obtruders of themselves, who have much to get and little to lose by troubles,
whose fortunes and estates must be vampt and mended by their practice upon the
Church and State; But such Gentlemen of quality and repute, for wel-gotten and
wel-used estates, that they may deserve to be esteemed Heads and Fathers of
their Tribes, and not the Tails or Posteriors, as the Scripture speaks to the
reproach of some public persons; Such in whom the Country may have sufficient
caution and security for their love of Justice, Order, and Peace, by what they
have to venture and lose in tumults, wars and oppressions: Commonly desperate
minds attend desperate fortunes; and the motto of such is Quocunque modo rem,
and oportet habere. The ( multis utile bellum) hoped advantages, (as Lucan
observes in the Cesarian, and Salust in the Catalinian, and Appian in the other
Civil Wars) is the spark, fuel and bellows for the most part to civil
perturbations; private not public interests are usually looked at. For how
can it be that the full and found parts of the body Politic should hope to
mend their condition by war, any more than men that are well, and not delirant
or raving in a Feavor and madness should by bruising, and beating, and cutting,
and wounding themselves and all that are near them, expect to make themselves
more strong, or more comely.

. 2. When the Patient has done himself so much right as to get good
Physicians, able and honest, for the public care:

By Physicians right discerning the disease and thoroughly searching the wounds.
Their work is, First, Morbum decernere, and vulnera, perscrutari, to find out
the true disease, to search the wounds througly, and impartially, yet with as
little pain and disorder to the Patient as may be, with a clear and judicious
eye, with a gentle but faithful hand, with a tender, but honest heart; neither
Physicians passion, nor compassion, must divert them from doing their duty.

. It is the first step, and a good advance to health, to know truly what the
hurts and disease is; herein to be only conjectural, or over-confident, or
fearful, or perfunctory, or palliating, or complying, not daring to search and
discover the ( pudenda vulnera) shameful wounds, and ( lethales morbos) deadly
diseases, which are discerned in the Patient, but with smiles, and fair words,
with healing questions, with Physical or Anatomical lectures about Government,
as with lingering lenitives, and petty cordials, to supple and skin them over,
to silence and smother them, with crying peace, peace, till we have done our
work, which is to undo you and all men but our selves; or for State Physicians,
so to regard by a superpolitick policy, the several partial novel and pretended
interests, that have been or are on foot, as to take in among others, even that
of the very disease, as if it were to be considered other ways than to be
cured, as if it must be continued, tolerated and indulged, yea and fed as a
Wolf or Cancer, in the body or breast, with good nourishment, least it prey upon
the whole body.

. This is for Physicians to be afraid, Of fainthearted, foolish, false and
flattering Physicians.
and overawed by the Malignancy, and predominancy of the disease; at this rate,
(Grex totus in agris, Vnius scabie perit and porrigine porci) the whole herd,
or flock must be infected; the patient will be like Gehazi, condemned to an
eternal plague and Leprosy of civil dissentions and oppessions, of war, and
its black consequences. Physicians after this course must turn very fools, and
become parasites to putrefactions; if they dare not own, or cannot attaque
either the sourse and head of the disease, or the streams and potency of it,
what do they meet and sit and consult (or rather constult) together? they had
as good cast their caps, as thus lay their heads together, when they have no
mind to do the work, nor courage to go through with the cure.

. Not but that all great and noble cures (not miraculous) are the children of
time and discretion; for a while the sons of Zerviah were too hard for David;
and Solomon did not those acts of remarkable Justice against Joabs, and
Shimeis, and Abiathars factious Priests, insolent Soldiers, and cursed cursers,
until the Kingdom was strengthened in his hand; but this is certain, as Christ
did not raise to life Jarus his daughter till the Minstrils were all turned
out; Matthew. ^.13.
So nor can the daughter of my people be recovered to firm and sure health,
till all pretended Civil Interests are by degrees, either satisfied, if just,
or crashed, quashed and removed, if not consistent with our Reformed Religion,
also with the Laws of the Land, and the fundamentals of our excellent
Government, which are the true principles of public health; and till all
Religions or Ecclesiastical pretended Interests are so tried and examined (for
many say they are Jews that are not, and cry up their new Church ways; Rev. 2.9.
when they may be but factors for the Synagogue of Satan; vaporing of Christ,
and the Spirit, when they are Antichrists, and full of unclean spirits) till I
say, all these, on all hands be faithfully reduced and subjected to the grand
interest of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, which consists in Justice and
true Religion: The measure of the first is our Laws enacted in full and free
Parliaments: The rule of the second are clear truths of Scripture, which set
forth the (facienda) morals necessary to be done by all to all men; the
(credenda) mysteries of Faith necessary to be believed, also the special
practiques of Christian Piety and Charity, of Worship and good works, which are
to be exercised decently and in order by all Christians in public as well as
private: Healing of the Church and Religion.
Till these be settled, there is no hope of soundness or health in Church or
State.

. Now of these things which properly tend to the health of the Church, Lev. 13,
and 14.
and the right constitution of Religion in piety and polity, for Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government, I humbly conceive (as the Priests of old
were by God appointed to be Judge and Physician of the plague of Leprosy) the
Clergy or Evangelical Ministry are fittest men to discern the distempers, and
to prepare those plasters or applications, which by the sanction of the civil
Magistrate, may best be laid to the Patient, or the parts affected.

. Of scandalous toleration in matter of Religion.
And here for any part to plead that it may have liberty or toleration for
that, which by public advice, and upon due search is found to be such as is
prone to endanger, or disorder, and infect the whole body with that itch, and
scab, or scalling humor, which that part pleases it self to scratch and
scatter, this is such a presumptuous motion as ought not to be made by any
Patient, nor granted by any Physicians, who have either justice or charity for
the (salus publica) common welfare, none inclining to those sad indulgences but
they who have neither ability nor authority to cure the hurt and disease; but
must to their shame cry out ( Morbus superat artem, and Chyrurgum vulnus) the
ill humors are too strong for the best Physicians, and the ulcers conquer the
Chyrurgeons; Truly in such deplorable cases, where not the disease, but the
Physicians are desperate, as in the raging plague, the way is to shut up the
doors of the Physicians College, and the Chyrurgeons Hall, and write upon them
in behalf of Church and State ( Miserere Domine) Lord have mercy on us; for
nothing remains in so deplored and desperate cases, where Healers cannot or
will not do their work; but the prayers and patience of the poor Patient, the
miserable daughter of my people; as in a State where either the disease is (
contemptor artis) a despiser of all remedies; or the Patient is of nothing more
impatient than to be well cured; or the Physicians are of nothing more afraid
than to make too speedy and sincere a cure.

The practice of sincere and speedy healing
Thirdly, But if Physicians of the daughter of my people are so blessed of God,
and encouraged by the Patient, that they may freely and do seriously apply to
their work of public healing; 1. To purge a way what is noysom.
they have but these main things to do. 1. Noxia and morbifica purgare;
discreetly to facilitate, and constantly to follow the purging away of the most
peccant and pestilent humors, which either are the main cause, occasion, or
increase and continuers of the hurt and disease: Here every presumptuous and
prevalent sin, which is most spread among the people, is to be repressed by
good Laws, and the due execution of them; when sins grow epidemical, and by the
multitude of commiters either threaten or plead their impunity, Psa. 119 126
they provoke God to punish what man does not; he takes the matter into his own
hand, when his Laws Moral and Evangelical are openly and impudently broken.

. Here it were good for Physicians of Church and State, in extraordinary
diseases, long distempers, and obstinate hurts, admitting no cure, such (as
those of the daughter of our people) are to make accurate search (as Joshua,
and David, and the Mariners in Jonah did) for what special cursed thing, or
crying sins sake all this evil, this long storm is come on us, and still so
continues for many years, as if there were no peace or calm to be expected; no
effectual Physician or cure to be had, till those Vipers teeth, or Serpents
stings be pulled out; till then no balm in Gilead will do us good.

. Doubtless every honest Englishman and good Christian would be glad of health
and peace to Church and State; whence then are our so dreadful wounds, so
raging humors, and our so dilatory healing? Matthew 13.23.
We must needs conclude (as he did of the Tares (inimicus homo fecit) an enemy
has done, begun, or augmented this evil: Some whose bloody designs, and
sacrilegious interests (as Achans and Saul's) are contrary to the Word of God
among us, and the vows or oaths of God upon us; contrary to the principles of
the Protestant and Reformed Religion, which once so flourished in England, and
contrary to the peace, honor and freedom of this Nation, which some foraign and
domestic Policies would bring down, as a Dromedary on its knees, that it might
at length take upon his back the burden of foraign tyranny and usurpation, of
Romish Trumpery and superstition.

. Hence no doubt are our distempers so horribly inflamed, our healing so
cruelly protracted, our Physicians so shamefully baffled, our body so woefully
maimed; Hence our wounds are made so deep, and our abscissions so desperate,
that (according to Achitophels counsel, to make the breach irreconcilable
between Absalom and David) some things have been done to so high a rage and
exorbitant indignities, and so intolerable injuries, without any authority from
God or man, that they are not capable of full reparation, nor yet patient
(hitherto) to bear such a measure of public repentance or reparation, as are
not only most just but most necessary for the appeasing Gods wrath, and for the
perfect healing of the Nation, without which there can be no soundness of
constitution, no compleatness of parts, no decency of motion in the Body
Politic or Ecclesiastic. Nor will the wrath of God be turned away, but his
hand stretched out still.

. Here not only Justice must be so done, to take away the guilt and curse from
the Nation of crying and notorious sins; but also such penitent deprecations,
and compensations as (are possible, and) may best expiate those horrid sins,
which are and ever will be (while unrepented, uncorrected, and uncured) the
maim and ulcer, the sin and shame, the defect and deformity; yea, the
consumption and death at last of the daughter of my people: For tragical
Judgments sooner or later follow tragical sins; and presumptions bring a a
Nation to consumptions; England will never be it self, till it does it self
this right, both in honor and conscience, in Reason of State, and for the
repute of the Reformed Religion; from whose face such black and bloody stains
must be washed if ever she will appear lovely to the world, and not as the
Whore of Babylon, who was drunk as well as besmeared with blood. All the
inventions and projects of making supplies and amends by some other
Commonwealth way, is no better than getting a wooden leg, or hands of clouts,
instead of such as are natural; or as a bolster of goats hair instead of David:
The body cannot have ease or orderly motion, or beauty and complexion, till
every part is restored to its place, office and proportion.

2. When the venom and core of the main distempers is removed, 2. To apply such
wholesome medicines as are tried and proper.
the next work of a wise Physician and Chyrurgeon, is, Sana Medicamina
applicare, to follow the Patient with wholesome medicaments, as are (1) probata,
approved upon the file of long experience, (2) propria and specifica, as apt,
proper, and specific, as can be had, considering the genius and constitution
of the Patient; also the original, continuance and progress of the disease;
cures are by contraries; ^^^^dels of new Governments heal (...).
those medicines will most certainly help, which most encounter the principal
causes of our maine disease; and are proper antidotes, against the malignity of
our sores.

. It is but the capricious and ridiculous conceit of some fine men who want
employment, to send this now languishing State of England, and the other two
adjacent, ancient and united Kingdoms, to Mars his hill in Athens, Acts 17.21
or to the Lacedemonian Sparta, or to the Roman Capitol, or to the Venetian
Arsenal, or to the State-house of the low Countries, and so to send the Church
to Geneva, Edinbrough, or Amsterdam, as if we were Churches or Nations of
yesterday, in our bibs and swaddling clouts, to be dandled in the laps of such
dry nurses, and this in order (forsooth) to learn some unwonted models of civil
and Ecclesiastical Government, which like new garments will hardly fit, for
they will be either uneasy because too straight, or unhansome because too
loose.

. Doubtless in Governments, that Scripture Proverb of Wine holds true, Luke ^
the elder is the better, if it have not lost its spirits, especially when not
only time and use, but great wisdom had proportioned it to the true interests
of the Nation, and of all estates in it, which follow much the genius of the
people, if they be either soft, Government must fit the genius of people.
slavish and pesantly, as in some countries, or robust, manly, and generous, as
in England; the first will easily crouth under any burden, and truckle under
any prevalent power; the second is hardly contained in any bounds but those
that are Soveragine, and Imperial, by way of monarchical, yet legal Majesty,
which having something in it nearer the Divine Idea, than any other way of
Government, by the perfection of wisdom guiding power, and power assisting
wisdom, is only fit to govern those Nations, whose high spirits are impatient
to be ridden, by their equals, much more to have their inferiors to become not
only their rivals, but superiors. When the Cappadocians had leave to be a
Province, or popular State, under the Roman Empire, they refused the freedom,
and craved the favor of having a King to rule them, as they ever had, time out
of mind, professing the temper of the people was such, that they would not be
subject to any, but those in whom Majesty was so concentred, by the Laws and
customs of the Nation, that they could without shame and disdain, pay an homage
as subjects to them.

. Herein experience has been, Novel essays of Government dangerous.
and will be our teacher; but then it will be and has been as Hippocrates
begins his Aphorisms, (...), a costly, painful difficult and dangerous
experiment, and if at last it do not fit the Genius temper and desire of these
Nations, so as to ease them of their terrors and vast charges of civil War, to
free them of the fear of Enemies at home, and abroad, to settle them in such
peace and plenty, as many yet remember they enjoyed before the flood of our
civil wars, to open the obstructions of trade, and those veins of industry, by
which the body is maintained, by the secret circulation of commerce, as of the
blood; if all these Symptoms, Concomitants, or effects of health, do not
follow the essays of new forms of Government, alas what do we all the while,
but keep the daughter of our people upon the rack of pain and expense, using a
kind of a State Strappado, by which to bring the arms to hang backwards,
rather then forwards, so as they can neither lift up themselves to their head,
nor yet defend and help the body or themselves, so by a dreadful convulsion, to
bring all things of ancient order, honor, and beauty in the nation, to the
distractions and deformities, which must needs attend such novelties as are not
proper for the public, nor practicable without continued force, and endless
charge.

To apply Catholic and completing medicines.
3. Their healing medicines must be plenaria, and Catholica, such as may in time
do the work completely, yet with leisure and discretion (For momentary cures,
are only miraculous,) So as carefully to preserve the good spirits and humors,
to strengthen the sound parts yet remaining, to follow the grand crises of the
disease, and the indications of health, which way evil humors are easiest
discussed, breathed out, or purged, still conserving the two main principles,
pillars, and supports of health, life and subsistence in the body politic,
the radicale humidum (as I call it) which is plenty, by trade and industry,
that there be no crying out, Psalm. 1^^.14
nor complaining, by those whose mouths cannot eat if their hands be idle. 2.
That calidum radicale, the sacred fire, or celestial flame, which Prometheus is
said to have kindled in mankind, which shines in reason and religion, in
Justice by good Laws well executed by Magistrates, and in devotion by the holy
public worship of God, solemnly discharged by able and autoritative
Ministers; both which are the grand designs of good learning, which is the
souls school for improvement and education, during its minority or absence from
its Fathers house, till it comes to vision and fruition, which sets it beyond
all learning, but that of the Fathers glorious example.

. No civil laws can be wholesome for the public which do enterfeer with true
Religion; which either rob God, or his Church, or his Vicegerents, and
Ministers, or his poor, of what is their due; nor can any Ecclesiastical laws
be healthful, which cross the civil laws, and authority, so, as to bring in
licentiousness, injuriousness, rebellion, or any thing that is for Doctrine
fanatic, or for practice injust and immoral, all which like poisonous
touchings, or unwholesome feedings, are destructive to the public health.

. Of Ecclesiastical Synods to heal a Church.
The perfect healing of the Church and Religion, as Christian and reformed
(whose divisions, hurts and deformities are many) will hardly be done without
calling those spiritual Physicians together, after the primitive pattern in
Ecclesiastical Synods or National Councils, Acts 15.6
who are best skilled in the true state of health, in the nature of the
diseases, and in the aptest remedies, which in Religion ought to be very humane
and charitable, convincing with meekness of wisdom, and healing as much by
prayers and tears as by reasonings and persuasions. I confess I cannot see how
a Committee of Parliament for Religion is proper for this work, further than to
be (...); the promoters of it, when put into fit hands of able Ministers.

. Herein, the first grand work is to bring us to be again one National Church;
from which honor and happiness we fell as Lucifer from heaven when some men's
ambition affected to make the chief Magistrate of a Commonwealth to be similis
altissimo, as high as the highest in three Kingdoms; which unity of this
Church, those have sought most subtly to divide, whose interests and purposes
was to destroy it; that by balancing of parties they might better keep up
themselves, as dancers on the rope are wont to do. This restoring of the Church
to its pristine unity, is to be done by such an harmony of Doctrine, as may be
publicly owned and confessed, by such an uniform way of worship, as shall be
publicly recommended and encouraged; by such an authoritative and orderly
Church Government among Bishops, Presbyters and People, as may carry on the
Discipline of the Church, for Ordination and Censure, with gravity and honor,
with piety and charity, redeeming both holy things, and the Ministers of them,
from that vulgar insolency and Plebeian contempt, under which they are fallen
and have long lain either by their own indiscretion, levity and divisions; or
by the petulancy, force, or fraud of others, whose aim is to have no Presbyters
as well as no Bishops, yea and no Churches of the Reformed Religion.

Of char^table toleration.
. That lenitive of equanimity, forbearance, and moderation, in respect of
conscientious Dissenters from the public consent, customs and constitutions
in the Church (which Christian charity requires, and public peace with safety
may bear) will best be prepared and applied, when we fully see what is noxious,
malicious and intolerable; what is only inconvenient, and imprudent, or infirm,
and venial in men's opinions and pretensions; to be sure such a wise method may
be used, and such a course taken, to have able Ministers, and honest
Magistrates concur in their judgment and joint endeavors, that the Justice of
the one, and the gentleness of the other; the ability and sanctity of both in
their places and performances, may be such, as shall render the established
Religion so venerable and conspicuous as will in a few years draw all sober men
to it, when they shall see nothing in it, but what is for the main conformable
to Gods Word, and necessary either for the being ot wel-being of Humane and
Christian Societies.

. As Civil, so Ecclesiastical hurts are best (that is, Civil hurts healed by
recourse to the Laws.
soonest, easiest and surest healed) revertendo ad leges bonas and antiquas) by
returning (as the wounded Heart to Dictamnum) to those Laws and Canons w^ are
not therefore ( bonae quia antiquae; but therefore antiquae, quia bonae, in
which the aequum, and unum, and bonum make the vetustum) Their verity, equity
and piety gave rise to their antiquity; and their antiquity gave reverence and
solemnity to their equity or goodness; It Is certain, there can be no complete
health in the body till every part, every limb, every vein, every vessel does
its Office in due time and place; irregularities must be rectified, defects
supplied, excesses repressed, ill humors purged, and all reduced by Law to good
order.

Of lenitives and mod^ration in healing
. A blessed work, and to be done with as much Moderation and gentleness as the
fidelity of the cure will permit, and the spreading of the disease does
require; wherein many parts may by weakness or by nearness to the (fons morbi)
the first peccant or ill affected part, have contracted sad distempers; which
will easily be cured of their anguish if the evil neighborhood be mended: Here
generous and gracious remissions are just and Christian, to misled multitudes,
and to such whose penitent errors show they were not of malice, but credulity
and mistake, who are more zealous now for health, than ever they were to be
debauched and disordered, so much to their own and the public affliction.

Acts of Oblivion.
. Acts of pardon, Amnesty, or Oblivion, are excellent lenitives, (Publico bono
tam publicae quam privatae simultates and injuriae sunt condonandae, to pardon
as well public as private losses and injuries to the public peace, to
interpret the intent and meaning of either side to have been good, who persist
not in evil; the zeal of some to maintain their Loyalty to the King, for which
they thought they had the clearest commands of Gods Laws and man's; The zeal of
others, to preserve the lawful privileges, and fixed authority of Parliaments,
against any thing, that by violent overthrowing of those, must needs hazard the
overthrow of all; possibly neither of these parties might be so bad or
blameable, as to the first intentions, but that they may easily be reconciled
in the medium which both first professed to intend, namely King and Parliament,
settled laws and established Religion; if this had been kept to, the quarrel had
been soon ended in Church and State; the misery was that by jealousies and
misunderstandings, the passions and transports of both sides, might so overbear
them, as to occasion those sad conflicts and consequences upon both, which
neither of them at first intended, but deprecated and detested; mean time while
humors were in motion, new and unexpected diseases got head, under the name of
interest of State, of liberty and common equity, which had no law, little
reason or Religion.

. So, between the Episcopal, Presbyterian, Reconciling of parties.
and Independent Parties, much of the acidness and sharpness of the humor would
be allayed, if this Poltice of charitable censure and interpretation were
applied one all sides that the first did but aim to maintain the order and
eminency of presidential Episcopacy, which was so universal, so ancient, so
primitive, so apostolical, and so prosperous in the Church of Christ; the
second designed only to bring Episcopacy to such a paternal temperament with
Presbytery, that the whole Clergy of a Diocese, and the concerns of Religion,
might not be exposed to one man's sole jurisdiction, without the such joint
counsel, consent and assistance of Ministers, as is safest for Bishops,
Presbyters, and People; the third of Independents, or Congregationists, which
seemed to stickle for the interests of people in religious transactions, where
their souls are so much concerned, what Minister they have, and how both he and
others of their congregation behave themselves, either to the edification and
comfort, or the scandal and grief of that part or members of the Church, with
which they actually congregate and communicate. It seems but agreeable to the
ancient usage of the Churches of Christ, in St. Cyprians, Tertullians, and
Irenaeus his time, that no public transactions, much less impositions,
touching Religion, should be made, without fairly aquainting the Clergy and
Christian people too with the grounds and reasons of them, that
Church Government, 1 Pet. 5.3.
might not seem to be a tyranny, or an arbitrary and absolute domineering over
the faith and consciences of Christ's flock, but a mutual and sweet conspiring
of the Shepherds with the sheep, to make each other happy, in truth and love,
by orderly authority, and due subordination.

Charity and cander among Christians.
. I should be glad to see the beams of this candor, this kindness, this
charity, shine in all faces from all sides, that the Shiboleths of different
dialects and designs, the carnal and unhappy discriminations of I am of Paul,
I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12 and 3.3
might be laid aside, by being all for and of Christ, who is not, and ought
not, and cannot, either truly in himself, or comfortably as to any Christians
and churches be divided; let all, like straight lines from the several points
of the circumference, be drawn true to the center of Gods glory, the public
peace, and the good of souls; no doubt we shall by meeting in those, come so
nigh to each other, that all will rejoice in the harmony and concurrence, who
do not seek the ruin of this Church, and the reformed Religion; and indeed the
differences of honest Protestants are but small, compared to the bonds of union
in which they do agree, as to doctrinals, morals, and essentials; nor are we
hard I hope to be reconciled as to prudentials, if we could meet freely, debate
soberly, and submit humbly to the public votes and results of the Major part
of Parliaments and Synods, without which submission, all counsels, and all
government, depending upon suffrages, must needs be vain, and dissolved either
into Tyranny or Ataxy, as the learned Grotius observes, in his Batavick
history, Lib. 17. p, 115
(Restat ut pauciores pluribus cedant; hoc uno stant populorum imperia, aliter
casura.)

. To conclude, F^llow holiness, and peace will follow.
let every one keep in Gods way, which is the way of peace and holiness, of
duty to God and man let good Christians entertain good thoughts, and give good
words to each other; good air conduceh much to recovery; uncharitable
speeches, and sinful courses (which are but halitus Diaboli, the breath of the
Divil, or the exhaltation of our own foul hearts, or the eructations of hell)
render the very air, in which men live unwholesome, and the very Senates or
Synods, where such men meet, grow infective by foul lungs and putid breaths.

. Mourn for sins
Let us privately mourn over the daughter of our people, for the hurts, which
our sins have either first inflicted on her, or deserved for her, or festred
and inflamed, or at least hindered from healing, by childish pevishness, or
popular pertinacies, or Sinister designs, or politic jealousies; lay these
aside, the work of healing will go on; for not outward applications so much, as
inward sound principles and honest persuasions do heal; as the outward
plasters and unguents or balsoms do not heal wounds by adding any matter to
the part, or the whole, but healing flows from an internal native principle, so
soon as the noxious humors are purged, and the proud or dead flesh removed,
which hinder the closure of parts, and the digesture of good supplies.

. Lastly let us in patience and prayers possess our souls, Pray with pati^nce,
and wait for the saving health of Gods salvation, who can best ordain peace
for us, who has smitten us, and only can heal us, by allaying and composing,
Isa, 26.12 Isa, 19.20
the spirits of honest-meaning men, by making them to be of one mind, by
suggesting good counsels, which no passions shall stop, or private interests
prevent, by showing us the way of peace, and guiding us in it. It is time for
us to accept of the long punishment God has inflicted on us; take heed (like
King Ahaz) of sinning more and more in our affliction, Lev. 26.41
by adding drunkenness to thirst, 2 Chronicles. 28.22
confusion to rebellion, and desolation to division.

. Do not listen to those charmers and cheaters who will pretend you are healed,
or the daughter of your people is not hurt, Beware of false Healers.
or she is much mended, or she is not to be cured but only in those ways which
their popular, partial, tumultuary, bloody and violent heads have invented,
practiced, and pursued to the intolerable charge and anguish of the Nation.

. If it be public, perfect peace; peace (as some have pretended) if she be
indeed healed, whence are those ( moribundae palpitationes) deadly pantings and
fainting fits into which she falls so often? What means the running Issues, the
putid sores and purulent matter which daily is vented in such pamphlets of
scurrility, and papers of discontent as show the fedity, pain and shame of our
times and Nation? what a scorn and derision, what a hissing and ashonishment is
she become at home and abroad, by the impatience and contempt of those useless,
yea hurtful means which some Empiricks have rudely applied, and variously
tampered with!

. Appeal to all Estates whether healed.
Ask all parts of the body politic if they be yet healed; what an Asthma or
difficulty of breathing have we had since the breath of our nostrils has been
oppressed as to that order and government, that sovereign public honor and
highest authority which belongs to the Nation, as its crown and glory, no less
than those properties, Liberties and Laws, or that industry, peace, and
security, which are due to every private honest man!

. Ask the Nobility, and Peers if they think themselves yet healed of the wounds
which some of their honors received in Jezreel, when they gave themselves the
first great blow by separating their Spirituals from their Temporals, and
instead of grave, venerable Bishops (who had for many hundred years sat in
Parliament as Patres and Pares to counsel with them) they submitted their
honors to such Presbyters as affected to be not only their Confessors but their
Dictators!

A^peal to all esteats whether healed.
, Ask the Gentry and Commons in Parliament, if they are yet fully healed of the
hurts which first tumults and afterward mutinies with armed force have made on
them.

. Ask the generality of the Clergy or Ministers (that ate truly such) if they
are healed of the hurts which Schism and Heresy, profaneness and
licenciousness, Sacrilege and Ataxy, contempt and confusion, inordination and
new Ordinations have made upon all holy Orders and Offices, upon all public
duties of Religion and devotion: Particularly, Ask those poor, but worthy
Ministers (who flagrante bello, and in cautelam) were by way of caution (ne
noceant) or by way of castigation (quia nocuerunt) for some light offenses
sequestered from their Livings, and after silenced from all Officiating; whether
their punishment which was greater than their sin be yet taken off? whether
their first sequestration be not made a total and final deprivation of all
livelihood; and their Purgatory become an Hell, out of which is no redemption
by a summa justitia, which looks like summa injuria.

. Ask the whole People, when their Representatives or Deputies meet, as their
mouths, whether they are healed, or have any hope to be healed of those stabs
and wounds which Oaths and Covenants, and cross Engagements have made upon
their souls; by either ill taking the latter, or ill keeping the former, which
were the first just and lawful ones, which no Pope or People can dispense
withal.

Ask all degrees of men whether they are healed as to their Laws, Liberties,
Properties, Peace, Plenty, Estates and Trade, except it be very slightly, or
whether they expect to be soundly healed till such methods of healing are taken
by wise, honest, impartial, authoritative, free and unanimous Physicians, as
may bring them to those tried and good applications, both for diet and physic
(both repenting what has been done amiss, and returning to do what is just) by
which they enjoyed health so many years, without any considerable aches or
pains, which was easily and speedily remedied, by the justice and discretion of
honest Physicians, complete and conscientious Parliaments, with a learned and
godly Synod.

. The sense of the Nation.
You know the unanimous cry and vote of far the most and best people of the
Nation is for healing, which shows that they do not yet find themselves
healed; the cries and complaints of poor and rich, of great and small witness,
We are not yet healed: All testify this so loudly in Cities and Country, that
none contradict it, but those who (as Sylla's lice, or Herod's worms) feed on
our soars, and hope to make a prey of Church and State, of our Bodies, Estates
and Souls by continuing the hurts, putrefactions and miseries of both.

. Whose cruel policies and impressions I hope the mercy of God by the valor
and wisdom of godly men, will speedily (if our sins hinder not) frustrate and
defeat, when they see, that next our sins, the instruments of all our miseries
have been Fanaticorum spicula, Jesuitarum veneno tincta: Fanatic darts and
arrows, dipped in the Jesuits poison.

. My only ambition and design in this freedom of my speaking to you, is, to
help to heal and close hurts, Necessary freedom to speak of our hurts.
and to arm you against them for the time to come. It Is high time for every
honest heart to make use of a discreet tongue, pathetically to set forth with
the Prophet the hurts of the daughter of his people, to cry mightily to heaven
and earth, to God and man, to honest Counselors and just Commanders, to give
us leave to use, or in pity to put us into such hands, and such ways as may
effectually and speedily heal us, and not by a supine silence and sottish
slavery suffer our selves, and our posterity to wallow in our sanies or putid
effluxions, or to sit for ever on a dunghill, like Job, scraping our sores with
potsheards, and there is none to help us.

Pristine health was best.
. We do not desire to be happier than our religion and laws would make us, and
did so before might affronted right, and force cut the sinews of Justice, Good
words heal not,
to put us off with fine words, (godly phrases) and Saraphick fancys of cures,
beyond the proportions of this mortal condition, as if we must all be healed to
Angelick perfections, and settled by Mathematical ballancing of a Commonwealth,
or a Church, beyond all humane infirmities, or worldly vicissitudes; these are
but the philters and delusions of those who meditate nothing less than a speedy
and honest healing; to which if my freedom used this day may any way
contribute, who am (I thank God) exempted from base fears or flatteries of any
man, I may hope that it will not only be pardonable but acceptable to you, as
from one that has no design so upon his heart (next the saving of his soul,)
as to see, before I dye, the salvation of God in the right healing of the hurts
of the daughter of my people, both in Church and State (whose welfares are
unseparable.) For this end I have now preached to you upon your desire, and
shall ever pray to God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Savior of his
Church, that after the many public troubles we have for our sins seen and
suffered to our sorrows, at length the waters may be so moved, by some good
Angel, that the daughter of my people may be effectually healed, Ier. 5.3.
(by a sovereign and celestial influence) of what ever disease or hurt she
has, either in Church or State; and this for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with
the Father and blessed Spirit, be everlasting glory.

FINIS.
These Book following are written by the Author Dr. GAUDEN, and are to be sold
by Andrew Crook at the Green-dragon in S. Paul's Churchyard.
HIeraspistes, A defense for the Ministry and Ministers of the Church of
England, in Quarto. II. Sermons preached on public occasions. III. Funerals
made Cordials, in a Sermon preached at the Interment of the Corpse of Robert
Rich, Heir apparent to the Earldom of Warwick, in Quarto. IV. A Sermon preached
at the Funeral of Dr. Ralph Brounrig Bishop of Excester (December. 17. 1659.)
with an account of his Life and Death (new) in Octavo. V. A petitionary
Remonstrance in the behalf of many thousand Ministers and other Scholars, (new)
in Quarto.

