AN EXAMINATION Of the CASE of the QUAKERS, CONCERNING OATHS Propounded by
them, A. D. 1673. To the Consideration of the KING, And both Houses of
Parliament. With a Vindication of the Power of the Magistrate to impose Oaths,
and the Liberty and Duty of all Christians to Swear by God Reverently; Humbly
Submitted to the Judgment of His Most Sacred Majesty, and the Two Houses of
Parliament. By Charles Gataker, Rector of Hoggeston in the County of Bucks.

(...), Hierocles in Pyth. Carm. Aur. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Thomas
Collins, at his Shop at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet, MDCLXXV.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE CASE OF THE QUAKERS, Concerning Oaths and Swearing;
Propounded by them to the Consideration of the King, and both Houses of
Parliament, A. D. 1673.
SECTION I. The Design of this Treatise.
IT is not mine intention, to examine the Truth of many Assertions boldly
affirmed by these Men, without any proof, or show of probability, but not
without an evidence of Pride and Vainglory; nor to inquire into the sincerity
and pertinency of all the Examples and Testimonies annexed to their frame of
their Case, which can only dazzle the Eyes, or amuse the Minds of vulgar
Readers. But my design is, out of the Love which I owe to Truth and Peace,
Zech. 8.19.
both which can never be so well preserved, as by the Holy and Wise Gods
Ordinances for their security, to assert (with as much brevity and perspicuity,
as I can well use) the warrantable use of Oaths under the Gospel, when
Christians do, upon a just occasion, Swear by the True and Living God in Truth,
Jer. 4.2.
in Judgment, and in Righteousness; notwithstanding Christ's inhibition (in his
Sermon on the Mount) that the Jews, then his Auditors, should not swear at all
by the Creatures, nor by God himself, Matthew. 5.^^ -- 37
in ordinary communication; and also to defend the Authority of our Lawful
Superiors, to require an Oath from them, who are subject to their Government,
be it Civil, or Ecclesiastical. Now because these subverters of Government, do
invite (or rather provoke) the whole Nation to consider their Case, that they
may gain pity to themselves from the Common People, and Protection from the
Powers ordained of God, even in their disorderly ways of singularity, wherein
they villify Authority, and disturb that peace of Conscience, with which good
Christians do approve themselves, to be faithful Subjects both to Christ, and
his Vicegerents on Earth, I shall endeavor to discover, not only the defects,
but also the frauds of these new Casuists in stating of the Question; and then
proceed to unfold the Nature of an Oath, in order to the right stating of the
Question in hand, viz. Whether an Oath of God, or of the Lord, (as the Holy
Ghost speaks) be consistent, or repugnant, with or to the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Eccl. 8.2. Exodus 22.^.
And lastly I shall reconcile sober, deliberate, and reverent swearing unto
Christian Religion, still proceeding upon those Principles, and Maxims which
are avowed by all, who are indeed, the Disciples of Christ, taught of God by
his holy Spirit and Word, which in Religion, derived from Heaven by Revelation,
are never to be severed, since the holy Scriptures are by Gods gracious
providence employed, and by his Blessing are sufficient to make us wise unto
Salvation. And in this undertaking I do earnestly beseech the only wise God,
who is the Father of Lights, and free-flowing Fountain of Wisdom, to direct and
assist me in the lighting of my Candle at his written Word, and in drawing the
Waters of Life, out of that never failing Well of Salvation.

SECT. II. The Pretense of the Quakers.
THis late upstart Generation, raised up by the Lord, as they boast, (and we
will acknowledge it to be true in some sense, Exodus 9.^6.
as God says he raised up Pharaoh, first to be a Destroyer, and then to be
Destroyed) complains that for 20 or 30 years last past, under the various
Revolutions of Government, although they have been of a peaceable behavior,
(They say nothing of their refractory disobedience to Authority, in what hand
soever) have been a suffering People only for refusal of Oaths; whereas they
cannot swear at all, their Consciences not allowing them to do so, because of
the express command of Christ, and out of obedience to the Doctrine of the
Apostles. They allege, Mat. 5.33, 34. Jam 5.12 from whence they conclude,
that though Swearing were allowed in the Law, yet Christ and his Apostles
forbid it in his Gospel. They dare, and do appeal to God the searcher of
Hearts, (pray mark, how near this comes to an Oath, wherein every Swearer does,
as St. Paul did, 2 Cor. 1.23.
call God to Record upon his Soul) that their refusing to swear, is with
respect to the Reputation of Christianity, and the Evangelical dispensation of
Truth and Righteousness, which exceed that of the Law and the solemn Oaths
thereof, and to the express Prohibition in the Case. This is the sum of their
Case, and the ground of their Request, to be eased of the heavy burden, and to
be delivered of the Snare of Oaths.

SECT. III. An Examination of this Pretense for Refusal of Oaths.
I Shall not now make inquiry, whether all the Imprisonments and Sufferings of
Quakers, have been only for their refusing of Oaths exacted of them by
Magistrates. But my business is to examine, whether their pretense of
Conscience be allowable in this Case, to exempt them from being pressed to Swear,
or to secure them from the guilt of disobedience, in their obstinate refusal of
all Oaths whatsoever. Here, first I must lay open two things in this Discourse,
to wit, the foul Hypocrisy, and the false Doctrine of these Quakers, in the
groundwork of their perverseness. It is a matter of much consequence, to the
right understanding of this serpentine breed, to compare their professions
here, of respect to the Honor of Christianity, of obedience to Christ's command,
and the Doctrine of the Apostles, with their known Principles and Practices,
and to see whether there be an uniformity in them, and these Men bear an equal
regard to all the Precepts of Christ, Psalm. 119.6.
and his Apostles, as David had a respect to all Gods Commandments. For
partiality in keeping one command with a nice scrupulosity, but breaking others
with licentiousness, is a certain token of insincerity, and a pretense of Zeal,
for one part of the Rule of Religion, when all the Rule beside is rejected, can
be taken for no other, than divelish dissimulation. Now let the Conversation of
the Quakers, in relation to other parts of Christianity, be a little looked
into, and you will quickly see, how little value, credit, or obedience, they
defer to the precepts of Christ, and his Apostles. Do they not cast aside the
Ordinances of Christ and his Apostles, for Worship and Government? Do they not
avowedly refuse to give honor, Romans 13.7.
to whom honor is commanded to be given as due? Do they not dissolve, or weaken
those bonds of civil societies, which Christ by his Gospel has tied
streighter, than the Law of Nature did? Do they not violate Christian Charity,
by Damning all that are not of their combination? To say nothing of their
reviling all Ministers of the Gospel. Has this Precept of not Swearing,
swallowed up the whole Body of their Christian Religion? Or shall the
observance of it pass current for universal, and uniform obedience, to the
complete Law of Liberty? Jam. 1.25.
Is not then something else in the bottom, besides the tenderness of the
Reputation of Christianity? Let this be well thought on. But another thing is
yet more remarkable. Who would not think, but that these hot Zealots for
Christ's Doctrine of the Gospel, who suffer such hard things, rather than break
Christ's Commandment, did make the Holy Scriptures of the Old Testament, which
Christ, and his Apostles, have, by practice and precept, commended to our
study, for the confirming of our Faith, and the regulating our Lives, and those
of the New Testament superadded to them, jointly to be the Foundation on which
we are built up to be that Temple, Ephesians. 2.19.
whereof Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone, or the complete Rule of Faith,
and Manners? For indeed without the Scriptures, now who can assuredly know what
is the good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of God? And how came these Men to
be acquainted with this very Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, but by the
Scriptures? But after all this, you will find your self much mistaken, if you
imagine that these Men make the written Oracles of God, their principle of
Religion, or Rule of Life. For the heads of them, in several Books, set up the
Light of God within them, for the only infallible Rule, and they disparage the
Holy Scriptures, which they allow to be, at the best, but a shadow of Gods
will. Again their dissimulation of what they dare not deny, to be the Word and
Will of God concerning Swearing, together with their impious despising of the
same Holy Word, is apparently visible in their Sophistical conclusion, thus
expressed with all the subtilty that the old Serpent could inspire into them, So
though it (viz. Swearing) was allowed in the Law, (viz. of Moses which is
opposed by them in the precedent sentence, and here to the Gospel) Christ and
his Apostles forbid it in his Gospel.

Here is a double fallacy in the first Member of the conclusion. They would
induce a conceit, that as Divorce was by God, and Moses, permitted to the Jews,
to pass unpunished, Mat. 19.8. Mal. 2.16.
for the hardness of their hearts, which yet was not approved by God, as good
in it self, and therefore it is regulated by a Law for the security of the
Woman, which Law does but permit the divorce, but enjoin the giving a Bill; so
Swearing was but allowed barely with prescription of forms for Solemnity, and
not commanded: Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.12.20.
Whereas Swearing by the Name of God was commanded, (which is devoted by the
Fear of God in Scripture) as a solemn part of his Holy Worship, whereby Man
gives God the Glory of his Sovereignity, Providence, Omnipresence, Omniscience,
Omnipotence, Veracity, Justice and Equity. The Prophets also, who reached to
the depth of the Law, which was Romans 7.14. Jer. 4.2. and 12.16.
Spiritual, commanded Swearing under the Old Testament, and Esa. 19.18. and
45.23. and 65.16.
foretold, in their Evangelical Sermons, that way of serving God and Christ
under the dispensation of the New Covenant, when the Gentiles turn to the Lord,
(mark the words of Esaiah,) which according to the Hebrew, run thus. He that
blesses himself in the Earth, shall bless himself in God Amen; (as we render
it not amiss, but not to the full importance of the word, Esa. 11.9.
the God of Truth) and he that Swears in the Earth (when it shall be full of
the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea, in the new state of the
Church, when God calls his Servants by another Name, Esa. 65, 16, 17. And what
is that new and blessed name but Christians?) Shall Swear by God Amen. Christ
himself expounds the word, when in his Heavenly Epistle to the Church of
Laodicea, Apoc. 3.14.
he takes to himself that glorious Title Amen. The true and faithful witness,
who is invoked as a Witness and Judge of the Heart in every Oath made by his
Name. It is not to be omitted, that the Oaths, which God commanded to be used
in judicial proceedings, are enjoined as fit means in their own nature for the
discovery of truth, Heb. 6.6.
and decision of controversies, which benefit and effect is common to all
Nations in all Ages, who are imbrued with an apprehension, and fear of God, as
Judge of the World. It is therefore an Imposture of these Wolves in Sheepskins,
to attempt the persuasion that Swearing was only allowed, and not as expressly
commanded in the Law, as these Dreamers Dream it to be forbidden in the Gospel.

Their second piece of juggling is this, that by their taking no notice of the
practice of all Nations, not debauched into direct Atheism, and of the
constant practice of Gods best servants, who used Oaths for firm binding
themselves and others in public Confederacies, and private transactions, which
were made between Gods servants on both sides, and also between the people of
Gado on one side, and Idolatrous people on the other part, (of which
proceedings, the Sacred History of the World, before the Law given by Moses,
Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor. 10.11. Heb. 10.1. Col. 2.17.
yields a full Harvest of Precedents) they divert us from looking after those
things, which as St. Paul says, were before written for the instruction,
conviction, reformation, teaching and admonition of us, upon whom the ends of
the World are come. Therefore though Jesus Christ brought that Grace and Truth,
whereof Moses, in the Ceremonial Law, by Gods wise contrivance, gave the Jews a
Shadow, and that Shadow vanished, when the Body of the Son of Righteousness
appeared above the Horizon of the Church, yet Christ in his Gospel did not
diminish any thing of that natural Religion, the seeds whereof, God had once
sown in the Hearts of all Mankind, for the keeping up the Faith of his
Providence, and the fear of his Judgment, which are the two Pillars of Justice,
without which, no civil society can firmly subsist.

I now proceed to animadvert the false Doctrine, either insinuated secretly by
supposition, or expressed openly by profession.

First, It is falsely supposed, that the Law of Moses does not in any part of it
concern, or oblige us Christians. I shall hereafter show that Christ's
prohibition of Swearing in familiar Discourse, and St. James's restraint of the
Tongues outrage in passionate heates, is no forbidding of what the Law
commands. But if the Law of Swearing oblige Christians, or be but a precedent
to direct them, we must observe it, or at least may warrantably imitate it. The
Ceremonial part of the Law, which concerned the Typical Service and Sacrifices
of the Temple, ceased as to the design and Virtue of it, when Christ by his
Gospel published the accomplishment of our Redemption wrought by his Death and
Resurrection. The Political Law of Moses, which was peculiarly accommodated, in
many particulars, to the seed of Jacob, called Israel, as they were, by
Covenant, made God's Tenants of Canaan, ceased, when they ceased to be the
Politic People of God. Both were openly abrogated, as to their exercise and
practice by the utter devastation of the Holy City, with the Temple it self, by
the dissolution of the Policy, by the ejectment of the Nation out of their
Land, and dispersion over the face of the Earth, in which state of exile, Hos.
3.4.
accompanied with bondage, they yet remain without King, Prince, Sacrifice,
Image, Ephod, and Teraphim; that is, without any settled Form of Government, and
without any means to serve, or to consult God, as formerly they had done. But
for the Law of Moses, so far as it prescribes Offices, and exercises of Piety,
Charity, Justice, Humanity, and Prudence; it obliges Christians, not upon the
same account it did the Jews, to wit, as it was a part of the Covenant made in
Horeb, but as it is a clear explication, and improvement of the Law of Nature,
by deduction of particular Precepts, from general Principals of Religion, and
Righteousness. Therefore St. Romans 13.8. Ephesians. 6.1.2.
Paul charges Christians with obedience to the Law, the second Table whereof he
ingrafts into the Gospel. And (which is yet more considerable, to manifest our
concernment in the Law) he establishes the liberal maintenance of the
Ministers, not only upon the Ordinance of Christ, but also upon two Laws of
Moses, 1 Cor 9.8.14.
according to the Spiritual meaning of the one, and the Reason and Analogy of
the other. And when we hear him speak thus, ver. 9. Does not also the Law say
these things? We must remember, that as St. Paul says elsewhere, Romans 3.19.
We know whatsoever things the Law speaks (either for conviction, or for
direction) It speaks unto them that are under the Law. We therefore who have
and hear, by God's bounty, Moses and the Prophets, as well as the Apostles, are
under the Law, Luk 16.29.
not as a Covenant of Righteousness and Life by Works, (for in this respect, We
are not under the Law, Romans 6.14.
but under the grace of the Gospel) but as an obligatory Rule of obedience, to
the Will of God, declared therein; therefore St. James calls the Law recorded
by Moses, a Perfect Law of Liberty, the doing whereof must be added to the
hearing, if we desire to be happy, St. James also calls it The Royal Law, one
Commandment whereof being broken, the whole Golden Chain is broken, by which
we must order our lives, Jam. 1.25. and 2.8.12.
and shall be judged. Now St. James knew, that the third Commandment running in
the Negative, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, did
include the Affirmative Precept of Swearing reverently, and keeping legitimate
Oaths, which were Duties known well by the light of Nature, but reinforced upon
the Jews by the Law, Now is it imaginable, that St. James the Apostle of the
Circumcision, writing to the Jews, should so far forget himself, as after this
high commendation of their Law, expressly prohibit what the Law enjoined, and by
a total abolition of swearing, cancel the Third Commandment, as a thing that
has no further any place or use under the Gospel? This intolerable
inconvenience is easily avoided, if according to the scope of the Apostles
discourse, easily gathered from the Context, and considering, that impatience
is the Parent of rash Oaths, we say, that St. James did very wisely join his
inhibition of Swearing in heat and haste, upon the Sallies of Passion, to his
exhortation unto patience; Jam. 5.8.12.
and yet he did not abolish the Third Commandment, nor banish Oaths out of
Christendom. I confess I have unawares transgressed mine own limits, and
expounded St. James before the method I prescribed to my self did require it;
but I shall have the less to say hereafter. Indeed being engaged to show how
St. James, and indeed all the Apostles, do oblige Christians to their
observance of, and obedience to the Law, in those Precepts which concern all
Nations, who are by Christ set at liberty from the Judaical Yoke of Ceremonies
and carnal Ordinances, amongst which, none was so mad yet, as to rank an Oath;
I could not but observe the incongruity of the Apostles prohibition, as it is
over-stretched by the Quakers, with his own honoring of the Law, and to
prevent any scruple which might arise through misunderstanding of the Apostles
restraint of us from swearing, by this distinction of imprudent and passionate
Oaths, belched out in rage, from deliberate swearing upon weighty Causes,
either arbitrarily, or out of obedience to Authority, but always with due
reverence to God, I have opened a way to reconcile St. James to himself, and
the Law to the Gospel. And now I proceed,

Secondly, To refute the dangerous errors of the Quakers, which they lay for a
foundation of their abstinence from swearing. They affirm, the Righteousness of
the Gospel exceeds that of the Law. This Affertion they maintain by the example
of one Walter Brute, who, (as Mr. Fox relates, in his Martyrology) defended his
refusal of an Oath, because his Master Christ taught Christian Men, that in
affirmation of a Truth, they should pass the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees of the Old Testament, or else he excludes them out of Heaven, Matthew.
5.20. To the words recited out of Matthew. 5.33.37. Walter Brute subjoyned;
Therefore as the perfection of the ancient Men of the Old Testament was, not to
forswear themselves; so the perfection of Christian Men, is not to swear at
all, because they are so commanded of Christ. But though Walter Brute was
mistaken in the sense of Christ's Commandment, yet his words mount not to such
an height of Error, as this position of the Quakers. For W. B. does well note,
that our Savior says, our Righteousness must exceed that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, but not that of the Law of Moses. And to the right understanding of
Christ's Sermon in the Mount; we must take notice that Christ does not unfold to
his novice Disciples, the Mysteries of the Gospel; but first corrects the
Jewish vulgar error of Happiness, consisting in the full enjoyment of the
Temporal Blessings promised in the Law, and prepares them for the Cross, to be
suffered for Righteousness: and that they might not be deceived by a
counterfeit or defective Righteousness, he establishes the Law, and the
Prophets, to be the Rule of Righteousness, and then proceeds to clear and
vindicate the Law of Moses from the corrupt Glosses of the Scribes and
Pharisees, whose new Model of Righteousness was so defective, that our Savior
said plainly, and severely; that except your Righteousness exceed beyond that
of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 5.20.
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, ye cannot be Subjects
of the Kingdom of the Messiah, which now ye long to see. Mark that Christ spoke
then to the Jews, who were carried away with a reverence and esteem of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who partly enervated, partly made void the Law of Moses,
by their new Traditions, and false Interpretations. Christ recovers the Law of
Moses, as it was expounded by the Prophets, who preferred a Spiritual
Obedience, and sincere Righteousness, and charitable Mercy before Sacrifices,
from noval corruptions, and recommends it, explained by himself, to them, who
delighted to be counted the Disciples of Moses. He propounds no superabundant
Righteousness beyond the Law, which cannot be exceeded in a tittle. For there
is nothing imaginable in the way of Righteousness, (as it imports a conformity
of Man's Will unto God's Will) beyond the loving of God with all the Heart,
Soul, Understanding, Matt. 22.37.40.
and Strength, and the loving of our Neighbor as our self, on which two
Commandments all the Law and the Prophets do depend. These, Christ came neither
to make void, nor to improve by any new Precept of Righteousness. The
Righteousness of God by Faith, which is now fully and clearly revealed in the
Gospel, Romans 1.17. and 3.21, 22.
is another thing, far different from the inherent and active Righteousness,
which Christ in his Sermon so earnestly recommends to his new-come Auditors.
The conceit that Christ made up the defects of the Law, and laid a yoke of more
exact Righteousness upon Christians, than Moses laid upon the Jews; (yet
Papists say, we may take up, or refuse at pleasure, because all these pretended
additions (which we may find as easily in the Old Testament, as in the New) are
not Commandments, but Counsels,) has bred many pernicious errors and practices
in the Church. The Popish way of taking Christ's additional Ordinances (as they
conceive) for Counsels leading to a state of Perfection above common
Christians, has begot the Doctrine of Works of Supererogation, of Merit, of
Monkery, and all the Superstitions and Frauds, depending upon them. The
Phanatick way of false expounding Christ's interpretations of the Old Law, for
New Precepts obliging all Christians, has put Anabaptists and others upon the
conceit, that the use of the Sword in the Magistrates hand, and in the
Soldiers, and also Swearing, is altogether inconsistent with Christianity. But
let it be considered, whether it is likely that Christ would engage his raw
Disciples to break the Law of Moses, and in a refractory manner to disobey
their Magistrates by refusal of Oaths, which might be exacted of them almost
every day. Certainly if his Doctrine had been such, and any number of his
Disciples, had been obedient to his new Law; his adversaries who took much pain
to little purpose, in suborning witnesses against Christ, might, with ease,
have found ground enough of accusation, and plenty of Witnesses, who heard and
practiced his Doctrine, or, in their Courts, saw it observed: (if Christ's words
had been taken at that time in the same sense as the Quakers do now) to have
overwhelmed our Savior with the charge of abrogating Moses's Law.

Lastly, is it imaginable, that Christ our Blessed Lord and Master would so
prevaricate, as not to observe, and practice, what he taught and preached to
his Disciples? But our Blessed Savior, whom these Seducers affirm to have
forbidden Swearing in a Court, at the Command of a Magistrate, and to have made
this abstinence from Oaths a degree of Perfection above the Righteousness of
the Law, did, himself, at the great Council at Jerusalem, after long and
strange silence, give an answer to the High Priest, being required to speak
upon his Oath; and he submitted to the High Priest's adjuration, by confessing
himself to be Christ. The High Priest (as if he would use a Spiritual Rack, to
extort a confession from his silent Prisoner) said, I adjure thee by the living
God, Mat. 24 63.
that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God. The form of the
Oath is pronounced by the Judge himself, with the Matter inquired for. Our
Savior's answer of assent, is a taking of the Oath. Thus Christ did, and that
he taught the contrary, is contrary to Reason, and to the sense of our Saviors
Sermons, who therein secures the Law of Moses to a Tittle, and excludes from
Heaven, Matt. 5 17, 18 19,
any one that teaches the breach of the least Commandment in the Law. Surely if
his Auditors had then understood their new Master to have abrogated all the
Precepts of Moses, concerning Oaths in Judicature especially, they would have
accused him of contradicting himself, and of disparaging Moses, and of
vilifying the Law of God, and in that humor would have deserted him. But it is
evident that our Saviors Doctrine had a powerful Influence upon them another
way, Matt. 7 28, 29.
to raise their Wonder and Reverence of his Authority, above that of the
Scribes and Pharisees.

But the knotty question is not yet untied. For it is said by many, If our
Savior did not fill up (as they expound (...)) the Defects, or the Shortness
of the Law, in points of Righteousness; why does he oppose his sayings, to what
was said of old in the Law, and settle a new Rule of Righteousness? Here lies
the difficulty, which I pray God direct me to clear.

First, I say, that the common exposition of the word (...), by fulfilling, (as
the Evangelist uses it, Matt. 3.15.
when he relates our Blessed Saviors Speech, wherewith he satisfied John the
Baptist, concerning Baptizing his Master; Thus it becomes us to fulfill all
Righteousness) is very pertinent and apposite, to the former member of the
Sentence, as much as it is agreeable to the Truth. For Christ that came to
destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.6.5.
and to take away sin, which is the breach of the Law; by his Holy Life and
Doctrine, and by his expiatory Sacrifice, might truly and fitly say, he came
not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them. And to reject this
Sense of Christ's words, without manifesting the incongruity of it, is an
injurious dealing with Scripture. On the other side, the expounding of it
Filling up, or Supplying, is supposed to be true, before it is proved; whereas
it is not so agreeable to the opposition set between (...) and (...).
Certainly, Filling up by Addition is not so directly opposite to the
destruction of the Law and Prophets, as Fulfilling them is, which strengthens
their Authority and Credit. But let these Men, who are so earnest for Christ's
improvement of the Law, by addition of more excellent Precepts of exact Purity,
and heroic Patience, show how he has supplied the defects of the Prophets;
since Moses, David, Solomon, and the Prophets, have in several places given the
same Rules of Purity, Peace, Patience, etc. and the Apostles have enforced
their exhortations to these Christian Virtues, by testimonies taken out of the
Old Testament, as any one that is indifferently versed in the Apostolical
Epistles will find.

Secondly, this pretended filling up of the Law, makes the new Doctrine of
Christ, indeed to be the inserting a piece of a new and unwrought Cloth into an
old Garment, Matt. 9.^6.
which agrees not with it, but makes the rent worse. For if the superstructure,
which these expositors build upon their fancied foundation, be true, Christ
came to destroy the Law of Moses and the Prophets as unsufficient for
Christians, and for the Jews too at that time, by requiring a Righteousness
more accurate, then they did. For if Christ forbad all Oaths, even those which
Moses commanded, it unavoidably follows, that the great Prophet Christ untaught
what Moses and the Prophets enjoined, and he dissolved their building, which is
a strange way of perfecting, and Christ for his part, strongly disavows to have
been the intent of his coming. Matt. 9.^2.
The rub that lies in my way, is Christ's prohibition of Divorces, except in
case of Adultery; and the reduction of God's Ordinance of Marriage, to its
primitive Unity, Purity, and Indissolubility, Matt. 16.^^. etc.
as our Savior more largely elsewhere handles the case. It is besides my
present purpose to enter upon another question, besides that of Oaths: I shall
only say, that our Blessed Savior intended a reformation of the Jewish Nation,
corrupt by custom, and the restitution of Marriage, throughout all Christendom,
to its Integrity, and Dignity; and to prefer God's Primitive Ordinance before a
political Law; attempered by a wise and a Gracious Lawgiver, to the humor of
an ill-natured people. And yet here is nothing new, or more perfect than what
was delivered in the Law and the Prophets. For Christ proves his Doctrine of
Marriage out of Moses. Matt. 19. ^


The severe Law of Retaliation which God made, that he might, by terror,
prevent the first injury; and not that he might encourage the last of Revenge,
is no more repealed by Christ, than by Solomon, Prove. 20.22. and 24.29. But it
sounds harshly, when a Man says, This Law is filled up by Christ, when he
disswades the use of the Law. By the way take notice, that many Political Laws
were wisely contrived, and provided, by God, for the Jewish People, as fit
remedies of many evils emergent by the naughty disposition of a froward
Generation, which Provisions were left to the liberty of the offended Party to
make use of. Now Christ's prudential admonitions of the Jews, not to fly to
those Remedies, are no abrogations of those Laws. But I have said enough of
Christ's preserving reverence, and enjoining obedience to that original Rule of
Righteousness, given to Mankind, which was antienter than the Law, given in
Mount Sinah, and is set down and explained in the Law, and in the Prophets,
which complete the Body of the Holy Scriptures of the Old Testament, which God
has thought expedient to preserve, for the benefit of his Church Universal of
all Nations.

Finally, to solve the whole objection, the Adversaries and their Doctrine,
against which, Christ bends his Discourse, are to be enquired for, and
discovered. Christ, before he delivered his own Sense and Saying, premises this
to his present Auditors, Ye have heard, that it was said to, or by them of old
time, etc. Mal. 5.21.27.23. ver. 38.43. ver. 31.
Or, Ye have heard that it has been said, etc. Or barely, It has been said.
Now that which was said to them of old time ( viz. to the Ancestors of the
Jews, that either heard God himself, or Moses and the Prophets) which is
recited and interpreted by our Savior, is either some words of the Decalogue,
viz. the 6.7, and 3 Commandments; or else some Precepts in the Law, as those
concerning Divorce, Retaliation, Love and Hatred; but of whom did that people
hear it? without doubt, of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matt. 23.13, and and 16.
whose form of Righteousness Christ taxes for defectiveness, and whom elsewhere
he sharply reproves for Blind Guides, yet active and cunning Seducers; and of
whose sower but spreading Leaven of false Doctrine, he warns his Disciples to
beware. But did they hear all that God said to them of old time, and nothing
else? Did these popular Rabbis preach the word of God entirely, and sincerely,
without addition, mutilation, corruption, and adulterating, by vain traditions
of Men, and by fraudulent glosses? No such matter; this is confessed, and
without controversy, that those soothing Preachers insisted on the Letter of
the Law, and to gratify the corrupt affections of their Clients and Scholars,
who looked on them, as bearing the Keys of Knowledge, and uncontrollable
interpreters of the Law, and rewarded them accordingly; persuaded them, that an
external obedience, or abstinence from Adultery, Murder, Perjury, was a full
satisfaction to the Law, and this patch of innocence was an entire raiment of
Righteousness. Further, They gave all the indulgence to the Peoples passions of
Lust and Revenge, which the politic Law did not reach at to punish. In the
mean time they neglected all the Sermons of the Prophets, who were, by their
Office, Interpreters of the Law, and Preachers of Repentance, and did
constantly require the cleaness of the Heart; Truth in the inward Man, and
Regularity in their Affections. Now our Savior Christ reflects upon the
Impostors, and their corrupt comments upon the Law of God, when he expounds the
several Commandments: He makes no distinction of Perfections (as W. Brute
misconceived) as if there were one perfection of the Men of the Old Testament,
and another of Christian Men. A sincere endeavor to be Holy, and Merciful, as
God our Heavenly Father is, and shows himself to be our pattern, is the
Perfection common to both Jew and Gentile, that follow after the Righteousness
of God's prescription. That which W. Brute, and these Quakers that follow him,
call The perfection of the Ancient Jews, Not to forswear themselves, is but the
partial, clipped, and counterfeit Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
expounding the 3 Commandment by halfes; Thou shall not take the Name of the
Lord thy God in vain; that is, said they, Thou shall no swear falsely, nor break
thy Oath, whereas they never counted rash and vain Oaths to be a breach of this
Commandment, worthy their reproval. And that which they call the perfection of
Christian Men not to swear at all, is indeed a corruption of Religion, by
depriving God of his Honor and Worship, and a great Defect introduced into the
public Institutions of Justice, by debarring Christian States of a very
serviceable Ordinance of God. The reason of mine Assertion is this; As Christ
in expounding the sixth and seventh Commandment, the force of which he extends
to the restraint of the Eye, Heart, and Affections, as well as to the Members
of the Body, opposes nothing but what the Pharisees indulged; In like manner,
in dealing with the third Commandment, Christ forbids not what the Law (which
he himself, being the Word of God, did give unto Moses, and by his hand, unto
the People) did Command, and Establish, but that sinful swearing in ordinary
communication, which being grown customary (peradventure with the Leaders, as
well as the following people) these Masters in Israel connived at, who sought
their own Glory and Profit, and never seriously considered the honor of God,
which Christ sought to advance, in all that he did and taught. And now I hope I
have evinced, that Christ did not set up a new, and more perfect rule of
Righteousness, than what of old was given by God, and that he has cleared it
from the corruption, and restored it to its integrity, from the defalcation of
the Scribes, and Pharisees, without addition or detraction; and without
crossing or abolishing his own Law, concerning reverent swearing by the Name of
God. I do not think it needful, to take notice now of the fond and senseless
Traditions of the Pharisees, concerning the binding force of Oaths, which
varied with them, according to the several forms of them, as they were
expressive, either of the Name of God the Creator, or of the Creatures; and in
the names of several Creatures, they deferred more Virtue to some than to
others, though the preference be ridiculous, because unreasonable, Mal.
23.16.22.
as our Savior has related, and censured them. Our Savior in this
Prohibition of Swearing, now under debate, appears clearly to have had a
reflexive Eye upon some of their frivolous niceties. But these are besides the
lines of the main matter in question, and may, without prejudice to the Cause,
be past over without any further handling. It is high time now to conclude this
Section.

SECTION IV. Concerning the Nature of an Oath.
AN Oath being the subject Matter of the Controversy, the right understanding
of it will conduce much to the stating, clearing, and determining the Question,
concerning the consistency thereof with Christianity. I shall therefore explain
the nature of an Oath, by a more resplendent Light, than that of the Natural
Conscience, which yet is a Divine Light, and spark of Piety, which God in his
Wife and Holy Providence, kept alive in the World, for the preservation of
Humane Society, from our Universal Confusion. The Holy Scripture informs us
abundantly, of the nature and use of Swearing, which is common to God the
Creator, and the Creatures that bear the Image of God, both Angels and Men.

By the way, hence we may collect the absurdity of all them, who deny
deliberate Swearing, upon weighty motives, as an Imperfection; whereas indeed,
to swear in due manner, upon just grounds, Mat. 5.^8.
is to be perfect in Truth, Sincerity, and Constancy, as our Heavenly Father is
Perfect, and to make Christians, even before the Resurrection, in some measure
equal to Angels. Now though there be a great difference between the Oath of the
Creator; Heb. 6.^3. Jer. 22.^^. Deuteronomy. 32.^0, 41. Jer. 51.^4. Psalm. 89.^5. Amos.
4.^^. Heb. 6.^7.
who because he has none Superior or Greater than himself, swears by Himself,
by his Life, hy his Holiness, that is, his incommunicable Majesty, and the Oath
of the Creature, who swears by God in the way of an Appeal, to a Sovereign
Lord, who is both a sharp-sighted witness of Truth, and a severe avenger of
falsehood; yet there is somewhat common to both; for which, in propriety of
speech, Swearing is, by the Holy Ghost, attributed, to both; I do therefore
describe an Oath in general to be the binding ones self immutably, to speak and
act according to Truth and Faithfulness. St. Paul leads me to this description,
by saying, that God willing to show more abundantly the unchangeableness of his
Counsel, to the Heirs of the Promise, confirmed it by the interposition of an
Oath. Numb. ^0.2. etc.
All swearing, (as Moses teaches us) is binding the person, with a Bond, to be
constant and true to his word that goes out of his mouth. Now God is above the
power of being bound by others, but yet may, and does bind himself, by himself,
and to himself primarily, and secondarily, by a gracious condescension to his
Creatures. But Man who is subject to the power of others, may not only bind
himself, of his own accord, by an Oath, but may also, and sometimes ought to
suffer this sacred Bond to be imposed on him, and to put it on himself. For
persons under the Authority of Magistrates, Parents. Masters, are bound by the
express Law of God, to take such Oaths, which, upon just grounds, are exacted
of them; and those of equal quality may, by God's Warrant, bind themselves each
to other, by interchangeable Oaths. It is superfluous now to recite at large
all the examples of these obligations recorded in Scripture, which frequently
occur to the Reader, and are set up by God as Pillars for the direction of
Travelers, Psalm. 1.105.
or (to use David's words) are designed to be a Light to our Feet, and a
Lantern to our Paths. But the Swearer, whether by his own motion, or at the
command, or entreaty of another, ought to bind himself to nothing, but what is
agreeable to Goodness and Justice. God, the Fountain and Measure of Goodness
and Justice, can do no other; And Man made, at first, in the likeness of God,
ought to do no other. Therefore the two celebrated Axioms of Divines, which
depend one on the other, are true and fixed Rules of Conscience. 1. An Oath
ought not to be made the Bond of Iniquity. 2. An Oath taken to that purpose,
binds to nothing but Repentance.

Now that by which a person binds himself in swearing, is suitable to his own
nature, or quality and condition. God, who is an independent Being, (as his
Name, by which he revealed himself to Moses, imports, I am that I am, or more
concisely, Exodus 14.
I am) binds himself by the very mention of, and reflection upon his own
indeficient, and invariable Life and Holiness, Tit. 1. Heb. 6.18. 2 Timothy 13.
Mal. 3 6. Jam. 1 17.
who can equally neither Lie nor Dye; who is one, and changes not, and is
incapable of variation, and ingages himself, by his immutability, to constancy
in his word. But Man, who is a Creature dependent, and obnoxions to God, his
Sovereign Lord, Lawgiver, and Judge, binds himself over to the vengeance of
God, if he fail in the Truth and Sincerity of his Swearing, by an open, or at
least an imperfect invocation of God, to be first a witness to his Assertion,
or Engagement, and then to be the Judge and Avenger, if he fail of Truth and
Honesty in either. Furthermore, it is necessary for us, to the right
understanding of God's Swearing, to observe, what very many do not take notice
of, or do not enough consider, and therefore set up their rest here, that God,
when he takes an Oath, deals with Men after the manner of Men, out of a
gracious condescension to Humane infirmity, that complying with Men's weakness,
he may cure their infidelity with an Oath, as an Antidote against Unbelief, and
a cordial strengthener of Faith. Now though there be Truth in this, and I will
not say that this Doctrine is unsound, yet I will say, and prove, that it is
too short or narrow an explication of the mystery of God's Swearing. For the
Scripture informs us, that God has sworn, not only to us who are mere Men,
sometimes in Mercy, as to Abraham, and to his Seed, for the confirmation of his
promises, and to David and others; and sometimes in wrath, as to the
incredulous and murmuring Jews, to show the irreversibility of that sentence,
whereby they were excluded out of the promised Land, ^^l. 95. ^ Heb. 3.^.18, ^^
because they, had forfeited their Title to it, by Infidelity; But God the
Father has also sworn to God his own Son, when he was designed to be made Man,
and being invested with our Flesh, to be the Savior of the World. Now the
Eternal Son of God, being the brightness of his Fathers Glory, Heb. 1.^4.
was more excellently Pure, than the very Angels, who, although (as Gregory
Nazianz speaks) they were (...) Spotless mirrors of God's Holy Light in their
original estate, yet were, as experience proved, by the ruin of some, capable
of foul darkness, and therefore Christ stood not in need of such means, to
preserve his fixed Purity, as we do to restore and secure our health, which
depends upon our Faith on God's word. Yet God for other reasons did swear unto
Christ, Thou art a Priest for ever, ^^l. 110.
after the Order of Melchisedeck. It is impertinent to say, that God swore only
for our assurance, and encouragement to rely upon the alsufficient atonement of
this High Priest, and for binding us to serve and obey this King of Peace and
Righteousness. For by that Oath, as we do not swear Fealty and Allegiance to
God or Christ, so God does not swear to us, that Christ shall be a Faithful
High Priest; but the Holy Scripture reveals the transaction which past in the
Court of Heaven, for settling the Mediatorship upon Christ, how the Father swore
unto his Son, ^^b. 7.^^ 25.
Thou art a Priest, etc. And the Apostle gives us some account of the matter;
for from this Oath of God, in the constitution of the Messiah, to be King and
Priest jointly, he infers the Dignity of Jesus Christ's Priesthood, above the
Levitical, because these Priests were ordained without an Oath to a temporary,
successive, and, at last, a transitory, and failing Priesthood, whereas,
Christ, by an Oath, was consecrated to an unpassant and eternal Priesthood.
Here is no shadow of imperfection in this grand affair of State, in the Kingdom
of God, nor any appearance of God's condescension to humane infirmity in the
business, but a manifestation of the Riches of God's wisdom, and Mercy, in the
Divine Counsel, concerning the salvation of miserable mankind, by the
Mediation, Propitiation, Intercession, and Redemption, of the Son of God
incarnate, who is our King and Priest, and is by oath inaugurated into both. If
this be duly weighed, we shall find that there is no reason to say, that
Christ took away swearing from Christians, to advance them to a state of
Perfection above the Jews. But this proud affectation of Phanaticks, to be
above Oaths, surmounts the pride of Lucifer, in the Prophet Esaias, who said, I
will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God; I will be like the most high. Esa.
14.12, 13, 14. Dan. 12.7. Apoc. 10.5, 6.
For not contented with excelling the Angels in Heaven, who did swear by the
living God, nor satisfied with being like unto God, they will be above
swearing, that their single testimonies shall pass for creditable. This indeed,
if it were obtained, would not be the perfection of Christian Religion, which
Christ has adopted to the condition of all Mankind, yet full of imperfections;
but of these singularists, who would be above, as they are cross to, all the
world, and above God himself, who is not above swearing, and counts it no
disparagement to the Glory of his Truth. I will conclude this discourse with
the Pious Meditation of Tertullian. O nos faelices, quorum causa jurat Deus,
sed and miserrimos, si Deo juranti non credimus. O how happy are we, for whose
sake God himself does swear? but oh the wretched misery of us, if we do not
give credit to God, when he swears to win our belief. But because not Divine,
but Humane Oaths are at present in question, their special nature is to be
examined. Now Man's Oath is plenarily described by a very Learned Divine, to be
an extraordinary part of Religious Worship, wherein God is solemnly called in
to be a witness with us of the Truth and Sincerity of our speaking, upon the
peril of his wrath, to be inflicted on us, if we deal not sincerely. Cicero
Offic. l. 3. says an Oath is Affirmatio Religiosa.


1. It is a part or act of God's worship, because it is not a bare naming of
God, or making use of his name, as pious persons may often do, who yet may live
many years without swearing, but it is an act of Religion, wherein the name of
God is taken up on purpose for his Honor, in the acknowledgement of his
Presidency, over Humane affairs. Thus it agrees with Adoration, Deuteronomy. 32.40.
Ex. 17.16. Numb. 14.30. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and was of old, accompanied with such Ceremonies, as import an Adoration, as
lifting up the hand to Heaven, or laying the hand on the Altar, for which
cause, the lifting up of the hand to Heaven, is ascribed to God, who is a
Spirit, when his Swearing is intended to be expressed, It is such an eminent act
of Religious Worship, that it is put sometimes for the whole service of God.

2. 1 Thessalonians. 17.
It is an extraordinary piece of Worship, not of so frequent use as Prayer is,
which is enjoined to be in a manner uncessant, but restrained to certain
weighty occasions, so that it is more like Physic than Food. And for this
cause Christ forbids it in ordinary communication: It is not the common
language of a Christian, nor the embellishment of familiar discourses, but a
Holy weapon to be taken up for the defense of Truth and Justice, when the
security of either does require it.

3. As to the special nature of this Religious Act, an Oath is an Appeal to God
with a Penalty. It is first, an invocation of God, to bear witness with us. And
so we acknowledge God to be, videntem very, one that sees and knows the truth
of the thing doubted of (for it is in vain to call in one for a witness, who
knows nothing of the matter) and also a searcher of Secrets, a tryer of the
Hearts, who knows our thoughts and intentions, and the conformity of our words
to our Knowledge and Purposes; And then there goes a curse upon our selves,
along with our Prayer to God. There is always an imprecation of Vengeance added
to the invocation of God's testimony, in case we speak otherwise than we know,
or intend. Herein we acknowledge God to be Vindicem falsi, a just and powerful
Revenger of Falsehood, Deceit, and particularly of our abuse of him, by drawing
him down to countenance our lies and fraud. These things are so clear, that I
need not enlarge my Lecture upon the proof of them. But these evident Truths I
lay now as the premises, out of which I shall anon draw my conclusion.

And that will the easier obtain credit, if to the nature of an Oath, we
briefly recollect the Ends, Uses, and Benefits of an Oath, which are indeed too
many to be particularly recounted, and unfolded at this time. The main ends of
swearing are two, 1. The Glory of God, which naturally results from Man's
serious acknowledgements of God's Sovereignty, and all those excellencies which
are requisite to such a Witness and Judge, as we make our Appeal to, whenever
we swear in sobriety. 2. The good of others, or our selves, which we are bound
to procure, and promote. For it is designed as a means, 1. To clear the Truth,
and to preserve the Reputation of Men, charged unjustly. 2. To discover Crimes,
Heb. 6.16.
that evil may be taken away from a society. 3. To put an end to Controversies.
4. For the firmer binding of Contracts. In many cases, all other means of
giving satisfaction to Magistrates, Friends, etc. may be ineffectual in matters
of moment, where the requiring and taking of an Oath, may have a good effect to
procure Quiet, Peace, and Justice. I need say no more; and what I have said, is
warranted by the Law of God, and the good customs of the Nations, which are not
only recorded, but approved by God in Scripture. It is therefore perversely
done, by those Fanatics, (whereof the Anabaptists are a part,) who do
maintain, in show at least, the Holy Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith and Life,
and defend their Authority against the Quakers, to refuse deliberate Oaths,
which are so frequently commanded, Psalm. 15.1, 4. and 63.11.
and commended in Scriptures; because Christ in one place, restrains Men from
rash, light, and vain Oaths, which are very near a kin to perjury, and because
one Apostle forbids hasty Swearing in fits of impatience, which make Men unfit,
even for Prayer, much more for Swearing. For that St. James meant no more, 1 Timothy 2.8.
it is manifest, because another Apostle, who was led by the same Holy Spirit
of Truth, (and that Spirit never contradicts himself) does in his
Divinely-inspired Epistles, pretty froquently make use of an Oath upon several
weighty occasions, 2 Cor. 1.23. 1 Cor. 15.31. Gal. 1.20. 1 Thessalonians, 2, 5, 10.
Romans 9, 1.
whereof one was the vindication of his own reputation, because the credit of
his Apostleship, and the success of his Ministry, did, in a good measure,
depend upon it. And the same Apostle St. Paul charges others by Oath, to
perform their Duty, or what he thought expedient for the public benefit of the
Churches. See 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. This last instance, wherein St.
Paul adjures the Christians of Thessalonica, is a parallel for Words, and for
the power of imposing of an Oath, with the High Priest's adjuration of Christ
himself beforementioned. Let now the Anabaptists find a more commodious way of
reconciling the Apostles in this matter, if they can, than this, which we
offer, saying, The Gospel of our Lord Jesus, preached by his Apostles, forbids
temerarious swearing in anger, by Heaven, or Earth, or in any other form of an
Oath, unto which Men were then accustomed, who were wont to express their Oath
by a Creature concealing, or sparing the name of God (for this is the true
meaning of the words, Nor any other Oath, which these Men vainly urge for their
cause) but at the same time the Gospel allows swearing by God, or by the Lord,
upon grave and important occasions, with judgment; and also, charging
inferiors, under an Oath, to do their Duty. But the Quakers are no less, if not
more irrational, then the former; for they do not deny the Scriptures, which
Jews for the Old Testament, and Christians for the Old and New Testament,
acknowledge to be written by Divine Inspiration, to be True; but they fondly
affirm, that nothing is the Rule of Humane Life, but the Light of God within
us. We deny not the Light of God within us, to be the Director of us, but
acknowledge that God, who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has
enlightened his House the Church, (which was larger, or lesser, as he saw good,
to proportion the frame of it, under several dispensations of Grace) with his
Word, both outwardly published, and inwardly applied, 2 Cor. 4, 6.
and by both ways does shine in our Hearts. And we further affirm, That since
God has committed his living and lightsome Oracles to Writing, and the
Churches custody, as a Standard, whereby we may try the Spirits, whether they
are of God, the Father of Lights; or of the Prince of darkness, who does
frequently transform himself into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
that he may with false Light delude and secure Men into his Kingdom of
Darkness; nothing ought to be accepted, attended, and followed, as the Light of
God within us, but what is agreeable to the Light of God without us, and shines
in the Candlestick, that is the Church, which Christ has set up to bear the
Light.

To come close then to the purpose, is it not a perverseness and giddiness of
Spirit in these Men, to allow the Truth of the New Testament, which commends
the Holy Scriptures of the Old, as directors of us in all those Duties to God
and Man, which concern all Nations, whom God would have come to the knowledge
of the Truth, and yet to condemn them who direct their actions, particularly in
taking Oaths, by this Rule? Again, since the Light of God within us, is, (as
they acknowledge) an infallible Rule, and we, in Swearing deliberately, do
follow that Light of God, which shined in the Hearts of all Nations, as well as
of the Patriarchs, and of Gods Servants, both before, and after the separation
of the Jews from the wide World, to be Gods chosen, and peculiar people, and of
the Prophets, and of the Apostles, and the practice of these Men agreeable to
Gods revealed word and will, shows that the Light of Conscience, which directed
and moved the Nations to Swear, was no other than the Candle of the Lord; is it
not a prodigious obstinancy in this froward Generation, not to entertain this
light, but to condemn all those that do receive it and walk by it? Till then
the Quakers can and do by some evidence, as clear, as that is for which we
receive and submit unto the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, manifest
that this pretended Light within them, which is directly opposite to the Light
which hitherto has enlightened all the World, which did not extinguish it by
Atheism, or wink against it with wilful folly, is of God, we cannot but
conclude, that the use of Oaths is still as warrantable, from the very Nature
and benefit of them, as ever it was. And as the superstitions, which, though
contrary to the common Notions of a God, and to the natural principles of
Piety, yet by Satan's malicious subtilty, and the vanity of Man's mind, are
ingrafted upon the stock of natural Religion, do not extirpate the root of
natural Religion, which will maintain true Piety to Gods Glory, when by good
husbandry the corrupt grafts are cut off, and the root and branch are
cultivated aright for the service of the true God; so the various abuses of
Oaths, frequent in all Ages, with profane despisers of God, and by vicious
custom too general with Professors of Religion, do not in themselves directly,
and should not, by consequence, eliminate the religious practice of Swearing.
For the banishment of a Sacrament, as the Latins call an Oath, out of humane
Society, is a step to supersede all Worship of God, and to remove an Oath out
of all procedures of Judicature, is no little artifice to extinguish the fear
of God in the World.

SECT. V. Concerning the sum and end of the Gospel.
THat we may yet draw nearer to an end, and hit our Mark close and deep, it
will be fit to consider the intimate and peculiar quality of the Gospel, to
which these pretenders to Evangelical perfection say, that an Oath is
irreconcilable. The Gospel, as it stands in opposition to the Law of Works,
Romans 3.^.28. and ^.5. -- ^.
whereby Man was to seek Righteousness and Life by his own perfect obedience,
is called by St. Paul, the Law of Faith, whereby Man being, by the general
corruption of humane nature, and by his singular sinfulness, obnoxious to Gods
wrath, which is the Messenger of Death, obtains Righteousness, Luke 1.^9. (...)
Cor. 5.^8.19. (...) 3.9.
and Life by Faith on Christ's Blood. The Gospel then is a way of peace, a word
of reconciliation, a ministry of Righteousness, Peace, and Life, which are
purchased by the Death of Christ and by the Blood of his Cross.

The primary ends of the Gospel are these two inseparable benefits, which our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has compassed by his Death, and works,
by the power of the Gospel, upon the Consciences of Believers, Reconciliation,
and Reformation of Man, who was in a state of enmity with God, both active and
passive, by his Sin. Romans 5.^0. Col. 1.^1.22. (...) Pet. 3.^8. and 2.^3. Tit.
2.11.^2.
In one word, this is the Reduction of the lost sheep, or the fugitive servant,
unto God, in the way of Peace and Holiness. The saving Grace therefore of the
Gospel teaches all mankind, which is enlightened with its beams, to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and piously in
this present World. We are moreover to observe, that from the first foundation
of a Church, which immediately was after Man's Sin and Sentence, began to be
built upon the promised Messiah, who is the Rock of Salvation. common to all
Ages, God did set up a way of Worship, which had relation to Christ the Lamb of
God, (...) Pet. 1.^9. 20.
fore-designed by God, and manifested in Gods own season. This instituted
Religion, in several shadows, drawn out by Gods hand, in such proportions, as
he thought fit, contained the Salvation by Christ, and the Doctrine of Faith
and Repentance, of which the Law given to Man, in his state of integrity, made
no words, and gave no hopes of Salvation that way. The Gospel therefore first
in the cloudy Pillar, which was the guide of Patriarchs and Prophets, and then
in the brightness of its Revelation by Christ, since all is accomplished and
preached to the Nations, superadds to the Law, Romans ^^.17.
the Righteousness of God from Faith to Faith: but it pares off nothing of the
Religion and Righteousness which Man owes to God, and to his Neighbor, by that
natural dependence upon God, and that order to his neighbor, Act. ^^.26.
which God established by Creation of Mankind after his own Image, and of one
blood to bind them together. This indeed is that which we call the Law of
Nature, which God unfolded and taught the Patriarchs, the first Fathers of
Families, and founders of humane Society. And the grace of the Gospel is so far
from loosening the Bond of this Law; that on the contrary, by addition of the
inestimable benefit of Redemption to our deep engagement by Creation, it ties
more strictly the Redeemed of the Lord, who are enlarged from the bondage under
Sin, and made the Servants of Righteousness, to yield up all their Members,
once abused to the service of uncleanness and iniquity, Rom ^^.19.
to become now the servants and instruments of Righteousness unto
sanctification. This then being the end and efficacy of the Gospel, to clear
the light of the Law of Nature, and to strengthen the holy bonds of Love to God
and Man, how is it imaginable, that the Tongue is restrained now by the Gospel,
from being still made an instrument of Religion and Righteousness? Since the
Evangelical Prayer of our Saviors framing for our use, is, that Gods name
should be hallowed in all the World, can we think that silence, and total
abstinence from taking up the name of God in an Oath, with reverence upon just
occasions, sanctifies, or magnifies the Name of God? Mal. ^^.11.
Or is it consonant to that enlargement of Gods honor, which is the effect of
the Gospel, in regard of persons, and to the maintenance of it, by all acts of
Piety, which our Savior professes to have been his work and care, that
Heathens and Infidels should still, by the Law of Nature, be bound to
acknowledge, and honor the Name of God, by Swearing in a due manner; and
Christians should have their hands tied from lifting up to Heaven, 2 Cor 14.
and their Tongues from calling upon his Name, and giving him the Glory due
unto it? Indeed the Apostle says, what participation is there between
righteousness and the transgression of the Law? what communion of Light with
Darkness? or what agreement of Christ with Belial? Let it therefore first be
proved, that an Oath is the transgression of the Law, Ma^^ 33
before it be cast out of the Kingdom of God, as inconsistent with the
Righteousness thereof, ^^h. 5.^.
which Christ commands us to seek. Let an Oath which is indeed a Light
(according to the Apostles sentence) because it does discover, and manifest
sometime Truth, and sometime many shameful things which are done in secret, be
proved to be an unprofitable deed of Darkness, or else let this light shine
still in a Christian state. Let it first be proved, that the Man who suffers
the Lords anointed to rule over him, and submits to authority in Swearing, is a
Child of Belial, (that is, of the Devil, who is so called, for his impatience
of a yoke, and therefore the refractory people, who would not submit to Saul,
^am. ^^ 27.
anointed by God, are styled Children of Belial) is a work of the Devil, which
Christ has destroyed by his Gospel, or else there will be a good harmony still
between Christ's Gospel, and a Reverend Oath.

SECT. VI. The Conclusive Arguments, to warrant the reverent use of Oaths among
Christians.
THese things being premised, not to preoccupate, but to expedite the decision
of the Question, concerning the consistency of Swearing, with the glorious
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, I shall now make their agreement evident by
all the Light of Nature, Law, and Gospel, united in one body. To this purpose I
will first prove, the Divine Right and Power of the Magistrate to exact an
Oath, and with the same labor open a wide door for Christians to come into a
Court, without pinching their Consciences, and bring them in with Christ's
Authority. ^^m. ^7.
And for private Oaths, they may have Christ's good leave to use them, as well
as Jonathan and David had Gods.

This Case of the Quakers is an Axe laid to the root of Magistracy, which fells
down all Christian Magistrates, as Antichristian Tyrants, who, contrary to
Christ's command, bind themselves and their subjects by Oaths, and persecute all
them who out of pure Conscience of Christ's command, and for the honor of
Christianity, refuse to renounce their Christian Faith, which they say cannot
be avoided, if they take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, or any other
legitimate Oath. (...) 49.
Indeed these seemingly tame people, are a brood of Vipers, like the Adder in
Jacobs Prophetic character of Dan, which bites the heels of the Horse, and
makes him throw his Rider: I spare the application, because it is obvious; But
I will break the Cockatrices Egg, Esa. 59.5.
I mean this Aphorism of Anarchy, Christians ought not to Swear by the force
of Christ's prohibition. And to make the way plain for proceeding in my Method,
I shall first inquire to whom the Sermon of our Savior was Preached, and how
it reached the present and future Auditors. This Sermon was not spoken to
Magistrates, whether Sovereign, or Subordinate, but to the Multitude of the
people, neither is there any part of it which relates to the Magistrates
special duty; except that severe threatening. Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever breaks one of the least Commandments of Moses, and the Prophets
(and certainly, Thou shall Swear by the Lord, is one of them, and not the
least) he shall be called, i. e. esteemed, and taken for the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven, be thought applicable to the Magistrate, as well as to the
Minister. Those precepts therefore of not resisting evil, and not judging
(which if they were given to Magistrates in their politic capacity, Mat. 5.37.
and 7.1.
do overthrow Tribunals, and either disarm the powers ordained of God, or tie
up the Sword, both Civil and Martial, in the scabbard) concern not Magistrates
further, than as they are considered in an estate common with them to private
persons, and are subject to the same duties. This is to be taken notice of the
rather, because some pious Doctors of the ancient Church, who lived under
Heathen and persecuting Emperors, and making no prospect into the latter times
wherein Kings, according to several Prophesies, should kise the Son of God, and
serve him with their Authority, Psalm. 2.11.12. and 72.11. and 138.4, Esa.
43.23. and 60.3.
prove the Guardians of both Tables of the Law, Defenders of the Faith, and
Patrons of the Church, did think Magistracy it self, and the use of the Sword,
inconsistent with the Christian Faith; and it is no marvail, if some of latter
times were tender of Swearing, who mistook the Subject and scope of our
Saviors discourse. But we must know that our Savior who was born a King, but
of such a Kingdom as is not of this World, Mat. ^.2.
was very sollicitous to decline any thing that favored of Worldly power, and
was an cautious in his Sermons, of reflecting upon Princes, Joh. 18, 36, Luc.
12.13.14. Joh. 8.3. -- 11.
and very careful to secure the Authority of the Magistrate, in his whole
conversation, and also in his Gospel. For his design being the Salvation of all
sorts of Men, of all Nations indifferently by the Preaching of the Gospel, he
did insert nothing into it, which might rationally obstruct the entertainment
of it, and especially nothing prejudicial to the power of Princes, whereof they
are jealously tender, that they might have a just aversion from the Faith. The
Ancient Church therefore sung this true and good Anthem, unto the Honor of
Christ, Qui regna das caelestia, non eripis terrestria; Thou that give the
Heavenly Crown,
Castest not Earthly Kingdoms down.


Indeed Christ took the World as he found it, and altered nothing in the
secular estate of Kings, or Subjects, but by virtue of his Heavenly power in a
spiritual way, by his word and spirit, established light instead of darkness,
knowledge, and the fear of the true God instead of ignorance, and impiety,
faith, in himself, instead of Paganism, and holiness of heart and life, instead
of vitiousness in his new erected Kingdom, the subjects whereof continued in
the same outward estate, See 1 Cor. 7.21.22.
wherein they were called, whether bond or free, Subjects or Governors. As the
grace which came by Jesus Christ, entitled no Man to Wealth or Power, to which
a believer had no right and title before, by the Law of Nations, and of his own
Government, under which he lived; so it Paul's Heavenly (...) (Phil. 3.20.)
whereby he was a Citizen of Jerusalem, that is, above, the City of the Living
God, (Heb. 12.22.) did not extinguish his (...), his being a Citizen of Rome,
which was his Birthright, and that a precious Privilege; neither did the
former hinder the Apostle from claiming the benefit of it, and making advantage
of it. See Act. 22.25-29. and Act. 16.37.38.39.
divested not, nor disinherited any of honor or estate, nor abridged any
secular liberty, nor retrenched any public Authority, which the Ministers of
Gods Providence were entrusted with, for the public good. If it did, let that
Scripture of the New Testament be produced. But none such ever was, or can be
alleged. Yea many, indeed too many to be repeated now, are obvious in the
Apostolical Writings, which manifest the contrary. Furthermore, as the truth of
the Gospel crossed no truth, See Romans 13. 1-7. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13-18. Ephesians.
6.1-9. Col. 2.20 etc. and 4 1.
either evident by the light of Natural Reason, or revealed by the word of God
written; so the Grace of Christ loosened no bonds of the Law of Nature, nor of
the Laws of Nations, which were agreeable to natural Justice and humanity, but
binds Christians by new bonds of peace in obedience to Magistrates, Parents,
and Masters, although they be harsh and froward. And now I come to mine
Argument, which I shall frame out of these Propositions.

1. The Sovereign Magistrate, and those who are sent by him, according to the
Evangelical Doctrine, have received in their Divine Ordination, a power to use
all means, that either by Gods appointment are, or in common prudence seem, to
the Wisdom of the State, directly conducible to the preservation of the Peace,
and promotion of Righteousness; and for punishment of Offenders: all which
indeed is the public good, and for the procuring whereof, God has armed his
Deputies with a Sword, or a coercive power, that the fear or the feeling of it,
may constrain Men to obedience. All this is written with a Sunbeam in the New
Testament. See Joh. 19.11. Romans 13.1. etc. And it is further confirmed, by what
I have already produced to show, that the Gospel takes no flower out of the
Crowns of Kings, though they were infidels, much less if they be faithful. For
if St. Paul's Logic be good, that Servants being made Christians ought the
rather to serve their Masters being converted, because they are believers, and
beloved; 1 Timothy 6.2.
we may by proportion conclude, that the Magistrates embracement of the
Christian Faith, does not impair his Authority, and ought not to diminish the
Subjects inclination to serve and obey, and is an indeerment of the King to his
People.

2. An Oath seasonably administered, and duly taken, is a fit means to preserve
Peace, by a firm obligation of Subjects to their Sovereign, (whereof we have an
example, 2 Kings 11.17.) and to secure and promote Justice, and to carry on
judicial proceedings, in discovery of right and wrong, and in conviction of
Offenders. To prove this, I need say no more, than advise any doubter, to look
upon the judgment and practice of all polished Nations under the Sun, since the
Foundations of Kingdoms and Republics in the World. And if all that be
counted but a general corruption of reason, like the general Idolatry of the
Nations estranged from God, let him remember, that the use and force of Oaths,
is founded upon no other basis, but the hearty Faith and sincere fear of Gods
power and vengeance. But I shall drive the Nail to the Head by Gods own
Sentence, who established Swearing in his own government, as a means proper to
produce the effects aforesaid, and tells the Jews for their credit, that their
political Laws did exceed those of all Nations, for Wisdom and Righteousness.
Deuteronomy. 4.5.8.
Now the use of Oaths is an ingredient of very many Laws in the Government.

3. The Magistrate who stands accomptable to Christ, Apoc. 19.16.
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, for the exercise of his power, in
order to the ends of Government, may and ought to require Oaths of the
Subject, as the occasions, viz. of secuting the Kings Life and Honor, the
preservation of the public Weal and Peace, the ending of Controversies, and
the execution of Justice, or the like, do require. Otherwise, he will hardly be
able to clear himself of imprudence, or of remisness, in refusing the choice
and use of such means, as God himself has approved, and appointed in the
course of Government. I think I may now upon these premises, safely and
rationally infer.

Ergo the Magistrate according to the Gospel, may put his Subject, of what
Religion soever, to his Oath to Swear by the true God. I wave the Question of
requiring Jews, and Infidels to Swear upon the Gospel, that it is by Jesus
Christ, whom we confess to be the true God, but they do not own as such.

I have now suffciently proved, (as I think, and hope that all who are both
rational and impartial will apprehend) that the Gospel of Christ does not
infringe, but confirm that power that Magistrates in joy'd by the Law of
Nature, that is to say, by Gods general ordination of humane Society throughout
the World) and the Kings of Gods special anoyntment, and appointment over his
people, were endowed with by his Statutes, to tender Oaths to their Subjects,
and to require their obedience in taking them, supposing still that the use of
them be referred to their proper ends. See an example of an Oath imposed by
Solomon, 1 King 2.42. Romans 13.4.
I have now but little to do farther for the proof, that the same Gospel binds
Christians to take such Oaths as are administered to them by their lawful
Superiors. For God both in the way of Nature, and also in the course of Grace,
does nothing in vain, (and as St. Paul says expressly,) Gods Minister does not
carry a Sword in vain, and is as much bound to draw it for the defense of Gods
honor, which is concerned in Swearing, as the servants of Secular Kings, are
obliged to fight for the Life or Honor of their Master; which rule of Worldly
State, Christ has consecrated by his Sentence. Joh. 18.36.
But the Magistrates power is rendered vain and ineffectual, if the subject can
clude his Authority, and resolve his commands into such wind as shakes no Corn,
by his obstinate refusal to swear. I shall therefore urge but one Argument to
satisfy the Subjects Conscience in this case.

The Gospel of Christ, Romans 13.1-7. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.14.17.
taught by the Apostles to all Nations, lays, upon all Christians, a necessity
of submission, and obedience, with a readiness to every good work, unto the
supereminent powers and principalities of the World, and to the Administrators
of Government commissioned by them, not only for Wrath, (and yet that terror
arising from the apprehension of the Sword that gliters in the Magistrates hand
is justified by St. Paul) but also out of Conscience, (Quakers, mark that, to
wit, Conscience binds to no things but obedience, in this case rightly stated)
or reverence of Christ, by whom Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice. Prove.
8.15. Ephesians. 6.1
And this universal obedience, like that which Children owe to their Parents,
is limited but by one Rule, obey in all things in the Lord. It reaches to
things indifferent, as the obedience of the Rechabites did, Jer.
35.8.9.10.18.19.
which God commended and rewarded with a Blessing. But Obedience to our
Superiors in those things, which are so far from being evidently repugnant to
the Will and Command of the Lord, that they are consonant to the express Word
of God, and agreeable to his Ordinances, is an Evangelical Duty unavoidable
upon any pretense whatsoever, where there is a possibility of performance.

If you consult the Allegations out of St. Paul and St. Peter, and confer them
together, the perspicuity of the words will not permit you to doubt of the
truth of this Proposition.

But Swearing in the manner aforesaid, when it is exacted by a lawful Superior,
is a good Work done in the Name of the Lord, as I have abundantly proved
already. Therefore some Swearing is not only consistent with Christianity, but
also required by the Gospel.

It remains only for me to show, for the direction and satisfaction of
Christians in several cases of a more private concernment, that Oaths taken or
given, without the interposition of the Magistrates Authority, either upon a
single persons own Motion of Spirit, impelled thereto by weighty
considerations, or out of compliance with a Neighbor, are not repugnant, but
agreeable to the Rules of the Gospel. Here I shall, for brevities sake, produce
but one argument, which has Light and Strength enough to prove my conclusion,
and may lead the Reader to frame more by proportion out of the Gospel, if he
please, for the fuller Conviction of the Adversary, to stop his Mouth with
number, if weight will not bear down his reason. The Gospel does always allow,
1 Cor. 10.21. 1 Pet. 4.11. Romans 15.2.3. 1 Cor. 10.24. Phil. 2.4.
and as the importance of the matter requires, commands Christians to do
whatsoever does directly, and by the nature of the act it self, tend to the
Glory of God, which ought to be the aim which we intend in all our deliberate
actions: and in like manner to perform freely whatsoever really conduces to the
good, peace, and welfare of our Neighbor, whom we are bound to love, as our
selves, by the Law and Gospel.

But the due Swearing in many things that concern our selves, or for the
satisfaction of our Brother; or for a mutual engagement to do what is agreeable
to Piety, Justice, and Charity, does bring Glory to the Name of God, and
procures the good of our selves and others; And therefore is not by the Gospel
wholly banished out of the conversation of Christians.

The Assumption is manifestly true. For it is apparent to sense and reason,
that when a Christian calls God to witness, regard, judge, and revenge falsehood
upon the Head and Soul of perjured persons, he sets forth the Glory of God, as
much as Jacob and Laban, or Jonathan and David, or any of the former days
before or under the Law did. And common experience teaches us, what
satisfaction and benefit, we mutually give and receive by an Oath reverently
taken. The conclusion therefore naturally flows from the premises, and abides
firm as built upon a Rock, that Christianity has not made the Third
Commandment a mere insignificant or useless Cipher to us, by forbidding Oaths,
which leaves no place for the honoring of Gods Name that way, and stops up the
passage against Piety and Impiety both together.

I confess, that a great measure of Christian Prudence is requisite in the
private use of Oaths, above what is needful in Oaths administered by authority.
For our submission to the wisdom of the State enjoined us by God, absolves us
from much of the trouble and care about the sufficient weight in the ground of
the Oath; whereas now the whole burden of the Oath, with all the circumstances
to qualify and legitimate the same, lies upon the discretion of the private
Christian, who ought to have a full assurance in his own Mind, Romans 14.^5.
of the warrantableness of the action. Therefore the sparing use of private
Oaths is safe, commendable, and comfortable. For according to St. 1 Cor. 6.12.
and 10.23.
Paul's golden rule. All things that are lawful for us, are not always
expedient, neither do they always edify. And Christ's precept of abstinence
from Swearing in ordinary discourse, does, in a manner, restrain his Warrant
concerning Oaths, to matters not only serious, but also weighty, which need
such an inforcement of belief, or engagement. Being now arrived at this
conclusion, I will imitate my Adversaries a little, and quote the Testimony of
a Heathen, who was beholden to the Gospel for his refined Morality, but a
professed Enemy to Christ. Hierocles, one of the By the way, we may observe, that
it was a cunning Stratagem of Satan in that age, that he might yet support his
sinking Kingdom, to revive and set up the Pythagorcan and Platonic Philosophy,
the Morality whereof they improved, not without borrowing Light from the
Christian Religion. But the Devils design was, by Philosophy to baffle Faith,
and to discountenance Christianity, as being, at the best, but useless, which
could do no more to advance Virtue, than Paganism it self. This is evident by
the Writings of Porphyrie, Jamblichus, Hierocles, and the like.
Platonic School at Alexandria, in his accurrate Coment on the Golden Verses
of Phythagoras, explicating that Precept, (...), Reverence an Oath, discourses
thus, as I shall render his sense faithfully, without transcribing the Greek.
He calls an humane Oath, the Image of Gods Oath, whereby God establishes the
immutable Law and order of the Universe, the helper of humane affairs, and
Procurator of constancy and truth; which reduces the versatile free will, into
order and affixedness, both in words and deeds. The Reverence of an Oath, is
the keeping of what is Sworn to, as much as in us lies, without violation,
which by a voluntary necessity, trimmes them that reverence an Oath, to the
constancy and truth of a Divine Habit or Constitution. None but they who are
possessed with political Virtues, can swear aright. (...)
The word of the Law, Man 5.33. (...).
Naughtiness or vitiousness is the Mother of false or for-swearing. How is it
possible, that a covetous, voluptuous, or cowardly person, should ever do
other, then put off the reverence of an Oath, and when ever he imagins that
some advantage may be reaped by Perjury, barter away Divine Goods, for those
which are mortal and fading? Now the best course of care to preserve the
reverence of an Oath, is not to use it frequently, nor at adventure, nor upon
light occurrents, nor for the filling up of talk, nor for the giving credit to
a relation; but as far as it is possible, to reserve the use of it for things
that are equally necessary and precious, and them only when their Security
appears not any other way to be procured, but by the truth issuing from an
Oath. And then our Oaths will gain credit, when our whole conversation bears
harmony with it, to show, that, in humane matters, nothing is more precious
with us, than Truth, whether we be unsworn, or swear. Now this precept charges
us not only to Swear aright, but also to abstain from Oaths. For so we shall
always swear aright, if we do not (...), Mark that the word (...), does not
alway^ signify the Abuse of a thing but sometimes the full use o^ a thing to
the utmost of ou^ power and liberty. So St. Pau^ who never had thoughts of
abusing his power in the Gospel resolved to deny himself, b^ not using his full
power of l^ving upon the Gospel, 1 Co^ 9 18. And the transitoriness o^ the
World, should move Christians (...), not t^ use it at full liberty, but
sparingly, with self-denial, 1 Co^ 7.31.
abuse Oaths, or rather take our full liberty of Swearing. For also in
frequency of Swearing, a Man shall readily fall into perjury. But keeping of
Oaths follows upon the sparing use of them. For a Man will either not Swear, or
when he does, will Swear aright, neither will his Tongue, by custom, out run
his mind, neither will his Mind be overthrown, by the violence of his
intemperate passions. This the good Man's Virtue will correct, and the customary
abstinence from Swearing, will cure the other. But Swearing aright becomes the
Honor of the Gods, before given in Charge, (we must remember, the Heathen
Philosopher speaks of God in the plural number,) it being bred together, and a
companion of Piety. Reverence an Oath by not over freely and hastily using it,
that you may be accustomed to swear aright, (to wit, when there is a fit and
just occasion) by not accustoming your self to Swear. For Swearing aright, is
no small part of Piety. Thus the Philosopher has secured the Reverence due to
Oaths, religiously taken, by abstinence from rash, light, vain, and customary
Swearing, without banishing an eminent piece of Piety and Honor due to God out
of the Life of Men. This one Testimony of Hierocles I shall oppose, to the many
examples in the Quakers Case, not for any esteem I have of the person, but for
the solidity of his reason, which gives us a precedent to reconcile the
Reverence of an Oath, with abstinence from customary, dangerous, and profane
Swearing, which is the taking of Gods Name in vain, and as much forbidden by
God in the Third Commandment, as perjury, which the Scribes and Pharisees
accounted to be the only crime struck at by Moses. And this is all that I have
at present to say to the Question, concerning the lawfulness of Oaths under
Christianity. I shall briefly recollect the sum of the whole discourse, into
these Corollaries.

1. The Quakers may justly be suspected of a false pretense, when they ascribe
their disobedience to authority, in refusal of Oaths, to their conscientious
regard of, and to obedience to Christ's Command, because they do not with equal
Zeal, obey Christ's Ordinances of Worship and Church Government.

2. They do very ill consult for the reputation of Christian Religion, Tim.
6.^. Pet. 2.^.
when, by their alleging Christianity it self, for the ground of their
disobedience, they make the way of Truth, to be evil spoken of.

3. They blaspheme Christ, and his Holy Gospel, by fathering their pernicious
Errors, and Heresies, upon the truth it self.

4. They reproach the Footsteps of the Lords Anointed, by charging him with
persecution, when he uses the Sword for the punishment of evil doers.

5. The nature of an Oath justifies Swearing to be an act of Piety, and an
instrument of Justice.

6. The Gospel of our Lord Jesus confirms the Magistrates power, to exact an
Oath of his Subjects.

7. The same Doctrine binds all Subjects to obedience, when an Oath is in due
manner tendered to them.

8. The Christian Liberty of Swearing upon some occasions, is not taken away by
Christ and his Apostles.

9. Abstinence from Oaths in ordinary communication, is commanded by the
Gospel, not as a special perfection of any order of Men, but as a common Duty
of all Christians, who are obliged to bridle their Tongues, and to endeavor to
arrive at this perfection.

10. The Religion of Quakers, who refuse sober Oaths, but their mouth is full
of Cursing and Bitterness, who incessantly spit forth the poison of Aspes, with
unbridled Tongues, is, according to St. Jams's Sentence, a vain Religion, from
which good Lord deliver us, Amen.

AN APPENDIX Of an Useful Consideration.
THe course of my Building, required a large discourse; first for the digging
up and clearing the Ground of the Rubbish of erroneous conceits, and then for
laying my Foundation deep and firm, that it might be able to bear and
strengthen the Superstructure. Now this being finished, I have thought fit, for
a Coronis, to add one clear Evidence of their impertinencies whosoever
allege our Saviors and his Apostles prohibition, Swear not at all, to defend
a refractory refusal of a Reverent Oath, exacted by Authority. Let this
parallel be considered. Mat. 7.1. Romans 14.10.13.
Our Blessed Savior in the same Sermon, gives another prohibition, Judge not,
that ye be not Judged; St. Paul seconds him, and says, Why judge thou thy
Brother? For we shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Therefore
let us not judge another. And St. James on the same ground re-enforces the
restraint of judging, Jam. 4.12. Genesis 18.25.
There is one Lawgiver (and consequently, one Judge) who is able to save and
to destroy, (to wit, God, the Sovereign, Absolute, and Almighty Judge of all
the World) who art thou that judge another? These words of Christ and his
Apostles, are, in their sound, universal or indefinite, yet that they may be
reconciled to the word of God elsewhere revealed, their sense must be
restrained by such distinctions as are grounded upon Scripture. For if the Law
did not limit, we durst not. It will not be lost labor to see this made out
more fully. There are several distinctions observable, for the due limitation
of this Interdict, Judge not.

First, the Persons, both judging and judged, are to be distinguished. Persons
are either of a Private quality, and considered in that state which is general
to all Men: and indeed the most of Christ's Auditors, and of Christians in the
days of the Apostles were private Men, and were so considered by Christ and his
Apostles, according to their station in privacy, in regard of the World. Or
else Men are of a Public quality, invested with Authority.

Now if we consider Christians in their Private quality, every Man is, by God,
made his own Judge, and is bound to Judge himself, by a certain Rule of Truth
and Righteousness, which God has given him; He is therefore bound to judge of
his own Faith, and of his own Duty. In order to this, he is to try the Spirits,
whether they be of God, 1 John 4.1. 2 Cor. 11.13.14.15. Heb. 5.14. 1 These.
5.21. Romans 6.13. 2 Timothy 1.13. Ephesians. 2.20. 1 Pet. 1.11.12.
least he be deluded and seduced by false Teachers, who may pretend to be
Ministers of Righteousness, and boast of Gods Spirit, when they are indeed, the
actors for the Lying Spirit. Christians therefore should have senses exercised,
by study of Gods Word, to discern good and evil, that they may prove all
things, and hold fast that which is good, which is agreeable to the form of
wholesome Doctrine, which the Prophets and Apostles, and Christ the inspirer of
both have taught; every Christian therefore, for his own security, must
exercise a judgment of Discretion, that he may discern the Wolves, although
clad in Sheeps clothing, from the good Shepherds of the Lords Flock. And this
is not a judgment of their Persons, but of their Doctrines, the reception
whereof, concerns a Man's own Salvation. And if the common reason of all Men,
directed by such Light as God affords them, do enable them to choose that
Church, among the several pretending Societies of Christians at this day, with
which he may safely hold Communion, then the same reason, with the same aids,
will be sufficient to guide him to determine what Doctrines of Faith and
Manners he may safely receive. For God has given unto us all one Rule of Faith
and Manners, which is common to the Stewards, and to the inferior Servants of
his House, the Church. Neither is it now possible to make a right Judgment of a
particular Church, but by conferring of their Doctrine, with that Rule. For the
Light cannot be discerned, whether it be True or False, by the Candlestick, but
the Candlestick must be judged of by the Light, which it upholds, and that must
be tried by something else. Thus it is evident, that every one must pass a
Sentence within himself, of what he must Believe and Do. Our Savior reproves
those who will not employ their Talent of Reason, Luke 12.57. Lam. 3.40.
and make use of their Light, this way, saying, But why do ye not, even of your
selves, Judge what is right, or just? Again, every Christian is bound to judge
himself, for what he has done, to search and try his ways,, whether they have
been, and are conformable to the Law of God. God has set up Conscience, a
Domestic Judge, within a Man's own Breast, who is a swift witness, and an
impartial Judge. And the sincere proceeding in judgment of our selves, is the
certain way both to make, and to keep our Peace with God. For St. 1 Cor. 11.31.
Paul says, If we would Judge our selves, we should not be judged. The Master
says, Judge not, to wit, others, least ye be judged; and the servant says,
Judge your selves; and ye shall not be judged.

But God the Supreme Judge of all, has delegated his own power to certain
Ministers, whom he has honored with one of his own Names, to wit, Elohim, and
armed them with Authority, to judge and punish other Men, See this Title given
to Judges Ps. 82.1.6. Ex. 22.28. Act. 23.5. Levit. 19.22. where we should read,
Honor the face of the old Man, and fear thy Judge. I am the Lord, Age is to be
honored: Authority is to be feared.
if they be proved Malefactors. These are by Gods Ordinance advanced to sit
upon the Throne of the Lord, (1 Chronicles. 29.23) that they may judge for the Lord,
(2 Chronicles. 19.7.) and their Sentence pronounced according to Justice and Equity,
is the Judgment of God, Deuteronomy. 1.17.

This Judicial power derived from above, Joh. 19.11. Act. 25.9.10.
our Savior owned in Pontius Pilate, and the Apostle St. Paul in Augustus
Caesar, whom he accounted a complete Judge, even in matters of Religion, and
therefore made an Appeal from the Jews to the Roman Emperor. Briefly, it is a
main point of Christian Doctrine, that Christians must be subject to the
Judicial Authority of the Powers ordained by God in the Civil Government of the
World. Romans 13.1.6. Tit. 3.1.
I will not now run out, to show what spiritual power of Government and
Jurisdiction, the Lord has given to his Ministers, entrusted with the Pastoral
charge, for edification and not for destruction, which the Sea Mat. 18.17. and
19.28. Here our Savior promises to the twelve Apostles, that in the
Regeneration, when all things are made new, under the spiritual Kingdom of the
Messiah, they shall be. the Judges of Gods Israel. Read 1 Cor. 5 3.4.5. and
12.28. 2 Cor. 10.8. 1 Timothy 5.17.19. Tit. 3.10.
Holy Scripture abundantly testifies.

To conclude then, if Christ's words, Judge not, should be taken in their utmost
latitude, the Lord himself would be taken for the Author of Confusion, and not
of Peace, in the State and in the Church, the subverter of his own Ordinances,
and his Gospel, which is a word of Peace, would be made an Engine to turn the
World upside down. Thus we see a necessity of limiting them by the distinction
of private persons judging others, which cannot be done without the bold
intrusion upon Gods Office, and of Public Ministers of Gods Government,
judging those who are under their Power, which is a lawful execution of their
delegated authority.

Secondly, Christ has given us another distinction of the manner of judging in
cases, wherein Men are allowed to judge. For, he says, Judge not according to
the appearance, Joh. 7.24.
but judge righteous judgment. Here is a double charge, judge not, to wit,
hastily, rashly, upon weak grounds, of slight and superficial shows; and yet
judge Righteous Judgment, that is according to the Merit of the Cause, upon
clear evidence. I need say no more, to show that this prohibition is not to be
understood in an unbounded sense.

We may observe the like of our Saviors inhibition, Mat. 5.39. Mat. 13.38.39.
1 Pet. 5.8.9. Jam. 4.7. Heb. 12.4. Phil. 2.17. Apoc. 12.11.
But I say unto you, resist not Evil, which must be limited by the distinctions
of the Evil to be resisted, and of the persons resisting. For every private
Christian is a Soldier, who must stoutly resist that Evil one, that Enemy,
both of God and Man, the Devil; and Sin, which is the Work of the Devil, yea,
every temptation unto Sin, is to be resisted, sometimes even unto Blood, not
actively by shedding the blood of others, but passively, by suffering our own
to be shed, and by willingly pouring it out as a drink offering upon the
Sacrifice of our Faith. For in the spiritual warfare Christians are more then
conquerors, when they love not their Lives unto Death itself. But the
Magistrate is armed with a Sword, and has a Commission to resist every evil
work, to stop the course, and to repress the force of Sin in others, for the
public welfare and peace of the State. If therefore a Magistrate draw his
Sword, to execute Justice, he must not put it up in his sheath, and be quiet;
if the Malefactor shall say, oh Sir, you must remember the command of our
Savior, Resist not evil, and the check given to Peter, when he was
unseasonably and rashly over-valiant, Put up thy Sword into its place, Mat.
26.52.
for all that take the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. Thus the resisting
evil, is unwarrantable in private persons, but necessary in public officers.

To close up all, if it be an intolerable abuse of the Gospel-prohibitions
aforesaid, to extend them to all occasions, whereas in many cases they are not
of any force, it is equally irrational to stretch this negative, Swear not, to
the utmost extent of the words, when they cannot consist with that Law of God
written in the Heart of Man; which is also established by the Law written by
Moses at Gods command, and given to his own people for a Rule of Religion and
Righteousness; and is farther urged by the Prophets, who were sparing in
pressing carnal Ordinances, but earnest in exacting the everlasting
Righteousness of God; and is confirmed by our Blessed Saviors Declaration,
that he came not to abrogate any part of that Law, nor to infringe any piece of
Gods Righteousness, whereof an Oath, reverently taken upon a just occasion, is
a part. Let the Adversaries then, if they can, show a Disparity between these
Prohibitions, why the one, concerning Judging and Resisting, must be limited,
and the other, concerning Swearing, ought not, or may not, without injury to
our Blessed Saviors Authority. In the mean time I conclude in the words of St.
Paul, who, with modesty and care to decline the suspicion of exercising a
Dominion over the Faith of his Brethren, 2 Cor. 1.24. 1. Cor. 10.15.
referred his Doctrine to be determined by common reason, upon the general
principles of Religion, I speak as unto Men of discretion, judge ye what I say.

FINIS.

