THE BOOK OF OATHS. AND THE Several FORMS thereof, BOTH ANCIENT and MODERN

Faithfully Collected out of sundry Authentic Books of Records, not heretofore
extant.

Very useful for all persons whatsoever, especially those that undertake any
Office of Magistracy or public Employment.

Whereunto is added a perfect Table.

LONDON, Printed for H. Twyford, T. Basset, B. Griffin, C. Harper, T.
Sawbridge, S. Keble, G. Collins, J. Place, M. Wotton, and are to be Sold in
Fleetstreet and Holborn. 1689.

coat of arms and emblem

A TABLE
A
ABjure the Land for Stealing the Kings Venison. 196 Alderman of London. 254
Administrators Oath. 249 Allegiance. 36 Allegiance of the Duke of York, and
other Lords in Parliament. 145 Aletaster within a Leet his Oath 250 Allegiance
of the Duke of York in Parliament to Henry the 6. 146 Allegiance of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, at Coventry. 148 Alneger. 134 Appraisers within London.
246 Approver Banished. 116 Archbishops Oath 66 Articles Matrimonial between
Prince Charles, and the Infanta of Spain. 154 Assistants of the Company of
Worsted Weavers. 235 Assent and Consent, the Declaration to be Subscribed. 233
Attorney at Law 17 Attorney of the Sheriffs Court. 244 Attorney of the
Augmentation Court 47 Attorney of the Mayors Court. 247 Attorney of the Court
of Wards 179 Attorney of the first fruits. 184 Attorney of the Court of the
Survey. 198 Auditor of the Augmentation. 49 Auditor of the Court of Wards. 181
Auditor of the first fruits. 185 Auditors of the Court of Survey. 199 Auditor
of the Exchequer. 213
B
Baron of the Exchequer. 119, 216 Barwick Soldiers 32 Bayliffe to attend a
Jury. 111 Bayliffe of Shewers. 10, 203 Bail upon suspicion of Felony, or
Murder. 115 Beadle of a Ward in London. 44 Bishops Oath, 74 Bishops
Renuntiations of the Popes Bull 137 Bishops Fidelity. 137 Bishops Popish. 156
Broker London. 40 Bull of the Pope Renounced. 137
C
Captains in Zealand. 109 Captains of a Band 31 Chancellor of England. 118
Chancellor of the Augmentation. 44 Chancellor of the Exchequer. 133, 215
Chamberlain of the Exchequer. 291 Chancellor of the first fruits. 183 Church
Wardens. 222, 223 Clerk of the Augmentation. 49 Clerk of the Chancery. 6 Clerks
six of the Chancery. 140 Clerk of the Checque in Berwick. 30 Clerk of the
Council to the Prince. 54 Clerk of the first fruits. 186 Clerk of the Liveries.
195 Clerk of the Parliament. 35 Clerk of the Petty Bage. 142 Clerk of the
Pleas. 218 Clerk of the Signet. 81 Clerk of the Statutes. 132 Clerk of the
Court of Survey, 200 Clerk of the Court of Wards. 182 Clothes to be valued. 194
Commissioners for executing the Commissions in the Diocese of York, for
Mustering and putting the Kings Subjects in readiness for War. 10 Common
Sergeant of London. 259 Commissioners for draining Bedford Fens. 237
Commissioners for Sewers. 203 Common Council of London. 243 Comptroller of the
Kings Household. 158 Comptroller of the Pipe. 219 Comptroller of Calice. 100
Comptroller of the Customs. 128 Constable of London. 11, 42, 245 Constable in
the Country. 207 Controversy to be Compounded in Parliament between the Duke
of Gloucester, and the Bishop of Winchester. 72, 143 Corporation Oath. 232
Council of Calice, 107 Council Clerk. 5 Council to Princess Mary. 55 Council
Privy. 3 Council Privy. 75 Council of War. 57 Council of Wales. 67 Customer.
130
D
Decay of Castles, and Forts to be surveyed and reported. 189 Declaration to be
Subscribed by all Officers of Corporations. 233 Declaration of Assent and
Consent. 233 Declaration to be Subscribed by all in Holy Orders, and
Schoolmasters. 234 Declaration against Transubstantation. 271 Declaration of
Fidelity to King William and Queen Mary, and Subscription of the Christian
Belief to be Subscribed by Dissenters. 263, 264 Doctor of Divinity according to
the University of Basil. 205 Deputy of Calice. 81 Deputy Chamberlain of the
Exchequer, 222
E
Earl in Scotland. 208 Escheator. 127, 220 Esquires for the body. 71 Estates of
the Subjects to be discovered. 189, 190 Estates of the Subjects to be Examined.
191, 192, 193 Estates of the Subjects to be discovered 191 Evidence between
party and party. 113 Evidence against a prisoner. 112 Evidence upon Bills of
Indictment. 114 Examiner in the Chancery. 143 Excise Officers Oath. 234
Executors Oath. 249
F
Fealty. 133 Fealty of the King of Scots. 201 Fealty of John King of England to
the Pope. 204 Fidelity of a Bishop. 74 Fidelity of the Priour of St. John's. 154
Forrester of the Forest. 200 Foraign Opposers to the Exchequer. 218 Franck
Pledge in London. 39 Freemen of London. 13 Freemen of Merchants Adventures. 18
French Kings Oath. 51
G
Garnet the Jesuit. 206 Garnishee on a Attachment in London. 247 Garter King of
Arms. 58 Governor of Berwick. 25 Great Seal. 78
H
Heralds of Arms. 61 Homage of an Archbishop. 66 Homage of the King of Scots.
109 Homage of a Temporal Lord. 138
I
Ingrosser of the great Roll. 213 Inhabitants of Forests. 201 Inquest grand.
113 Judge. 6 Judge endorso claus de Anno. 120 Jury to try a Nisi prius. 113
Jury to try a Travers. 252 Jury to try a prisoner at the Bar. 111 Jury of Women
250 Justice to hear and determine. 130 Justice of Peace. 206 Justice for works,
weights, and measures. 122 Justice of Air. 131
K
Kidderminster Weavers Company. 238 Keeper of the Kings Papers of State. 177
Keeper of the great Seal. 78 King Charles the first his Oath. 154 King Charles
the Second his Coronation Oath 230 King of Arms. 59 Kings Council and Judges of
the Court of Requests. 205 King Edward the Second his Oath. 195 King of France
to observe the Statutes of the Garter. 51 King James his Servants. 55 Kings
Oath before H. 8. 1 Kings Oath corrected by H. 8. 2 King of Polonia to the
Turk. 65 King James the Second his Oath. 260 King Williams, and Qmeen Mary's
Coronation Oath. 262 King of Scots to King Henry 6. 109 Knight of the Garter.
52 Knights of the Round Table. 64 Knights for the Body. 71 Knights of the Bath.
108, 200 Knight of Scotland. 209
L
League and Covenant. 226 Leather Sealer or Searcher his Oath. 251 Lieutenant
of Calice. 92 Lieutenant of Guisness. 86 Lieutenant of Hannues. 100 Lieutenant
of Hewhaven. 104 Lieutenant of Ruisbank. 97 Lieutenant of the Tower. 150
Lollardism renounced. 151 Lord of the Parliament in Scotland. 209
M
Mary Queen her Council. 55 Marshal of Barwick. 26 Marshal of Calice. 89
Marshal Deputy of Calice. 105 Master of the Ordinance for Berwick. 29 Master of
Requests. Master of the Rolls. 140 Master of the Court of Wards. 178 Master and
Warden of the Company of Kidderminster Weavers. 238 Master of the Woods of the
Court of Augmentation 47. Master of the Woods of the Court of Survey. 199
Master and Wardens of the Manufacture of Broad woollen Cloth. 236 Master of
the Staple. 135 Mayor of London. 211, 253 Members of the House of Lords their
Test 240 Members in Parliament and others in Offices of Trust in place of the
Oath of Allegiance. 261 Messenger of the Augmentation. 51 Messengers of the
Court of Survey, 201 Merchants for the true Shipping Cloth to the Mart Town.
19 Midwives Oaths. 161 Militia Officers. 232
N
Nun entering into the Cloister; 194 Non Conformity living within 5 miles of a
Corporation 238
P
Parliament Member Test. 240 Philip Duke of Burgoyne took to Henry 5. as right
inheritor of France 116 Poor Prisoners not worth 10. l. 239 Portage of the
Chancery. 136 Porter of Barwick. 26 Porter of Calice. 103 President of the
Council. 67 President of Wales. 33 President Warden, and Assistants of
Kiderminster Weavers 230 Prior of St. John of Jerusalem. 154 Privy Seal. 76
Presenters of the Peace against any delinquent. 252 Protestation. 224 Pursevant
at Arms. 63
R
Ranger of the Forest. 196 Receiver of the Augmentations. 50 Receiver of the
Court of Survey. 200 Receiver general of the Court of Wards 180 Receiver in
particular of the Court of Wards 181 Recorder of London, 241 Regarder of the
Forest 200 Register of the Kings papers of State. 177 Remembrancer to the
King. 217 Request Master. 9
S
Scavenger of London. 12 Scavengers of the Wards in London. 39 Searcher in the
Customs. 139 Searchers of the manufacture of of Broad woollen Cloth. 236
Secretaries of State 76 Seminary Priests. 200 Sergeant at Law. 139 Sergeant at
Law to the King 138 Sergeant to attend a Jury 111 Sergeants to the Sheriff of
London 42 Servants to the King 8, 69, 71 Servants of the Kings Chamber. 53
Servants for the true serving of their Lords. 19 Sheep to be numbered and
valued. 193 Sheriff of the Counties. 14, 123 Sheriff of a County newly
altered. 206 Sheriff of London. 255 Sheriff of Oxon and Berks, etc. 126
Steward of Gascoygne. 134 Solicitor of the Augmentation. 47 Soldiers Sworn for
their true Service. 24 Sub-Treasurer of the Exchequer. 212 Succession of the
Crown. 141 Succession of H. 8. and Queen Ann, 186 Succession of H. 8. and Queen
Jane, 38, 201 Supremacy. 28, 201 Surveyer of the Augmentation. 45 Surveyer of
the Court of Survey. 196 Surveyer of the Moors. 251 Surveyer of the Lands in
the Court of Augmentation. 50 Surveyers of Bedford Level. 237 Surveyer of the
Liveries. 194 Surveyer of the Woods in the Augmentation. 48
T
Tales de Circumstantibus. 252 Tennants Attorning to their Lords. 110 Test for
Members of Parliament. 240 Tennants to the King in a Court Baron, 110 Test to
be taken by all Officers of Trust. 239 Town Clerk of London. 257 Treasurer of
the Augmentation 46 Transubstantiation the Declaration concerning the same. 239
Treasurer of Berwick. 27 Treasurer Clerk. 20 Treasurer of Calice. 95 Treasurer
of England, Treasurer of the first Fruits, 184 Treasurer of the Exchequer, 118
Treasurer of the Kings Household, 156 Treasurer of the Court of Survey 197
Treasurer of the War. 56 Tronater of London. 129
V
Verderer of a Forest, 197 Under Sheriff, Bailiff of Franchies, Deputies, and
Clerk of every Sheriff. 204 Vow and Covenant 225 Usher of the Exchequer. 23
W
Warden and Assistance of Worstedweavers. 235 Warmote Inquest in London. 45
Writer of the Pell, 23 Writer of the Tables, Tallies, and Counter Talies 22
THE BOOK OF OATHS, BOTH ANCIENT and MODERN.
The Ancient Oath used and taken by the Kings of England at their Coronation.
THat he shall keep and maintain the liberties of the Holy Church, of old time
granted by the righteous Christian Kings of England; and that he shall keep all
the Lands, Honors, and Dignities, righteous and free of the Crown of England,
in all manner holy, without any manner of minishments; and the rights of the
Crown hurt, decay, or loss to his power shall call again into the ancient
estate: And that he shall keep the peace of the holy Church and of the Clergy,
and of the People with good accord; And that he shall do in his Judgment
Equity and right Justice, with discretion and mercy; And that he shall grant to
hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and to his power keep them, and affirm
them which the Flock and People have chosen; And the evil Laws and Customs
wholly to put out, and steadfast and stable peace to the People of his Realm
keep, and cause to be kept to his power.

The new Oath used and taken by the Kings of England at their Coronation.
T He King shall then swear, that he shall keep and maintain the lawful Right,
and the Liberties of old time granted by the Righteous Christian Kings of
England, King H. 8. corrected the old Oath with his ^wn hand to the effect of
this: The Original is in the hands of Sir Rob. Cotton, Knight. Bar. 1625.
to the holy Church of England, not prejudicial to his Jurisdiction and Dignity
Royal, and that he shall keep all the Lands, Honors, and Dignities, Rights and
Freedoms, of the Crown of England, in all manner whole, without any manner of
minishment, and the Right of the Crown hurt, decay, or lost, to his power shall
call again into the ancient estate; and that he shall endeavor himself to keep
unity in his Clergy and Temporal Subjects; and that he shall according to his
Conscience in all his Judgments minister Equity, Right, and Justice, showing
where is to be showed mercy; and that he shall grant to hold the Laws and
approved Customs of the Realm, and lawful, and not prejudicial to his Crown,
or imperial Jurisdiction, to his power keep them, and affirm them which the
Nobles and People have made and chosen with his consent, and the evil Laws and
Customs wholly to put out, and steadfast and stable peace to the People of his
Realm keep, and cause to be kept to his power in those which honor and Equity
do require.

The Oath of a Privy Counselor.
Y Ou shall swear, To the uttermost part of your cunning, wit, will, and power:
you shall be true and faithful to the Queens Majesty our most dear and
Sovereign Lady, and to her Highness Heirs and Successors, Kings and Queens of
England, according to the limitation of the Statute made in the year of her
Reign for the establishment of the Succession of the Crown Imperial of this
Realm; You shall not know nor hear any thing, that may in any ways be
prejudicial to her Majesty, or to her Heirs and Successors in form aforesaid,
or to the Commonwealths peace, and quiet of this her Majesty's Realm; but you
shall with all diligence reveal and disclose the same to her Majesty, or to
such person or persons of her Highness Privy Counsel as you shall think may and
will honestly convey and bring it to her Majesty's knowledge; you shall serve
her Majesty truly and faithfully in the room and place of her Highness Privy
Council; you shall keep close and secret all such matters as shall be treated,
disputed, debated, and resolved of in Counsel, without disclosing the same, or
any part thereof to any, but to such only as be of the Privy Council; and yet
if any matter so propounded, treated, disputed, and debated in any such
Council, shall touch any particular person sworn of the same, upon any such
matter as shall in anywise concern his fidelity, and truth to the Queens
Majesty, you shall in no wise open the same to him, but keep it secret, as you
would do from any other person, till the Queens Majesty's pleasure be known in
that behalf; you shall in all things to be moved, treated, disputed, and
debated in any such Council, faithfully and truly declare your mind and
opinion, according to your heart and conscience, in no wise forbearing so to do
for any manner of respect, of favor, love, n^^^, dread, displeasure, or
corruption. Finally, you shall be vigilant, diligent and circumspect in all
your doings and proceedings, touching the Queens Majesty and her Affairs; all
which points before expressed you shall faithfully observe, fulfill, and keep,
to the uttermost of your power, wit, and cunning. So God you help, and by the
holy Contents of this Book.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Council.
Y Ou shall swear, To be a true and faithful Servant unto the Queens Majesty,
as one of the Clerks of her Highness Privy Council; You shall not know or
understand of any manner of thing to be attempted, done, or spoken, against her
Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown and Dignity Royal, but you shall let and
withstand the same, to the uttermost of your power, and either do, or cause it
to be revealed either to her Majesty her self, or to her Privy Council; You
shall keep secret all matters committed and revealed unto you, or that shall be
treated of secretly in Council; And if any of the same Treaties or Counsels
shall touch any of the Counselors, you shall not reveal it unto him, but shall
keep the same until such time, as by the consent of her Majesty, or of the
Council, Publication shall be made thereof; You shall to your uttermost bear
Faith and true Allegiance to her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, and shall
assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Preeminencies, and Authorities, granted to
her Majesty and annexed to her Crown, against all Foreign Princes, Persons,
Prelates, or Potentates, etc. by Act of Parliament or otherwise; And generally
in all other things you shall do as a faithful and true Servant and Subject
ought to do to her Majesty. So help you God, and by, etc.

The Oath of a Judge.
T He Kings Justices shall be sworn, That they well and truly shall serve the
King and his People; and that they shall not assent to things that may turn to
his damage or dis-inheritance: nor that they shall take no Fee nor Livery of
none but of the King, nor that they shall take gift or reward of none that has
a do before them, except it be meat or drink of a small value, as long as the
Plea is hanging before them, nor after for that cause: Nor that they shall give
Council to none in a matter that may touch the King, upon pain to be at the
Kings will, body and goods; And that they shall do right to every person,
notwithstanding the Kings Lees, etc. And in like manner the Barons of the
Exchequer shall be sworn, and also Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and of
Assizes and Goal Delivery, and Justices of Peace, before whom they have their
Commissions, in a certain form, as shall seem good to the Chancellor. Anno 2.
Edw. 3.

The Oath of the Clerks of the Chancery.
Y E shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve our Sovereign Lord the
King and his People, in the Office of the Chancery, whereto ye are Titled; nor
shall ye assent, or procure the dis-herizon or perpetual hurt of the King, to
your power: Nor you shall do no fraud nor procure none to be done, to the hurt
of any of the people, nor in any thing that touches the keeping of the Seal;
And truly shall ye counsel the things that touch the King, when you shall be
thereto required, and the counsel that you know touching him shall ye conceal,
and if ye know the Kings dis-heritance, or his perpetual hurt, or fraud to be
done in things touching the keeping of the said Seal, you shall put your lawful
power to redress it; and if ye cannot do it, ye shall show it the Chancellor
or other that may amend it after your intent. And it shall be added for the
Clerk of course; And ye shall not bring, nor suffer to be brought to your
knowledge, Writs, which ye shall make of the Court not sealed, thereof to make
execution; nor ye shall record none Attorney, neither by Writ nor without
Writs, without special License, if ye have not Lawfully examined the party, and
the Attorney in proper person: or at least he that shall make the Attorney in
proper person: nor no Writ which is of Commandment ye shall not deliver to the
Examiners, nor to the Seal, before the same Writ be commanded to you, by a
Commander that has power, if it be not to the Chancellor, or to one of the
Masters, which shall command you to make the Writs; and that all the Writs
which ye shall make ye shall deliver them to the Examiner by your own hands, or
by a fellow that is sworn to the King, if your self be out of the Court because
of sickness, or cannot do it for some other necessary cause; And that ye shall
deliver to the Examiner no Writs written of another hand under your name as
yours, nor you shall put no name upon your Writs. So help you God, and his
Saints. Anno xviii. Edw. 3.

The Oath of the Kings Servants, Yeomen, by the Vice Chamberlain.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be true to your Sovereign Lord King Hen. 8. and
to his Heirs Kings of England; and if ye have known any thing in times past, or
may know in time coming, that might be prejudicial to his Royal Person, or to
this his Realm, ye shall with diligence do it to be known, either to his Person
or to such of his Council as it may soonest come to his knowledge; Ye shall
from henceforth use your self in the Room, as one of the Squires for his Body;
ye shall be diligent in giving your attendance for the same; Ye shall be
obedient to the Lord Chamberlain, to the Vice-Chamberlain, to all Gentlemen
Ushers, and to all Yeomen Ushers, in all things that shall appertain to your
Room, Ye shall not depart this the Kings Court without the Kings especial
License, the Lord Chamberlains, or the Vice-Chamberlaines in his absence; You
shall not from hence forward bear your service, nor be retained to no manner of
person, but only to the Kings Highness; Ye shall not from hence forward retain
no man, otherwise than according to the Kings Laws, except it be only for the
Kings service. These Articles, with all other, ye shall truly observe and keep;
As help you God, and holy David, and all Saints, and by this Book, etc.

The Oath of a Master of Requests, as it is entered in the Council Book, Anno
Eliz.
Y Ou shall swear, To be true Counselor to the Queens Majesty, as one of her
Masters of Requests; You shall not know or understand of any manner of thing to
be attempted, done, or spoken against her Majesty's Honor, Crown, and Dignity
Royal, but you shall let and withstand the same to the uttermost of your power,
and either do, or cause it forthwith to be revealed, either to her Majesty's
self or to the rest of the Privy Council; And you shall to the uttermost bear
Faith and true Allegiance to the Queens Majesty, her Heirs, and Lawful
Successors; and shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Preeminencies, and
Authorities granted to her Majesty, and annexed to the Crown, against all
Foreign Princes, Persons, Prelates, and Potentates, etc. by Act of Parliament,
or otherwise, and generally in all things ye shall do as true Counselors ought
to do to her Majesty. So God you help, etc.

The Tenor of the Oath directed by King Hen. 8. and his Council, in the fourth
year of his Reign, to his Commissioners for executing the Kings Commissions and
Instructions within the Diocese of York, for Mustering and putting the Kings
Subjects in a readiness for the Wars, and to understand the substance of every
man throughout England
Y E shall truly and plainly declare and show, as near as ye can, or may
possibly call to mind or remembrance, putting apart all color, fraud, or
deceit, of what value and substance ye be, as well in Money, Plate, Jewels,
Utinsels, Stuff, and Ornaments of Housholdstuffe, Merchandises, of all manner,
sorts, and qualities, debts upon specialties, Obligations, Pledges, Promises,
or any otherwise, not only on this side the Seas, but also in any outward
parts; not forbearing thus expressly to show and declare, for any lucre,
singular profit, or advantage, prejudices, hindrances, losles, and damages
that may ensue unto you by the same. So God you help, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Bayliffe for the Sewers
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall diligently, truly, and circumspectly peruse,
view, and search from time to time, all and singular such damages, perils,
defaults, and reparations, that shall at any time happen or chance to be within
any of the Banks, Walls, Sewers, Troughs, or Slewces, within the Precinct of
the Level, as far as the limits of your Office shall extend, and the same with
all diligence, to the uttermost of your power, procure to be presented unto her
Majesty's Commissioners or Sewers, and the Jury that are or shall be
impannelled for such causes, that the same with all expedition may be amended
and repaired; and to do and execute all and every other thing and things
whatsoever that shall appertain unto your said Office, as nigh as God shall
give you grace. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Constables within the City of London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall keep the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King
well, and lawfully after your power, and ye shall Arrest all them that make
Contempt, Riot, Debate, or Afray by breaking of the said Peace, and lead them
to the Home or Counter, and if ye be withstood by strength of mis-doers, ye
shall rear on them an Entry, and pursue them from Street to Street, and from
Ward to Ward till they be Arrested; and ye shall search at all times when ye be
the Scavengers, or Beadles, the common noysomness of your Ward, and the Beadle
and Raker ye shall help to rear, and gather their Sallary, and Quarterage, if
ye be thereunto by them required, and if any thing be done within your Ward
against the Ordinance of this City, such defaults as ye shall find there done
ye shall then present unto the Mayor, and Ministers of the City, and if ye be
let by any person, or persons, that ye may not duly do your daily Office, ye
shall certify the Mayor and Council of the City of the name or names of him or
them that so let you,

You shall also Swear, that during the time that ye shall stand in the Office,
and occupy the room of a Constable; ye shall once at the least every Month
certify and show to one of the Clerks of the Mayors Court, as well the names
as the fir-names of all Freemen which ye shall know to be deceased within the
Month in the Parish wherein ye shall be inhabited, as also the names, and
sir-names of all the Children of the said Freemen so deceased, being Orphans of
the said City; and thus you shall not fail to do, as God you help, etc.

The Oath of the Scavenger.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall diligently oversee that Pavements within your
Ward be well and sufficiently repaired and not made too high in noysance of
your Neighbors; and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes be cleansed of Dung, and
all manner of Filth for the honesty of this City; and that all the Chimnies,
Furnaces, Reredoes be of Stone, sufficiently and defensible made against peril
of Fire, and if ye find any of the contrary, ye shall show it to the Alderman
of the Ward, so that the Alderman may ordain for the amendment thereof; And
thus ye shall do, as God ye help, etc.

The Oath of every Freeman of the City of London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord King
Charles and to the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord the King; obeysant and
obedient shall ye be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, the Franchises
and Customs thereof ye shall maintain, and this City keep harmless in that
which in you is; ye shall be contributary to all manner of Charges within this
City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Taxes, Tallages, Lot and Scot, and to
all other Charges bearing your part as a Freeman ought to do; Ye shall color
no Foreign Goods under or in your name, whereby the King or this City might or
may lose their Customs or Advantages; ye shall know no Foreigner to buy or
sell any Merchandise with any other Foreigner within this City or Franchise
thereof, but ye shall warn the Chamberlain thereof or some Minister of the
Chamberlains; ye shall implead or sue no Freeman out of this City; whiles ye
may have Right and Law within the same City; ye shall take none Apprentice, but
if he be free born (that is to say) no Bondmans Son, nor the Son of any Alien,
and for no less term than for seven years, without fraud or deceit, and within
the first year, ye shall cause him to be Enrolled, or else pay such Fine, as
shall be reasonably imposed upon you for omitting the same; and after his term
end, within convenient time being required, ye shall make him Free of this
City, if he have well and truly served you; ye shall also keep the Kings Peace
in your own Person; ye shall know Gatherings, Conventicles, or Conspiracies
made against the Kings Peace, but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to
your power; all these Points and Articles ye shall well and truly keep
according to the Laws and Customs of this City to your power, So help you God,
etc.

The Oath of a Sheriff of a County.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well, and truly in the Office of
the Sheriff of A. and do the Kings profit in all that belongs to you to do by
way of your Office, as far forth as you can or may; ye shall truly keep the
Kings Rights, and all that belongs to the Crown; ye shall not assent to
decrease, to lessenings, or concealment of the Kings Right, or of his
Franchises, and whenever ye shall have knowledge that the Kings Rights, or
the Rights of his Crown be concealed, or withdrawn, be it in Land, Rent,
Franchise, or Suits, or any other things; ye shall do your true power to make
them be restored to the King again, and if ye may not do it ye shall certify
the King, or some of his Council thereof, such as ye hold for certain will say
it to the King; ye shall not respite the Kings Debts, for any gifts or favor,
where you may raise them without great grievance of the Debtors; ye shall truly
and righteously treat the People of your Sheriffwrick, and do right as well to
Poor as to Rich in all that belongs to your Office: Ye shall do no wrong to
any man for any gift or other behest, or promise of Goods, for favor, nor
hate; ye shall disturb no man's right; ye shall truly acquit at the Exchequer
all those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the Kings Debts; ye shall
nothing take whereby the King may lose, or whereby that Right may be disturbed,
let, or the Kings Debts delayed; ye shall truly return and truly serve all
the Kings Writs, as far forth as shall be within your cunning; ye shall not
have to be your under Sheriff, or any of the Sheriffs Clerks of the last year
past; ye shall take no Bayliffes into your service, but such as ye shall answer
for; ye shall make each of your Bayliffes to make such Oath as ye make your
self in that that belongs to their occupation; ye shall receive no Writ by
you or any of yours unsealed, or any sealed, under any Seal of any Justice save
of Justice in Air, or Justice Assigned in the same Shire where ye be Sheriff
in, or other Justice having power or authority to make any Writs unto you by
the Law of the Land, or any Justice of Newgate; ye shall make your Bayliffes of
the true and sufficientest men in the Country, Nota, These words All manner of
Heresies commonly called Lollards were objected against by the Lord Chief
Justice Cook, and ordered to be left out of the Oath, Cro. Car. 1. quod vide.
also, ye shall do all your power and diligence to destroy, and make to cease
all manner of Heresies, and Errors, commonly called Lollards, within your
Bayliffwick, from time to time to all your power, and assist and be helping to
all Ordinaries, and Commissaries of holy Church, and favor and maintain them
as often times as we shall be required by the said Ordinaries, and Commissaries;
ye shall be dwelling in your proper person within your Bayliffewick for the
time ye shall be in the same Office, except ye be otherwise licensed of the
King; ye shall not let your Sheriffwick, nor any Bayliffwick thereof to Farm to
any man; ye shall truly set, and return reasonable and due issues of them that
be within your Bayliffwick after their estate and their honor; and make your
Pannels your self of such persons as be most next, most sufficient, and not
suspect, or procured, as it is ordained by the Statutes, and over this in
Eschewing and restrainder of the Man's slaughters, Robberies, and other manifold
grievous offenses that have been done daily, namely of such as name themselves
Soldiers, and by other Vagarants, the which continually increase in number,
and multiply, so that the Kings true Subjects may not be safe, yea ride, nor go
to do such things as they have to do, to their intoleerable hurt and
hinderance; ye shall truly and effectually with all diligence possible to your
power execute the Statute, as the Statutes of Winchester, and of Vagabonds;
these things all ye shall truly keep, as God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of an Attorney at Law.
Y Ou shall do no falsehood, nor consent to any to be done in the Court, and if
you know of any to be done you shall give knowledge thereof unto my Lord Chief
Justice, or other his Brethren, that it may be reformed; you shall delay no man
for lucre or malice; You shall increase no Fees, but shall be contented with
the old Fees accustomed; you shall plead no Foraign Plea, nor suffer no Foraign
Suits unlawfully to hurt any man, but such as shall stand with order of the
law, and your conscience; you shall seal all such Process as you shall sue out
of the Court with the Seal thereof, and see the Kings Majesty, and my Lord
Chief Justice discharged for the same; ye shall not wittingly nor willingly
sue, nor procure to be sued any false Suit, nor give aid, nor consent to the
same, in pain to be expulsed from the Court for ever; And furthermore, you
shall use your self in the Office of an Attorney, within the Court according to
your Learning and discretion; so help you God, etc.

The Oath of a Merchant Adventurer.
F irst, ye shall swear, To be true to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, her Heirs
and Successors, and if any thing may come to your knowledge intended against
her Majesty's Person, or Dominions, to discover the same to the Governor of
this Fellowship, or his Deputy, or some other in place convenient.

Secondly, You shall swear to be obedient and assistant to the Governor, and
his Deputy, and Fellowship of Merchant-Adventures; and to keep all Acts and
Ordinances by them made, or to be made, without doing or procuring any thing in
prejudice thereof, or else offending, duly to pay the penalties.

Thirdly, Ye swear, To conceal the secrets of the Fellowship, and to make known
unto the Governor, or his Deputy, from time to time, any thing which you shall
understand to be pretended against the Fellowship, or the Privileges thereof.

Lastly, You swear, That in no case you shall color or free any man's Goods
whomsoever, being either Stranger, or one free of this Followship.

The Oath of a Merchant Adventurer taken before the Poqueter, for the true
Shipping of his Clothes.
Y Ou shall swear, That all and every such Clothes, and other Commodities,
whereof you, or any of you have made entry, are already bought, and within the
Walls of London, being over and above all former Entries, and are not yet
Shipped, and they are also belonging to those men in whose names they be
entered, and their Partners, being free Brothers of this Company of Merchant
Adventurers; and that they are entered to be Shipped either for Stoade, or
Middleborough. So God you help.

The Oath which the Honorable George Lord Nevel, Baron of Abergaveny used to
swear his Servants by, at their first coming into his Household.
Y E shall bear your faith therewith, and true service next unto our Sovereign
Lord King Henry 8. unto my Lord and Lady of this place, whom ye intend now to
serve; also if ye know any hurt, harm, or hinderance to be done to my said Lord
and Lady to their Bodies, or to their Goods, or to his Children, by any person
or persons, ye shall give him knowledge, or some of his Council as soon as God
will give you grace; Also ye shall not consume nor waste none of his Goods, nor
suffer them to be wasted negligently by any other person, if ye be in power to
let it, or else give knowledge to his Officers that have the Rule and Charge of
his House; And also at all times ye shall be obedient, requisite, and
necessary, unto my Lords Officers that have the Rule and Charge of my said
Lords Household aforesaid, ye shall well and truly of your behalf keep and
perform, to the best of your power. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of Treasurer Clerk in the Exchequer.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve the King your Lord, in
your Office, and Room of Clerkship, to the Lord Treasurer of England, within
this Court of the Kings Receipt and Treasury; And you shall uprightly behave
your self toward all his Subjects and Accomptants, for their speedy
expedition, without any unjust hindrance or delay, for affection, meed, or
dread,; And you shall make uo untrue Entry into any of the Kings Rolls, or
other Books of Receipt and exitus, commonly called the Pelles of Receipt and
Exitus, whereby the King our Lord, or any his Subjects, may be hurt or damaged.
But if you shall know of any error in them escaped; speedily to be amended;
And you shall from time to time make, or cause to be made to the Lord Treasurer
of England, true and perfect Declarations of all manner of Sums of Money coming
in, and going out of the Kings Treasury, so often as the same Lord Treasurer
shall demand; And you shall safely preserve and keep the Kings Records,
Leagues, and other Writings lying in his Treasury, not suffering any of them to
be harmed, lost, or altered by your default, nor yet to be removed abroad to
any place out of the said Treasury, but only by Warrant or License from the
Lord Treasurer of England; And when any such License or command shall be given,
yet you shall not rudely adventure the carrying thereof by water, if you may
have convenient passage by Land; And you shall to the best of your power
conserve all the ancient and laudable Customs of this Court, without
permitting any new error to arise (if you be able to resist it,) and where you
are not able, you shall speedily disclose it to the Lord Treasurer of England
for reformation. Finally, you shall in all things concerning this your Office
be obedient, faithful, and true, to the Lord Treasurer for the time being, and
shall not bewray the secrets of this Court; nor yet any waste make of the Kings
goods for any cause. So help you God, and all Saints, and by the Contents of
that Book.

The Oath of the Writer of the Tallyes, and Counter Tallyes.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall truly and faithfully writ all the Tallyes and
Counter-Tallyes, otherwise called the Joyles of the said Tallyes, of all manner
of payments in the Court of Receipt to be made, and to give good attendance to
the same, helping to dispatch all manner of Accomptants according to the
ancient customs of this Court; and to make Declarations for the declaring of
all manner of Receipts and Payments, there received and paid from time to time,
to the Lord Treasurer of England, or to the under-Treasurer for the time being;
and especially to regard, and so from time to time, unto the Entries safe
keeping, taking out, showing, delivery, and laying up all manner of Leagues,
and other Writings of any other parties, which remain within the King our
Sovereign Lord his Treasury; to whom you shall be true, secret, and faithful,
during the time of your being in the said Office. So help you God, and all
Saints.

The new Oath of the Writer of the Pell, made in the sixth year of King Edward
the sixth.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall truly and faithfully keep the Kings Majesty's
Book within this his Court, called the Pell, for the speedy expedition of his
Accomptants, for their surety; And you shall delay none of the Kings
Accomptants; for favor meed, affection, or dread; and see all ways that no
untrue entry be made in the said Pell: And if you know of any error done within
the said Court, you shall show it to the Lord Treasurer or to the under
Treasurer, without any delay thereof to be made: And the secrets of this Court
you shall not bewray. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Usher of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the Treasurer and
Chamberlains of the Exchecquer in your room of Ushership to the Lord Treasurer
of England, within this Court of the Kings Receipts, and shall diligently lock
and keep the doors of the Kings Treasury in due time for safety of his goods;
And the same doors ye shall be ready to open again at all times, when the same
Lord Treasurer and Chamberlain, or other their Clerks, and Deputies, shall have
occasion to enter, and there shall give your attendance till their departure.
And ye shall demand no unjust allowance for any necessaries or other kind of
thing by you bought for service of the King within this Court: And ye shall, to
your power, help and further all such the Kings Accomptants as shall have to do
in this Court. So help you God, and Holidome, and by the Contents of that Book.

The Oath ministered unto the Soldiers serving under the Earl of Leicester in
the Low Countries.
W EE do swear and promise, To do all loyal, true, and faithful service unto
the Queen of England, her most Excellent Majesty, and unto the Provinces and
Cities united in these Countries, and their Associates, under the charge and
obedience of the Right Excellent the Earl of Leicester Governor general of the
said Provinces and Cities, and their Associates, and of her Majesty's Army and
Forces within the same, and all lawful and due obedience unto the said
Governor, and to any other Superior that shall have charge under him for
Government in this Army. And further we do promise to endeavor our selves to
keep and fulfill all such lawful Ordinances as his Excellency has, or shall set
forth and establish for the better ordering of this Army, as much as concerns
us, so long as we shall serve under him. So help us God, by Jesus Christ.

The Oath of the Governor of Berwick.
Y OV shall swear, To be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by
the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. and to keep and defend, to the use of her Majesty, her Heirs and
Successors, This Town of Berwick, and the Marches of the same, to the uttermost
of your power, and according to your Offices, you shall not be absent at any
time from your Office, without her Majesty's special License, containing in the
same the names of such to whom your charge shall becommitted in your absence,
except it be upon reasonable causes, to go into the Wardency of the East
Marches for the service thereof, or to some other part of Northumberland, upon
any your needful causes; at which time nevertheless you shall depute the
Marshal, or in his absence, the next principal Officer, to take your charge of
this Town: You shall cause all the Officers of this Town to do their duties, or
else see them punished without favor or delay; you shall use the advice of all
those which be Counselors of this Town for any matter concerning the
Government thereof, except the matter shall touch any of themselves in which
the same parties shall be excluded for the time; you shall see that this Town,
and the Garrison be provided of a convenient force of Victual of all sorts from
time to time; And that the Mayor and his Brethren shall do their duties for the
Common weal of the same Town according to their Jurisdiction. You shall
administer Justice truly, and indifferently to all manner of persons having any
Cause depending before you: You shall not admit, nor suffer to be admitted any
manner of person to be of this Garrison that shall be born out of the Realm of
England or Ireland; nor above the number of forty that shall be born within the
Realm of Ireland; You shall at sundry times visit the Gates and Posterns of
this Town, the Locks and Shuttings thereof, the Town Walls, Bulworks, Ditches,
Ordinances, Artillery, and Munition, and the Houses of the Stoage of the same,
and cause to be redressed to the best of your power any thing therein amiss;
Finally, you shall quarterly peruse the Statutes and Ordinances heretofore
made, and now remaining in force for the Government of this Town, and them
cause to be duly kept and observed.

The Oath of the Marshal of Berwick.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. You shall be obedient to the Governor of this
Town, for the good governance and defense of the same, and shall give good
counsel and assistance unto him, and all other Officers of the Town to the
uttermost of your power; You shall set the Watch of the Town, and visit it from
time to time, as to your Office belongs; You shall not imprison, or present
any person without reasonable cause, and thereof you shall certify the
Governor of their names, and their causes: You shall suffer no person born out
of the Queens Majesty's Allegiance without the Governors special License, (and
that not without good cause) to lodge in this Town above two nights, or to
continue above twenty four hours at any one time, nor shall suffer any stranger
to be lodged, but in convenient place to keep the same person from the knowledge
of the secrets of this Town. Finally, you shall keep, and cause to be kept, all
manner of Statutes, Laws and Ordinances, heretofore made, and now remaining in
force, for the good governance of this Town, to the uttermost of your power.

The Oath of the Treasurer of Berwick.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. You shall be obedient to the Governor of this Town for the
good governance and defense of the same, and shall give counsel and assistance
to him, and all other Officers of the Town to the uttermost of your power; you
shall make no payment to Officers or Soldiers until Muster be had, viewed, and
taken by the Governor and Marshal of the Town, and the Comptroller, and of the
Checque hereof. Finally, Ye shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and
kept, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, heretofore made, and now
remaining in force; for the government of this Town.

The Oath of the Porter of Berwick.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the faith, etc. You shall be obedient and attendant to the Governor for the
time being in all things appertaining to the good governance and defense of the
same Town, and to him, and to the Queens Council and Officers of the same Town;
You shall give faithful and diligent counsel, and them aid and assist to the
uttermost of your power: You shall safely, surely, and diligently keep the
keys of the Gates of this Town of Berwick, while they shall be in your hands,
and shall see the same Gates guarded and shut up at the times accustomed, and
as the Governor of this Town shall command, for the surety of this Town; And
at all times, as soon as the Gates shall be shut, you shall bring the said Keys
to the Governor of the Town, and in his absence, to his Deputy; you shall
whenever any tidings or intelligence shall come to you by Land, or by Water,
that is meet to be known to the Governor of the Town, or to the Council in his
absence, forthwith let them know the same; You shall rear no new Customs or
Taxes, to the vexation of any comers or goers, etc.

The Oath of the Master of the Ordinance for the Town of Berwick.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall be true and faithful to our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. You shall be obedient to the Governor of this Town, for the
good governance and defense of the same; And shall give good counsel and
assistance to him, and all other Officers of the Town to the uttermost of your
power; You shall see that the Ordinance, Artillery, and Munition be safely and
well kept from all danger of the Enemies, of Fire, or other misadventures to
the best of your power, and that the Ordinance and Artillery placed for the
defense of this Town he always kept in good repair, and be in readiness for the
use where the same is or shall be planted; You shall issue no part thereof at
any time but for the service of this Town, nor shall expend any portion of your
Office but by Warrant; Finally, You shall observe and keep, or cause to be
observed and kept all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances of this Town
heretofore made, and now remaining in force for the good governance of the same
Town.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Checque in Berwick.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall be true and faithful to our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the Grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. You shall swear to keep truly the Books of Musters of all
the persons in the Town, and you shall keep true Record, and Report of the time
of all manner of persons departing from the Town, being either Licensed for
more then two days, or being Cashiered or discharged of Service, and of all
such as shall depart without License, and shall duly inform the Governor of
the defaults that you shall find, and the same you shall Checque in your Book,
and the same Book you shall duly keep, and at the pay see the party thereof
Taxed and defaulted, and surther punished as the cause shall require.

The Oath of Captains of Bands in the Town of Berwick.
Y Ou shall swear, To be true and good to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, and to
the Governor of the Town, and shall keep your whole number being, in your
charge without diminishing, or admitting of the same until you have certified
the Governor of the Town thereof, and that the Clerk of the Checque by the
Governors appointment have enrolled the same in his Book, and if any of your
Band shall escape away, or die, you shall forthwith notify the same to the
Governor of the Town, and the said Clerk of the Checque; You shall not refuse
to come to common Musters at any time, upon the call of the Governor of the
Town, either being alone, or else having with him the Treasurer and Clerk of
the Checque; neither shall you bring to Muster any person but such as have
served in your Band, during the time for which he shall have pay; neither shall
you to your knowledge suffer any one to be in your Band that receives any man's
pay of our Treasurer in any other room or place within this Town, except it be
for the Tax work in our Fortifications, whereof you shall make privy the
Treasurer, and Clerk of the Checque; You shall see, and cause every your
Soldiers to be frequently Trained and taught the use of their Weapons, and
other Feats of War convenient for them; and at the last you shall cause the
same to be done every fourteen days in Summer once, and every twenty days in
Winter: You shall not permit any of your Band to take any more Victuals, or
other Wares within that Town then his Wages will discharge; You shall with your
Band, Watch and Ward for the defense of this Town as you shall be appointed by
the Marshal and Governor thereof; You shall not depart out of the Town and
Marches further then the Orders of the Town do permit without leave of the
Governor of the Town, or in his absence by his Deputy, under their Writings
and Seal, mentioning the time of your leave to be absent, and before your
departure (if it shall be longer then for three days) you shall present your
self to the Treasurer, or his Deputy, giving notice unto them for the time
licensed you for absence, and at your return you shall also give notice to the
said Treasurer and Clerk of the Checque; You shall also be obedient to the
Governor, and to the other Counselors of this Town, and shall obey all
Statutes and Ordinances of the same.

The Oath of every private Soldier in Berwick.
Y Ou shall swear, To be good and true to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, and to
the Governor of this Town for Her Majesty's service, and truly (do as much as
in you shall lie, to) keep this Town always true English, and in good obedience
to the Governor, Marshal, and other Officers thereof; and you shall be
governed by your Captain within any Debate or Rebellion, and if you shall know
any thing hurtful to the state of this Town, or to any part thereof, you shall
forthwith disclose the same either to your Captain, or to the Governor, or to
one of the Council of the Town; You shall keep such Armor and Weapon as you
are by your Captain limited to have without willful spoil, or selling thereof,
except it be to provide better; You shall keep all other Ordinances of this
Town that may any ways pertain to you to keep.

The Oath of the Lord President of the Council in the Marches of Wales.
Y Ou shall swear, To the uttermost of your power, will, and cunning, that you
shall be true and faithful to the Queens Highness, our Sovereign Lady, and to
her Heirs and Successors, and that you do utterly testify and declare in your
conscience, that the Queens Highness is the only supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other her Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things or Causes as Temporal; and that no Foraign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate has, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or
Spiritual within this Realm; And that you do utterly renounce and forsake all
Foraign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities; and do promise
that from henceforth you shall bear faith, and true Allegiance to the Queens
Highness; her Heirs and Successors, and to your power shall assist, and defend
all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminencies, and Authorities granted or
belonging to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

2. You shall not know nor hear any thing that may in any wise be prejudicial
to her Highness or her Commonwealth, peace and quiet of her Highness Realm,
but you shall with all diligence reveal and discover the same to her Highness,
or to such other person or persons of her Graces Privy Council, as you shall
think meet, and will soonest convey and bring it to her Highness.

3. You shall serve her Highness truly and faithfully in the room and place of
one of her Graces Council.

4. You shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated, in any Council,
faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion according to your heart and
conscience, no wise forbearing so to do, for any manner, respect of favor,
meed, displeasure, or corruption.

5. You shall faithfully and uprightly, to the best of your power, cause
Justice to be duly and indifferently Ministered to the Queens Majesty's
Subjects, that shall have cause to sue for the same, according to equity and to
the Order of the Law.

Finally, You shall be vigilant and circumspect in all your doings and
proceedings touching the Queens Majesty, and her Highness Affairs.

All which points and Articles before expressed, with all other Articles,
Signed with the Queens Majeslies Hand, and delivered to me the Lord President
of her Highness Council, established in those parts; you shall saithfully keep
and fulfill, to the uttermost of your power, wit, will, and cunning. So God you
help, and the contents of this Book.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Parliament.
Y Ou shall be true, faithful, and truth you shall bear to our Sovereign Lord
the King, and to his Heirs and Successors; You shall nothing know that shall be
prejudicial to his Highness, his Crown, State, and Dignity Royal, but that you
shall resist, to your power, and with all speed ye shall advertise his Grace
thereof, at the least some of his Council, in such wise as the same may come to
his knowledge; Ye shall also well and and truly serve his Highness in the
Office of Clerk of his Parliament, making true entry and Records of the things
done and past in the same; Ye shall keep secret all such matters as shall be
treated in his said Parliament, and not disclose the same before it shall be
published, but to such as they ought to be disclosed unto: And generally ye
shall well and truly do and execute all things belonging unto you to be done,
appertaining to the Office of Clerk of the Parliament; as God you help, etc.

The Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare,
in my conscience before God and the world, That our Sovereign Lord King James
is lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions and
Countries; and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the
Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any Power or
Authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or
Dominions, or to authorize any Foraign Prince to invade or annoy him or his
Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and
obedience to His Majesty; or to give License or leave to any of them, to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal
Person, State, or Government, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects within His
Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any
Declaration or Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or
to be made or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority
derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his See. against the said King
his Heirs or Successors, or any absolution of the said Subjects from their
Obediance, I will bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against
all Conspiracies and Contempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or
their Persons, their Crown and. Dignity, by reason or color of any such
Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons
and treacherous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be against him
or them. And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure, as impious and heretical, his damnable Doctrine and Position, that
Princes which be Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever; And I do believe, and in
conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any person whatsoever has
power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by
good and full Authority to be lawfully administered unto me; and do renounce all
Pardons, and Dispensations to the contrary, and all those things I do plainly
and sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to these express words by me
spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and underitanding of the
same words, without any equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever; And I do make this Recognition and acknowledgement heartily,
willingly, and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God, etc.

The Oath of Supremacy.
I A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions, and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
things or causes as Temporal; And that no Foraign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this
Realm; And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foraign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do promise that from
henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist, and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminencies, and Authorities granted, or
belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

The Oath of Franck Pledge within the City of London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord, the
King of England, and to his Heirs, Kings, and the Kings Peace ye shall keep,
and see that it be kept; And to all the Ministers of the City ye shall be
obedient, and at all times ye shall be ready to help the Officers of the City
in doing of their Offices for arresting of Mis-doers, in keeping of the Kings
Peace, and for to follow them from Street to Street, and Ward to Ward, unto the
time they be Arrested, and brought to one of the Counters; and if ye know any
Congregation, or Conventicles of any mis-doers within the Ward, ye shall do the
Alderman to weet thereof; and all other points within the Wardmoot ye shall
well and truly keep. So help ye God, and by this Book.

The Oath of the Scavengers of the Ward.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and diligently over-see that the Pavements
in every Ward be well and rightfully repaired, and not hausted to the noyance
of the Neighbors, and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes be kept clean from
Dung and other Filth for the honesty of this City, and that all the Chimnies,
Redosses, and Furnaces be made of Stone for defense of Fire; and if ye know any
such ye shall show it to the Alderman, that he may make due redress thereof;
and this ye shall not leave. So help you Gods etc.

The Oath for Brokers in London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall neither buy nor sell, nor any other for you,
any manner of Merchandise by fraud or collusion to your own proper use within
the Franchises of this City, nor without; And that ye neither make, nor do to
be made any manner Bargain between Forraigner and Forraigner, or Forraigner and
Stranger within the Franchises of this City, nor without, upon pain of
forfeiture of one hundred pounds to the Chamber of London, and losing of your
Office for ever; Also that ye buy no manner of Merchandise of any person within
the Franchises of this City nor without to no persons use; That ye bring the
Seller and the Buyer together, making a rightful Bargain between them if you be
required; and that ye shall neither suffer, nor counsel any other person to use
Brokeage within the said City, or the Franchises of the same, but if he be
admitted and sworn and has found sufficient Surety to do well and truly, and
keep and observe all these Articles and Ordinances: and if ye know any person
so doing ye shall open it to the Mayor and Aldermen, and else ye shall be
deprived of your Office for ever.

Also ye shall be in no Livery with any Person nor Host, any manner of
Stranger, or Alien, upon pain of losing of your Office for ever; Also ye shall
do all your Bargains that ye shall make between any manner of persons to be
written in a Book, and that ye shall have the same Book ready before the Mayor,
and Aldermen for the time being, at all times when he by them shall be required
to testify the Bargains aforesaid; Also that ye shall not be dwelling,
harbored, nor lodged with any Merchant Stranger within the City of London, or
Liberty thereof.

Also ye shall make no manner Bargain of Usury, nor exchange of Usury, nor any
other false Chevisance nor untrue Bargain, nor Contract, nor meddle, nor
consent to the same in any wise no such Bargain, favor, nor counsel, or hide,
but them disclose to the Mayor and Aldermen of the same City for the time
being, and this you shall not leave. So God you help.

The Oath of the Sheriff of Londons Sergeant.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the Sheriff of London in
your Office of Serjeantship, and the Franchises of London; Ye shall swear and
maintain to your power, and all manner persons that ye shall Arrest by Plaint,
Writ, or by Fray, or by any other lawful cause, ye shall bring them unto the
Counter if ye be of power; Also ye shall warn no person to agree with the
Creditors of their Debts, but that a Plaint of such Debts be lawfully made;
Also ye shall warn no person on Whom a Plaint or a Writ is on in the Counter,
and ye shall well and truly enter such Plaints as ye shall have of your Clients
or any other person; Also all manner of Mercements and Fines that ye shall
receive, ye shall well and truly bring them to the Counter, and there to
deliver them to the Sheriff, or to his Deputy; Also ye shall not tarry, or
delay none occasion, nor make none untrue Process; That ye shall by virtue of
your Office, fraud, or hate, or promise for your singular avail: Also ye shall
be no Lone day maker, nor maintainer of none occasion; Also in all manner of
Plaints that ye shall return good and honest persons, and true, and not
suspicious, not procured by you, nor by your assent; Also you shall counsel
nothing whereby the Sheriffs, or any of their Courts or Officers may be hurt
in their availes; Also the commons of the City peaceably and gently ye shall
entreat, and also to all other persons that have his Patents of exemptions of
any Office, or other Charges within the City of the Kings grant ye shall do,
summon them like as ye do other Freemen of Inquests; Also ye shall take no
Yeoman into your Governance whilst he be Officer with the said Sheriff, unto
the time that ye show the said Yeoman unto the said Sheriff, and by him so to
be accepted; and also ye shall not do away the said Yeoman in that being
without a lawful cause, certifying, and knowing to the Sheriff; And if that
Yeoman be from you so voided, ye shall take away the Livery of the Sheriff,
except, and in all other things your Office you shall well and truly keep and
bear you. So help you God, and by this Book.

The Oath of a Constable in London.
Y e shall swear, That ye shall keep the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King
well, and lawfully after your power; Also ye shall Arrest all them that make
any Riot, Debate, or Affray in breaking of the said Peace, and ye shall bring
them to one of the Sheriffs Houses, or to the Counters of the said Sheriff,
and if ye be withstood by strength of any such misdoers, ye shall ever rear up
Hue and Cry, and ye shall follow them from Street to Street, and from Ward to
Ward till ye may Arrest them.

Also ye shall search at all times when ye shall be required by Scavengers, or
Beadle, for the common noyance of the Ward.

Also if there be any thing done within the Ward contrary to the Ordinance to
the City.

Also such faults as ye find ye shall present them to the Mayor, and to the
Ministers of the City; and if you be withstood with person or persons, that ye
may not do your Office ye shall present them to the Mayor, and to the
Common Council of the City, with the names of them that so trouble you. And
this ye shall not leave. So help you God, and holidome, and by this Book.

The Oath of a Beadle of the Wards in London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and honestly keep the Ward that ye be
Beadle in: And ye shall suffer no manner Ribbawdes, nor none of evil living,
nor hunters of Ale, nor women holding Brothels, nor none other Noyons, other
women slandred of evil name, and of evil life, dwelling within the Ward, but
you shall certify the names of them unto the Alderman, to that intent that he
shall have them out within fifteen days; and if the Alderman do it not, ye
shall anon after the fifteen days ended, do the Mayor to weete; and if any man
make any fray, or draw any weapon against the Kings Peace, ye shall do the
Sheriff to weet, that they may make leavy by the Sergeants of such misdoers
also; Ye shall return good and lawful men in the Hustings asor the Sheriffs,
and the Kings Crowner to the Quest, and not men suspicions, and maintainers of
persons of evil name; And the Return that ye make, ye shall show them three or
four days before the Hustings, that ye may see the Return, whether it be
sufficient or no; Also ye shall see, that no Poulter, nor no other Victualler,
make no sale of Poultery, Corn, or Meal, or any other Victual, in no privy
place, against the Ordinance of the Mayor, but ye shall warn the Mayor, and the
Sheriffs thereof; Ye shall be none Ofricer in Court expedient during your
Beadleship; Also ye shall brew none Ale, nor none for you, to be no Regrater ye
shall keep no Bake-house: Also ye shall be no Regrater of Victual, nor none
hunter of Ale, nor partner with none of them: And other things to your Office
belonging ye shall well and lawfully keep. So help you God, and Holidom, and by
this Book.

The Oath of the Wardmoot Inquest within London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King that now
is, and to his Heirs and Successors Kings of England; and readily ye shall come
when ye be summoned, to the Common Council of this City; but if ye be
reasonably excused; and good and true Council ye shall give in all things
touching the Commonwealth of this City, after your wit and cunning; And that
for favor of any person ye shall maintain no singular profit against the
common profit of this City; And after that ye be come to the Common Council,
you shall not from thence depart until the Common Council be ended, without
reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Mayors License: And also any secret
things that be spoken or said in the Common Council, without to be secret, in
no wise ye shall disclose; As God you help and his Saints.

The Oath of the Chancellor of the Court of Augmentation.
Y E shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the Office of
the Chancellorship of the Court of the Augmentations and Revenues of the Kings
Crown; And shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best of your
cunning and power; And that ye shall diligently procure all things which may
honestly and justly be to the Kings advantage and profit, and to the
Augmentation of the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown, and truly use the
Kings Seal, appointed to the Office; And also endeavor your self to see the
King truly answered of such Rents, Revenues, Issues, and Profits, which shall
or may arise or grow in your Office, and from time to time deliver with speed,
such as shall have to do for you; And that you shall not take nor receive of
any person any gift or reward in any Cause or matter depending before you,
wherein the Kings Highness shall be party, whereby any prejudice, hinderance
loss, or dis-herizon shall grow or be to the Kings Highness. So help you God,
and all Saints.

The Oath of the general Surveyor of the Court of Augmentation.
Y E shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the Office of
the general Surveyor of the Court of the Augmentations and Revenues of the
Kings Crown; And shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best of
your power; And that ye shall diligently procure all things which may honestly
and justly be to the Kings advantage and profit, and to the Augmentation of the
Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown; And also endeavor your self to the
uttermost of your power, to see the King truly answered of all such Rents and
Revenues, Issues or Profits, which shall or may arise or grow in your Office,
and from time to time deliver with speed, such as shall have to do before you;
And that you shall not take or receive of any person any gift or reward in any
cause or matter depending before you, wherein the Kings Highness shall be
party, whereby any prejudice, hinderance loss, or dis-herizon, shall grow, or
be to the Kings Highness. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Treasurer of the Court of Augmentations.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord and his People in the Office of Treasurer of the Court of the
Augmentations according to the Orders hereafter ensuing; and ye shall
reasonably and honestly procure the Kings profit, and do right to all manner of
people poor and rich, in those things which touch your Office, and the Kings
Treasure; ye shall truly keep and dispend, and true Declaration and Account
make from time to time without any concealment, according to the Ordinance made
for the establishment of this Court; and further shall do every thing that of
right appertains to your Office. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Master of the Woods of the Court of Augmentations.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, in the Office of the Master of the Woods of this Court of Augmentations,
in all things touching your Office, according to the Authority given unto you
by these Letters Patents, for the Kings most advantage; And ye shall do all and
every thing and things which you ought to do by reason of your Office according
to the form and effect of these Letters Patents. So help you God, and all
Saints.

The Oath of the Attorney, and Solicitor of the Court of Augmentations.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King, as his Attorney
or Solicitor in all Courts, for and concerning any matter or cause that shall
concern or touch the Possessions and Hereditaments limited to the Survey and
Governance of this Court of the Augmentations, and procure the Kings profit
thereof; and that ye shall truly counsel the Kings Chancellor, and general
Surveyor of this Court, all things concerning the same, to the best of your
Cunning, Wit, and Power, and with all speed and diligence from time to time at
the calling of the said Chancellor and general Surveyor, or any of them, be
diligently attendant to assist the said Chancellor and Surveyor, or any of
them, with good advise and counsel, in the hearing and determination of such
matters and causes as shall depend before the said Chancellor and general
Surveyor of this Court; And that he shall not take any gift or reward in any
matter or cause depending in the same Court or elsewhere, wherein the King
shall be party, whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hindered, hurted, or
disherited; And further do all and every thing that shall appertain to your
Office. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Surveyor of the Woods of the Court of Augmentations.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall serve truly the King in your Office of Surveyor
of the Woods within the Survey of this Court of the Augmentation; and to your
cunning and power shall truly do and execute all and every thing and things
which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, according to the forms and
effect of the Ordinance and Establishment of this Court. So help you God, and
all Saints.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Augmentations.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of
Clerk of this Court of the Augmentations, and truly do and execute all and
every thing and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, according
to the form and effect of the Ordinance made upon the Erection of this Court.
So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of the Augmentations.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of
Audicorship; and true Allegiance make to every person which shall be Accomptant
before you; Ye shall not take nor receive of poor or rich any Gift or Reward in
any Matter or Cause depending, or to be discussed in Court, but such that shall
be your ordinary Fees; and ye shall do all and every thing and things which ye
ought to do by reason of your Office, according to the form and effect of the
Ordinance made and established upon the Erecting of this Court of the
Augmentations. So help you God and all Saints.

The Oath of the Receiver of the Court of Augmentations.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and
nothing conceal, but true Account make of all such Revenues, Rents, Sums of
Money, and other profits wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged, by reason of
your Office; ye shall make no Petition nor ask any allowance, but such as shall
be good, just, true, and reasonable; And ye shall do all and every thing and
things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, according to the form and
effect of the Ordinance made and established upon the Erection of this Court of
Augmentation. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of Surveyor of the Lands of the Court of Augmentations.
Y E shall truly serve the King in your Office of Surveyor of Lands within the
Survey of this Court of the Augmentations, and to your cunning, wit, and power,
shall truly do and execute all and every thing and things which ye ought to do
by reason of your Office, according to the form and effect of the Ordinance,
and establishment of this Court. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Messenger of the Court of the Augmentations.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of
Messenger of this Court of the Augmentations, as well in speedy serving all and
singular Process to you to be delivered, without fraud, covin, guile, or
deceit, as also making true and speedy Certificate to this Court of the same;
and that you well and truly do and execute all and every other thing and things
which ye ought to do, by Reason of your Office. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of Henry the third, French King, for observing of the Statutes of the
Order of the Garter.
W E Henry by the Grace of God King of France and Pologne do Swear, Vow, and
Protest solemnly upon our Honor, and in the Word of a King, That we shall
observe, keep, and maintain, the Statutes and Orders of the right Noble Order
of St. George, called the Garter, so far forth as they shall not be found
contrary to our Religion Catholic, Greatness, and Majesty Royal, nor to the
Statutes and Ordinances of Our two Orders of the blessed Holy Ghost, and of St.
Michael.

In witness whereof we have Signed this present with our own Hand, and caused
the same to be sealed with our Privy Seal at Paris the last day of February,
Anno 1585. Henry Prilart.

The Oath of a Knight of the Garter, at his first admission, as it was used in
the time of King, P. and Queen Mary.
Y Ou being chosen to be one of the Honorable Companions of the most
Honorable Order of the Garter, shall promise, and by those holy Evangelists by
you manifestly touched, swear truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the
Statutes of the said Order, and every Article in the same contained, for so
much as to you pertains and belongs. And further, That you shall help to defend
and maintain, so much as in you lies the Rights and Liberties of the College
of our Blessed Lady, and Saint George the Martyr, wherein the Honorable Order
of the Garter shall be founded.

The Oath Ministered to them of the Kings Chamber by the Lord Chamberlain, in
the time of King H. 8.
J A. B. swear by the holy Evangelists, That I faith and truth shall bear unto
our Sovereign Lord Henry 8. King of England, and of France, and Lord of
Ireland, and unto the Queen our Sovereign Lady his Wife, and to their Issue;
and in and upon the Office of C. D. I shall duly and truly await and attend
unto which at this time I am admitted and received; I shall not know any
Treason or thing prejudicial compassed, attempted, or imagined, against our
Sovereign Lord or Sovereign Lady, or their Issue, or any of them, but I shall
incontinent upon the said knowledge discover it unto our Lord Chamberlain, or
unto his Deputy, if he have any, or in their absence to one of their Ushers in
the said Chamber; I shall not discover any secrets or things that may happen to
come to mine Ears, that shall touch the Kings Council, or the honor of his
Chamber; And I shall be obedient unto my said Lord Chamberlain, and unto his
said Deputy, if he have any, and unto the said Ushers, and their Commandments
diligently and faithfully observe and keep to my power; I shall eschew all
manner of Riots, making of Bandies, Quarrels or Debates either within the said
Chamber, or without, but I shall forbid and let all such inconveniences as far
forth as I may; And also let the said Officers, or one of them, have knowledge
thereof; Also I shall not depart out of the Kings Court, without License
appointed and had of my said Lord Chamberlain, or of his Deputy, if he have
any: Which Premises, and every of them, with all other Commandments to be
given on the behalf or our said Sovereign Lord, by my said Lord Chamberlain or
his said Deputy if he have any, or any of the said Ushers, I shall faithfully
observe, obey, and keep to the uttermost of my power. So help me God, and his
Saints.

The Oath Ministered to the Clerk of the Council to Prince Henry Son to King
James
Y Ou shall swear, That well and truly you shall serve the High and Mighty
Prince Henry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, in the
Office and Clerk of his Council, and matters committed to you, or treated of by
his Council, to be kept secret, you shall faithfully keep; And you shall not
know nor understand, nor suffer any thing tending to the hurt or disheriting of
his Highness, be decreased by any means, so far forth as ye may let it; and if
ye may not let it, ye shall make it clearly and expressly known to his Highness;
and that ye shall do, and procure and purchase his Highness profit in all that
ye reasonably may as God you help. Perused and Examined by Mr. Stevens the
Prince's Atrorney.

The Oath to be ministered to any of King James his Servants in ordinary or
extraordinary.
Y Ou shall swear, Faithfully and truly to serve our Sovereign Lord the King,
James of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, his Heirs and Successors; You
shall serve him in the room and place of N. N. in ordinary: You shall know
nothing that shall be prejudicial to his Person, his State, his Crown, or
Dignity, but you shall with all diligence make it known to the Lord
Chamberlain, Vice-Chamberlain, or some other of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council; You shall be obedient to the Lord Chamberlain, Vice-Chamberlain,
and Gentlemen-Ushers, in all matters tending to his Majesty's Service. So help
you God, and Jesus Christ.

The Oath ordained to be ministered to the Princess Mary's Council, when her
household was established in the 17. year of King H. 8.
Y Ou shall be true and faithful unto the King our Sovereign Lord King Henry 8.
and unto his Heirs and Successors Kings of England; And ye shall be faithful
and true unto my Lady Princess Grace; And ye shall, according to your Wit,
Discretion, Knowledge, and Experience, give unto her true and faithful Counsel
in all things, as shall be demanded of you by way of good advice and counsel:
Ye shall also keep secret and conserve her said counsel, without disclosing of
the same to any person, except he be of the same Council; And if the matter
touch any of the said Council, ye shall not disclose the same unto him; ye
shall not also promote nor further any matter in her said Council for any Meed,
Reward, Favor, Affection, or Displeasure; And in case you shall perceive any
thing to be done or attempted contrary to her Honor, Estate, Degree, or
Surety, ye shall to the uttermost of your power, withstand and let the same.
And generally, You shall do all manner of things that unto a good, true, and
faithful Counselor shall appertain. So help you God, and the holy Contents of
this Book.

The Oath ministered to the Treasurers of War, for the Receipt and Issues of the
three Subsidies, and three Fifteens, granted by Act of Parliament in the 21.
year of King James.
Y Ou shall swear, That you being appointed one of the Treasurers for the
receiving of the three Subsidies, and three Fifteens and Tenths, granted by the
Temporality, shall not issue any part of those Moneys which shall be paid unto
your hands, or unto the hands of any other by your appointment or consent,
without the special Warrants of those Persons which are by his Majesty
appointed to be of his Council for the Wares, and in this Act nominated, or of
five of them at the least, whereof two of them to be such as are of His
Majesty's Privy Council, under their Hands.

The Oath ministered to the Council of War, for the true employing of the three
Subsidies, and three Fifteens, granted by Act of Parliament in the 21. year of
King James.
Y Ou shall swear, That you being one of the Council of War chosen by His
Majesty, and nominated in this Act, shall make no Warrant for any Moneys to be
issued, which are given by this present Act, but for some of those ends which
are expressed in this Act; And that all such Warrants as shall be made by you,
shall mention in them that those Moneys are to be employed according to the
true meaning of this Act; and to the best of your means you shall employ the
same accordingly.

The Oath ministered to Garter King of Arms at his Creation.
F Irst, ye shall swear, To honor and obey the Kings Highness, as first and
Sovereign of this most noble Order, and after him other Knights of the same
Order, namely in such things as shall belong to your Office, which shall be
found reasonable. And because you be taken as here to be made privy of Council,
you shall swear Always to be a man of silence, true and faithful in all things
here to be done, and shall in no wise disclose any part thereof.

Ye shall swear also, That ye shall be faithful and diligent to fulfill,
perform, and execute all things that shall be committed to your charge and
credit; and diligently to enquire of all the Noble Acts of all and every the
said Noble Knights of the said Order, and shall certify the Register thereof,
that he may put the same in perpetual Memory.

Moreover when any Knight of the said Order shall die, ye shall strait, upon
knowledge thereof, first make the Sovereign privy thereof, and after him the
other Knights of the said Order, to be made privy thereunto.

And finally, ye shall swear, That ye shall truly and faithfully use and
exercise this same Office. So God you help, and these blessed Evangelists.

The Oath of a King of Arms at the time of his Coronation.
Y E shall swear by the Oath ye received when ye were made Herald, and by the
faith ye own to our Sovereign Lord the King, whose Arms you bear, That you
shall truly keep such things as be comprised in these Articles following:

First, when the King shall command you to do any Message either to Emperor or
King, Prince, or any other Estate of what condition or degree soever he be of,
either within the Realm or without, you shall do it as honorable and truly as
your wit, reason, and discretion shall serve you; and as greatly to the
advantage of your said Sovereign and his Realm, and true report bring again to
your foresaid Sovereign, of your Message that ye shall do, as near to the
charge to you committed, in word and substance as your said reason shall
attain, always keeping your self secret for any manner of motion, except it be
to such persons as you are commanded to utter your Charge unto.

Secondly, you shall do your true endeavor, every day to be more cunning than
other in the Office of Arms, so that ye may be the better furnished to teach
others under you, and execute with more wisdom and eloquence, such charges as
your Sovereign or any Noble man of this Realm shall deliver, or give unto you
by virtue of the Office which his Highness will erect unto you at any time,
not discovering in no wise such as ye are commanded to keep close, unless it be
prejudicial unto the King his Sovereign Lord, and to this Realm.

Thirdly, you shall do your best endeavor to enquire of all the Noblemen and
Gentlemen within your Province or Marches, which should bear Coats in the
Field, in the Service of our Sovereign Lord, or Commissioners, and them with
their Issues truly to Register, together with their Arms as they may truly
bear, with their difference due in Arms to be given, and whether they hold any
service of Knights Fee, whereby they should do the King Service for the defense
of his Realm.

Fourthly, ye shall not be strange to teach Heralds and Pursevants of such
doubts as they shall move unto you, howbeit you shall ask the Pursevants
whether he have moved it, and desired any of the Heralds to instruct him
therein; and if he say nay, ye shall limit him to one of them, or else ease him
your self; and if you cannot, then you shall show it to the Constable or
Marshal: Also you shall keep from month to month in your Marches your Chapters
to the increase of cunning in the Office of Arms, and the doubts which cannot
there be resolved and answered, you shall move to the Constable and Marshal.

Fifthly, ye shall observe and keep, to your cunning and power, all such Oaths
as ye make when ye were created Herald, to the honor and worship of Nobles,
and great increase of learning and good living, and namely in eschewing of
slanders, and dishonest places and persons reproached; and to be always readier
to excuse then to blame any Noble Person unless ye be charged to speak truth by
the Kings Highness. Constable, or Marshal, or any Peer Judicial; Also you shall
promise, to Register all Acts of Honor in manner and form as they are done, as
far forth as your power and cunning can extent. As God shall you help, and by
the holy Contents of this Book.

The Oath of a Herald at Arms, at the time of his Creation.
F Irst, ye shall swear, to be true to the most High and Mighty Prince our
Sovereign Lord the King that here is; And if ye have knowledge or any
imagination of Treason, in Language or word, that moves to the derogative or
hurt of his Estate or Highness, who God defend, you shall in that case, as
honestly and as soon as shall be possible discover and show to his Highness, or
to his Noble and discreet Counsel, and it in no wise conceal.

Secondly, ye shall promise and swear, That ye shall be conversant and
serviceable to all Gentlemen; to do their commandments, to the worship of
Knighthood; and to excuse their Worship by your good Council that God has sent
you, ever ready to offer your self unto them.

Thirdly, ye shall swear and promise, To be secret, and to keep the secret of
Knights, Esquires, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, as a Confessor of Arms; and not to
discover them in no wise, except it be Treason, as aforesaid.

Fourthly, ye shall promise and swear, That if it fortune you in any Land or
Country to go or ride, and find any Gentleman of Name and Arms that has lost
his good in Worship of Knighthood in the Kings Service, or in any other place
of Worship, and is fallen into Poverty, ye shall aid, support, and succor him
in that you may, if that he ask of you goods to his sustenance, ye shall give
him part of that which God has sent you, to your power, and as ye may bear.

Fifthly, ye shall swear and promise, if ye be in any place where ye hear of
any debate or evil Language, between party and party, that is not worshipful,
profitable, nor virtuous, that ye report it not forth, but to their worship,
and to the best.

Sixthly, if ye be in any place where you here debate or language dishonest
between Gentleman and Gentleman, whereunto you are called as a Witness, or
required by Princes, Judges, or any other, unless the Law do so compel you, ye
shall not open without License of both Parties; and having License, ye shall
for any love, dread, or favor of any party, report the truth.

Seventhly, ye shall promise and swear, To be true and secret to all
Gentlewomen, Widows, or Maids; and in case be that any man would do them
wrong, or enforce them, or disherit them of livelihoods, and they having not
goods to pursue their Rights, if they require you of supportation, you shall
help them with your goods, wisdom, and counsel, and show their griefs to the
Prince and Judges.

Eighthly, ye shall swear and pronounce, That ye shall forsake all places
dishonest of hazardy, and daily going to common Taverns and places of debate,
and all manner of vice, and take you to virtues to your power. These Articles,
and all other Articles abovesaid, you shall truly keep. So God you help, and by
the Cross of this Sword, that belongs to Knighthood.

The Oath of a Pursevant of Arms, at his Creation.
F Irst, ye shall swear, That ye shall be true to the most High, Mighty, and
most excellent Princess, the Queens most excellent Highness that now is; and if
ye have any knowledge, or hear any imagination of Treason, of Language, or
word, that should sound to the derogation or hurt of her Estate and Highness,
which God forbid, ye shall in that case as hastily and as soon as is to you
possible, discover and show it unto her Highness, or to the Honorable and
discreet Council.

Secondly, ye shall also dispose you to be lowly, humble, and serviceable to
all those States Universal, that be Christians, not lying in wait to blame, nor
hurt none of the said Estates in any thing that may touch their Honors.

Thirdly, ye may dispose to be secret and sober in your Por^, and not to abuse
in Language, ready to commend, and loath to blame, and diligent in your
service, eschewing vice, and taking you to virtue, and true in your reports;
And so to exercise whiles you be in the Office of Pursevant, that your merits
may cause your more preferment in the Office of Arms in the time to come; All
such Articles and things as belong to a Pursevant of Arms to keep, you shall
well and truly keep and observe. So God you help, and Holidome, and by the
Contents of this Book.

The Oath of the Knights of the Round Table, in the time of King Arthur.
N Ot to put off your Armor from your Body, but for requisite rest in the
night.

To search for mavelous adventures, whereby to win renown.

To defend the poor and simple people intheir right.

Not to refuse aid unto them that shall ask it in any just quarrel.

Not to hurt, offend, or play any lewd part the one with the other.

To fight for the protection, defense and welfare of his friends.

Not to purchase any goods or particular profit, but Honor and the Title of
honesty.

Not to break faith promised or sworn, for any cause or occasion whatsoever.

To put forth and spend his life for the honor of God and his Country, and to
choose rather to die honestly then to live shamefully.

The Oath which the new King of Polonia made to the Turk, in Anno 1573.
I Promise and swear by the mighty God merciful, and being the maker of Heaven
and Earth, and of all things that are therein, by these holy Evanglists, by
holy Baptism, and by Christian faith. That all those that I know shall be
manifested to high and mighty Solomon, Emperor of the Turks, whose Empire God
certify, I will be friend to his friends, and enemy to his enemies: I will be
a redeemer of his Captives out of the hands of his Enemies, there shall be no
fraud or deceit on my part. If I shall neglect thus to do, I will be an
Apostata, a forsaker of the holy Commandments, of the Gospel of the Christians;
I will say that the Gospel is false and untrue; I will cross both Altar and
Priest; I will slay Swine upon the Fount, I will deny the holy Trinity, and
will worship them; I will commit whoredom upon the Altar; and will receive the
curse of the Saints even as God shall behold me from Heaven.

The Oath of Homage done and performed by an Archbishop.
I F your Homage, by reason of my Tenure in the Manor of A. in the County of
B. become Leigeman of life and limb, and of earthly worship, and faith, and
troth, I shall bear unto you, to I Have and die against all manner of men; as God
me help, and all Saints. I shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth
shall bear to you my Sovereign Lord King H. and to your Heirs Kings of England,
of life and limb, and earthly worship, for to live and die against all people;
and diligently I shall intend unto your needs and business, after my wit and
power; and your Counsel I shall keep and lein, and truly I shall knowledge; And
the servicedue of the Temporalities of my Arch-Bishoppwrick B.C. the which I
claim to hold of you, and the which ye gave and yield to me; And to you and
your Commandments, in that to me appertains and belongs, I shall be
obeysant. As God me help, and all Saints.

The Oath Appointed by Queen Elizabeth in June 1579. to be ministered by the
Lord President of Wales unto the Council established in those parts, etc.
Y Ou shall swear, That to the uttermost of your power, wit, and cunning, you
shall be true and faithful to the Queens Highness our Sovereign Lady, and to
her Heirs and Successors; And that you do utterly testify and declare in your
conscience, that the Queens Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm of England, and of all other her Highness Dominions and Countries, as
well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal; And that
no Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, power, Supremacy, Preeminence, or Authority: And do promise, That
from henceforth you shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Queens Highness
her lawful Heirs and Successors, and to your power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminencies, and Authorities, granted or
belonging to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom and Realm.

You shall not know, nor have any thing that may any way be prejudicial to her
Highness or to her Commonwealth, peace and quiet of this her Highness Realm,
but you shall with all diligence reveal and disclose the same to her Highness,
or to such other person or persons of her Graces Privy Counsel as you shall
think meet, and will soonest convey it, and bring it to her Highness knowledge.

You shall serve her Majesty truly and faithfully in the room and place of her
Highness Counsel; You shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated in
any Counsel, faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion, according to
your heart and conscience; in no wise forbearing so to do, for any manner
respect of favor, meed, dread, displeasure, or corruption.

You shall faithfully and uprightly, to the best of your power cause Justice to
be duly and indifferently ministered to the Queens Majesty's Subjects, that
shall have cause to sue for the same, according to the equity and the Order of
the Law.

Finally, You shall be vigilant, diligent, and circumspect in all your doings
and proceedings, touching the Queens Majesty and all her Affairs.

All which points and Articles before expressed, with all other Articles signed
with the Queens Majesty's own hand, and delivered to me the Lord President of
her Highness Counsel established in those parts, you shall faithfully observe,
keep, and fulfill, to the uttermost of your power, wit, will, and cunning, So
help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

The Oath that a Gentleman Usher does give to any that is sworn the Kings
Servant in the time of H. 8.
F irst, you shall swear upon the Holy Evangelists, That you faith and truth
shall bear unto our most gracious and most dread Sovereign Lord, and unto his
Issue Kings of England.

Ye shall be here sworn in and unto the room of a Gentleman Usher, or etc.
whereunto at this present time by the Kings Highness Commandment you are
admitted and received, you shall from henceforth truly and diligently attend
and wait.

Ye shall not know or conceal any thing prejudicial compassed, attempted, or
imagined, against our said most gracious and most dread Sovereign Lord the King
or his Issue, or any of them; but you shall incontinently upon the said
knowledge discover the same unto my Lord great Chamberlain, or else to Master
Vice-Chamberlain, and in their absence, to one of the Ushers of the Kings
Chamber.

Ye shall not discover any secrets or other things that may touch the Kings
most Honorable Council, or to the Honor of his Chamber.

Ye shall be obedient unto the Lord Great Chamberlain, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain,
and unto the Ushers of the said Chamber, and to their Commandments fully, and
keep to the uttermost of your power.

Ye shall eschew all manner of Riots, Routs, unlawful Assemblies, and making of
Bands, Quarrels, Debates, Strifes, Controversies, either within the Kings
Chamber, or without; and ye shall forbid and let the same, to the uttermost of
your power; and ye shall let the said Officers or one of them have knowledge
thereof without any further delay.

Ye shall not wear neither Livery, Cognizance, nor Badge of no man's, be
retained of no man, but only to the Kings Majesty; nor ye shall not retain
contrary to the Statute.

Ye shall not depart out of the Kings Court, without License had and obtained
of my Lord Great Chamberlain, or else of Master Vice-Chamberlain, or his Deputy
in his absence.

All the which Premises, and every of them with all and singular other
Commandments whatsoever they are, or shall happen to be given you in charge,
on the behalf of our most Gracious and most Excellent Majesty by my Lord Great
Chamberlain, Master Vice-Chamberlain, or any of the said Ushers; Ye shall on
your behalf observe, perform, fulfill and keep, to the uttermost of your power.
So help you God, and all his Saints, and by the Holy Contents of this Book.

The Oath ministered to the Kings Servants, as well Knights and Esquires for the
Body as others, in the time of Henry 8.
Y E shall be from henceforth during your life natural, faithful and true, and
faith shall bear, and faithfully and truly ye shall serve the King our
Sovereign Lord H. 8. by the Grace of God King of England and France, and Lord
of Ireland, and in Earth Supreme Head of the Church of England, and to his
Heirs of his Body begotten, against all Men that may live or die, of what
Estate, Degree, or Condition soever they be.

Ye shall nothing do or attempt that in any manner of wise may be hurtful or
prejudicial to our said Sovereign Lord, or to his Heirs; And if it shall happen
at any time hereafter, any thing to come to your knowledge, that in any manner
of ways be hurtful or prejudicial to our said Sovereign Lord, or to his Heirs,
or that may touch the surety or honor of their persons, ye shall not only let
it to the best of your power, but also in all haste possible shall show it to
our Sovereign Lord, or to some of his Council attending upon his person, so
that the same may come to the knowledge of his Grace.

Also ye shall not be, nor stand confederate, nor Banded, nor Band your self,
or yet be retained in any cause or matter, to, or with, or toward any manner
of person, of what estate, condition, or degree soever he be of, privily or
openly; neither by Promise, Sign, Indenture, Fee, nor by any other manner of
wise whatsoever it be, otherwise then the Law will suffer or permit you.

You shall also diligently serve the Kings Grace in the room of N. N. and not
depart from the Court where his Grace for the time shall be, unless ye be
licensed so to do by his Grace, or by his Lord Chamberlain, or in his absence
by his Vice Chamberlain, and to be obedient in that they shall command you to
do within the Kings House, or elsewhere touching the Kings service in that
appertains to the room of N. N. well and truly keep, and observe on your
behalf. So help you God and all his Saints, and by this Book.

The Oath ministered in Parliament to the Duke of Bedford, and other Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, for the according of all Controversies between the Duke
of Gloucester, and the Bistop of Winchester Chancellor of England,in the fourth
year of H. 6.
T Hat my Lord of Bedford, and my said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and each
of them shall as far forth as their cunning and discretion sufficiently, truly,
justly, and indifferently counsel, and advise the King, and also proceed and
acquit himself in all the said matters and quarrels withouten, that they or any
of them shall privily, or apart make, or show himself, or be party, or parcel
therein naught, being, or eschewing so to do for affection, love, meed, doubt,
or dread of any person or persons, and that they shall in all ways keep secret
all that shall. be conveyed by way of counsel in the matters and quarrels
abovesaid in the foresaid Parliament, withouten that they or any of them shall
by word, writing, or in any wise open it, or discover it to any of the said
parties, or to any other person that is not of the said Counsel; but if he have
especial Commandment thereto of the King, or of my said Lord of Bedford, and
that each of them shall with all his might and power by by him, and by his
strength, and assist by way of Counsel, or else unto the King to my said Lord
of Bedford, and to the remnant of my said Lords, to put the said parties to
reason, and naught suffer, that any of the said parties by them, or theirs,
proceed or attempt by way of feat against the Kings Peace; nor help, assist, or
comfort any of them hereto, but let him with all their might and power, and
withstand him, and assist unto the King, and my said Lord of Bedford in keeping
of the Kings Peace, and redressing of all such manner of proceedings by way of
feat and force.

The Oath of a Bishop.
I A. B. Doctor in Divinity, late Bishop of D. and now elected Bishop of L. do
verily testify and declare in my conscience, that your Majesty is the only
supreme Governor of this Realm of England, and of all other your Majesty's
Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, Causes,
as Temporal, and that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate
has, or ought to have any Jurisdictory power, superiority, preeminence, or
authority Ecclesiastical or Temporal within this Realm; and therefore I do
utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities,
and Authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall and will bear true
faith and allegiance to your Majesty, your lawful Heirs, and Successors, and to
my power shall assist, and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences,
and Authorities granted and belonging to your Highness, your Heirs, and lawful
Successors, or united or annexed to the Imperial Crown of this your Majesty's
Realms; and further I acknowledge and confeses to have the said Bishop of L.
and the Possessions there of your Highness; and after the same I do my homage
presently unto your Majesty, to whom and to your lawful Heirs and Successors, I
shall be faithful and true. So help me God, and the contents of this Book.

The Oath of a Privy Counselor, framed now in the time of King James.
Y Ou shall swear, To be a true and faithful Servant unto the Kings Majesty,
and one of his Privy Counsel; you shall not know, or understand of any manner
of thing to be attempted, done or spoken against his Majesty's Person, Honor,
Crown, or dignity Royal, but you shall let and withstand the same to the
uttermost of your power, and either cause it to be revealed unto his Majesty
himself, or to such of his Privy Counsel as shall advertise his Highness of the
same; you shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated in Counsel,
faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion according to your heart and
conscience, and shall keep secret all matters committed and revealed unto you,
or that shall be treated of secretly in Counsel, and if any of the same
Treaties or Counsels shall touch any of the Counselors. you shall not reveal
it unto him, but shall keep the same until such time as by the consent of his
Majesty, or of the Counsel, publication shall be made thereof; You shall to
your utmost bear faith and allegiance unto the Kings Majesty, his Heirs, and
lawful Successors, and shall assist, and defend all Jurisdictions,
Preeminences, and Authorities granted to his Majesty, and annexed to his Crown
against all foreign Princes, Persons, Prelates, or Potentates, etc. by Act of
Parliament or otherwise; and generally in all things you shall do as a faithful
and true Servant and Subject ought to do to his Majesty. So help you God, and
by the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath of the Lord Privy Seal.
Y E shall as far forth as your cunning and discretion suffices, truly,
justly, and evenly execute, and exercise the Office of Keeper of the Kings
Privy Seal to you by his Highness committed, not leaving or eschewing so to do
for affection, love, meed, doubt, or dread of any person or persons, and ye
shall take special regard that the said Privy Seal in all places where you
shall direct unto, may be in such substantial wise used and safely, that no
other person without the Kings special commandment, or your assent or
knowledge, shall more seal, or imprint any thing with the same, and generally
ye shall observe, fulfill, and do all and every thing which to the Office of
the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal duly belongs and appertains. So help
you God, and by the contents of this Book.

The Oath of a Secretary of State.
Y Ou shall swear, To be a true and faithful Servant unto the Kings Majesty, as
one of the Secretaries of his Majesty's Highness Privy Counsel; you shall not
know or understand of any matter or thing to be attempted, done, or spoken
against his Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown, or Dignity Royal, but you shall
let and withstand the same to the uttermost of your power, and either do or
cause it to be revealed, either to his Majesty himself, or to his Privy
Counsel; You shall keep secret all matters revealed and committed unto you, or
that shall be secretly treated of in Counsel, and if any of the said Treaties
or Counsels shall touch any of the said Counselors; you shall not reveal the
same unto him, but shall keep the same until such time as by the consent of his
Majesty, or of the Counsel publication shall be made thereof; you shall to your
uttermost bear faith and allegiance unto the Kings Majesty, his Heirs, and
lawful Successors and shall assist, and defend all Jurisdictions,
Preemininencies, and Authorities granted to his Majesty, and annexed to his
Crown against all foreign Princes, Persons, Prelates, Potentates, etc. by Act
of Parliament or otherwise; And generally in all things you shall do as a
faithful and true Servant, and Subject (ought to do) to his Majesty. So help
you God, and by the holy contents of this Book.

This clause above noted thus, C. C. is the same which is set down more largly
in the Oath of Supremacy, in the first Act of Parliament, in the first year of
Queen Elizabeth, which Oath must be taken at the same time with this, and
therefore is not needful to be here recited.

The Oath of the Lords Keeper of the Great Seal of England.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly you shall serve out Sovereign Lord the
King, and his people in the Office of the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, and ye shall do right to all manner of People, poor and rich, after
the Laws and Usages of this Realm, and truly ye shall counsel the King, and his
Council you shall leave and keep, and you shall not know, nor suffer the hurt
or disheriting of the King, or that the rights of the Crown be decreased by any
mean, as far forth as you may let it, and if you may not let it you shall make
it clearly and expressly to be known unto the King, with your true advice and
counsel, and that you shall do, and purchase the Kings profit in all that you
reasonably may, as God you help, and by the contents of this Book.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Signet.
Y Ou shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King, and his heirs and
Successors, Kings and Queens of England; and also you shall keep secret his
Counsel in all things you shall be privy unto concerning the Office of the
Signet, without uttering or disclosing the same to any person; and if you shall
hear, or know any thing either in word or deed which shall be in any wise to
the derogation or hurt of his Majesty's Person and Royal Estate, you shall it
let to your power as in you lies; and as honestly as is possible, shall
discover, and show the same to his Highness, or to some of his discreet
Council. So help you God, and by the holy contents of this Book,

The Oath of the Deputy of the Town of Calice, ordered by Parliament in Anno
XXVII. Hen. 8.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be faithful true unto our Soyeraign Lord King
Henry 8. by the Grace of God King of England and of France, defender of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head, of the Church of England;
And if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or hurtful unto his
Highness, or his Heirs, or to his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; ye
shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in case ye cannot, ye
shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or to such of his
Council as ye think will show it unto him, and ye shall safely keep to the use
of our said Sovereign Lord, and of his Heirs, and defend to the uttermost of
your power this his Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, as much as to you
by reason of your Office belongs; and in all things to be done that touches
the safeguard, defense, and good Governance of the said Town, and Marches; Ye
shall give as it shall need from time to time your true, faithful, and diligent
Counsel to the other the Kings Officers of the same Town and Marches, and ye
shall at no time be absent from your said Office without the Kings special
license obtained in that behalf. Ye shall well and truly oversee the Marshal,
and all other Officers, his, and their Ministers and Servants, and their
Charge, and every one of them in his degree entreat in his Office as
appertains, not suffering any of them to do in his said Office, or by color
thereof, any excess, extortion, bribery, or exaction; and if any of them be
found, or approved in that case culpable, that without favor or delay ye
proceed to the punishment of them, and every of them to the example of other;
Ye shall do your devoyer at your power to the keeping of the Peace among all
estates, and other persons of what degree or condition soever they be within
the said Town dwelling, or thereunto from time to time repairing, not suffering
any Congregations, Assemblies, Commotions, or Conventicles to be made within
the said Town, against the said Peace, or against the good, restful, and
Politic Governance of the said Town; And if any person of what degree or
condition soever he, or they be within the said Town, that provokes privily,
or appartly any such Congregation, Assembly, Commotion, Sedition or
Conventicle, as be found faulty thereof, either else that takes upon him any
unlawful maintenance, to the perturbance or violation of the said Peace, or
against right to oppress by might any person; Ye shall resist and let, with the
advice and aid of the residue of the Kings Council of the said Town, and do
such punishment thereunto as with reason may serve, without any exception of
person, not sparing so to do for favor, love, dread, or meed of any person;
And that as much as in you shall lie, to your power you shall foresee that the
said Town be sufficiently Victualled from time to time, as unto the same
necessarily shall appertain or belong; And ye shall oversee the Rule and
Governance of the Mayor, and Aldermen of the said Town touching all manner of
Victual and other things appertaining to their charge for the Commonweal,
profit, and policy of the said Town, and if any default ye find therein, ye
shall minister and show it unto them, charging them to amend and redress it,
and if they be therein negligent or froward, ye shall then by the said advice
purvey such remedy by your wisdom and discretion as can be thought most
expedient with reason; And if you, and the said Council cannot provide remedy
in that behalf; that then ye shall disclose the same to the Kings Highness, or
to such of the Kings Council as ye think verily will inform the Kings Highness
thereof with speed; And ye shall administer truly, rightfully, and
indifferently Justice to all manner of person and persons, that shall have any
cause moved or depending before you in the said Town and Marches, without
having any manner of respect to any person for love, meed, dread, or favor;
And ye shall in time conveniable, after your said discretion, visit, and
oversee the Locks and shutting of the Gates and Posterns of the said Town, and
also the governance of the Watch, Tower, Wall, and Ditches of the same, and
generally all other things necessary for the surety, safeguard, and defense
thereof; And ye shall not appoint, nor admit any person or persons into any
room within the retinue of the said Town belonging to your Admission; but if
the same person or persons be born within the Realm for England, Wales,
Ireland, the said Town of Calice, and the Marches of the same; and that the
said person or persons be not Artificers, except he or they be a Bowyer, or
Amorour, Fletcher, Crossbow maker, or Smith, and the same Person so by you
named not to be admitted to any such room, nor to enjoy nor exercise the same
room to the time he be viewed, examined, and enabled thereunto as well by the
Treasurer and Comptroller, as by the residue of the Kings Council there then
being present; And you shall not admit, nor suffer any Alien born out of the
Kings obeisance, to take and inhabit any dwelling House within the Town of
Calice and Marches of the same, as much as to you appertains, except the said
person be licensed by the Kings Letters Patents so to do under his Great Seal,
any Grant, or Grants heretofore made to the contrary notwithstanding: And ye
shall see surely to be kept, and safely and straightly cause to be observed as
much as in you lies all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or to
be made by the King our Sovereign Lord Henry VIII. or by his Council Authorized
for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense, and good orders of his Town
of Calice, and the Marches of the same, doing due execution upon the
Transgressors of any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no
regard to the persons so transgressing for affection, meed, dread, or any other
cause whatsoever; As God you help, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of Guysnes, ordered by Parliament, Anno 27. H. 8.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord King
Hen. 8. by the Grace of God King of England, and of France, Defend^^ of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supreme head of the Church of England, and
to his Heirs, and if you shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or
hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or his Town of Calice, or Marches of
the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in case
ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or to
such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him; And ye shall safely keep
to the use, and behoof of our said Sovereign Lord, and of his Heirs and defend
to the uttermost of your power the Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes, by his
Highness appointed and assigned to your safe keeping, and in all things to be
done that touches the defense, and good Governance of the Town of Calice, and
Marches of the same; ye shall give from time to time your true, faithful, and
diligent counsel and assistance to the Kings Deputy for the time being, and
other of the Council and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and ye shall be
personally remaining, and be resident upon your room and Office there, and at
no time to be absent from the same without the Kings special license obtained;
And you shall well and truly oversee, that all the said Officers and Ministers
of the said Castle and Town, and County of Guysnes, that shall serve the Kings
Highness there under you, shall diligently do, cause, and suffer to be done,
all and every thing and things that unto them shall appertain and belong
concerning the sure and safe keeping of the said Castle, Town, and County, and
if any of them be found, and approved to be remiss or negligent in doing his,
or their duty, that then ye without any favor or delay, proceed to the
correction and punishing of him or them so offending; and that ye do your duty
to your power to the keeping of the Peace among all and every person and
persons, of what degree or condition he or they be dwelling within the said
Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes, or thereunto from time to time repairing,
not suffering any unlawful Congregations, Conventions, or Conventicles to be
made within the said Castle, Town, or County of Guysnes, against good, restful,
and Politic Governance of the same, and duly to correct all and every person
or persons so offending; and that as much as in you shall lie, ye shall foresee
that the said Castle be furnished with Victuals, as with all other things
appertaining to the sale custody of the same that to you belongs of the duty
of your said Office; And that you truly, rightfully, and indifferently
administer Justice unto all and every Person and Persons that hereafter shall
have any cause or matter moved or depending before you in the said Castle,
Town, and County of Guysnes, without having any manner of respect to any Person
or Persons, for love, dread, meed, malice, or affection; And that you from time
to time as much as in you is foresee, that the Kings Highness be not deceived,
or defrauded in any of his Possessions, Rents, Revenues, and Profits which to
his Highness should appertain within the said Castle, Town, and County; And ye
shall not appoint, nor admit any Person or Persons within the retinue of the
said Castle; but if the said Person or Persons be born within the Realm of
England, Wales, Ireland, the said Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; and
that the said Person be sworn to be true Leigeman unto the King our Sovereign
Lord, and to his Heirs; And finally, ye shall observe and keep, or cause to be
observed and kept as much as in you shall be, during the time that you shall be
Captain there, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or to be made
by our said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs, or Successors, or by his or their
Council authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense, and good
orders of the Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes, doing due execution upon the
Transgressors offending any of the same Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having
no regard to the person so offending, for love, favor, meed, dread, or any
other cause whatsoever. So help you God, Holydome, and all Saints, and by this
Book.

The Oath of the High Marshal of Calice, ordained by Parliament in Anno 27.
Hen. 8.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord King
H. 8. By the Grace of God King of England and France, Defender of the Faith,
Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supreme head of the Church of England, and to his
Heirs; And if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or hurtful unto
his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same,
ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power; And in case ye cannot,
ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or unto such of his
Council as ye think will show it unto him; Ye shall be diligent obedient and
attendant to the Deputy of the said Town, and Marches for the time being, in
those things that to the service of the Kings sure, good, politic Government,
and defense of the said Town and Marches appertains, and in all things to be
done that touches the defense, safeguard, and good Government of the said Town
of Calice, and Marches of the same, shall give as it shall need from time to
time your true faithful, and diligent counsel to the Deputy for the time being,
and to the Kings Council, and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them
aid and assist to the uttermost of your power; and ye shall set, or do to be
set the Kings Watch, and that visit from time to time as unto your Office
appertains, as it is ordained to be used, searched; And if ye can any better
order or devise, ye shall show it unto the Deputy, and Kings Council of the
said Town and Marches, to the intent it may be set in the surest and strictest
way for the safeguard of the said Town and Marches; and that ye present not, or
do to be presented, nor imprisoned, nor cause to be imprisoned, any manner of
person, Watchman, or other without reasonable or just cause, and if any be
imprisoned may be delivered without Fees, or Costs paying. And that ye shall
duly and truly Arrest; and do to be Arrested, all and every person and persons,
according to the Laws used and accustomed within the said Town, and also all
and every other person or persons that ye shall know to be sugitive, taking the
Fees thereunto limited and accustomed without excess; and also that you take
Surety, or do to be taken of each Prisoner, as well of the Plaintiff as of the
Defendant, to pursue, and answer as the Law will ordain, so that every person
that comes into the Kings Court may have full right; and if any person by
chance meddle, drawing Weapon or smiting, that ye lead, or cause to be led to
Prison, there to remain according to the Laws, Customs and Ordinances of the
Town. And that ye Present every fault Presentable, and that ought by you to be
Presented by virtue of your Office, and if ye see any default, or that ye be
required of any person to take any distress for doing or cleansing of the said
Town, that ye do it duly, and truly, and cause it to be done by the Officers
under you, so that no man have cause to complain thereof; And ye shall make
good and true Records of all manner of things that ought to be Recorded, taking
no other Fees for the same then of right and reason have been used of old time;
And ye shall not hold with no Party against the other, none sustain, but ye
shall be true Reverentary, and Reporter of all that which belongs unto your
Office of Marshal, and if ye hear, or weet of any Menaces or Debate between any
parties that ye take, or cause to be taken of both the said Parties Sureties,
to the intent that the Peace may be kept and holden for the said Town and
Marches, and ye shall see surely to be kept, and straightly cause to be observed
as much as in you lies, all manner of Statutes, Laws, Ordinances made, or to
be made by our Sovereign Lord King Henry VIII. or his Heirs, or by his Council
authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense, and good order of
this Town of Calice and of the Marches of the same, doing due execution upon
the Transgressors of any of the same Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no
regard to the Person so Transgressing for affection, meed, dread, or any other
cause whatsoever.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of the Castle of Calice, ordained by Parliament in
Anno 27. H. 8.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord King
Hen. 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Surpeam head of the Church of England, and
to his Heirs, and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or
hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches
of the same; Ye shall reside the same to the uttermost of our power, and in
case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness or
unto such of his Council as ye shall think will show it unto him; Ye shall give
as it shall need from time to time your true faithful, and diligent counsel to
the Kings Deputy of his Town, and Marches of Calice for the time being, and to
the Kings Council, and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them shall
aid and assist to the uttermost of your power, in all things to be done
concerning safeguard, defense, and good governance of the said Town and
Marches; Ye shall safely keep true English to the use and behoof of our
Sovereign Lord, and of his Heirs to the uttermost of your power, his Castle and
Fortress of Calice, by his Highness appointed and assigned to your safe
keeping; Ye shall personally remain, and be resident upon your said room, and
Office there, and at no time to be absent from the same without the Kings
special license for the same obtained; And you shall well and truly oversee
that all Officers, Souldidiers, and Ministers of the said Castle and Fortress,
that shall serve the Kings Highness there under you, shall diligently do,
cause, and suffer to be done, all and every thing and things that unto them
shall appertain and belong, concerning the sure and safe keeping of the said
Castle and Fortress; and if any of them be found and proved to be remiss, or
negligent in doing his or their duty, or duties, that then ye without favor or
delay proceed to the correction and punition of him or them so offending; And
that you do your duty to your power to the keeping of the Peace among all and
every person or persons, of what condition he or they be, dwelling within the
said Castle or Fortress or thereunto from time to time repairing, not suffering
any unlawful Congregations, Conventions, or Conventicles to be made within the
said Castle or Fortress, against good, restful, and Politic. Government of the
same, and duly to correct all and every person and persons offending; And that
as much as in you shall lie, you shall see that the Castle and Fortress be
furnished as well with Victuals and with all other things appertaining to the
safe custody of the same that to you belongs by duty of your Office, and that
you truly, rightfully, and indifferently administer Justice to all and every
person and persons that hereafter shall have any Cause or matter moved, or
depending before you in the said Castle or Fortress, without having any manner
of respect to any person or persons, for dread, meed, malice, or affection; And
ye shall not appoint, nor admit any person or persons within the retinue of the
said Castle or Fortress, but if the said person or persons be born within the
Realm of England, Wales, and Ireland, or being English born within the said
Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; and that the said person to be true
Leigeman unto the King our Sovereign Lord, and to his Heirs. And finally, ye
shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and kept as much as in you
shall be during the time ye shall be Lieutenant there, all manner of Statutes,
Laws, and Ordinances made, and to be made by our said Sovereign Lord, his
Heirs, or his Successors, or by their Council Authorized for the same, for the
safeguard, tuition, defense, and good Orders of the said Castle and Fortress,
doing due Execution upon the Transgressors so offending any of the said
Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to any person so offending for
affection, meed, dread, or any other cause whatsoever. So God, etc.

The Oath of the Treasurer of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament in the
27th. Year of Hen. 8.
Y Ou shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
Hen. 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth, Supreme head of the Church of England,
and to his Heirs, and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial and
hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches
of the same; Ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in
case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or
unto such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him; Ye shall be
diligent, obedient, and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town, and Marches
for the time being, in those things that to the service of the King, sure and
Politic Governnance, and defense of the said Town and Marches appertains,
and in all things to be done that touches the safeguard and defense, and good
governance of the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the same; Ye shall give,
as it shall be need from time to time, your true, saithful, and diligent
counsel to the Deputy for the time being, and to the Council, and Officers of
the same Town and Marches, and them aid and assist to the uttermost of your
power, and that to your knowledge, wit, and power, for as much as in you is
during the time you shall be in your Office, you shall endeavor your self to
see his Highness answered, and truly satisfied of all Rents, Revenues, Issues,
Profits, and Commodities, as well casual as certain, whatsoever they be or
shall be which his Highness of right ought for to have, or hereafter shall
have, or be, or shall be to him belonging by any manner of mean within the said
Town, County, and Marches; and that he be in no wise defrauded, or deceived
thereof by your negligence or default; and that ye make no payment of none
Wages to none Officer nor other Soldier, unto such time as due Muster be had,
viewed, and taken, and the same comptrolled by the Comptrollers Book for the
time being; And ye shall from time to time, during the time ye shall be in your
Office, see all Artificers which be, or shall be in Wages under your Governance
and Rule, diligently, duly, and truly exercise and occupy their Occupations,
and Mysteries in the Kings Works, and that you shall not appoint, or admit any
person or persons into the Office or room of a Spear, or other Soldier within
your retinue, but if the said person or persons be born within the Realm of
England, Wales, Ireland, the said Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; And
that the said person be sworn to be true Leige-man unto the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his Heirs, and be an able person to serve the King, for the Defense
of the said Town and Marches; And finally you shall observe and keep, or cause
to be observed and kept as much as in you shall be, during the time that you
shall be in your Office, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or
to be made by our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, or by his or their
Council authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense, and good
Orders of the said Town and Marches. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of Ruisbank, as it was ordained by Parliament in
Anno 27. of Hen. 8.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord King
Henry the eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender
of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supreme head of the Church of
England, and to his Heirs; And if ye shall know any thing that shall be
prejudicial or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of
Calice, or Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of
your power, and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto
his Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him; Ye
shall give from time to time as it shall need your true, faithful, and diligent
counsel to the Kings Deputy of his Town and Marches, and them shall aid and
assist to the uttermost of your power in things to be done concerning the
safeguard, defense, and good Governance of the said Town and Marches; Ye shall
safely keep true English to the use and behoof of our said Sovereign Lord, and
of his Heirs, and defend to the uttermost of your power his Castle and Fortress
of Ruisbank, by his Highness appointed and assigned to your said keeping; Ye
shall be personally remaining and resident upon your said Office and Room
there, and at no time to be absent from the same without the Kings special
License for the same obtained; And you shall well and truly oversee that all
Officers, Soldiers, and Ministers of the said Castle and Fortress, that shall
serve the Kings Highness there under you, shall diligently do, cause, and
suffer to be done, all and every thing and things that unto them shall
appertain and belong, concerning the sure and safe keeping of the said Castle
and Fortress, and if any of them be found, and proved to be remiss, or
negligent in doing his or their duty; That then ye without Favor, or delay,
proceed to the correction and punition of him, or them so offending, and that
you do your duty to your power to the keeping of the Peace among all and every
person and persons, of what degree or condition ye or they be, dwelling within
the said Castle or Fortress, or thereunto from time to time repairing, not
suffering any unlawful Congregations, Conventions, or Conventicles to be made
within the said Castle or Fortress against good, restful, and Politic
Governance of the same; and duly to correct all and every person and persons
offending; and that as much as in you shall lie you shall see that the said
Castle and Fortress be furnished as well with Victual as with all other things
appertaining to the safe custody of the same that to you belongs by duty of
your said Office; and that you truly, rightfully, and indifferently administer
Justice to all, and every person and persons that hereafter shall have any
cause or matter, moved or depending before you in the said Castle or Fortress,
without having any manner of respect to any person or persons for love, dread,
meed, malice, or affection; And ye shall not admit, nor appoint any person or
persons within the said Castle and Fortress, but if the said person or persons
be born within the said Realms of England, Wales, Ireland, or being English
born within the said Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; and that the said
person, be sworn to be true Leigeman unto the King our Sovereign Lord, and unto
his Heirs; and finally, you shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and
kept as much as in you shall be, during the time you shall be Lieutenant there,
all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, and to be made by your said
Sovereign Lord, his Heirs, or his Successors, or by his or their Counsel
authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense, and good Orders
of the said Castle and Fortress, doing due execution upon the transgressors
offending any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to
the person so offending, for love, favor, meed, dread, or other cause
whatsoever. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Lieutenent of Hannues, as it was ordained by Parliament, in
Anno 27. Hen. 8.
T He said Lieutenant shall take the like Oath as is Ordained before for the
Lieutenant of Ruisbank.

The Oath of the Comptroller of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament in
Anno 27. Hen. 8.
Y Ou shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
Hen. 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth, Supreme head of the Church of England,
and to his Heirs, and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or
hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches
of the same; Ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in
case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or
unto such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him; Ye shall be
diligent, obedient, and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town, and Marches
for the time being, in those things that to the service of the King, sure good
Politic Governnance, and defense of the said Town and Marches appertains;
And that you shall not be absent from your said Office without the Kings
special License obtained in that behalf, and in all things to be done that
touches the safeguard, defense, and good governance of the said Town of Calice
and Marches of the same, shall give as it shall need from time to time, your
true, faithful, and diligent counsel for the time being, and to the Kings
Council and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid, and assist to
the uttermost of your power; And you shall so much as in you is, that due
Musters shall betaken at all the whole retinue, at two several times in the
year before the paying of their Wages and oftener if need shall be thought by
the Deputy and the Kings Council of the said Town to be needful; and in as much
as in you is, and shall be from time to time, ye shall see that the Deputy,
Soldiers, and all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever, be resident,
attendant, and furnished as to them in every degree appertains; and such as
ye shall find defective, or faulty from time to time; ye shall reform, and do
therein as to your Office belongs; ye shall also diligently and particularly
oversee the Provisions made, and to be made of all and every thing and things
necessary and expedient for the Kings Works, Buildings, and Reparations within
the said Town and Marches, and diligently see that all Artificers, and
Workmen, that from time to time shall be retained in the Kings Wages, shall do
their duties in all such things for the which they are so retained; And that
you from time to time, as much as in you is, foresee that the Kings Highness be
not deceived, nor defrauded of any of his Possessions, Rents, Revenues, Woods,
Waters, Customs, Forfeitures, and other Profits, as well certain as casual,
whatsoever they be, which to his Highness shall of right appertain; And that ye
shall not appoint, nor admit any person or persons into the room of a Soldier
within your retinue, but if the said person or persons be born within the said
Realm of England, Wales, and Ireland, and the said Town of Calice, and Marches
of the same, and the said person to be sworn to be true Leige-man unto the King
our Sovereign Lord, and to his Heirs; and to be an able person to serve the
King for defense of the said Town and Marches. And finally, ye shall observe
and keep, or cause to be observed and kept, as much as in you shall be, during
the time that you shall be in your Office, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and
Ordinances made and to be made, ut supra.

The Oath of the Master Porter, as it was ordained by Parliament, in Anno. 27.
H. 8.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord King
Henry 8. by the grace of God King of England, and of France, Defender of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in each Supreme Head of the Church of England, and
to his Heirs; and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or
hurtful unto his Highness or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches
of the same; ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power; And in
case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or
unto such of his Council, as ye think will show it unto him; Ye shall be
diligent, obedient, and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town and Marches,
for the time being, in those things that to the service of the Kings Sewer,
good politic Governance and defense of the said Town and Marches
appertains, and in all things to be done as touches the safeguard, defense,
and good governance of the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, shall
give, as it shall need, from time to time, your true, faithful, and diligent
counsel to the Deputy, for the time being; And to the Kings Council and
Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid and assist to the uttermost
of your power; Ye shall safely keep, duly and truly, the Keys of the Gates of
this Town of Calice at all times, as to your Office appertains; and if that
you may hear or espy coming by Water or by Land any tidings, you shall do it to
be known to the Kings Deputy of the said Town and Marches with diligence; And
ye shall not raise, nor suffer to be done or raised any new customs which might
turn to prejudice or hinderance of any person. And finally, ye shall not raise,
nor suffer to be done or raised any new customs which might turn to prejudice
or hinderance of any persons. And finally, ye shall see surely to be kept, and
straightly cause to be observed, as much as in you lies, all manner of
Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made or to be made by our said Sovereign Lord or
his Heirs and Successors, or by his Council authorized for the same, for the
safeguard, tuition, defense, and good Orders of this Town of Calice, and
Marches of the same, doing due Execution upon the Transgressors of any of the
said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to the person so
transgressing, for affection, meed, dread, or any other cause whatsoever, So
God, etc.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of Newenham Bridge, as it was ordained by
Parliament, in Anno 27. Hen. 8.
T He said Lieutenant shall take like Oath as is Ordained before for the
Lieutenant of Ruisbank.

The Oath of the under Marshal of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament, in
Anno 27. Hen. 8
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be Faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord King
Henry VIII. By the Grace of God King of England, and of France, Defender of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supreme head of the Church of England, and
to his Heirs; and if you shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or
hurtful to his Highness or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of
the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power; and in case
ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same to his Highness, or to such
of his Counsel as ye think will show it unto him; Ye shall be obedient to the
Kings Deputy for the time being, in all things to be done, that touches the
safeguard, defense, and good Governance of the said Town of Calice, and Marches
of the same; ye shall give, as it shall need, from time to time, your true,
faithful, and diligent counsel to the Kings Deputy for the time being, and to
the Kings Council, and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid and
assist to the uttermost of your power; Ye shall truly set, and cause to be set
the stand-Watch, nightly on the Walls of the said Town at the Castle hill, and
shall suffer no person or persons to keep and furnish the said stand-Watch, but
such person or persons as shall be by you appointed, and sworn according to the
Oath for the same devised; and also take sureties for his or their Abearing in
the Watch; And that ye neither present, nor do to be presented, nor imprisoned,
nor cause to be imprisoned, any manner of person or Watchman, nor other
whatsoever, without reasonable and true cause; And if you find any persons in
Chance-medly, drawing any weapon, or smiting, that ye do lead, or cause to be
lead, him or them to Prison without any let; And that ye present, or do to be
presented, every fault that belongs to your Office to be presented duly and
truly; and that ye take not, or cause to be taken, any other fees of any person
or persons then of right and of reason have been used, and of old time
accustomed, belonging to your Office; And also you shall not hold with no party
against other nor none sustain; but ye shall be true Referender of all that
belongs to your Office of under Marshal, and ye shall nightly be in the
Marketplace to take the Report of the Typped-staves of the furnishing of the
Watches in the East and West Houses, on the Walls, and shall certify the same
Report unto the Kings Deputy immediately. And all other things do that
appertain to your said Office of under-Marshal, during the time you shall
continue in your said Office. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of them that be or shall be made of the Kings Counsel of the Town and
Marches of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament in Anno 27. Hen. 8.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be good, true, and faithful unto our Sovereign
Lord King Henry the 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France,
Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head of the Church
of England, and to his Heirs, and ye shall be ready with good attendance to
come to the place of Council holden for the King, where it shall be assigned
and appointed by the Deputy of his Town, and Marches of Calice for the time
being, and not absent you there from without reasonable cause of excusation,
and that in all matters, causes, and questions that by the said Counsel be, or
shall be opened moved, stirred, or asked, you shall say and utter your good
advice, and opinion, clearly after your discretion and understanding, showing,
and giving in conclusion your true and faithful counsel, not letting for
favor, affection, love, affinity, hatred, wrath had, or born to any party, or
for corruptions of any goods, or other things whatsoever it be; And that all
manner Languages, Reasons, Conclusions had, moved, or uttered in the said
Council ye shall effectually keep them secretly, and not discover them in no
wise in other form or manner then by the same Counsel shall be ordained,
devised, and accorded; and whereas you can devise, think, or purpose any thing,
form, or rule that might be evident to turn to the honor, weal, and commodity
of the King our Sovereign Lord, or to the good governance of this Town and
Marches, ye shall at all times show, and move it to the Counsel, to the intent
that it may be ordained and executed. These things abovesaid, and every of them
with all their circumstances and dependances ye shall duly exercise, use, keep,
and do from time to time, during your abiding in the said Counsel, with all the
spirits of your good mind. So help you God, and the Holydome, and by this Book.

The Oath given to a Knight of the Bath at the time of his Creation.
G Reat Worship be this noble Order unto you, and Almighty God give you Grace
well to keep it; you shall be strong in the Faith of Holy Church, you shall
relieve as right requires, Widows, Maids, and Orphans; you shall love and
dread God above all things, you shall love the King your Sovereign Lord, and
him and his right defend to your power; you shall suffer no Extortion as far
forth as you may, nor sit in any place where wrongful Judgment shall be given
to your knowledge; and as great honor be this noble Order unto you, as it was
to any of your Kin or Progenitors before you, or any others,

The Oath of the Captains and Soldiers serving the Estates of Zealand.
W E swear and promise, To be faithful to the Queens Majesty of England, our
Sovereign, and to the General united Provinces of the Low Countries, especially
to the Estates of this Province of Zealand, to the end to keep this Town of
Flushing, with the Forts belonging to the same for the assurance of her
Majesty, the profit of the said Estates, and the maintenance of the true
Christian Religion, as it is at this present exercised as well in England as in
the Town and Country of Zealand, and to yield all due obedience to our
Governor chief, and Captains. So God us help.

The Oath and Homage made by James the King of Scots, unto King Henry 6. in the
second year of his Reign over England.
J James Steward King of Scots, shall be true and faithful unto you Lord Henry,
by the grace of God King of England and France, the noble and Superior Lord of
the King of Scotland, which I hold and claim to hold of you; and I shall bear
you my faith and fidelity of life and limb, and worldly honor, against all
men; and faithfully I shall knowledge, and shall do to you service due to the
Kingdom of Scotland So God help me, and these holy Evangelists.

The Oath of a Tenant that does Atturn to the Lord of a Manor.
Y Ou shall become true and lawful Tenant, and true faith bear to the Lord of
this Manor, for such Lands as you hold of the same Lordship, and do such
Customs and Services, as of right ye ought to do, saving the faith that you
bear to any other Lands. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath used in a Court Baron, to swear any to the Queens Highness.
Y Ou shall be true Liegeman, and true faith bear to our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and to her Heirs and
Successors; You shall be no Thief, nor Thiefs Feir, but if you know of any, you
shall do the Queens Majesty's Justices to weet of them, as soon as you can; and
you shall live by such good and true occupation as God lent you, uprightly and
truly, so far as God will give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents
of this Book.

The Oath that is to be given to any Jury, before Evidence given in against a
prisoner at the Bar.
Y Ou shall true Deliverance make between our Sovereign Lord the King, and the
Prisoner at the Bar as you shall have in charge, according to your Evidence, as
near as God shall give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of this
Book.

Or, more modern, thus
Y Ou shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make between our Sovereign
Lord the King and the Prisoners at the Bar, whom you shall have in charge
according to your Evidence. So help you God.

The Oath given to a Bayliffe, or Sergeant that attends on any Jury or
Inquest at an Assize.
Y Ou shall well and truly keep this Inquest from meat and drink, fire and
candle; you shall not suffer any man to speak with them, neither shall you your
self speak with them, more than to ask them, If they be agreed, until such time
as they be agreed. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

Or, thus
Y Ou shall well and truly keep every person sworn of this Inquest, together in
some private and Convenient Room, without meat, drink, candle, or lodging, and
you shall not suffer any person whatsoever, to speak to them, or any of them,
neither shall you your self speak to them, until such time as they have
delivered up their Verdict, unless it be to ask them whether they be agreed of
their Verdict. So help you God.

The Oath for Evidence upon the Arraignment of the Prisoner at the Bar.
T He Evidence that youshall give to this Inquest against the Prisoner at the
Bar, shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth as near
as God shall give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

Or, thus
T He Evidence that you and every of you shall give to this Inquest against I.
S. prisoner at Bar, shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth. So help you God.

The Oath to be given to any Jury, by whom a Nisi prius is to be tried.
Y Ou shall truly try this Suit of Nisi prius between party and party,
according to the Evidence as shall be given you in Court, as near as God shall
give you grace. So help you God and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath to be given to such as are to give Evidence between party and party,
at an Nisi prius.
T He Evidence that you shall give to this Inquest concerning the matter in
variance, shall be the truth and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so
near as God shall give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of this
Book.

The same Oath that your Foreman has sworn you of your part shall well and
truly keep. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath of the great Inquest,
Y E shall truly enquire, and due presentment make of all such things as you
are charged withal on the Queens behalf, the Queens Council, your own, and
your fellows, you shall well and truly keep; And in all other things the truth
present. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

Or more modern, thus
YOu as Fore man of this Inquest for the body of this County of L. shall
diligently enquire and true presentment make of all such matters and things as
shall be given you in Charge the Kings Majesty's Counsel, your fellows and your
own, you shall keep Secret, you shall present no man for Envy, Hatred, or
Malice, neither shall ye leave any man unpresented for love fear, favor or
affection, or hope of reward, but you shall present things truly as they come
to your knowledge according to the best of your understanding. So help you God.

The Oath of those that give Evidence upon Bills of Jndictment.
T He Evidence that you shall give to the Inquest, upon this Bill shall be the
truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, And you shall not let so
to do for malice, hatred, or evil will, nor for meed, dread, favor or
affection. So help you God, and the holy Contents of this Book.

Aliter thus
T He Evidence which you shall give to the grand Inquest against I. S. upon
this Bill, shall be the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth. So
help you God.

The Oath of such as are to be bailed upon suspicion for Felony or Murder.
J A. B. shall from henceforth during all my life, be true Leigeman, and true
faith bear unto our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, and to her Heirs and Successors
Kings and Queens of this Realm; and shall commit no Murder, Treason, or
Misprision of Treason, nor consent or agree to any such Offense, nor shall know
any peril or damage to his Grace, or to the Realm, or other Dominions
aforesaid, but shall reveal and disclose it with all speed unto such as have
the Laws in Government; nor shall commit any Felony or Murder, or be accessory
to any such Offense or Offenses; but shall live a good and an obedient Subject
during my life. So help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

The Oath of the Approver banished.
H Oc Audis tu Coronator quod Ego, A A. sum Latronius equi vel Alterius Rei,
vel Homicidia unius per homines vel Plurimorum and fell. Dom. Regis H. and quia
multa Mala, and Latricinia, Perpetram in hac Terra Abjura Regnum H. Regis
Anglia, and debeo me festinare versus portum de etc. quem dedisse mihi, and
quod non debeo devertere ab altu via, and si faciam volo quod sivi capius sicut
latro and fell. Dom. Regis, ut quod apud etc. queram diligentur Transitum meum,
and non expectabo ibi, visi fluxum, and refluxum maris unum si transitus haberi
poterit, and visi Tanto Spatio abire potero, ibo quolibet die in mare usquee ad
genua tentane transire, and visi hoc potero infra, 40. dies continues, mittum
me itcrum in ecclesium sicut latero and fell. Dom. Regis, sic me Deus adjuvet,
secundum judicium.

The Oath which Philip Duke of Burgony took, accknowledging, and promising to
obey King H. 5. as the right Inheritor of the Kingdom of France, after Charles
the first Kings Death.
I Philip, Duke of Burgoyn, For me and my Heirs, swear and make Oath upon these
holy Evangelists, to Henry of England, and Heir Apparent and Regent of France,
by the Sovereign Lord King Charles, that meekly and faithfully I shall obey the
same King Henry, in all things that appertain to the King of France, as to the
Commonweal of the same Realm; and immediately after the death of the said King
Charles, our Sovereign Lord, we shall be true and faithful Leigs, to the said
King Henry, his Heirs and Successors; and furthermore, we shall not be of
Council, nor give our consent to no things that may be to the prejudice of the
same King H. his Heirs, and Successors wherein they may suffer any derogation
or detriment of their bodies, of their Members, Possessions, or Honors; And if
we know of any conspiracy against him, his Heirs, or Successors in all the
haste to us possible, either by our Letters, or else by our Trusty Messengers
to declare, that they may the better provide to eschew the perils thereof.

When the Dukes Oath was thus finished, as many as were present there, both of
the Kings Council, and also of the Parliaments, Bishops, Lords, Knights, and
Commons, made the same Oath to the King, and 23. and 24. days of the same month
of May the Chancellor of France, and many other Lords, Bishops, Prelates and
Noblemen of the Realm gave the like Oath to King H.

The Oath of the Chancellor of England.
Y E shall swear, That well, and truly, ye shall serve our Sovereign Lord the
King and his People, in the Office of Chancellor, and ye shall do Right to all
manner of People, Poor and Rich, after the Laws and Usages of this Realm, and
truly ye shall counsel the King, and his counsel ye shall lain and keep, and ye
shall not know nor suffer the hurt nor disheriting of the King, nor that the
Rights of the Crown, be distressed; by any means, as far forth as you may let;
And if ye may not let it, ye shall make it clearly and eypresly known to the
King, with your true advice and counsel; And that ye shall do, and purchase the
Kings profit, in all that ye may, as God help you and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Treasurer of the Exchequer
Y E shall swear, That well, and truly, ye shall serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his People in the Office of Treasurer, And ye shall do Right to all
manner of People, Poor, and Rieh, of such things as touches your Office; And
that Kings Treasure truly ye shall kep and dispend; And truly ye shall counsel
the King, and his counsel ye shall layn, and keep; and that ye shall neither
know nor suffer the Kings hurt, nor his dis-heriting nor that the Rights of his
Crown be distressed by any means, as far forth as ye may let; And if ye may not
let it, ye shall make knowledge there of clearly and expressly, to the King,
with your true advice, and counsel: And ye shall do, and ptrchase the Kings
profit in all that ye may reasonably do, as God you help, and the holy
Evangelists.

The Oath of the Barons of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King, in the Office of
Baron of his Exchequer; And that truly ye shall charge, and discharge all
people that have Account before you; and that ye shall do Right to all manner
of People, as well to Poor as to Rich. And that for Highness, nor for Riches,
nor for hearted, nor for the estate of amarner of person, nor any good deed,
gift, nor promise of any person, the which is made to you or may be made to
you, nor by crafts nor by Engines, the Kings Right, nor none other persons ye
shall disturb, let, nor respite against the Laws of the Land, nor the Kings
Debts, ye shall put in respite where that they may goodly be leavied; And that
the Kings needs ye shall speed before all other, And that neither for gift,
wages, nor good deed, ye shall lain, disturb, nor let the Profit, and the
advantage of the King, in advantage of any other person, nor of your self; And
that no thing ye shall take of any person, for to do wrong, or Right to delay
of, for to deliver, or delay the people, the which that have to do before you;
But as hastily as ye may them goodly to deliver without hurt to the King; And
having no reward to any profit that might thereof to you he made, then ye shall
make to the delivered. And that whereas ye may know any wrong or prejudice to
be done to the King, ye shall put and do all your power and diligence, that to
redress, and if ye may not do it ye, shall tell it to the King, or to them of
his Council, the which may make relation to the King, if ye may not come to
him; And the Kings Counsel ye shall keep, and layn in all things; As God you
help, and all his Saints.

The Oath of a Judge, endorso claus de Anno 20. Edw. 3. Par. prima.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve our Sovereign Lord, the
King and his People in the Office of Justice; And that ye shall counsel, our
Sovereign Lord the King in his needs; And that ye shall not give any counsel,
or assent to any thing, the which might turn to hurt or dis-heriting of the
King by any way or color, and that ye shall not know any hurt or dis-heriting
of the King, but that ye shall make it to him known by you or by some other
person, and that ye shall do equal Law and Execution of Right, to all the Kings
Subjects Rich and Poor, without having regard to any person: And that ye shall
not take by you, or by any other privily, ne apart any gift, or reward of Gold,
or of Silver, nor of any other thing, the which might turn you to profit. But
if it be meat or drink, and that of little value, of any man, that shall have
any Plea or Process hanging before you, as long as before your self two Pleas
and Process shall be hanging, nor after for that cause; And that ye shall take
no Fees, as long as ye be Justice, nor Robe of any Person, Great or Small in
any case, but of the King himself; And that ye shall not give any Counsel, or
advice to any person great or small in any case, where the King is party; and
in case that any persons in what estate that they be of, come before you in
Sessions with force and Arms, or otherwise, against the Peace, or against the
form of the Statute hereof made for, to disturb the Execution of the Common
Law, or for to Menace the people, that may not do the Law; That ye shall do,
Arrest their Bodies, and put them in prison; and in case they be such as ye may
not Arrest, that ye shall certify the King of their Names, and of their
misdoing hastily, to that End that ye may thereof Ordain remedy; And that ye
shall not maintain by your self, nor by none other privily nor openly, any Plea
or Quarrel, hanging in the Kings Courts, or elsewhere in the Country; And that
ye shall not delay any person of Common Right, for the Letters of the King, or
of any other person, nor for any other cause; And in case that any Letters come
to you contrary to the Law, that ye shall nothing do for such Letters, but ye
thereof shall certify the King; And ye shall proceed to do the Law, the same
Letters notwithstanding, and that ye shall do, and procure the Profit of the
King and his Crown, in all things where ye them reasonable may do: And in case
that ye be found in default hereafter, in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall
be at the Kings will of Bodies, Lands and of Honor, to do thereof that that
shall please the King.

The Oath of a Justice for Works, Weights, and Measure.
Y E shall swear, That in your Office of Justice, of Labors, and of Weights,
and Measures, ye shall do equal Right to the Poor as to the Rich, after your
cunning, Wit and Power, and after the form of Statutes thereof made, and the
Issues, Fines, and Amerciaments, the which shall be made and to be made before
you ye shall do truly, enter without any concealment or embezling, and truly
send into the Exchequer; And that ye shall not leave for gift, nor for other
cause, but that well and truly ye shall do your Office of Justice in that
behalf; And also ye shall Swear, that in your Office of Justice of Peace, and
Labors, and of all other Articles contained in the Kings Commission to you
directed; Ye shall do equal Right to the Poor, and to the Rich, after your
cunning and power, and after the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and the
Statutes thereof made, and the Issues, Fines, and Amerciaments, the which shall
be made, or happen to be made, and all forfeitures the which shall fall before
you, ye shall make truly to be entered, without any concealment, imbezling; and
truly them to send into the Exchequer: And ye shall not let for gift, nor for
other cause, but that well and truly, ye shall do your Office of Justice on
your behalf; And that ye take nothing for your Office of Justice of Peace to
do, but of the King, and Fees accustomed; And that ye shall not make, or
deliver any Warrants to the Parties, but ye shall them deliver to the Bailiffs
of the County, or to other of the Kings Officers or Ministers of the same to do
Execution. As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of a Sheriff.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve, the King in the Office of
the Sheriff of Bedford and Berks, and do the Kings profit in all things that
belongs to you to do by way of our Office, as far forth as ye can or may; ye
shall truly keep the Kings Rights, and all that belongs to the Crown; ye
shall not assent to Decrees, or Passing, or to Concealment of the Kings Rights,
or of his Franchises; And wherever ye shall have knowledge that the Kings
Rights, or the Rights of the Crown been concealed or withdrawn, be it in Lands,
Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, or any other things, ye shall do your true power
to make them be restored to the King again; And if ye may not do it, ye shall
certify the King or some of his Council thereof, such as ye hold for certain
will say it to the King; ye shall not respite the Kings Debts for any gift or
favor, where ye may raise them without great grievance of the Debtors; Ye
shall truly and righteously treat the People of your Sheriffwick, and do right
as well to the Poor as Rich in all that belongs to your Office; ye shall do
no wrong to any man, for any gift or good behest, or promise of good, nor
favor, nor hate; ye shall disturb no man's right; ye shall truly acquit at the
Exchequer all those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the Kings Debts; ye
shall nothing take whereby the King may leese, or whereby that Right may be
disturbed, let, or the Kings Debts delayed; Ye shall truly return and truly
serve all the Kings Writs, as far forth as it shall be in your cunning; Ye
shall none have to be your under Sheriff, or any your Sheriffs Clerks, of the
last year passed; Ye shall take no Bayliffe into your Service, but such as ye
will answer for; Ye shall make each of your Bailiffs to make such Oath as ye
make your self, in that that belongs to their Occupation; Ye shall receive no
Writ by you or any of yours unsealed, or any sealed, under the Seal of any
Justice, save of Justice of Air, or Justice Assigned in the same Shire where
ye be Sheriff in, or other Justices having power and Authority to make any Writ
unto you by the Law of the Land, or of the Justice of Newgate; you shall make
your Bailiffs of the true and sufficient men in the Country: Le residue del
servement que hic sequitur fuit insert depuisne temps come appeirt per le
Regist. f. 301.
Also ye shall do all your pain and diligence to destroy and make to cease all
manner of Heresy and Errors, commonly called Lollardries, within your
Baylywick, from time to time, to all your power, and assist and be helping to
all the Ordinaries and Commissaries of Holy Church, and favor and maintain
them as often times as ye shall be required by the said Ordinaries and
Commissaries; ye shall be dwelling in your proper person within your Baylywick,
for the time ye shall be in the same Office; ye shall not let your Sheriffwick,
or any Baywick thereof, to farm to any man; Ye shall truly set and return
reasonable and due Issues of them that be within your Bayliffwick after their
Estates and Honor, and make your Pannels your self; And over this, in
eschewing and restraint of the Manslaughters, Robberies, and other manifold
grievous Offenses that has been done daily, namely by such as name themselves
Soldiers, and by other Vagarants, the which continually increase in number,
and multiply, so that the Kings true Subjects may neither ride nor go to do
such things as they have to do, to their intolerable hurt and hindering; ye
shall truly and effectually with all diligence possible to you, execute the
Statutes, the which ye shall have knowledge of. These things all ye shall truly
keep, as God you help, you and his Saints.

The Oath of the Sheriff of Oxon and Berks, Cambridge and Huntington.
Y Ou shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
Sheriff of Oxon and Berks, and the Kings profit, etc. ut supra usque ibi. So
God help you and his Saints, Et tunc sic; And also ye shall swear, That the
Masters and the Scholars of the University of Oxon, and their servants, from
injuries and violences, ye shall keep and defend by all your strength and
prower; and the Peace in the said University, as much as is in you is, ye shall
do keep; And that ye shall give your counsel, and help to the Chancellor, and
Scholars of the same University, for to punish the Disturbers and Breakers of
the Peace there, after the Privileges and Statutes of the said University at
all times when it shall be needful; And also ye shall put your help with all
your strength to defend the privileges, liberties, and customs of the said
University: And that ye shall receive all such Oaths of your Under-Sheriffs,
and other your said Ministers of your said County of Oxon, as soon and anon as
ye shall be at the Castle, or at the Town of Oxon, in presence of any that
shall be thereto deputed by the said University; to the which things, the King
will that your said Ministers, be by you Arted, and compelled, As God you help
and all his Saints: Consimile sacrum fac. Vio. Cant. and Hunt.

The Oath of an Escheator.
Y EE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of
Escheator, in the Counties of Bed. and Bucks, and do the Kings profit, in all
things that belonggeth to you to do, by way of your Office, after your wit and
power, his Rights and all that belongs to the Crown ye shall truly keep; Ye
shall not assent to Decrees, ne to concealment of the Kings Rights, ne of the
Franchizes; And wheresoever ye have knowledge of the Kings Rights, or his Crown,
be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, be in any wise concealed, or
withdrawn, ye shall do your pain and diligence to withstand it, and to make it
be restored, and repaired; and if ye may not, ye shall say it unto the King, or
such of his Council, the which ye shall know for certain will say it unto the
King; Ye shall truly, and righteously Treat the people of your Bailiffwick, and
do Right to every man, as well to Poor as to Rich, in that that belongs to
you to do; Ye shall do no wrong to any man, neither for promise, love, nor
hate, nor no man's Right disturb; Ye shall nothing do, whereby the King may
lose, or whereby that Right may be disturbed, let, or delayed; Ye shall
truly and right wisely return, and serve the Kings Writs; Ye shall in your
proper person make, or do to be made the extents of Lands and other Revenues,
after their very value, and duly charge the Quests that be returned before you
and receive the Verdicts, and return them as often as they been taken by you,
and that within a month; Ye shall take no Bailiff into your service, but such
as ye will answer for; Ye shall make your Bailiff to make such Oath as it
belongs to you to give him; Ye shall truly, and right wisely yield Accounts
at the Kings Exchequer, of all the Issues of your said Bailiffwick; Ye shall
take your Inquests in open places, and not privy, and that by Indenture, after
the effect of the Statute made thereof, As God help you, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Comptroller of the Customs.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
troller of the Kings Customs and Subsidies, in the place of Customer, and truly
ye shall enter all the Goods and things Customable the which shall come to the
said Port, or shall pass from the same; And that ye shall no gift take for to
do your Office, nor for any thing that may fall in disadvantage of the King,
nor any Merchandise, nor any other thing Customable, ye shall not suffer to
pass out of the said Port, without custom due be paid; And ye shall do the
Office your self, and dwell thereupon in your proper person, without making any
Substitute, or Deputy under you; And ye shall write the Rolls with your own
hands, and the Kings profit ye shall await, and do, in as much as ye may after
your knowledge and power. As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of a Tronator.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
Tronator, in the City of London, and truly ye shall weigh and poyse the Wool
that shall come thither, and ye shall not suffer any Wool to pass but by
certain weight and poyse, ordained so that neither more nor less be put in the
weight, and poyse, but all only the certainty: And that all the Wool the which
shall come, ye shall do to be weighed, and poysed out, that for gift nor favor
of any person, ye shall not suffer any Wool to pass before that be entirely
weighed and poysed, and ye shall dwell and abide, upon your Office in your
proper person, without making of any Substitute or Deputy under you, And ye
shall wait and do the Kings profit, and Advantage all that ye may. As God you
help and his Saints.

The Oath of Custom.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall make continual abiding in the Port of London,
and shall oversee the charge of Wool, Leather, and Woolfell, and all other
Merchandises, and things Customable, and the number of Sacks in the said Port,
and in as much as in you is, ye shall not suffer that the King have hurt or
loss there; and that true account thereof ye shall yield; and of the Issues of
the said Customs, truly ye shall swear, without Fauxim or Fraud, to be done in
any point, As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of a Justice to hear and determine.
Y E shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King as Justice, to
hear and determine the wrongs and grievances done to the King and his People,
after the form of the Commission to you and to other your fellows thereof made;
And shall keep and lean the Kings Council and Right to your power; Ye shall do
to all People, as well to the poor as to the rich: And that ye shall take no
gift of any person to do wrong, nor right to delay, and that for Highness, nor
for Riches, nor for hatred, nor for the Estate of any person, nor for any good
deed, gift or promise, the which is made to you of any person, or may be made
to you, nor by craft or maligning Right ye shall not disturb, nor respite
against Reason, and against the Laws of the Land; but without regard of any
Estate or Person truly ye shall do right to all People, after the Laws
aforesaid. So God ye help, and his Saints.

The Oath of a Justice in Air.
Y E Justice in Air shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King
in the Office of Justice, and shall do Right to your power, to all People, as
well to poor as to rich; and that for Highness, nor for Riches, nor for hatred,
nor for the Estate of any person, nor for good deed, gift, nor promise of any
person that is made to you, or may be made to you, neither by craft, nor by
maligny, the right of any person ye shall not disturb nor respite, against
reason, nor against the Laws of the Land; but without having of regard of any
Estate or Person, truly ye shall do Right to every person after the Laws and
Customs of the Land; and that ye shall nothing take of any person for to do
wrong, or right to delay. So God ye help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Statutes.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
Clerk of the Statutes, in the Town of B. and that ye shall be dwelling and
abiding upon the same Office in proper person, without making any Substitute or
Deputy: And truly ye shall enter the Recognizances the which shall be made
before you, and them that keep the greater party of the Seal, ordained for such
Recognizances to be taken in the said Town: And that ye shall not receive, nor
take any Recognizance without the presence aforesaid, that for to do, be
deputed and ordained, and that no manner of Recognizances, the which be not
taken by you, and them, together as it is aforesaid; And ye shall not enter
them, nor make them to be entered, and that all manner of Recognizances so
before you, and them made, ye shall write and enroll with your own Hand, As God
help you, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King, in the Office of
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and well and truly ye shall do all that pertains
and belongs to the same Office; and the Kings Business and needs ye shall
speed before all others; and that no Writ of Judgment of any other Place, but of
the Exchequer it self, ye shall not enseal with the Seal of the Exchequer, as
long as the Chancery shall be twenty miles where the Exchequer does abide.

The Oath of Fealty.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth bear
unto the King our Sovereign Lord, and to his Heirs, Kings of England, and truly
ye shall do, and truly knowledge the services due of the Lands, the which ye
claim to hold of him, as in the Right of your Wife, and in the which the King
to you does yield. As God help you, and all his Saints.

The Oath of the Steward of Gascoygne.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall with all your Wit, and withal
your power, ye shall keep the Office of the Stewardship, of the Duchy of
Guyan; And ye shall do right to all People, in that that to you appertains
and belongs; And the Towns Castles, Fortlots, and the Lands, and Tenements,
of the King our Sovereign Lord in that Duchy ye shall keep to the use of him
and his Heirs; And ye shall not deliver them to any person, but to him or to
his Heirs, or to the which shall bring you his Letters Patents, and his Honor,
his Estate, his Rights, and his Seignory ye shall keep, and maintain to all
your power; and if any thing of his Rights, in what things soever it be, be
withdrawn or concealed, ye shall put to your true pain and deavour, that to
repeal and retain in due and right estate; and if ye may not that do; ye shall
do it to be known to the King. So God ye help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Alneger.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People,
in the Office of Substitute Lannyour of the King; And that for favor nor for
hatred, ye shall not let; But that ye shall meet the Clothes, the which attain
and belong to your Office to meet truly, and them enseal with the Seal of your
Office; and that truly ye shall answer to the King of the forfeitures of the
Clothes, after the form contained in the Statute thereof late made; And that ye
shall not tarry nor delay the people, in that that appertains and belongs
to your Office; And that ye shall use your said Office without Fraud,
Extortion, or Outrage, to be done to the people. As God you help, and his
Saints.

The Oath of the Major of the Staple, and Constable of the same Staple.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his people in
the Office of Major, of the Staple of Westminster, to the which ye be chosen,
and truly ye shall Treat the Merchants of the same Staple, and equal Right ye
shall do to all people, as well to Strangers as others after the Ordinances
thereof made, and the Law Merchant. As God you help, and his Saints.

Like Oath shall make the Constable of the same Staple, of that that
appertains to their Office.

The Oath of the Portage of the Chancery.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
Portage of the Chancery, and that ye shall be continually abiding upon the said
Office, and no time ye shall absent you, without especial leave of the
Chancellor, or of the Keeper of the Rolls, and that for good and just cause,
and that ye shall not carry nor bear, nor suffer the Rolls to be carried or
born to any place, but unto the place, to the same Ordained and Deputed; and
that ye shall not show them to any Person, but by the Commandment of the said
Keeper of the Rolls, privily or openly, and that ye shall not assent that any
fraud or deceit, the which may be done to the said Rolls, as by taking of
Coppie, or by the sight, to have of the said Rolls privily, nor in none other
manner; and of Fraud, or untruth, that ye may know to be done in the said
Rolls, or any thing that appertains to your keeping of the said Rolls, ye
shall tell to the said Keeper of the Rolls, without any concealment to do so.
So God ye help, and all Saints.

The Oath of a Bishops Renuntiations of a Popes Bull.
I Renounce all the words comprised in the Popes Bull, made unto me of the
Bishop-prick of B. the which be contrary and prejudicial to the King our
Sovereign Lord, and to his Crown; and of that I put my humblement in his Grace,
praying to have restitution of my Temporalities of my Church of B.

The Oath of a Bishops Fidelity.
A Lso I shall be faithful, and true, and faith and truth shall bear the King
our Soveveraign Lord, and to his Heirs Kings of England, of Life and Limb, and
of Earthly worship for to Live and Dye against all the people; And diligently,
I shall be intendant unto the Kings Needs and Business after my wit and Power,
and the Kings Counsel I shall keep and lain, and truly I shall knowledge and do
the services due of the Temporalities of my Bishopprick of B. The which I claim
to hold of my said Sovereign Lord the King; And the which he gives and
yields me, and to him and to his Commandments, in that that to me attaineth
and belongs for my Temporalities, I shall be obeysant. As God me help, and
his Saints.

The Oath of the Kings Sergeant at Law.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King and his people,
as one of his Sergeants of the Law, and truly counsel the King in his matters,
when he shall be called, and duly and truly Administer the Kings matters, after
the course of the Law, after your cunning; ye shall take no wages, nor Fee of
any man, for any matter where the King is party; against the King, ye shall as
duly and hastily speed such matters, as any man shall have to do against the
King in the Law, as ye may lawfully do, without delay or tarrying the party of
his lawful Process, in that that to you belongs; ye shall be attendant to the
Kings matters when ye shall be called thereunto. As God help you, and his
Saints.

The Homage of a Temporal Lord.
J Become your Leigman of Life and Limb, and of Earthly Worship, and says and
troth, I shall bear unto you, for to live and dye, against all manner of Folk.
So God me help, and his Saints.

The Oath of a Searcher in the Custom House.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall serve the the King well and truly in the Office
of the Searcher-ship in the Port of N. and do the Kings profits in all things
that longs to you, to do by way of your Office, and well and truly ye shall
make due search of all the Ships and Vessels, coming in or passing out of the
said Port, and truly answer the King of all that shall belong unto him, in your
said Office without Fraud or Malign, after your wit and power. As God help you,
and his Saints.

The Oath of a Sergeant at Law.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the Kings People, as one
of his Sergeants at Law, And ye shall truly counsel them, that ye shall be
retained with after your cunning, and ye shall not defer, tract, nor delay
their causes willingly for covetousness of money, or other thing that may turn
you to profit, and ye shall give due attendance according. As God you help, and
his Saints.

The Oath of the Master of the Rolls.
Y E shall swear, That well and lawfully ye shall serve the King our Sovereign
Lord and his People, in the Office of Clerk or Master of the Rolls, to the
which ye be called; Ye shall not assent, ne procure the dis-inheritance, ne
perpetual damage of the King, to your power; ne fraud ye shall do, nor cause to
be made wrongfully, to any of his People, ne in any thing that touches the
Seal; and lawfully ye conceal the things that touches the King, when ye shall
be thereto required; And the Council that ye shall give touching him, ye shall
not disclose; And if ye know any thing of the dis-inheritance, or damage of the
King, or fraud to be made upon any thing that touches the keeping of the Seal,
ye shall put your lawful power that to redress and amend; And if that ye
cannot, ye shall advise the Chancellor or other, which may that amend, to your
power. As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the six Clerks in the Chancery.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People in
the Office of one of the six Clerks of Chancery whereunto ye be admitted, and
well and justly order your self in the same, according to your learning, and
truly counsel them that ye shall be retained with; And ye shall be diligent to
further the Kings business from time to time, as need shall require; And ye
shall not assent to any fraud or deceit to be had or done by you, or any by
your consent, in any of the Kings Records, whereunto ye shall have recourse;
but well and truly ye shall entreat the same; And ye shall not absent your self
willingly, whereby the Kings business or any other shall be undone or hindered,
without special License of the Master of the Rolls, or his Deputy for the time
being. As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath to maintain the Succession of the Crown of England.
Y E shall swear, To bear faith, truth, and obedience all only to the Kings
Majesty, and to his Heirs of his body of his most dear and entirely beloved
lawful Wife Queen Ann, begotten; And farther to the Heirs of our said Sovereign
Lord, according to the limitation in the Statute made for surety of his
Succession in the Crown of this Realm, mentioned and contained, and not to any
other within this Realm, nor Foreign Authority or Potentate. And in case any
Oath be made or has been made by you to any person or persons, that then you
to repute the same as vain, and annihilated; And that your cunning wit, and
uttermost of your power, without guile, fraud, or other undue mean; ye shall
observe, keep maintain, and defend the said Act of Succession; and all the
whole effects and Contents threof, and all other Acts and Statutes made in
confirmation, or for due execution of the same, or of any thing therein
contained; And this ye shall do against all manner of persons of what Estate,
Dignity, Degree, or Condition soever they be; And in no wise do or attempt, nor
to your power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing
or things privily or apartly, to be let, hinderance, damage or derogation
thereof, or of any part of the same, by any manner of means, or for any manner
of pretense. So help you God, all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of a Clerk of the Petty Bag.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People,
as one of his Ministers and Clerks in the Office of the Petty-bag, whereunto ye
be admitted; and well and truly order your self in the same, according to your
learning; And ye shall be diligent to further the Kings business from time to
time, as need shall require; And ye shall not assent to any fraud or deceit to
be had or done by you, or any by your consent, in any of the Kings Records
whereunto ye shall have recourse; but well and truly ye shall entreat the same.
As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Examiner in the Court of Chancery.
Y E shall swear, Well and truly, after your cunning and learning, to excuse
and occupy the Office of one of the Examiners in the Kings Court of Chancery,
whereunto you are admitted; And duly, Justly, and equally, ye shall examine
their Causes that shall be committed unto you, without any favor or corruption
of any person or persons to be had, otherwise than shall of right appertain
concerning the same; And ye shall be attendant as well to further the Kings
business as the same Causes from time to time, as need shall require; And ye
shall not publish, or show the same Depositions to any person before publication
in the Court, without the Warrant of the same Court. As God you help and his
Saints.

The Oath which the Duke of Bedford and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal took
in Parliament in Anno 4. H. 6. Nov. 10. for their sincere arbitrating of the
variance between the Duke of Gloucester and the Bishop of Winchester, Lord
Chancellor of England.
T Hat my said Lord of Bedford and my said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
each of them, shall, as far forth as his cunning, and discretion, sufficient,
truly, justly, and indifferently, counsel and advise the King, and also proceed
and acquit himself in all the said matters and Quarrels, withouten that they or
any of them shall privily, or apart, make or show himself, or be party or
parcel therein, naught be leaving or schewing so to do, for affection, love,
meed, or dread of any person or persons; And that ye shall in all wise keep
secret all that shall be communed by way of Counsel in the Matters and Quarrels
abovesaid in the foresaid Parliament, withouten that they or any of them shall
by word, writing, or in any wise open it, or discover it to any of the said
parties, or to any other person that is naught of the said Counsel, but if he
have especial Commandment thereto of the King, or of my said Lord of Bedford;
And that each of them shall with all might and power, by him and by his
strength, aid and assist by way of Counsel, and tell unto the King, or to my
Lord of Bedford, and to the remnant of my said Lords, to put the said parties,
to reason; and naught suffer that any of the said parties by them or theirs,
proceed or attempt by way of Feet, against the Kings Peace; nor help, assist,
or comfort any of them thereto; but let them with all her might and power, and
withstand them, and assist unto the King and my said Lord of Bedford, in
keeping of the Kings Peace, and redressing of all such matter of proceeding by
way of Feet and Force.

The Oath which the Duke of York, and Buckingham, the two Archbishops. 11.
Bishops. 6. Earls. Two Viscounts. 18. Abbots. 2. Priors. 17. Barons, took in
Parliament, unto Hen. 6. in Anno 33. Nov. 25. for their Allegiance unto the
said King.
I Promise unto your Highness, by the Faith and truth that I owe to God and
you, that I shall true and faithfully keep the Leigeman that I owe unto you
most Sovereign Lord, and to put me in my devoir to do all that may be to the
welfare, honor, and safeguard of your most noble Person and Royal Estate,
Preeminence and Prerogative, and I shall at no time, will, or consent to that,
that might in any wise sound to the hurt, or prejudice of your said most noble
person, Dignity, Crown or Estate: And over that I shall with all my power
resist and withstand all them, that will in any wise presume to attempt the
contrary. So God me help, and his Saints.

The Oath which the Duke of York took for his Allegiance to King Hen. the 6. At
the High Altar in St. Pauls-Church London, in presence of the said King, which
is entered in the Parliament Roll, Anno 38. Hen. 6. Nov. 9.
I Richard Duke of York, confess and know, That I am, and ought to be humble
Subject and Liegeman, unto you my Sovereign Lord the King, Hen. 6. And ought
therefore to bear you faith and truth, as to my Sovereign and Liege Lord; and
so shall do all the days unto my lives end; and shall not at any time will, nor
at any thing be attempted or done against your most Royal Person: But
whenever, I shall have knowledge of any such things imagined, or purposed, I
shall with all the speed and diligence possible to me, to make that your
Highness shall have knowledge thereof, and ever do all that shall be possible to
come to the withstanding thereof, to the uttermost of my lise: I shall not in
no wise any thing take upon me against your Royal obeisance, that is due
thereto, nor suffer any other man to do, as far forth as it shall lie in my
power to let it: And also I shall come at your Commandment, whenever I shall
be called by the same, in all humble and obedient wise: But if I be let by
sickness, or impotency of my person, or by such other causes as shall be
thought reasonable to you my Sovereign Lord, I shall never hereafter take upon
me to gather any Routs, or make any Assembly of your people, without your
Commandment or License, or my lawful defense; In the interpretation of which my
lawful defense and declaration thereof; I shall report me at all time unto your
Highness, and if the case require, unto my Peers, nor any thing attempt by way
of faith against any of your Subjects, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition
they be; but whenever I shall be, or when I shall feel my self wronged or
grieved, I shall sue humbly for remedy unto your Highness, as an humble and
true Subject ought to have him to his Sovereign Lord; All these things
abovesaid I permit truly to observe, and keep by the holy Evangelists contained
in this Book that I lay my hand upon, and by the holy Cross that I here touch,
and by the blessed Sacrament of our Lords body that I shall now with his mercy
receive, and over this I agree me, and will, that if I at any time hereafter,
as with the grace of our Lord I never shall any thing attempt by way of fact or
otherwise against your Royal Estate, or obeisance that ought thereto, or any
thing I take upon me otherwise then is above expressed, I from that time forth
be unable to all manner of worship, Estate or dignity, be it such as I now
occupy, or any other that might grow unto me in any wise; And this that I have
promitted and sworn, proceeds of my own desire and free volunt, and by no
constraint or cohertion; In witness of all the which things above written, I
Richard Duke of York above written, Subscribe me with my own Hand, and Seal,
this with my own Seal etc.

The Oath which was taken in the Parliament at Coventry unto King Henry 6. Anno
38. Nov. 26. by the two Arch Bishops, sixteen Bishops, five Earls, two
Viscounts, three Dukes, (in the absence of the Duke of York) fourteen Abbots,
two Pryors, and seven Barons.
J A. B. knowledge you most High and Mighty, and most Christian Prince, King
Henry 6. to be my most redoubted Sovereign Lord, and right-wise by Succession
born to Reign upon me, and all your Liege People; Whereupon I voluntarily,
without cohertion, promit and oblige me, by the faith and truth that I owe unto
God, and by the faith, truth, and Liegeance, that I owe unto you my most
redoubted Sovereign Lord, That I shall be without any variance, true, faithful,
humble, and obeysant Subject and Liegeman unto you my most redoubted Sovereign
Lord; and that I shall be unto my lives end, at all times and places, ready and
attending at your calling in my most hearty wise and manner, as any true
Liegeman owes to be unto his Sovereign Lord, putting me in my true undelayed
endeavor, to do all that may be unto the weal and furety of your most Royal
Person, of your most Noble Estate, and the very conservation, and assurance,
and continuance of Your most High Authority, Preeminence, and Prerogative, To
the weal, surety and preserving of the Person of the most Noble and Benign
Princess Margaret the Queen, my Sovereign Lady, and of her most High and Noble
Estate, she being your Wife; And also to the weal, surety, and Honor of the
Person of the right High and Mighty Prince Edward, my right redoubted Lord the
Prince, your first begotten Son, and of the Right High and Noble Estate of the
same, and faithfully, truly, and obeysantly, in my most humble wise and manner,
honor, serve, obey, and bear mine Allegiance unto you my most redoubted
Sovereign Lord during your life, which God the Father of mercy, for my most
singular recomfort, preserve long in prosperity to endure; and if God of his
infinite Power take you from this Transitory life, me bearing life in this
world, That then I shall take and accept my said redoubted Lord the Prince,
Edward, your said first born Son, for my Sovereign Lord, and bear my true Faith
and Liegeance unto him as my natual born Sovereign Lord, and after him, unto
his Succession of his body lawfully begotten; and in default of his Succession,
which God defend unto any other Succession of your Body lawfully coming; And
that I shall never at any time, for any manner of occasion, color, affinity,
or cause, consent, give aid, assistance, or favor, or agree to any thing, that
I may understand, or know by any means, that may be prejudicial or contrary to
the premises, or any of them: But that I shall, as soon as I may have
knowledge, put me in my undelayed devoyre, in most hearty and effectuous wise
and manner, without color or faintness, with my body, goods, might, power,
counsel, and advertisements, to resist, withstand, and subdue all them that
would in any wise presume to do cont^ary to the premises, or any of them. So
God me help, and those holy Evangelists. In witness whereof, I set to these
Presonts my Seal, and my Sign Manuel.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of the Tower of London.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve the Kings Majesty in the
Lieutenancy of the Tower of London, and the same Tower ye shall faithfully and
safely keep to the behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs and lawful Successors; And
the profit of the Kings Majesty ye shall do and advance in all things that you,
as Lieutenant of the Tower belongs; And the Rights and Privileges of the
Tower, that to the same lawfully appertain, you shall keep and preserve; You
shall hear nothing that may be hurtful to the Tower or prejudicial to his
Majesty, but that with all convenient speed you shall disclose it to some of
his Majesty's Privy Council: In these and all other things that to a Lieutenant
of the Tower belongs to do, well and faithfully you shall, according to your
best power and knowledge, perform, fulfill, and keep. So help you God, etc.

The Oath ministered to certain persons for the renouncing of their profession
of Lollardism, in Rich. 2. his time, vide Claus, Anno. Rich. 2. Nov. 18. Dorso.
M Emorandum quod primo die Decembris, Anno Regni Regis Rich. 2. Post.
Conquestum 19 Willus Divet, Nichus Tailor, Nichus Poncher, and Will. Staynor,
de Nottingham, in Canc. prim. Regis Personaliter Constit. Sacram. divisim
prestiterint, sub eo qui sequitur Tenor.

J William Deynet, before you worshipful Fader Lord Archbishop of York, and
your Clergy, with my free will, and full advised swear to God, and all his
Saints, upon the holy Gospel, That for this day forthward I shall worship
Images with praying and offering unto them, in the worship of Saints, that they
be made offer; And also I shall never despise Pilgrimage, ne States of holy
Church in no degree, And also I shall be Buxim to the Laws of holy Church, and
to yhorn as my Archbishop, and to my other Ordinaries and Curates, and keep
your Laws upon my power, and maintain them; And also I shall never more
maintain, ne teachen, ne defend an Error, Conclusions ne teachings of the
Lollards, ne swich Conclusions and Teachings that men clepity Lollards
Doctrine, ne shall her Books, ne swich Books, ne hem, or any suspect or defamed
of Lollardy, receive or company withal wittingly, or defend in your matters;
And if I know any swich, and also I shall excite and stir all tho to good
Doctrine that I have hindered with my Doctrine, up my power; And also I shall
stand to your Declaration which is Heresy or Error, and do thereafter; and
also with Penance, yhe wook for, that I have done for maintaining of this
false Doctrine inmyns me, I shall fulfill it, and I submit me thereto up my
power; And also I shall make no other gloss of this mine Oath but as the words
stand; And if it be so, that I come again, or do again this or any part
thereof, I yield me here comptable as an Heretic, and to be punished by the
Law as an Heretic, and to forfeit all my Goods to the Kings will, withouten
any other process of Law; And thereto I require the Notary to make of all this,
the which is my will, and instrument against me.

The Oath of Fidelity, by the Priour of St. John's of Jerusalem, in Dorso Claus,
Anno 14. Edw. 4. Nov. 5.
J shall be faithful and true, and Faith, and Truth shall bear to the King our
Sovereign, and to his Heirs Kings of England, of Life and Limb, and of Earthly
Worship for to live and die against all People, and diligently I shall be
attendant unto the Kings needs and business; after my wit and power, and to
him, and to his Commandments, in that that to me attaineth and belongs I
shall be obeysant. As God me help, and his Saints.

A Copy of an Oath of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the Kings
Council sworn for performance of the Articles Matrimonial, treated, and had
between the High and Mighty Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, and the Highness
of the Infanta of Spain and their Commissaries on both Parties, the 20th. July,
1625.
I George Archbishop of Canterbury, do swear that I will Justify and
Faithfully observe, so much as in me lies, all and each of the Articles which
are contained in the Treaty of Matrimony between the most Excellent Prince
Charles, Prince of Wales, and the most Excellent Lady, the Lady Mary Infanta of
Spain; And I do also swear, That I will neither Execute, nor cause to be
Executed any Law made against any Roman Catholic, or exact any pain imposed
thereby, neither by my self, nor any inferior Ministers serving under me; but
in all things appertaining unto me, I will faithfully observe the orders of the
Kings Majesty in this behalf made and provided.

The Oath which King Charles took at the time of His Coronation.
After the Sermon was done the Archbishop of Canterbury came to the KING, and
with a low voice inquire of his Majesty, saying:

SIR, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the People of
England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, Your
Lawful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, The Laws Customs, and
Franchizes granted to the Clergy, and to the People, (by the) glorious King
Saint Edward your Predecessor, According, and conformable to the Laws of God,
and Profession of the Gospel Established in this Kingdom, and agreeing to the
Prerogatives of the Kings thereof, and to the Ancient Customs of this Realm.


Respons, I grant, and Promise to keep them.


Sir, Will you keep Peace, and Agreement entirely according to your Power, both
to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and to the People?


Respons, I will keep it.


Sir, Will you to your Power, cause Law, Justice, and Mercy, in discretion, and
Truth to be Executed in all your Judgments?


Respons, I will.


Sir, Will you grant to hold and keep, the Laws and Rightful Customs, which the
Commonalty of the Kingdom have; And to defend and uphold them, to the honor of
God, so so much as in you lies?


Respons, I grant, and promise so to do.


Legatur, Admonitio sequens, ab uno Episcopo, Coram Omnibus, Clara voce sic
dicendo.

Domine, Rex, a vobis Pardonari Petimns unicuique de nobis and Ecclesiis, nobis
commissis Cannonicum Privilegium, and debitam Legem, atque Justitiam,
conservetis, and defensiomen exhibiatis, sicut Rex in suo Regno debet unicuique
Episcopo, and Ecclesiis, sibi commissis.


Responder Rex. Animo Libenti and devoto promitto vobis, and Pardno, Quia
unicuique de vobis and Ecclesiis vobis-Commissis Canonicum Privilegium, and
debitam Legem, atque justitiam servabo, and defensionem (quantum potuero
adjuvante Domino) exhibeo sicut Rex in suo Regno unicuique Episcopo, Ecolesiis
sibi Commissis, per rectum defendere debet.


This being done the King comes to the Altar, and laying his right hand on the
Bible, says these words:

These things which I have before promised, I shall observe and keep: So God me
help, and by the contents of this Book.

The Oath which all Popish Bishops swear unto the Pope, under Decretalls; Lib.
1. Tit. 14. Cap. 4.
J H. Bishop, will be faithful, from this day forward, unto St. Peter, and to
the holy Church of Rome, and to my Lord Boniface the Pope, and to his
Successors elected Canonically; and I will be an help to keep and defend
against all people, the Popedom, or Papal Sovereignty, and the rules of the
holy Fathers. So God me help, and the holy Gospel.

The Oath of the Treasurer of the Kings Household, in the time of H. 8. as it is
entered in the Black Book of the Household
Y E will swear, By that Book to be after your power, and cunning, and good
worshipful and true Officer to the King our Sovereign Lord, whose high estate
is here present, and diligent service to do him, as Treasurer of his honorable
Household, and be knowing and consenting to any thing that might be against him
in his Body Natural, or of his goods Temporal, but that you let it after your
power, or else to give hasty knowledge thereof to himself, or to such about him
that will do him Wit, or to let it or amend it; And also such good as ye shall
receive of the King, by the Treasurer of England, or other Officers for the
Estate, and conservation of his Royal Household, and for the expenses of it, you
shall truly charge your self therewith, and true Account yield into the
Exchecquer, full and whole by every two years end at the furthest, and no
concealment make; also to behave you truly and honesty, in making of all your
payments with favorable demeaning, cherishing love between the King and people,
and that such payments be made and used continually as the green Cloth in the
Counting House of Household; also that ye take oftentimes views and such over
sight of all manner of Victual, and stuff, comprised within your charge and
parcel, in every Office, so that the utterance of it be guided to the Kings
most worship and profit; and that in all your Sessions and Judgments in the
Counting House, upon any mattter, cause or any thing to say, and give your doom
truly, after good Conscience, right, reason, and all the Rules of this Court
will require between the King and party, or any other party or parties,
cherishing the good Officers, and punishing the evil doer, not by affection or
love only, nor in anger or evil will but return truth to every party as nigh as
you can.

Item, ye shall neither ask nor consent to any allowance but as shall be
rightful and due to be done, and that you demean you in charging or discharging
of the expenses of Household, always to the Kings Household Worship and Profit,
and in your own person, to be example to other in the Court; All such parcel of
purveyance as shall be brought into the Counting House of your time, truly
purveyed and parcelled by Indentures, betwixt such Officers, and if you by good
examinations and searches in the Countries, as truly ye can charge all the
Purveyors, and that it be duly opposed in the Counting House monthly for the
King; And also that he search, the good old rule worshipful, and profitable of
this Court, used before time; and them to keep, uphold, and better if you can.
As God help you, and by that Book.

The Oath of the Comptroller of the Kings Household, as it is recorded the Black
Book of the Household.
Y E shall swear, By that Book, to do unto the King our Sovereign Lord, good
and true service, and diligent after your power and cunning, as Comptroller of
his Honorable Household, and not to know or consent to any thing, that may be
hurting to his Highness Estate, or to his body, or goods, but that ye shall
that after your power, or else warn them in hasty time that may let it, also to
comptrol the receipts and all issues, of the Treasurers Office of Household, and
that to record in plain Account into the Kings Exchequer, of the old form of
the Compting house; Also truly and justly, to help to make the prizes of all
manner of Stuff, Victual, and other purveyance for this Household, and that you
see and know it to be good and wholesome Victuals in every thing for the King,
and his Household, and for the Kings Worship; Also that it be like worth to the
Silver, that the King must pay therefore, or better by your wisdom and
discretion; and also such Victuals of meat and drink be dampened and annulled,
so that it be not expended within the Household, and to show comin such matters
as the green Cloth, before the Steward and Treasurer, that it may be
understood, not done for malice, and then to counsel upon whom to cast the
losses of such mispurveying; Also ye to be consciently assenting in, and to all
due allowance to be made, or giving in the Counting house, betwixt the King and
his people, to apply your businesses, upon the good guiding and oversight of
all such manner of charges, and expenses within this Court, and without also
belonging to this Household, also in our parties to make due search and enquiry,
of and upon the conditions of purveyance, and of their purveyance inward and
outward, and of all the demeaning of the Officers of the Court, that there rise
no slander by their deeds, unto this famous Court, and that you see that the
Officers under you for the King, put them in their diligence to take often the
views of the Offices, that the allowance of the Expenses, pass not their
charges of receipts; ye also to make Account of all the Treasurer of Household
charge and discharge for all receipts, purveyances and expenses, and no
concealments make thereof but truly to ingross it, and to put into the Kings
Exchequer; and in your Office to attend, and preserve the Kings Worship and
profit, as nigh as you can devise; and ye to search, keep, and uphold the good
said Worshipful and profitable Rules and Statutes used before time in this
Court, and them to. increase, and that this demeaning be example to all other,
under you in this Court of good governance; And also that ye or your under
Clerk, or both, be at the Cowperage of Flesh, and at the departing of Fish, at
the service of the Kings Chamber and Hall, and to know the very duties of
Liveries dailyin Household, and to see with the Almner that the Messes thereof
be smitten in a sufficient and according manner, after the old Customs, and so
to see it to the Kings Table, and to other Officers due; Also ye and your Clerk
truly, as often as it is requisite, shall take the Remanents and viewes in
Offices, and surely make the Book of Wine, and all present into the counting
House, as often as you be desired by the Steward, Cofferer, and Clerk of the
Green Cloth, which must needs ingross the great Account of the Household by your
Record. To all which things ye will conform after your power and understanding,
So help you God, and by this Book.

The Oath that is to be administered to a Midwife by the Bishop or his
Chancellor of the Diocese, when she is licensed to exercise that Office of a
Midwife.
Y Ou shall swear, First, That you shall be diligent and faithful, and ready to
help every Woman laboring of Child, as well the Poor as the Rich; and that in
time of necessity, you shall not forsake, or leave the Poor woman, to go to the
Rich.

2. Item, Ye shall neither cause nor suffer any woman to name, or put any other
Father to the Child, but only him which is the very true Father thereof indeed.

3. Item, You shall not suffer any Woman to pretend, feign, or surmize her self
to be delivered of a Child, who is not indeed; neither to claim any other
Woman's Child for her own.

4. Item, You shall not suffer any Woman's Child to be murdered, maimed, or
otherwise hurt, as much as you may; and so often as you shall perceive any
peril or jeopardy, either in the Woman, or in the Child, in any such wise, as
you shall be in doubt what shall chance thereof you shall thenceforth in due
time send for other Midwis^s, and expert Women in that faculty, and use their
advice and counsel in that behalf.

5. Item, That you shall not in any wise use or exercise any manner of
Witchcraft, Charm, or Sorcery, Invocation, or other Prayers then may stand with
Gods Laws and the Kings.

6. Item, You shall not give any counsel, or minister any Herb, Medicine, or
Potion, or any other thing, to any Woman being with Child whereby she should
destroy or cast out that she goes withal before her time.

7. Item, You shall not enforce any Woman being with Child by any pain, or by
any ungodly ways or means, to give you any more for your pains or labor in
bringing her a bed then they would otherwise do.

8. Item, You shall not consent, agree, give, or keep counsel, that any Woman
be delivered secretly of that which she goes with, but in the presence of two
or three Lights ready.

9. Item, You shall be secret, and not open any matter appertaining to your
Office in the presence of any man, unless necessity or great urgent cause do
constrain you so to do.

10. Item, If any Child be dead born, you your self shall see it buried in such
secret place as neither Hog, nor Dog, nor any other Beast may come unto it, and
in such sort done, as it be not found nor perceived, as much as you may; And
that you shall not suffer any such Child to be cast into the Jaques, or any
other inconvenient place.

11. Item, if you shall know any Midwife using or doing any thing contrary to
any of the premises, or in any other wise then shall be seemly or convenient,
you shall forthwith detect, open, to show the same to me or my Chancellor for
the time being.

12. Item, You shall use your self in honest behavior unto the woman being
lawfully admitted to the room and Office of a Midwife in all things accordingly.

13. Item, That you shall truly present to my self, or my Chancellor, all such
women as you shall know from time to time to occupy and exercise the room of a
Midwife within my foresaid Diocese and Jurisdiction of A. without my License
and admission.

14. Item, You shall not make or assign any Deputy or Deputies to exercise or
occupy under you in your absence the Office, or room of a Midwife, but such as
you shall perfectly know to be of right honest and discreet behavior, as also
apt, able, and having sufficient knowledge and experience to exercise the said
room and Office.

15. Item, You shall not be Privy, or consent, that any Priest, or other party,
shall in your absence, or in your company, or of your knowledge or sufferance,
Baptize any Child, by any Mass, Latin-Service, or Prayers, then such as are
appointed by the Laws of the Church of England; neither shall you consent that
any Child, born by any woman, who shall be delivered by you, shall be carried
away without being Baptized in the Parish by the ordinary Minister, where the
said Child is born, unless it be in case of necessity, Baptized privately,
according to the Book of Common Prayer: But you shall forthwith upon
understanding thereof, either give knowledge to me the said Bishop, or my
Chancellor for the time being. All which Articles and Charge you shall
faithfully observe and keep. So help you God and by the Contents of this Book,

The Oath of a Nun, taking upon her a Monastical life.
T V igitur Primo Jurabis quod in castitate corporis te conservabis: Item tu
Jurabis, quod eis Obediens Abati Sci. Augustini comtuari, qui nunc est, and
Successoribus suis, qui and Temporo fuerint, in Omnibus, que Pertinent, ad
jurisdictionem quam eadem Abbas Habet, super te, vel habefurum sunt Successores
ejus.

Item, Tu Jurabis, quod eris Obediens and intendens Magistro, and Priorisse,
hujus Loci, qui pro Tempore fuerint in his, quam tibi ex part dicti Abbatis
Injungent, saluberitur vel imponent haec omnia permittis Observaturam, quam diu
in hac domo, soror volueris commorari, and Beneficio hujus domus gaudere, sic
Deus te Adjuvet, and haec sancta Dei Evangelia.

The Oath taken by Edw. 2. King of England, at his Coronation, Anno 1. vide
Claus Nov. 10.
S Ire volez vous grauntere garder, and par vostre sorment, confermer an People
d'Engleterre les leyes, and les custumes, a eux grauntees pur les Auncien Rois
d'Engleterre voz Predecessors, duotenus and deotz a dieu and noment les leys
custumes, and les Franchisez guntez, an Clerge, and an People, Par le gloriens
Roy Seint Edw. vostre Predecessor.


Respons, Jeo lees grantee, and permit.


Sir, garderez vous a dieu, and Seint Eglise, and an Clerge, and an People Paes
and acore, en dieu entiremt. solunt, vere Poer.


Respons, Jeo les garderai.


Sir, freez vous fear en touz vos Ingementz, mele, and droit Justice, and
discretion, en Misericorde, and verite a vere Poer.


Respons, Jeo lefrai.


Sir, grant vous, a tenir, and garder, les leyes, and les custumes, droit les
quieles, la comunante, de vere Royalme, Aura est in, and les defendres, and
afforcerez ad honor, de dieu a vostre Poer.


Respons, Jeo les grant, and promitte.


The Oath taken by such as are convicted for stealing the Kings Venison, and
therefore ordered to abjure the Land.
M Aster Coroner hear you this, That I have offended our Sovereign Lord the
King in his Venison, for which cause I abjure the Realm of England, and
hereafter I shall never return into it again, without the leave of our
Sovereign Lord the King. So God me help, and those holy Saints.

The Oath of a Ranger of the Forest.
Y Ou shall truly execute the Office of a Ranger in the Panralles of W. upon
the Borders of the Kings Forest of Waltham, you shall rechuse, and with your
hand drive back again the wild Beasts of the Forest, as often as they shall
range out of the said Forest into your Panralles; you shall truly present all
unlawful Hunting, and Hunters of wild Beasts of Venire and Chase, as well
within the Pancallees as within the Forest. And those and all other Offenses
you shall present at the Kings next Court of Attachments or Swanmoth, which
shall first happen. So God you help

The Oath of a Verderor of the Forest.
Y Ou shall truly serve our Sovereign Lord the King in the Office of a Verderor
in the Forest of W. you shall, to the uttermost of your power and knowledge, do
for the profit of the King, so far as it does appertain unto you to do; You
shall preserve and maintain the ancient Right and Franchizes of the Crown; you
shall not conceal from his Majesty any Right of Privileges, nor any Offense,
either in Vert or Venison, nor any other thing; You shall not withdraw nor
abridg any defaults, but shall endeavor your self, you shall give knowledge
thereof unto the King, or unto his Justice of the Forest; Ye shall deal
indifferently with all the Kings Liege People; You shall execute the Laws of
the Forest, and do equal Right and Justice, as well unto the poor as unto the
rich, that appertains unto your Office; You shall not oppress any Person by
color thereof, for any Reward, Favor, or Malice. All these things you shall
to the uttermost of your power observe and keep. So help you God.

The Oath of the Regarder of the Forest.
Y Ou shall truly serve our Sovereign Lord the King, in the Office of a
Regarder of the Forest of Waltham; you shall make the Regard of the same
Forest, in such manner as the same has been accustomed to be made; You shall
range throughout the whole Forest, and through every Bayliwich of the same, as
the Foresters there shall lead you to view the same Forest; and if the
Foresters will not, or do not know how to lead you to make the regard, or range
of the Forest, or that they will conceal from you any thing that is forefeited
to the King, you your selves shall not let for any thing; but you shall see the
same forfeiture and cause the same to be enrolled in your Roll; You shall
enquire of all wastes, purprestures and asserts of the Forest, and also of
concealment of my offense or trespass in the Forest, either in Vert or Venison,
by any Officers of the same Forest. And all these things you shall to the
uttermost of your power do. So help you God.

The Oath of a Forester of the Forest.
Y Ou shall truly execute the Office of a Forester or Keeper of the Kings wild
Beasts, in the Walk called P. within this Forest of W. You shall be of good
behavior your self toward his Majesty's wild Beasts, and the Vert of the same
Forest; You shall not conceal the offense of any other person, either in Vert
or Venison that shall be done within your Charge; but as well the same offense,
as also all Attachments, and Swanmothe, other you shall present at the Kings
next Court of Attachments or Swanmothe, which shall first happen to be holden
for the same Forest; And you shall, to the uttermost of your power, maintain
and keep the Assizes of the Forest, and in all things the Kings Right defend,
concerning the same, so long as you shall be Keeper there. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Inhabitants of the Forest, being of the age of twelve years,
as the same has been accustomed and used in ancient time.
Y Ou shall true Leigeman be unto the Kings Majesty; You shall no hurt do unto
his Beasts of his Forest, nor unto any thing that does belong thereto, the
offenses of other you shall not conceal; but to the uttermost of your power,
you shall them reveal unto the Officers of the Forest, or to them that may see
the same redrest. All these things you shall see done. So help you God, and
Holidome.

The Oath of the English Seminaries of the Romish institution use to take.
I John Copley Collegial of the English Seminary, duly considering the great
benefits which Almighty God has bestowed upon me and that especially whereby
he has drawn me out of the Country infected with Heresy, and made me a member
his true Catholic Church, and desiring not to show my self altogether ingrate
unto Gods so great mercy, I have freely decreed to consecrate, and offer up my
self wholly unto his divine service, for attaining as much as in me lies to
the end of the said College; And I do promise and confirm by this mine Oath
unto Almighty God, that I am, and shall be ever most ready in mind, by the
assistance of his holy grace, to receive in due time Holy Orders, and to return
into England, there to gain Souls, whenever the Superior of this College
shall think good by virtue of his Office, to command me thereto.

The Oath of a Knight of the Bath, as it was Ministered at the Coronation of
King Charles, Anno, 1625.
R Ight dear Brother, great Worship be this Order unto you, And the Almighty
God give you the praise of all Knighthood; You shall love God above all
things, ye shall be steadfast in the faith of Christ, and the same maintain and
defend to your power; You shall love your Sovereign above all earthly
creatures, and for your Sovereign, and your Sovereigns Right and dignity, live,
and dye; You shall defend Maidens, Widows, and Orphans, in their Rights; You
shall suffer no Extortion so far forth as you may, nor sit in place to here any
wrongful Judgments given to your knowledge, And as great Honor be this Noble
Order unto you, as ever it was to your Progenitors.

The Oath of Fealty taken by John Balioll King of Scots, to the King of England,
T His hear you my Lord Edward King of England; Sovereign Lord of the Realm of
Scotland, that I John de Balioll King of Scotland, which I hold and claim to
hold of you, that I shall be faithful and loyal, and owe faith and loyalty to
you, I shall bear of life and member, and of earthly honor against all people;
And lawfully I shall acknowledge, and do the services which I owe to you, for
the Realm of Scotland aforesaid; So God me help, and his Holy Evangelists.

The Oath and Fealty, made by King John to Pope Innocentius, Anno Dom. 1213.
Anno R. John. 14.
J Ohn by the Grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland, from this
hour forward shall be faithful to God, and to Saint Peter, and to the Church of
Rome, and to my L. Pope Innocentius, and to his Successors lawfully entering; I
shall not be in word nor deed, in consent, or counsel, that they should lose
life, or member, or be apprehended in evil manner: Their loss, if I may know
it, I shall Impeach and stay, so far as I shall be able, or else so shortly as
I can, I shall signify unto them and declare to such persons the which I shall
believe, will declare the same unto you; The counsel which they shall commit
unto me, by themselves, their messengers, or their Letters, I shall keep
secretly, and not utter to any man to their hurt, to my knowledge. The
Patrimony of Saint Peter, and especially the Kingdom of England, and Ireland, I
shall endeavor my self to defend, against all men to my power; So help me God,
and these Holy Evangelists, Amen.

This Fealty was done on the Eve of the Ascension of our Lord, in the year
Anno, 1213.

The Oath of a Doctor of Divinity, according to the practice of the University
of Basil.
O Rnatissime, Vir, Sacrarum Literarum, canditate, D. Doctissime, Hodie coram
Amplissimo hoc concessit promittis atque fidem das in conspectu Sacrosancti
Adorandae Trinitatis, cui te Hactenus Totum Addixisti, Consecrati studiis,
laboribus, Vigilliis tuis, quod velis doctrinam Puram, a Prophetis Apostelis ac
Patribus, Melioris Notae Acceptam in corrupt in Scolis Ecclesiisque docere;
Dogmata Pugnantia cum dei verbo: (quantum vis (...) habeant) nulla vel
Seminare, vel tueri per totam vitam eruditioni, ac gradui sermon, and
Actionibus morum gravitatem conjungere eam, que Theology docet, and sit avera
(...) comoda nostrae Reipublicae Symnasii; utilitatem, ac in Primis Ordinis
Theologici salutem (quantum in te fuerit) Perpetuo promonere Indignes,
Ambitioses, contentioses a dignitatis titula (quem docturatam Appellamus long
Abarcere, denique cum universis Fratribus sinceram Religionem profitentibus,
(...)) insigne coujunctionis vinculum Color, Alere, Aeternum, Amen.

The Oath of a Sheriff of a County, according as it was reformed by direction
of the Kings Council, the 4. of December. Anno, 1625.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King, in the Office of
the Sheriff of the County of B. and do the Kings Profits in all that belongs
to you to do by way of your Office, as far forth as you may or can; Ye shall
truly keep the Kings and all that belongs to the Crown; Ye shall, not assent
to decease, to lessen, ne to concealment of any of the Kings Rights, or of his
Franchizes; And whenever ye shall have knowledge, that the Kings Rights, or
the Rights of the Crown be concealed or withdrawn, be it in Lands, Rents,
Franchizes, or Suits, or any other thing; Ye shall do your true power to make
them be restored to the King again: And if he may not do it, ye shall certify
the King, or some of his Council thereof, such as you know for certain will say
it unto the King Ye shall not respite the Kings debts for any gift or savor,
where ye may raise them without great grievance of the debtor; Ye shall truly
and righteously treat the people of your Sheriffwick, and do right as well to
poor as to rich, in all that belongs to your Office; Ye shall do no wrong to
any man, for any gift or other behest, or promise of goods, for favor nor
hate; Ye shall disturb no man's right, ye shall acquit at the Exchequer all
those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the Kings debts; Ye shall nothing
take whereby the King may lose, or that right may be letten, or disturbed, or
the Kings debt delayed; Ye shall truly return, and truly serve the Kings Writs,
as far forth as it shall be in in your cunning; Ye shall not have to be your
under Sheriff, any of the Sheriffs Clerks, of the last year passed; Ye shall
take no Bayliffe into your service, but such as you will answer for; Ye shall
make each of your Bailiffs make such Oath as you make your self, in that that
belongs to their Occupation; Ye shall receive no Writs, by you, nor any of
yours unsealed, nor any Sealed under the Seal of any Justice, save of Justice
in Air, or Justice assigned in the same Shire where you be Sheriff in, or
other Justices having power or authority to make any Writs unto you, by the Law
of the Land, or Justice of Newgate; You shall make your Bayliffe of the true
and sufficient men in the Country; Ye shall be dwelling in your own proper
person within your Bayliffewick, for the time you shall be in the same Office,
except ye be otherwise Licensed by the King: You shall not let your
Sheriffewick, nor any Bayliffwick thereof, to Farm to any man; Ye shall truly
set, and return reasonable and due Juries of them, that be within your Bailiff
wick, after their Estate and their Haviour, and make your Pannell your self of
such persons as be most meet, most sufficient, and not suspect, nor procured,
as it is ordained by the Statute; And over this in eschewing and restraining of
the Robberies, Man-slaughters, and other manifold grievous offenses that be
done daily, namely, by such as name themselves Soldiers, and by other
Vagrants, the which increase in multitude and number; So that the Kings true
Subjects may not safely ride, nor go to do such things as they have to do, to
their intolerable hurt and hinderance; Ye shall truly and effectually, with
all diligence possible to your power, execute the Statutes of Winchester, and
of Vagabonds; All these things ye shall well and truly observe and keep, So
help you God, etc.

The Form of The Oath of Justices of the Peace.
Y E shall swear, That as Justices of the Peace in the County of C. in all
Articles, in the Kings Commission to you directed, you shall do equal right to
the Poor, and to the Rich after your cunning, wit, and power, and after the
Laws and Customs of the Realm, and Statutes thereof made. And ye shall not be
of Counsel of any Quarrel hanging before you. And that ye hold your Sessions
after the form of Statutes thereof made. And the Issues, Fines, and
Amerciaments that shall happen to be made, and all forfeitures which shall fall
before you ye shall cause to be Entered without any concealment (or imbezilling)
and truly send them to the King's Exchequer. Ye shall not let for gift or other
causes, but well and truly you shall do your Office of Justice of the Peace in
that behalf. And that you take nothing for your Office of Justice of the Peace
to be done, but of the King, and Fees accustomed, and Costs limited by the
Statute. And ye shall not direct, nor cause to be directed any Warrant (by you
to be made) to the parties, but ye shall direct them to the Bailiffs of the
said County, or other the Kings Officers (or Ministers) or other indifferent
persons to do Execution thereof. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Register, and Keeper of the King's Papers and Records of
State, in his Palace of Whitehal at Westminster.
Y Ou shall swear, To bear faith and true Allegiance unto the Kings Majesty,
and him from henceforth truly and faithfully to serve in the place of Clerk,
Keeper, and Register of his Majesty's Papers and Records for matters of State,
established at his Majesty's Palace of Whitehal; You shall do your uttermost
endeavor to keep and conserve the said Papers and Records, which either now or
hereafter shall be committed ^o your charge, from all harm and damage; You
shall not willingly suffer any of the same to be purloyned, embeziled, or
defaced; You shall carefully and faithfully keep secret and conceal, from the
knowledge of others, either by writing or relation, all such things therein
contained as shall be fit, either for reason of State, or otherwise for his
Majesty's service, to be concealed and kept secret, except it be to the Lords,
and others of his Majesty's Privy Council, or such as his Majesty shall be
content to have them communicated unto; if you shall know of private person, or
persons, that have embezled, or do detain any such Papers or Records which
belong unto his Majesty, you shall do the best to recover the same, and bring
them to the said Office, and do all things else that belong to the duty of the
Clerk, Keeper, and Register of the said Papers and Records: All these you shall
well and truly perform and do. So help you God.

The Oath to be ministered to the Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
the Master of the Kings Wards, and shall minister equal Justice unto rich and
poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power: And that ye shall diligently
procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the Kings Advantage and
Profit, and to the Augmentation of the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown,
and truly use the Kings Seal appointed to your Office, and also endeavor your
self to the uttermost of your power, to see the King justly and truly answered
yearly of all such Rents, Revenues, Issues, and Profits, which shall, or may
arise, grow, or be due to the King in your Office, and from time to time,
deliver with speed such as shall have to do before you: And that ye shall not
take, nor receive of any person any Gift or Reward, in any case or matter
depending before you, or wherein the Kings Highness shall be Party, whereby any
prejudice, loss, hindrance, or disherison shall grow, or be to the Kings
Highness. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath to be ministered to the Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries,
as it is in the Statute 32. Hen. 8. Cap 16.
Y E shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King as his Attorney
in all Courts, for, or concerning any matter, or cause, that shall concern the
Possessions and Hereditaments limited to the Survey and Governance of this
Court, and procure the Kings Profit thereof: And that ye shall truly counsel
the King, and the Master of this Court, in all things concerning the same to
the best of your wit and cunning, and with all speed and diligence from time to
time, at the calling of the said Master ye shall endeavor your self, for the
hearing and determination indifferently of such matters and causes as shall
depend before the said Master; and that ye shall not take any Gift or Reward in
any matter or cause depending in the same Court, or elsewhere, wherein the King
shall be party, whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hurted or hindered, or
disherited: And further, ye shall do to your power, wit, and cunning, all and
every thing that shall appertain to your Office. So help you God and all Saints.

The Oath of the Receiver-General of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in
Statute, Anno, 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 46.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his people, in the Office of the general Receiver of this Court: And
ye shall reasonably and honestly procure the Kings profit, and do right to all
manner of people, poor, and and rich, in those things which touch your Office:
And the Kings Receipt of his Money, you shall truly keep, dispend, pay, and
deliver, and true Declaration and Account make thereof from time to time
without any concealment, according to the Act made for the establishment of
this Court: And further, shall do every thing that of right appertains to
your Office. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in the
Statute, Anno 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 46.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and true
Allowance make to every person which shall be accomptant before you: And you
shall not take, or receive of poor or rich, any Gift or Reward, in any matter
or cause depending, or to be discussed in the same Court, but such as shall be
ordinary appertaining to your Office, whereby the King shall be hurted,
hindered, or disherited: And ye shall do all and every thing, which shall be
appertaining to your Office. So help you God, and all Saints.

And all particular Auditors, that shall belong to, and be appointed to the
said Court, shall take the same Oath aforesaid, before the Master of the said
Court of Wards.

The Oath of the particular Receivers of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in
the Statute, Anno 32 Hen. 8 Cap. 46.
Y E shall swear, That ye truly shall serve the King in your Office, and
nothing conceal, but true Account make of all such Revenues, Rents, Sums of
Money, and other profits, wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged by reason of
your Office: Ye shall make no Petition, or ask Allowance, but such as shall be
good, just, true, and reasonable; And also truly content to pay the King, all
such sums of Money as shall come to your hands, and ye shall do all, and every
thing and things which ye ought to do, by Reason of your Office, according to
the form and effect of this Act: So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Clerks of the Council of the Court of Wards, as in the
Statute, 32. H. 8. Cap. 46.
Y E will swear, That ye shall well and and truly serve the King in your
Offices of Clerks of the Council of this Court, and truly do, and Execute all,
and every thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office,
according to the form and effect of this Act; So help you God, and all Saints.

All Surveyors, and Feodaries, that shall be appointed by the said Master,
Attourny, Receiver general, and Auditor of the said Court, or three, or two of
them, whereof the Master to be one, shall take a corporal Oath before the said
Master, according to the form abovesaid.

The Oath of the Chancellor of the first Fruits and Tenths, as in the Statute,
Anno 32. H. 8. Cap. 46.
Y Ou shall swear, That he well and truly serve the King in the Office of the
Chancellour-ship of the first Fruits, and Tenths, and shall minister equal
Justice to rich and poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power; And that
ye shall diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the
Kings best advantage and profit, and to the Augmentations of the Rights and
Prerogatives of his Crown, and truly use the Kings Seal appointed to your
Office, and also endeavor your self, to the uttermost of your power, to see
the King justly and truly answered yearly, of all such Rents, Revenues, and
Profits, which shall or may arise, grow, or be due to the King in your Office,
and from time to time, deliver with speed, such as shall have to do before you;
And that ye shall not take nor receive of any person any Gift or Reward in any
case or matter depending before you, or wherein the Kings Highness shall be
Party, whereby any prejudice, hindrance, loss, or dis-herison shall grow, or be
to the Kings Highness: So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Treasurer of the Court of first Fruits and Tenths, as in the
Statute, Anno 32 H. 8. Cap. 45.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his People in the Office of the Treasurer of this Court; And ye shall
reasonably and honestly procure the Kings Profits, and do right to all manner
of people, poor and rich, in those things which touch your Office, and the
Kings Receipt of his Money, ye shall truly keep, dispend, pay, and deliver a
true Declraation and Account thereof shall make, from time to time without any
concealment, according to this Act made for the establishment of this Court;
And further, shall do every thing that of right appertains to your Office: So
help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Attorney of the Court of First Fruits and Tenths, as in the
Statute, Anno 32 H. 8. Cap. 45.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King as his Attorney
in all Courts, for and concerning any matter or cause that shall concern or
touch the Rents, Revenues, Profits, or Hereditaments, limited to the Survey and
Governance of this Court, and procure the King Profit thereof; And that ye
shall truly counsel the King, and Chancellor of this Court, in all things,
concerning the same, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power, and with all
speed and diligence, from time to time, at the calling of the said Chancellor,
you shall endeavor your self, for the hearing and determination indifferently
of such matters and causes as shall depend before the said Chancellor; And
that ye shall not receive any Gift, or Reward, in any matter or cause depending
in the Court, or elsewhere, wherein the King shall be Party, whereby the Kings
Majesty shall be hurted, hindered, or dis-inherited; And further ye shall do to
your power, wit and cunning, all and every thing that of Right appertains to
your Office; So help you God and all Saints.

The Oath of the Auditor of the Court of First Fruits and Tenths, as in the
Statute, Anno 32 H. 8. Cap. 45.
Y E shall swear, That ye truly shall serve the King in your Office, and true
Allowance make to every person which shall be accomptant before you; And you
shall not take nor receive of Poor, nor Rich, any Gift or Reward in any matter
or cause depending, or to be discussed in the same Court, but such as shall be
ordinary appertaining to your Office, whereby the King shall be hurted,
hindered, dis^herited; And ye shall do every thing appertaining to your Office.
So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Court of first Fruits and Tenths, as in the
Statute, Anno 32. H. 8. Cap. 45.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of
Clerk of the Council of this Court, and truly do, and execute all and every
thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, according to
the form and effect of this Act; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath taken for the surety of the Succession of the Kings Highness, by
Queen Anne, Anno 26. H. 8. Cap. 2.
Y E shall swear, To bear faith, truth, and obedience, all only to the Kings
Majesty, and to his Heirs of his body of his most dear and entirely beloved
lawful Wife Queen Ann, begotten and to be begotten; And farther to the Heirs of
our said Sovereign Lord, according to the limitation in the Statute made for
surety of his Succession in the Crown of this Realm, mentioned and contained,
and not to any other within this Realm, nor for any Authority or Potentate. And
in case any Oath be made or has been made by you to any person or persons,
that then ye repute the same as vain, and Annihilated; And that to your cunning
wit, and uttermost of your power, without guile, fraud, or other undue mean, ye
shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the said Succession, and all the
whole effects and contents thereof, and all other Acts and Statutes made in
confirmation, or for execution of the same, or of any thing therein contained;
and this ye shall do against all manner of persons, of what Estate, Dignity,
Degree, or Condition soever they be, and in no wise do, or attempt, nor to your
power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or
things privately or appartly, to the let, hindrance, damage, or derogation
thereof, or of any part of the same, by any manner of means, or for any manner
of pretense; So help you God, all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath taken for the Establishment of the Succession of the Crown of this
Realm, in the Kings Highness by Queen Jane, Anno 28 H. 8. Cap. 7.
Y E shall swear, To bear Faith, Truth, and Obedience, all only to the Kings
Majesty, Supreme Head in earth under God of Church of England during his Life,
and to his Heirs of his Body, and of his most dear and entirely beloved lawful
Wife Queen Jane, begotten and to be begotten and Procreated; And further, to
the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord, according to the limitation in the
Statute made for surety of his Succession in the Crown of this Realm, As the
Parliament begun, and holden at Westminster the 8th. day of June, in the 28th.
Year of the Kings most gracious Reign; And also for lack of such Heirs to such
person or persons as the Kings Highness shall limit and appoint to succeed to
the Crown, by virtue and Authority of the same Act, and not to any other within
this Realm, nor for any Authority, Power, or Potentate; And in case any other
Oath be made, or has been made by you to any person or persons, that then ye
to repute the same as vain and Annihilate, and that to your cunning, wit, and
uttermost of your power, without guile, fraud, to other undue manner; Ye shall
observe, keep, defend and maintain the said Act of Succession, made in the said
Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, in the said 8th. day of June, in
the said 28th. Year of the Kings most Royal Reign, and all the whole effects
and contents thereof, and all things that shall be done by the Kings Highness
by Authority of the same and all other Acts and Statutes, made in Confirmation
or Execution of the same, or any thing therein contained; And this ye shall do
against all manner of persons, of what Estate, Dignity, Degree, or Condition
soever they be, and in no wise do or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be
done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or things, privately or
appartly, to the let, hindrance, damage, or derogation thereof, or any part of
the same, or of any thing or things that shall be done by the Kings Highness,
by virtue and Authority of the said Act, by any manner of means, or for any
manner of pretense; So help you God, all Saints, and the Holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Commissioners appointed for inquiry of the decay of Castles,
Forts, and other places near Scotland, and for Reparation of the same. Anno 2
and 3 P. and M. 4. Cap. 1.
Y E shall swear, That to your cunning wit and power, ye shall truly and
indifferently execute the Authority to you given by this Commission without any
favor, affection corruption, dread, or malice to be born, to any manner of
person or persons; and as the case shall remain, you shall consent, and
endeavor your self, for your part, to the best of your knowledge and power, to
the making of such wholesome, just, equal, and indifferent Laws and Ordinances,
as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent number of
your selves, being in Commission with you, for the making, errection and
preservation of all and every such things as are contained and specified in the
said Commission, and the same Laws and Ordinances to your cunning, wit, and
power, cause to put in due Execution, without favor, meed, malice, or
affection. As God you help, and all Saints.

The Oath of such as were Sworn to declare the true value of their Estates
toward the payment of the 15. Dismes and Subsidies, Anno 2. and 3. P. and M.
Cap. 23.
I Shall faithfully, truly, and plainly, according to my knowledge, show unto
you the King and Queens Commissioners, and to others by you assigned, the best
and greatest value of all my goods and chattels, and sums of money to me owing,
according to the grant of this Act of Subsidy, and truly answer to that I shall
be examined of, touching the premises, without coven or deceit; So help me God,
and the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath of such as were to make Enquiry of the value of the Goods and Lands
of such persons as were liable to the payment of Fifteens. Dismes, and
Subsidies, Anno 4. and 5. P. M. Cap. 6. and Anno 6. Edw. 6. Cap. 7.
I Shall truly enquire, with my Fellows that shall be charged with me of the
Hundred, Wapentake, Ward, Town, and other places of the best and most value of
the substance of every person dwelling and abiding within the limits of the
places, that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other which shall
have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with
any sum of money by this Act of the said Subsidy, and of all other Articles that
I shall be charged with touching the said Act, and according to the intent of
the same, and thereupon as near as it may be, or shall come to my knowledge,
truly to present and certify before you the names, sir-names, and the best and
uttermost substance and values, of every of them, as well of Lands, Tenaments,
and other Hereditaments, Possessions, and Profits, as of Goods, Chattells,
Debts, and other things chargeable by the said Act, without any concealment,
favor, love, affection, dread, fear, or malice, near as God will give me
grace; So help me God, and the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath of such as were to present names and best values of the substance of
such persons as were to pay relief to the King, Anno 2 and 3 Edw. 6. Cap. 36.
J Shall truly enquire, with my fellows that shall be charged with me, of the
Hundred, Wapentake, Ward, Town, or other place of the best and most value of
the substance of every person dwelling and abiding within the limits of the
places, that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other which shall
have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with
any sum of money by this Act, of this said relief, and of all other Articles
that I shall be charged with touching the said Act, and according to the intent
of the same, and thereupon as near as it may, or shall come to my knowledge, not
only truly to present and certify before you, the names, sir-names, additions,
and the best and uttermost substance and values of every of them, of their
Goods, Chattels, Debts, and other things chargeable by the said Act, and how
many Strangers, Denizons, or not Denizons, being above the age of seven years,
be resiant and dwelling within the limits of my charge, of what value in Goods,
and other things chargeable to the payment of this relief they have been, and
whether they be Householders, or Servants or otherwise, under the rule and
government parents, without any concealment, favor, love, affection, dread,
fear, or malice: So help me God, and the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath taken by those that were to pay Relief to the King, Anno 2 and 3 Edw.
6. Cap. 36.
I Shall faithfully, truly, and plainly, according to my knowledge, show unto
you the Kings Commissioners, and to others by you assigned, the best and
greatest value of all my goods and chattels, and sums of money to me owing,
according to the grant of this Act of Relief, and truly answer to that I shall
be examined of, touching the premises, without coven or deceit; So help me God,
and the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath to be taken by Parsons, Vicars, or Curates, and others, to declare
what number of Sheep were in their several Parishes, to the end, that the King
might be paid his his Relief by the Pooll, Anno 3. and Edw. 6. Cap. 36.
Y E shall diligently enquire, and justly and truly present and certify us,
the Kings Commissioners, what number of Ewes, Wethers, and other Shear-sheep
there be within the limits of your charge, whose they be, in what Town or
Parish the Owner dwells, of what condition or degree he is, and whether for
the most part of the year they be kept in several Pastures, or Marshes, or in
Commons, or Grounds, commonly used to be Tilled, As ye trust to be saved by the
merits of Christ's Passion.

The Oath of such as were to value Clothes, to the end, that the King might
receive payment of Relief for every Cloth, Anno 2 and 3 Edw. 6. Cap. 36.
Y E shall faithfully and truly esteem, set the just price and value of all
such Clothes as shall be brought to you to be viewed and praised, as ye shall
in your conscience think the same worth in your conscience to be sold when they
shall be wrought, and the same shall not suffer to be delivered out of your
custody till you have made of the Color, Kind, and Price thereof an entry,
both in the Book of the Clothier, and also of the Alnager, or his Deputy, and
set your hands, or Marks, delaring who was the Owner of the Cloth, and the
Kind and Price thereof. So help you God, and by this Book.

The Oath of the Surveyor of the Kings Liveries, Anno 33 H. 8. Cap. 22.
Y E shall swear, That ye well and truly serve the King our Sovereign in the
Office of Surveyor of his Graces Liveries, and shall minister equal Justice to
rich and poor to the best of your power, wit, and knowledge, and that you shall
diligently proceed in all things which may honestly and justly be to the Kings
advantage and profit, and to the Augmentation of the right and prerogative of
his Graces Crown, and from time to time deliver with speed such as shall have
to do before you; And that you shall not take, nor receive of any person or
persons any gift or reward, in any case or matter, depending or to depend in
the said Court of the Kings Wards, wherein the Kings Highness shall be Party,
by reason whereof, any prejudice, loss, hindrance, or dis-herison, shall or may
grow to the Kings Highness his Heirs or Successors; So help you God and all
Saints.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Liveries, as in Anno 33 H. 8. Cap. 22.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord in your Office of Clerk of the Liveries, and truly do and execute, without
delay, fraud, or coven, all and every thing and things which you ought to do,
by reason of your said Office, according to the form and effect of this present
Act: So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the general Surveyor of the Kings Court, called the Court of
general Surveyor of the Kings Lands, Anno 23 H. 8. Cap. 39.
Y E shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the said
Office of the general Surveyor of the Revenues of this Court, called the Court
of the general Surveyor of his Graces Lands, and shall minister equal Justice
to rich and poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power; And that ye
shall diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the
Kings advantage and profit, and to the Augmentation of the rights and
prerogatives of his Crown, and truly use the Kings Seal appointed for your
Office; And also endeavor your self, to the uttermost of your power, to see
the King truly answered of all such Rents, Revenues, Issues, and Profits, which
shall or may arise or grow in your Office, and from time to time deliver with
speed, such as shall have to do before you; And that ye shall not take, or
receive of any person, any Gift or Reward, in any cause or matter depending
before you, or wherein the Kings Hghness shall be Party, whereby any prejudice,
hindrance loss, or dis-herison shall grow, or be to the Kings Highness; So help
you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Treasurer of Office or Court of the Kings general Surveyor,
Anno 33 H. 8. Cap. 39.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his people in the Office of Treasurer of his Highness Court of
general Surveyor; And ye shall reasonably, and honestly procure the Kings
Profit, and do right to all manner of people, poor and rich, in those things
which touch your Office and the Kings Treasure; ye shall truly keep and
dispend, and true Declaration and account thereof shall make from time to time,
without any concealment, to and before such person and persons, as shall be
named and appointed by the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors for the
same; And further, shall do every thing that of Right appertains to your
Office: So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Kings Attorney of the Court of general Surveyer. Anno. 33 H.
8. Cap. 39.
Y E shall swear. That ye well and truly shall serve the King in all places,
for, or concerning any matter or cause that shall concern or touch the
possessions and Hereditaments, limited to the survey and governance of this
Court, and procure the Kings profit thereof; And ye shall truly counsel the
King and the Surveyor and Treasurer of this Court, in all things concerning the
same, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power, and with all speed and
diligence from time to time at the calling of the said Surveyor and Treasurer,
you shall endeavor your self, for the hearing and determination indifferently,
of such matters and causes as shall depend before the said Surveyor and
Treasurer; And that ye shall not take any gift or reward in any matter or cause
depending in the same Court, or elsewhere, wherein the King shall be Party,
whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hurted, hindered, or dis-inherited; And
further, do all and every thing that shall appertain to your Office: So help
you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Master of the Woods of the Court of General Surveyor, Anno, 33
Hen. 8. Cap. 39.
Y E shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, in the Office of Master of the Woods in this Court: And that ye shall
make true sale and sales of all Woods, and Under-woods belonging to your
Office, according to the authority given unto you by this Act of General
Surveyor, or any other Act or Acts to be made concerning the said General
Surveyors for the Kings most advantage, and nothing conceal, but true account
make of all such sums of money received for the same, and other Profits
wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged by reason of your said Office: Ye shall
make no Petition, nor ask any Allowance, but such as shall be good, just, true,
and reasonable: And ye shall do all and every thing and things which ye ought
to do, by reason of your Office, according to the form and effect of this Act.
So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of the General Surveyor, Anno 33 H. 8.
Ca. 39.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office,
and shall not take or receive of poor or rich, any gift or reward, in any
matter or cause depending, or to be discussed in the same Court, but such as
shall be your ordinary Fees: And ye shall do all and every other thing which
shall appertain to your Office. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Receiver of the Court of the General Surveyance, Anno 33. Hen.
8. Cap. 39.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and
nothing conceal, but true account make of all such Revenues, Rents, Sums of
Money, and other profits wherewith you shall be lawfully charged, by reason of
your said Office: You shall make no Petition, nor ask Allowance, but such as
shall be good, just, and true and reasonable, and ye shall do all, and every
thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, according to
the form and effect of this Act. So help you God, and by the contents of this
Book.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Court of the General Surveyor, Anno 33 Hen. 8.
Cap. 39.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of
Clerk of the said Court, and truly do and excute, all, and every thing and
things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, according to the form and
effect of the Act: And ye shall also be attendant unto the said General
Surveyor from time to time, as they shall require you. So help you God, and all
Saints.

The Oath of the Messenger of the Court of the General Surveyor, Anno 33 Hen.
8. Cap. 39.
Y OU will swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of
Messenger of this Court, as well in speedy serving all and singular Processes
to you, to be delivered without fraud, coven, guile, or deceit: As also making
true and speedy Certificate to this Court of the same: And that you well and
truly do, and execute all, and every other thing and things which ye ought to
do by reason of your said Office. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of Supremacy, Anno 28 Hen. 8. Cap. 10.
I T is Ordained and Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That all, and every
Ecclesiastical Judge, Ordinary, Chancellor, Commissary, Official,
Vicar General, Mayor, Bailiff, Sheriff, Undersheriff, Escheator, Alderman,
Jurate, Constable, Headborough, Thirdborow, Bursholder, and every other
Lay-Officer and Minister to be made, created, elected, or admitted within this
Realm, or any other the Kings Dominions, of what estate, order, degree, or
condition soever he shall be, from, and after the said last day of July, shall
before he take upon him such Office, make, take, and receive a Corporal Oath
upon the Evangelists, before such person and persons as have, or shall have
authority to admit him: That he from henceforth shall utterly renounce, refuse,
relinquish and forsake the Bishop of Rome, and his authority, power, and
jurisdiction: And that ye shall never consent or agree, that the Bishop of Rome
shall practice, exercise, or have any manner of authority, jurisdiction or
power within this Realm, or any other the Kings Dominions, but that he shall
resist the same at all times to the uttermost of his power: And that from
henceforth he shall accept, repute and take the Kings Majesty to be the only
Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England, and that to his cunning, wit,
and uttermost of his power, without guile, fraud, or other undue mean: He shall
observe, keep, maintain, and defend the whole effect and contents of all and
singular Acts and Statutes, made, and to be made within this Realm, in
derogation, execution, and extinguishment of the Bishop of Rome, and his
Authority, and all other Acts and Statutes, made, and to be made in Reformation
and corroboration of the Kings Power of Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of
England: And this he shall do against all manner of persons, of what estate,
dignity, degree, or condition they be, and in no wise do or attempt, nor to his
power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or
things privily or appartly, to the let, hindrance, damage, or derogation
thereof, or of any part thereof, by any manner of means, or of any manner of
pretense: And in case any Oath be made, or has been made to him, by any manner
of person or persons, in maintenance, defense, or favor of the Bishop of Rome,
or his Authority, Jurisdiction, or power, ye repute the same as vain and
adnihillate. So help him God and all Saints, and the Holy Evangelists.

The Oath of a Commissioner for Sewers, as is in the Statute, Anno 23 Hen. 8.
Y E shall swear, That you to your cunning, wit, and power shall truly and
indifferently execute the Authority given by this Commission of Sewers, without
any favor, affection, corruption, dread, or malice, to be born to any manner
of person or persons, and as the case shall require, ye shall consent and
endeavor your self, for your part, to the best of your knowledge and power, to
the making of such wholesome, just, equal, and different Laws, and Ordinances,
as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent number of
your fellows, being in Commission with you, for the redress, reformation, and
amendment, of all, and every such things as are contained and specified in the
said Commission: And the same Laws and Ordinances, to your cunning, wit, and
power, cause to be put in due execution without favor, meed, dread, malice, or
affection. So God you help, and all Saints.

The Oath of an Under Sheriff, Bailiff of Franchies, Deputies, and Clerk of
every Sheriff, and Undersheriff, Statute, Anno 27 of Queen Eliz. Cap. 12.
I. A. B. Shall not use or exercise the Office of Undersheriff corruptly,
during the time that I shall remain there, neither shall, or will accept,
rejoice, or take by any color, means, or device whatsoever, or consent to the
taking of any manner of fee or reward of any manner of person or persons for
the impannelling or returning of any Inquest, Jury, or Tales, in any Court of
Record for the Queen, or between party and party, above two Shillings, or the
value thereof, or such Fees as are allowed and appointed for the same by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, but will, according to my power, truly and
indifferently with convenient speed, Impannel all Jurors, and return all such
Writ or Writs touching the same, as shall appertain to be done by my duty or
Office, during the time that I shall remain in the said Office. So help me God,
and by the contents of this Book.

It is Ordained, That every Undersheriff, Bailiff of Franchizes, Deputy, and
Clerk of every Sheriff, and Undersheriff, and every other person and persons,
which shall have Authority, or take upon him to Impannel or return any Inquest,
Jury or Tales, or intermeddle with execution of Process in any Court of Record,
until he or they have taken the Oath of Supremacy, as it is Ordained in the
first year of Queen Elizabeth; together with the Oath abovsaid.

The Oath given to the Kings Council and Judges of his Court of Requests, as it
is entered in an old Book of Presidents remaining among the Records of that
Court, Anno 27 Hen. 6. Fol. 56.
Y Ou shall be faithful and true Counselor to our Sovereign Lord, Henry by the
Grace of God, King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland, the 7th. and
to his Council be diligently attendant, and due, and diligent attendance he
shall give to the same, and and in every matter touching our said Sovereign
Lord his Honorable surety or profit that shall come to your knowledge, or that
shall be communed or treated in his Council: Ye shall to the best of your
wisdom, give plain and true Counsel, not letting so to do for meed, dread,
favor, or affection of any person, of what degree or condition soever he be;
the Kings Council, as long as it is Ordained to be Council, ye shall conceal
and keep secret, without disclosing it to any person, though he be of the same
Council, if it touch him, and that he may not be made privy there: And if there
shall come any thing to your knowledge, that may be hurtful prejudicial, or
dishonorable to our said Sovereign Lord: Ye shall let it to the best of your
power, and as soon as ye goodly may, show it to our said Sovereign Lord, or
such of his Council as ye shall think will show it to him; All which premises,
and every of them, ye shall well and truly keep and observe. So help you God,
and all Saints, and by his Holy Evangelists, by you bodily touched.

The Oath which was given by Henry Garnet the Jesuit, to Catesby, Piercy,
Christopher Wright, and Thomas Winter, and the rest of the Conspirators in the
Powder Treason, Anno 1605. for secrecy, as perseverance and constancy in the
execution of their Plots,
Y Ou shall swear, By the Blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose
to receive, never to disclose directly nor indirectly, by word or circumstance,
the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep Secret, nor desist from
execution thereof, until the rest shall give you leave.

The Oath concerning the Office of a Constable in the Country, Vide Dalton,
Title Warrants.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King in the Office of a Constable; You shall see, and cause his Majesty's Peace
to be well and truly kept and preserved according to your power; You shall
Arrest all such persons as in your sight or presence shall ride or go Armed
offensively, or shall commit, or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach of his
Majesty's Peace; You shall do your best endeavor (upon complaint to you made)
to apprehend all Fellons, Baretors, and Rioters, or persons Riotous assembled;
and if any such Offenders shall make resistance (with force) you shall leave
hue and cry, and shall pursue them until they be taken: You shall do your best
endeavor, that the Watch in your Town be duly kept, and that hue and cries be
duly pursued, according to the Statute of Winchester: And that the Statutes
made for the Punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and Night-walkers, and such
idle persons coming within your Bounds and Limits be duly put in Execution: You
shall have a watchful eye to such persons as shall maintain or keep any common
house or place where any unlawful Games is, or shall be used; As also, to such
as shall frequent or use such places; or shall use or exercise any unlawful
Games there, or elsewhere, contrary to the Statutes at your Assizes, Sessions,
or Leet; You shall present all, and every the offenses done, contrary to the
Statutes made, 1. Jacob. 4. Jacob. and 21. Jacob. Regis, to restrain the
inordinate hunting and tippling in Innes, Alchouses, and other
Victualing-houses, and for repressing of Drunkenness. You shall true
representment make of all Bloodshedding, Affraies, Outcries, Rescuous, and
other Offenses committed or done against the Kings Majesty's Peace within your
Limits; And you shall have a care for the maintenance of Archery, according to
the Statute: You shall well and duly execute all Receipts and Warrants to you
directed, from the Justices of this County; And ye shall well and duly,
according to your knowledge, power, and ability, do, and execute all other
things belonging to the Office of a Constable, so long as you shall continue in
this Office; So help you God.

The Oath of a Duke and Earl in Scotland, to their King.
Y Ou shall fortify and defend the true and Christian Religion, and Christ's
holy Evangel presently preached in this Realm, and shall be loyal and true to
our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and shall defend his Highness Realm and
Lieges from all Aliens and Strangers, at the uttermost of your power; So help
you God, and by the Oath that ye have else made.

The Oath of a Lord of Parliament in Scotland.
Y E shall give due and faithful Counsel to our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty's Weal publicly in Parliament, as in all other places needful, and
secretly according to your knowledge, for the preservation of his Highness most
noble Person, his Royal Estate, Lieges, and Realm, and Commonweal thereof; And
shall never Heil nor conceil any point of Treason, or Crime, Leismajesty, that
shall appear to be conspired against his said Royal Person but shall
incontinent, with all possible diligence reveal the same; So help you God, and
by the Oath that ye have else made.

The Oath of a Knight of Scotland.
1. J Shall fortify and defend the Christian Religion, and Christ's holy
Evangel presently preached in this Realm, to the uttermost of my power.

2. I shall be Loyal and true to my Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, to all
Orders of Chivalry, and to the Noble Office of Arms.

3. I shall fortify and defend Justice at my power, and that with favor or
feed.

4. I shall never fly from my Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, nor from his
Highness Lieutenants, in time of Mellay and Battle.

5. I shall defend my Native Realm from all Alieners and Strangers.

6. I shall defend the just occasion and quarrel of all Ladies of Honor, of
all true and friendless Widows, of Orphans, and of Maidens of good fame.

7. I shall do diligence wheresoever I hear there is any Murderers, Traitors,
or masterful Reavers, that Oppresses the Kings Lieges, and poor people, to
bring them to the Law at my power.

8. I shall maintain and uphold the Noble Estate of Chivalry, with Horse,
Harness, and other Knightly Habilliments, and shall help and succor them of
the same Order, if they have need.

9. I shall enquire, and seek to have the knowledge and understanding, of all
the Articles and Points contained in the Book of Chivalry.

All these premises to observe, keep and faithful, I oblige me; So help me God,
by my own hand, so help me God, etc.

The Oath of the Mayor of London and Oxford, as it is entered in the Red Book of
the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall serve well and truly our Sovereign Lord the
King, in the Office of Mayoralty in the City of London, or (Oxenford,) and the
same City, Ye shall surely, and safely, unto the use of our said Sovereign Lord
the King of England, and of his Heirs, Kings of England, and the Profit of the
King, ye shall do in all things that to you longs, and the Right of the King,
and that that belongs to the Crown ye shall truly keep; Ye shall not assent
unto decrees nor concealment of the Rights, nor of the Franchizes of the King,
or of the Crown, be it in Lands Rents, or in Franchizes, or in Suits concealed
or withdrawn, you shall put your power to call it again; And if ye may not do
it, ye shall tell unto the King, or to those of his Council, of whom ye shall
understand for to be certain, that they shall inform the King thereof; And ye
shall truly and right wisely treat the people of your Bailey, and right ye
shall do to every person, as well to Stranger as to privy, to poor as to rich,
in that that belongs to you for to do; And that for highness, nor for riches,
for gift, promise, favor, nor hate, ye shall no wrong do to any person, nor to
any man ye shall the right let; Ye shall not take whereby the King may leese,
or by which the right may be let; And also that ye may set good keeping upon
the Assize of Bread, Wine Fish, Flesh, Corn, and all other Victuals, and also
of Weights and Measures in the said City, doing sad and due execution upon the
defaults that there shall be found, according to all the Statutes thereof made
not repealed, and that in all things to the Mayor of the said City longing for
to do, well and truly you shall have you, and do; So help you God, and holydome,

The Oath of the Sub Treasurer, as it is entered in the Red Book of the
Exchequer.
Y E shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign Lord, in the room of
Under Treasurer of this his Exchequer, and in the Receipt of the same; and well
and truly survey and order as well the Receipts of all sums of money, paid and
to be paid to the Kings use in the said Receipt, as the issue of the same; And
well and truly behave your self in the same room; So help you God, and all
Saints, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Auditor of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red Book of
the Exchequer.
Y E shall wear, That ye shall truly serve the King our Sovereign Lord, in the
Office of one of the Auditors of this Exchequer, during the time ye shall have
the same; And well and truly ye shall entreat, and with all goodly speed ye
shall rid such persons as shall be by this Court Assigned to Account before
you; Ye shall not take of any Person, whereby the Kings Majesty may lose, nor
consent to any untruth; And right ye shall do to every Accomptant that shall
have to do before you, according to your wit and discretion, and safely and
surely keep such Records, Writs, and other Mynuments of this Court as shall be
committed for any time to your custody, without raising or embezlinng of the
same. So God you help, etc.

The Oath of the Ingrosser of the great Roll, as it is entered in the Red Book
of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the Kings Majesty our
Sovereign Lord, Clerk of the Pipe.
in the Office of Ingrosser of the great Roll, otherwise called the Clerk of
the Pipe of this Exchequer, and the Office, with all the Rolls, Records,
Accounts, and other Mynuments, being and remaining in the same, and that
hereafter shall be committed to your custody, and pertaining to the same
Office; Ye shall safely and surely keep, or do to be kept, to the use of our
said Sovereign Lord the King; And ye shall draw, or cause to be drawn out of
the Two Remembrancers Offices, with all convenient speed, all manner of Femes,
or other Debts and Duties to be engrossed; And all the said Femes, Debts and
Duties, ye shall set forth to be summoned at the next Liberate; And ye shall
true entry make of all Awards made by the Court upon any Opposal of any
Sheriff, or other Accomptants, for and concerning any Femes, Debts or other the
Kings Duties; And the same Awards ye shall set out in the Scrowles of the
Pipes; And also, ye shall well and truly make and discharge, or cause to be
made and discharged, all Allowances and discharges the same Term, or the next
Vacation, before the first day of the next Term, without any further delay; And
ye shall not take of any person or persons, by promise, gift, reward, or
otherwise, whereby the King may lose, or be hindered, or his said Femes, Debts,
or other duties may be prolonged or detained by any time; or else by the which,
the right let to any manner of person and persons: And well and truly, and with
all convenient speed, ye shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, all
persons of all such things as the Court shall award, belonging to your said
Office; And all this ye shall do, during such time as ye shall be Officer in
the said Office, without fraud or guile; So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red Book
of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall serve well and truly the King our Sovereign
Lord, in the Office of Chancellor of his Exchequer, and well and truly ye shall
do all things, that appertains to that Office; And ye shall speed the Kings
Business before all other; And ye shall not enseal any Writ of Judgment of any
other Place then of the Exchequer, with the Seal of this Place, whiles the
Chancery shall be twenty Miles about the place where this Exchequer is abiding;
And also, ye shall swear, That if it fortune, that if hereafter, by reason of
your Office, to make any Clerks or Ministers to execute any Office or Place
within this Court, ye shall make such Clerks or Ministers, as ye will answer
for at your peril, and such as shall be sufficient, true, and intendant unto
that to them shall appertain, in speed, as well of the Kings Business, as of
his People, after the form of the Statute in that behalf, made in the
Parliament holden at Westminster the second year of the Reign of King Henry the
VI. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of a Baron of the Exchequer, as as it is entered in the Red Book of
the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, in the Office of Baron of this Exchequer, and lawfully ye shall charge
and discharge the people that have to account before you, and right ye shall do
to all people, as well to poor as to rich, and that for Highness for riches,
neither for hate, nor for the Estate of any person, for benefit, gift, nor
promise of any person that may be made to you, or shall be made to you, ne by
Art, nor Engine, the Right of the King, nor none other you shall disturb, ne
respite, contrary to the Laws of the Land, and the Kings Debts ye shall not put
in respite there where they may goodly be Levied, and the Kings Business ye
shall speed before all other, and that for gift, wages, or benefit, ye shall
not conceal the Kings Profit or advantage in advantage to other, nor for your
self; And that ye shall not take Fee, neither neither Robe of any person, but
of the King only; and ye shall have nothing of any person for to do wrong; or
delay the right, or to delude, or delay the people that have to do before you,
but in all that ye may ye shall deliver them; And there where ye may understand
wrong, or prejudice, to be done to the King, ye shall put all your power and
diligence to redress it; And if ye may not ye shall tell it to the King, or to
those of his Council which may show it to the King, if ye may not come unto
him; And the Kings Counsel ye shall keep in all things; So help you God, and
all Saints.

The Oath of the Kings Remembrancer in the Exchequer, as it is entered in the
Red Book of the Exchequer,
Y E shall swear, That you well and truly serve the King our Sovereign Lord, in
the Office of Remembrancer of his Majesty of this his Exchequer; And the same
Office, with all the Rolls, Records, and other Mynuments, now lying and
remaining in the same, and that hereafter shall be committed to your custody,
and appertaining to the same Office, ye shall safely and surely keep, or do to
be kept, to the use of our said Sovereign Lord the Knig, and of his Heirs Kings
of England; You shall true Entry make of all Awards, and other things to be
entered in the said Office, and that with all convenient speed; You shall not
take of any person or persons, by promise, gift, reward, or otherwise, whereby
the Kings Majesty may leese or be hindered, or by which the right may be let, to
any manner of person or persons, and all other things belonging to the Master
of the said Office to do, ye shall well and truly do, without fraud or guile;
So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Pleas in the Exchequer, as it is entered in the
Red Book of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly intend, that which shall
appertain unto your Office in speed, as well of the Kings Business, as of his
people, and all such rewards as do, or shall concern your Office, you shall
safely keep, or cause to be kept; And you shall true Entry make of all Orders,
Awards, and other things to be entered into your said Office, and that with all
convenient speed; And all other things belonging to the Master of the said
Office to do, you shall well and truly do; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Foreign Opposer of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red
Book of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, his Heirs and Successors, in the Office of Foreign Opposer of this
Exchequer, and the Kings Business in the same ye shall speed and dispatch
before all other; And you shall faithfuly and truly charge and discharge all
Accounts and people that have to do before you, and do all other things
appertaining to the said Office, and shall well and truly behave your self in
the same Office, without undue practice, fraud or concealment, so long as you
shall continue in the same Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Comptroller of the Pipe in the Exchequer, as it is entered in
the Red Book of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly execute the place of the
Comptroller of the Pipe in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer and shall comptrol
the great Roll of the Pipe and the Pipes thereunto belonging; And shall twice
in the year (that is to say) in the Term of Saint Hiliary, and the Holy
Trinity, yearly writ into the Summons of the Pipe, all Femes and Debts
contained in the said great Roll, and well and truly behave your self in the
said Office of Comptroller of the Pipe, as long as you shall continue in the
same Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red Book
of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King our Sovereign Lord, in the
Office of one of the Chamberlains of this Exchequer, and truly enter and
ingross as well all manner of Receipts of Money received, and to be received to
the Kings use, at the Receipt of this Exchequer, as the payment of the same;
And also, you shall safely and truly keep, as well all Records, being in the
Kings Treasury, as all other things, Leagues, Truces, Evidences, and Jewels,
and all other things being to the Kings Treasury, and all that hereafter shall
be committed to your keeping; And ye shall not assent unto the deliverance of
any of the Kings Money, nor any otherthing being in his Treasury, without
sufficient Warrant in that behalf; And ye shall not depute, or put any Clerk or
Minister to occupy any place or room under you in this Office, but such as
shall be sufficient, true, and intendant unto that that to them shall appertain
in speed, as well of the Kings Business, as of his people, after the form of
the Statute in that behalf made, in the Parliament holden at Westminster, the
second year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth; And in these, and all other
things concerning your Office, ye shall well and truly have you, and do; So
help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of an Escheator, as it is entered in the Red Book of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of
the Escheator, in the Town of N. and do the Kings Profit in all that belongs
unto you to do, by way of your Office, after your wit and your power, and his
Rights, and all that belongs to his Crown ye shall truly keep; Ye shall not
assent to decrease, neither conceal the Kings Right, nor his Franchizes; And
wheresoever that ye have knowledge of the Kings Rights, or of his Crown, be it
in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, that be concealed or withdrawn ye shall
do your true pain and diligence to withstand it; And if ye may not do it, you
shall say it to the King, or some of his Council, such as you know for certain
will say it to the King; Ye shall truly, and right wisely, treat the people of
your Baylywick, and do right to every man, as well to poor as to rich, in that
that belongs to you to do, by way of your Office; Ye shall do no wrong to any
man, neither for gift, promise, nor hate, neither no man's right ye shall
disturb; ye shall take nothing, whereby that right may be disturbed, let, or
delayed; Ye shall truly and right-wisely return and serve all the Kings Writs;
Ye shall in your proper person make the extent of Lands after their very value
and enquests, to return them as often as they be taken before you, and that within
a month after they be taken, ye shall take no Bayley into your service, but
such as ye will answer for, and ye shall do your Bailiffs, to make such Oath as
it belongs to them. Ye shall truly and right wisely yield account at the
Kings Exchequer, of all Issues of your said Bayliffwick; Ye shall take your
enquests in open places, and that by Indenture after the effect of the Statute
thereof made; As God help you, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Deputy Chamberlain of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the
Red Book of the Exchequer.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, as Deputy unto A.D. one of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer, in the
Office of the said Chamberlain of this Court, and shall surely join all such
Tables as any Accomptant or Debtor shall bring unto you to be joined with the
Foyles of the same, being in your charge and custody; And the same Tables so
joined, ye shall deliver over unto the Clerks of the Pipe, or the ingrosser of
the great Roll in this Court, and do all other things appertaining to the said
Office, so long as ye shall be Officer there; So God you help and his Saints.

The Oath to be ministered to all Churchwardens, and Sidemen, within the Diocese
of Salisbury, to present according to Articles published in Anno. 1616.
Y Ou shall swear, That all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain,
or fear of displeasure, or malice set aside; You shall upon due consideration
of the Articles given you in charge, Present all and every such person within
your Parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or made any default
mentioned in these or any of those Articles, or which are vehemently suspected
or defamed, of any such offense fault, or default, wherein you shall deal
uprightly, and according to truth, neither of malice, presenting any contrary
to truth, nor of corrupt affection, sparing to present any, and so conceal the
truth, having in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to
maintain the truth, and to suppress vice; So help you God, and the contents of
this Book.

The Oath to be ministered to all Churchwardens within the Diocese of Bristol,
in the Visitation to Present according to Articles published in Anno, 1595.
Y E shall swear, Calling Almighty God to witness, who sees into your hearts,
and knows your very thoughts, That you, and every of you, shall diligently
and faithfully perform and execute the Office whereunto he is appointed, and
setting apart all malice, hatred, love, fear, or affection, to any person or
persons, shall diligently enquire, and truly present and discover, all, and
every such person or persons within your Parish, either known, commonly
reported, or vehemently suspected to have committed any Misdemeanour, Fault,
Default, Crime, Sin, or Offense, mentioned or specified within any the Articles
in this Book comprised, or in the same omitted, which coming to your knowledge,
are by Ecclesiastical Authority to be reformed; So help you God, in Christ
Jesus.

The Protestation.
I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest to
maintain and-defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate,
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, his
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; as also the Power and Privileges
of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject and every person
that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Counsels, Plots,
Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, That I shall in all just and
honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and neither for hope, fear, nor
otherrespect shall relinquish this Promise, Vow and Protestation.

The Vow and Covenant appointed by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, to be taking by every man, in the Cities of London, Westminister,
the Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and throughout the whole Kingdom.
I A. B. In humility and reverence of the Divine Majesty, declare my hearty
sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this Nation, which have deserved the
calamities and judgments that now lie upon it; And my true intention is, by
Gods grace to endeavor the amendment of my own ways; And that I do abhor and
detest the said wicked and treacherous Design lately discovered, and that I
never gave, nor will give my assent to the execution thereof, but will
according to my power and Vocation oppose and resist the same, and all other of
the like nature. And in case any other like Design shall hereafter come to my
knowledge, I will make such timely discovery as I shall conceive may best
conduce to the preventing thereof. And whereas I do in my conscience believe,
That the Forces raised by the Two Houses of Parliament, are raised and
continued for their just Defense, and for the Defense of the true Protestant
Religion and Liberties of the Subject, against the Forces raised by the King: I
do here in the presence of Almighty God, Declare, Vow, and Covenant, That I
will, according to my power and Vocation, assist the Forces raised and
continued by both Houses of Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King
without their consent; and will likewise assist all other persons that shall
take this Oath, in what they shall do in pursuance thereof, and will not
directly or indirectly adhere unto, nor shall willingly assist the Forces
raised by the King without the consent of both Houses of Parliament. And this
Vow and Covenant I make in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all
hearts with a true intention to perform the same, as I shall answer at the
great Day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.

The Solemn League and Covenant.
1. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government against our common Enemies; the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine Worship, Discipline and Government
according the the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches;
And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the Three Kingdoms, to the
nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of
Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing: That we and our
Posterity after us may as Brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may
delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the Three Kingdoms.

3. We shall with the some sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our several
Vocations endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our loyalty; And that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and
great ness.

4. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one
of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or Parties amongst the
people contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public Trial, and receive condign punishment as the degree of their Offenses
shall require or deserve, or the Supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others, having power from them for that effect, shall udg
convenient.

5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both Parliaments, we
shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity; And that
Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
the present Articles.

6. We shall also, according to our places and callings, in this Common Cause
of Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist, and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof, and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the Contrarypart,
or give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this Cause;
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and Honor
of the King, but shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly
continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever, and what we are not able our
selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may be
timely prevented or removed, all which we shall do as in the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof. We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions, so much abounding amongst us. And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation,
and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Govenant
we make in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts, with all
true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when
the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, most humbly beseeching the Lord
to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people, and
encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of the
yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

The Coronation Oath of King Charles the Second.
A Rch-Bishop: Sir, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the
people of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your Lawful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, the Laws, Customs,
and Franchizes, granted to the Clergy by the Glorious King Saint Edward your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel
Established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the prerogative of the Kings thereof,
and the Ancient Customs of the Realm?


King, I grant and Promise to keep them.


Archbishop, Sir, will you keep Peace and Godly Agreement (according to your
Power) both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy and the People?


King, I will keep it.


Archbishop, Sir will you to your power cause Law, Justice and discretion in
mercy and truth to be Executed to your Judgment?


King, I will.


Archbishop, Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful
Customs which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have, and will you defend
and uphold them, to the honor of God, so much as in you lies?


King, I grant and Promise so to do.


The Form of The Oath to be taking by all Officers of the Excise
Office-directed by the Stat. of 12 Car. 2. Cap. 23. and 24.
Y Ou shall swear, to Execute the Office of truly and faithfully without favor
or affection, and shall from time to time, true Account make and deliver to
such person and persons as his Majesty shall appoint to receive the same; and
shall take no Fee, or reward for the Execution of the said Office, from any
other person then from his Majesty, or those whom his Majesty shall appoint in
that behalf. So help you God.

By the Stat. of the 13 Car. 2d. Cap. 1. It is (inter alia) Enacted, that all
persons, who upon the 24 of December, 1661. shall be Mayors, Aldermen,
Recorders, Bayliffes, Town Clerks, Common Council men, and other persons then
bearing any Office or Offices of Magistracy, or places of Trust, or other
Employment relating to, or concerning the Government of the said respective
Cities, Corporations, and Buroughs, and Cinque ports, and their members, and
other Port Towns shall at any time before the 25. day of March, 1663. when they
shall be thereunto required by the said re^pective Commissioners, or any three
or more of them, take the Oaths of Allegiance vide before fol. 36.
and Supremacy vide before fol. 38.
and this Oath following.

The Oath to be taken by all Officers in Corporations etc. by the Stat. 13.
Car. 2. cap. 1. and by all Officers of the Militia, and Soldiers, by the
Statute 13 and 14. Car. 2. cap. 3.
I A. B. do declare and believe that it is not lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever to take Arms against the King; And that I do abhor that Traiter ous
position of taking Arms by his Authority against his person, or against those
that are Commissionated by him. So help me God.

And also at the same time shall publicly Subscribe before the said
Commissioners or any three of them, this following Declaration.

Declaration to be Subscribed by all Officers of Corporations by the Statute.
13. Car. 2d. Cap. 1.
I A. B. do declare, that I hold that there lies no Obligation upon me or any
other person from the Oath Commonly called The Solemn League and Covenant vide
before fol. 226.
And that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and Imposed upon the
Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws, and Liberties, of the Kingdom.

Declaration of Assent and Consent to the Book of Common Prayer, to be
subscribed by all Parsons, Vicars, and Ministers, by the Statute of 13. and 14.
Car. 2d. Cap. 4.
I A. B. do hereby declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every
thing Contained and prescribed in and by the Book, Entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments and other rights and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England,
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, printed, as they are to be Sung,
or said in Churches, and the form or manner of Making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

Declaration or acknowledgment, to be subscribed by all persons in holy Orders,
and all Schoolmasters, directed by the Statute of the 13 and 14 Car. 2. Cap. 4.
and by all Vestry men by the Statute 14 Car. 2. Cap. 5.
I A. B. do declare, that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take
Arms against the King. And that I do Abhor that Traitorous position of taking
Arms by his authority against his person, or against those that are
Commissioned by him; and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now by Law Established: And I do declare that I do hold there
lies no Obligation upon me, or any other person, from the Oath commonly called
the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any Change or Alteration of
Government, either in Church, or State, and that the same was in it self an
unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the known
Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

Note, By the said Satute of 13 and 14 Car. 2. Cap. 4. it is provided, that
from and after the 25th. day of March, 1682. There shall be omitted in the
abovementioned Declaration or Acknowledgment so to be Subscribed, these
following words, (viz.)
And I do declare, That I do hold there lies no Obligation on me, or on any
other Person from the Oath, commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavor any Change or Alteration of Government either in Church or State; And
that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and Imposed upon the Subjects of
this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

The Oath to be taken by the Warden and Assistants of the Worsted Weavers, or
Master -Weavers in the City of Norwich, and County of Norfolk, directed by the
Statute of the 13 and 14 Car. 2. Cap. 5.
I A. B. do swear, That I will well, faithfully, and honestly perform, and
discharge the Office of Warden of the said Trade of Worsted-Weavers, according
to the best of my skill, power, and knowledge, So help me God.

The like Oath taking by the Assistants, mutatis mutandis.

The Oath to be taken by the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Manufacture
of Broad Woollen Cloth in the West Riding, in the County of York, directed by
the Statute of the 13 and 14 Car. 2. Cap. 32.
I A. B. do swear, That I will well, faithfully, and honestly, perform, and
discharge the Office of Master of the Corporation of the Free Cloathiers
according to the best of my skill, power and knowledge. So help me God.

The like for the Wardens and Assistants, mutatis mutandis.

The Oath of the Searchers of Broad Woollen Cloth within the said West Riding
directed by the same Statute.
J A. B. do swear, That I shall well, and truly Execute the Office of Searcher
of Broad-Woollen-Cloath within the West Riding of the County of York, according
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and according to the best of my skill
and knowledge. So help me God.

The Oath to be taken by the Commissioners appointed for settling the draining
the Fens called Bedford Level, directed by the Statute of the 15 Car. 2. Cap.
17.
I A. B. Shall, and will without favor or affection, hatred or malice, truly
and impartially, according to the best of my skill and knowledge, execute, and
perform, all and every the Powers and Authorities Established by this Act of
Parliament. So help me God.

The Oath of the Surveyors of the same Level directed to be taken by the
Statute of the 20 Car. 2. Cap. 8.
I A. B. do swear, That according to the best of my skill and knowledge, I will
faithfully discharge the trust of Surveying, Sorting, Dividing, and Rateing of
Eighty three Thousand Acres parcel of ninety five Thousand Acres within the
great Level of the Fens, known by the name of Bedford-Level, according to seven
degrees or more, as I upon my Oath shall think most equal. So help me God.

The Form of the Oath required by the Statute of the 17 Car. 2. Cap. 2. to be
taken by all Ministers dwelling within Five Miles of a Corporation, who have
not subscribed the Assent and Consent, and the Declaration mentioned in the
Statute of the 13 and 14 Car. 2. Cap. 4. before specified.
I A. B. do swear, That it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take
Arms against the King, And that I do abhor that Traitorous position of taking
Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are
Commissioned by him, in pursuance of such Commissions; And that I will not at
any time endeavor any alteration of Government either in Church or State. So
help me God.

The Form of the Oath to be taken by the President, Warden, and Assistants of
the Kiderminster-Weavers, directed by the Statute of the 22 and 23 Car. 2. Cap.
8.
I A. B. do swear, That I will well, faithfully, and honestly perform and
discharge the Office of President, or Warden, or Assistant -- mutatis mutandis
-- of the Trade of Cleathiers and Stuff Weavers within the Borough and Parish
of Kidderminster according to the best of my skill, power, and knowledge. So
help me God.

The Form of The Oath to be taken by poor Prisoners, not worth 10. l. directed
by the Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Cap. 20.
I A. B. do upon my Corporal Oath, Solemly profess and declare before Almighty
God, that I have not any Estate real or personal in possession, reversion, or
remainder of the value of ten pounds in the whole, or sufficient to pay the
Debt, or Damages, for which I am imprisoned, And that I have not directly or
Indirectly, sold, Leased, or otherwise conveyed disposed of or entrusted all,
or any part of my Estate, thereby to secure the same, to receive or expect any
profit, or Advantage thereof, or defraud, or deceive any Creditor, or Creditors
whatsoever, to whom I stand Indebted.

The Test or Declaration to be Subscribed by all Persons that shall bear any
Offices, or places of Trust directed by the Act made for preventing dangers
which may happen from Popish Recusants, 25 Car. 2. Cap. 2.
When the persons concerned in this Act shall take the aforesaid Oaths of see
fol. 38
Supremacy and see foll. 36.
Allegiance they shall likewise make and Subscribe this Declaration following
viz.

J A. B. do declare, That I do believe that there is not any Transubstantiation
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at
or after the Consecration thereof by any person whatsoever.

The Form of the Declaration directed by the Stat. 30. Car. 2. Cap. 1. to be
subscribed by all Peers or Members of the House of Lords, and Members of the
House of Commons, before they can vote in either of the said Houses.
Note, They are first to take the Oath of Allegiance, and Supremacy, and then
make and Subscribe the following Declaration, viz.

I A. B. do Solemnly, and Sincerely in the presence of God, profess, testify,
and declare That I do believe, that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there
is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine, into the Body
and Blood of Christ, at or after the Consecration thereof, by any person
whatsoever: And that the Invocation, or Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any
other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church
of Rome, are Superstitious, and Idolatrous. And I do Solemnly in the presence
of God profess, testify, and Declare, that I do, make this Declaration and
every part thereof in the plain and Ordinary Sense of the words read unto me,
as they are Commonly understood by English Protestants, without any Evasion,
Equivocation, or mental Reservation, whatsoever, and without any Dispensation
already granted me for this purpose, by the Pope, or any other Authority or
person whatsoever, or without any hope of any such Dispensation from any person
or Authority whatsoever, or without thinking that I am or can be acquitted
before God, or Man, or absolved of this Declaration or any part thereof, although
the Pope or any other person or persons or power whatsoever should dispense
with or Annul the same, or declare that it was Null, and void from the
beginning:

The Oath of the Recorder.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord the King
of England, and to his Heirs and lawful Successors, and to the City of London
in the Office of Recorder, and Franchizes and Customs of the same City within
the City and without, after your power ye shall maintain, and the Counsel of
the said City ye shall not discover which should turn or be to the hurt of the
same City; Also ye shall well and continually, keep and rule the Kings
Majesty's Courts, in the Chamber, and in the Hustings, after the Custom of
this City, and ye shall not let for gift, ne for favor, for promise, ne for
hate, but Law and right ye shall do to all manner of people as well to Poor as
Rich, Denizens and Strangers, That before you shall plead in Hustings pleas,
and other and all manner of pleas, that before you shall be pleaded ye shall
well and truly record, and your diligence ye shall do to see the said plea be
well and lawfully enrolled. Also right shall none let, neither no Judgments
tarry without Cause reasonable; And if ye know where the profit or the right of
the City, be it in Lands, or Rents, is withdrawn or concealed ye shall show it
to the Mayor, and to the Aldermen for the Salvation of the right of the City,
and ready ye shall be to come at the warning of the Mayor and Sheriffs, or
their Ministers for good and wise Counsel to give, and to ride and go with them
at all ^^mes when need shall be to maintain the State of this City, Also ye
shall attend to save, and maintain the Right of Orphans after the Laws and
Usages of this City. Also ye shall Swear, that you shall take no money, reward,
nor gift, wittingly of any person for any matter moved and hanging before the
Mayor, Aldermen, or Sheriffs, or before the Mayor of this City of London, for
the time being, Also ye shall take no manner of money nor other reward, for any
matter, or cause moved or hanging in any Court of this City wherein by reason
of your Office, you shall have any Authority or power, except only the Fees to
your Office, of Old time due, used, and accustomed: Also ye shall bear all
manner of Taxes and all other charges to you to be levied within this City
during your Office, like as Citizens, of this City shall do for their part, and
thus ye shall do. As God you help.

The Oath of the Common Council men within the City of London of Old time used
and accustomed.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King, That
now is, and to his Heirs and lawful Successors, and readily come when ye be
summoned to the Common Council of this City, but if ye be reasonably Excused;
And good and true Counsel ye shall give in all things touching the Commonweal
of this City, after your wit and cunning: ANd that for favor of any man ye
shall maintain no singular profit against the Common profit of this City: And
after that ye be come to the Common Council, ye shall not from thence depart
till the Common Council be ended, without reasonable cause be, else by the
Mayors License: And also that all secret things that be spoken, or said in the
Common Council, the which ought to be kept Secret ye shall in no wise disclose.
As God you help.

The Oath of the Attorneys of the Sheriffs Courts, London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and Lawfully do your Office of Attorney,
and well and Lawfully Examine your Client and their Quarrel without Champerty,
and without procureing of any Juries, or any Enquest embracing; And that ye
shall change no quarrel out of his nature after your understanding, Also ye
shall plead, Ne Ley, ne suffer to be pleaded, or Leyed by your assent no
foreign Release, acquittance, payment, Arbitration, plain account whatsoever
it be to put the Court out of its Jurisdiction, nor none other matter, but it
be such as ye may find rightful and true by the Information of your Client,
whose Information and saying upon your Oath, and Conscience ye shall think to
the true. And ye shall not Inform ne Enforce any man to sue falsely against any
person by false or forged Action. Ready ye shall be at all times to come and
attend at the warning of the Mayor and of the Sheriffs of the said City, unless
ye be let about the business of this City, or for some other reasonable
cause. The Franchizes, Laws, and Ordinances, of this City you shall keep, and
do to be kept to your power. And that well and lawfully ye shall do all things
that to the Office of Attorney pertains to do. As God help you.

The Oath of the Constables within the City of London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall keep the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King
well and Lawfully after your power: And ye shall Arrest all them that make
contest, Riot, Debate, or Affray, in Breaking of the said Peace, and lead them
to the House or Compter of one of the Sheriffs: And if ye be withstood by
strength of Misdoers, ye shall rear on them an Outery, and pursue them from
Street to Street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be arrested: And ye shall
search at all times, when ye be required by the Scavengers, or Beadles, the
Common Noysance of your Ward: And the Beadle and Raker ye shall help to rear
and gather in their Sallary and Quarterage, if ye be thereunto by them
required. And if any thing be done within your Ward, against the Ordinance of
this City, such defaults as ye shall find there done, ye shall then present to
the Mayor and Ministers of this City, And if ye be let by any person or
persons, that ye may not duly do your Office ye shall certify the Mayor and
Council of the City of the name or names of him, or them, that so let you; ye
shall also, swear that during the time that ye shall stand in the Office and
occupy the Room of Constable, ye shall once at the least every Month certify
and show to one of the Clerks of the Mayors Court, and in the same Court as
well the names as Sirnames of all Freemen which ye shall know to be deceased
within the Month in the Parish wherein ye be inhabited, as also the names and
Sirnames of all the Childron of the said Freemen so deceased, being Orphants of
this City: And you shall Enquire of all and every the Offenses done contrary to
the Statutes made. 1.4. and. 21. Jac. to restrain the Inordinate haunting and
tippling in Inns, and Alehouses, and for repressing of Drunkenness, and other
disorders, and thereof due presentiments make, according to the same Statutes.
And thus ye shall not leave to do. As God you help.

The Oath of an Appraiser of Goods within the City of London.
Y Ou, and every of you shall swear, That the Appraisement of the Goods and
Chattles of A. B. Late Citizen and Mercer of London, deceased, shall be a just
and true valuation and Appraisement of the same Goods and Chattels according to
the best of your Judgments and Skill. So help you God.

Aliter
Y Ou, and either of you, shall swear, that the Appraisement you have made of
the Goods and Chattels in this Schedle, or Inventory specified whereunto you
have Subscribed your names is a just and true valuation and Appraisment of the
same Goods, and Chattels according to the best of your Judgments and skills. So
help you God.

The Oath of a Garnishee upon a Foreign Attachment in London.
Y Ou shall swear, That at the time of the Attachment made which was the (...)
day of (...) Last past between the hours of Nine and Ten, in the forenoon of
the same day, or at any time since, you had not owed nor did detain, nor yet
have owed or do detain from C. in the Bill Original and Attachment aforesaid,
the Defendant named, any part of the said Sum of (...) so as aforesaid, nor any
penny thereof in manner and Form as the plaintiff by his Bill Original, and
Attachment aforesaid has Supposed. So help you God.

The Oath of an Attorney of the Mayors Court.
Y Ou shall swear, That you shall well and lawfully do your Office of Attorney
and well, and lawfully examine your Clients and their quarrels without
Champerty, and without procuring of any Juries or any Enquests embracing. And
that you shall change no qua^^, out of its nature after your understanding, and
you shall plead ne ley nor suffer to be pleaded or leyed by your assent no
Foreign release, acquittance, payment, Arbitration, plain Account whatsoever
it be to put the Court out of its Jurisdictions nor none other matter but it be
such as you shall find rightful, and true by the Information of your Clients
whose Information and saying upon your Oath and Conscience you shall believe to
be true, and you shall not inform, ne enforce any man to sue falsely against any
persons, by false or forged Actions; Attendant ye shall be upon the Mayor of
the said City for the time being, and ready ye shall be at all times to come at
the warning of the said Mayor, but if ye be let by the business of the said
City or by some other reasonable cause ye shall not deliver any Book or any
manner of Copy to any person of any thing that touches the Liberty of this
City without License and oversight of the Mayor, Recorder, and Town Clerks of
this City for the time being, or of two of them, or show to any person any
Book, concerning the Customs of the said City, nor suffer any person to look
upon any such Book of Customs at any time saving only the Council of this City,
but that ye shall keep the same Book secret among your selves, The secrets of
this Court ye shall keep, and not disclose any thing there spoken for the
Common Weal of the said City that might hurt any person or Brother of the said
Court unless it be spoken to his said Brother, or to other which in his
Conscience or discretion he shall think it to be for the Common Weal of this
City: And that well and lawfully ye shall do all such things that to the Office
of Attorney pertains to do: As God you help.

The Oath of an Executor.
Y Ou shall swear, That this Writing contains the true last Will of the above
named A. B. deceased, as far as you know or believe, and that you will well and
truly perform the same by paying first his Debts, and then the Legacies
contained in the said Will as far as his Goods, Chattels and Credits will
thereunto extend, and the Law charge you: And that you will make a true and
perfect Inventory of all the said Goods, Chattels and Credits, as also a just
account when thereunto required: So help you God.

The Oath of an Administrator.
Y Ou shall swear, That the abovenamed A. B. deceased, died without any Will as
far as you know or believe, and that you will well and truly administer all and
singular the Goods, Chattels and Credits of the said deceased, and pay his
Debts as far as his Goods, Chattels and Credits will thereunto extend, and the
Law require you. And that you will make a true and perfect Inventory of all the
said Goods, Chattels and Credits, as also a just account when thereunto
required: So help you God.

The Oath of a Jury of Women returned to try whether a Woman convicted that
pleads her Belly be quick with Child.
Y Ou as fore Matron of this Jury shall swear, That you shall search and try
the Prisoner at the Bar, whether she be quick with Child, and thereof a true
Verdict shall return: So help you God.

The same Oath that A. B. your fore Matron has taken on her part, you, and
every of you shall well and truly observe and keep of your parts: So help you
God.

The Oath of an Ale-taster within a Leet.
Y Ou shall well and truly execute the Office of Ale-taster within this Leet,
you shall see that all Victuals, Bread, and Beer put to sale within this Leet,
be sweet and wholesome, and of full weight and measure, and you shall in all
other things execute the said Office of Ale-taster within this Leet, according
to the best of your skill and knowledge: So help you God.

The Oath of a Surveyer of the Moors.
Y Ou shall well and truly execute the Office of Surveyor of the Moors within
this Manor, you shall see that all Orders and Bylaws made for the good
Government of the Moors be duly observed, and shall present the Offenders at
the next Court that shall be holden for this Manor, and all other things
belonging to that Office you shall well and truly execute according to the best
of your skill and knowledge: So help you God.

The Oath of Leather-Searchers.
Y Ou shall do your best and utmost endeavor to see and try all such Leather
as shall be brought to this Town to be sold, and such as you shall find to be
sufficiently Tanned and dressed, you shall mark and seal according to the
Statute for that purpose appointed, and such as you shall find sold or bought,
or offered to be sold not sufficiently Tanned and dressed, you shall seize and
retain in your hands until the same may be examined and tried by six skilful
persons upon their Oaths, according to the Statute in that Case made and
provided.

You shall also keep a Book, and therein truly Register all such Bargains and
Sales as shall be made of Leather, Hides or Skins, during the times of Fairs or
Markets within this Town, together with the prizes thereof, and the names and
dwellings of the said Buyers and Sellers being thereunto required by either of
them, taking for your pains therein such allowances as by the Statute is
appointed.

And you shall in all other things appertaining to the said Office well and
truly behave your self to the best of your Skill, and knowledge. So help you
God.

The Oath to be Administered to any that prosecute the peace against any
Delinquent.
T He peace which you require against A. B. is not out of any ill will, or
Malice which you bear to him but that you stand in fear of your Life, or some
other bodily hurt to be done by him unto you, or by some other person by his
procurement. So help you God.

The Oath of a Jury upon Traverse
Y Ou shall well and truly try this Issue of Traverse between our Sovereign
Lord the King and A. B. whom you have in Charge according to your Evidence. So
help you God.

The Oath of Tales de Circumstantibus.
Y Ou shall well and truly try the Issue of this Nisi prius between the
parties according to your Evidence. So help you God.

The Oath of the Lord Mayor of London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and lawfully serve the Kings Majesty in
the Office of Mayoralty in the City of London, and the same City ye shall
surely and safely keep to the behoof of his Highness, his Heirs, and lawful
Successors, and the Profit of the King ye shall do; In all things that to you
belongs, and the Right of the King that to the Crown appertains in the same
City of London, lawfully ye shall keep. Ye shall not consent to the decrease,
ne concealment of the Rights, ne of the Franchises of the King; and where ye
shall know the Rights of the King or of the Crown be it in Lands, or in Rents,
Franchises, or Suits concealed or withdrawn, to your Power ye shall do to
repeal it; and if you may not, ye shall say it to the King, or to them of his
Council, that you were will say it to the King. Also lawfully and rightfully ye
shall entreat the people of your Bailwick, and Right shall ye do to every one,
as well to Strangers as others, to Poor, as to Rich, in that belongs you to
do, and that for Highness, ne for Riches, for Gift, ne for Behest, for favor,
ne for Hate, wrong shall ye do to no Man, ne nothing shall ye take by which the
King shall leese, or Right be disturbed or let; and good Assise shall ye set
upon Bread, [Wine] Ale, Fish, Flesh, Corn, and all others Victuals; Weights and
Measures in the same City, ye shall do to be kept, and due Execution do upon
the Defaults that thereof shall be found according to all the Statutes thereof
made, not repealed, and in all other things that to a Mayor of the City of
London, belongs to do, well and lawfully ye shall do and behave you. As God
you help.

The Oath of an Alderman in London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and lawfully serve our Sovereign Lord the
King in the City of London, in the Office of Alderman, in the Ward of N --
wherein ye shall be chosen Alderman, and every other Ward whereof ye shall be
chosen Alderman hereafter, and lawfully ye shall entreat the People of the same
Ward of such things as to them appertains to do, for keeping of the City, and
for maintaining of the Peace in the same; and the Laws and Franchises of this
City, ye shall keep and maintain, within the City and without, after your wit
and power; and attendant ye shall be to maintain the right of Orphans after the
Laws and Usages of the same City; and ready ye shall be to come at the Summons,
and Warning of the Mayor and Ministers of this City for the time being, to
speed the Assizes, Pleas, and Judgments of the Hustings, and other needs of
this City, if you be not let by the needs of the King, or by some other
reasonable Cause; and good and lawful Counsel ye shall give for such things as
touch the common Profit of the City; and ye shall sell no manner Victual by
retail, as Bread, Ale, Wine, Flesh, and Fish, by your Apprentice, Allows,
Servants, ne by any other way, ne Profit shall ye none take of any such manner
Victual so sold during your Office. The Secrets of this Court ye shall keep,
and not disclose any thing here spoken for the Common wealth of this City, or
that might hurt any Person, or Brother of this said Court, unless it be spoken
to your Brother or to any other, which in your Conscience and Discretion ye
shall think to be for the Commonwealth of this City; and well and lawfully ye
shall behave you in the said Office, and in all other things touching the said
City. As God you help.

The Oath of the Sheriff of London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall be good and true unto our Sovereign Lord the
King of England, and unto his Heirs and Successors, and the Franchise of the
City of London within and without ye shall save and maintain to your power; and
ye shall well and lawfully keep the Shires of London, and Middlesex, and the
Offices that to the same Shires appertain to be done well and lawfully ye shall
do after your wit and power; and Right ye shall do as well to poor, as rich,
and good Custom you shall none break, ne evil Customs arrere; and the Assise of
Bread, Ale, and all other Victuals within the Franchise of this City, and
without, well and lawfully ye shall keep, and do to be kept; and the Judgments
and Executions of your Court, ye shall not tarry without cause reasonable; ne
Right shall you none disturb. The Writs that to you come touching the State and
Franchise of this City, you shall not return till you have showed them to the
Mayor and the Council of this City for the time being, and of them have
Advisement; and ready you shall be at reasonable warning of the Mayor, for
keeping of the Peace, and maintaining the State of this City; and all other
things that longen to your Office and the keeping of the said Shires, lawfully
you shall do, by you and yours, and the City you shall keep from harm after
your Power, and the Shire of Middlesex; ne the Goal of Newgate you shall not
let to farm. As God you help.

ADDITION.
Ye shall also swear, That ye shall freely give all such Rooms and Offices of
Sergeants and Yeomen as shall happen to become void during the time ye shall
remain in the Office of Shrievalty, to such apt and able Person or Persons as
shall be by you nominated to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and by them
admitted, without any Money or other Reward to be had, taken, or hoped for in
respect thereof, according to the Act of Common Council made and provided in
that behalf, the nine and twentieth day of April, in the six and twentieth Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, etc. As God you help.

The Oath of the Common Clerk, or Town Clerk of London.
Y E shall swear, That you shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord the
King and to his Heirs and lawful Successors; and the City of London, and the
Liberties and Franchises of the same, to your power ye shall maintain and
defend; and the Counsel of the said City ye shall keep, and the Harm of the
same ye shall not know, but ye shall open it unto the Mayor and Aldermen of the
said City for the time being; and attendant ye shall be upon the Mayor of the
said City for the time being; and ready ye shall be at all times to come at the
warning of the said Mayor, but if you be let about the business of this
City, or by some other reasonable cause. Also resiant and dwelling ye shall be
within the City during your Office, and all Pleas of Hustings, and all other
Pleas and Records that to you belongs to enter, ye shall truly enrol and
enter; and all things that comes to your keeping as well Records as other
things of the City, ye shall do your diligence safely to keep; ye shall show,
ne deliver no Rcord, nor other Mynument of the City, whereby the City might be
hurt, nor no Record that touches the Right of any Person, ye shall hide,
conceal, ne deny; and good Counsel after your Wit and Power, ye shall give in
all things touching the Weal of this City. Also ye shall keep no Clerk under
you, but such as shall be able and admitted by the Mayor and Aldermen of the
said City for the time being, and sworn before the said Mayor and Aldermen; nor
any such Clerk remove without the Assent of the said Mayor and Aldermen. Also
ye shall swear, That you shall take no Money, Reward, nor Gift of any Person
for any matter to be moved, or the which shall hang before the Mayor, Aldermen,
or Sheriffs, or before the Mayor of this City of London, for the time being.
Also ye shall take no manner of Money, nor other Reward for any Matter or Cause
which shall be moved, or hang in any Court of this City, wherein by reason of
your Office, ye shall have any Authority or power, except only the Fees to your
Office of Old times due, used and accustomed. Also ye shall bear and pay all
manner Taxes, and all others Charges to you to be laid within this City, like
as Citizens of the same City shall do for their part during your Office; and in
all other things to your Office appertaining, well and lawfully ye shall behave
you. As God you help.

The Oath of the Common Sergeant within the City of London.
Y E shall swear, That ye shall well and lawfully serve the City of London, in
the Office of Common Sergeant; and the Laws usages and Franchise of the same
City, ye shall keep and defend, within the City and without after your Wit and
Power; and the right of Orphans of this City ye shall pursue, save and
maintain; and good and lawful Councils ye shall give in all things touching the
common profit of this City; and the Council of the same City ye shall keep; and
the common harm of this City ye shall not know, but you shall after your power
let it, or give it in knowledge to the Council of this City; and attendant ye
shall be on the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons, for causes and needs of this City,
at all times when ye shall be required and charged, and in all Places where
need is, lawfully to show and declare, and attendantly pursue for the common
profit of this City. Also ye shall swear, That you shall take no Money, Reward,
nor Gift of any Person for any Matter to be moved, the which shall hang before
the Mayor, Aldermen or Sheriffs, or before the Mayor of the City of London for
the time being. Also ye shall take no manner of Money nor other Reward for any
Matter or Cause which shall be moved or hung in any Court of this City, wherein
by reason of your Office you shall have any Authority or power, except only the
Fees to your Office, of old time due, used and accustomed. Also ye shall bear
and pay all manner of Taxes, and all other Charges to you to be laid within
this City, like as Citizens of the same City shall do for their part, during
your Office. As God you help.

The Coronation Oath of King James the Second.
A Rch Bishop: Sir, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the
people of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your Lawful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, the Laws, Customs,
and Franchizes, granted to the Clergy by the Glorious King Saint Edward your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel
Established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the prerogative of the Kings thereof,
and the Ancient Customs of the Realm?


King, I grant and Promise to keep them.


Archbishop, Sir, will you keep Peace and Godly Agreement (according to your
Power) both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy and the People?


King, I will keep it.


Archbishop, Sir will you to your power cause Law, Justice and discretion in
mercy and truth to be Executed to your Judgment?


King, I will.


Archbishop, Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful
Customs which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have, and will you defend
and uphold them, to the honor of God, so much as in you lies?


King, I grant and Promise so to do.


The Oaths appointed to be taking by Members in Parliament, and others in
Offices of Trust, in the Place of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
Statute Anno. 1. Willielmi and Mariae.
I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. So help me God, etc.

I A. B. do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do Declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. So
help me God, etc.

The Coronation Oath established per Stat. Primo Gulielmi and Mariae.
The Archbishop or Bishop shall say, WIll You solemnly Promise and Swear to
Govern the People of this Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, according to the Statutes in Parliament Agreed on, and the Laws and
Customs of the same?


The King and Queen shall say, I solemnly Promise so to do.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will You to Your power cause Law and Justice in Mercy
to be Executed in all Your Judgments.


King and Queen. I will.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will You to the utmost of Your power Maintain the Laws
of God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed
Reliligion Established by Law? And will You Preserve unto the Bishops and
Clergy of this Realm, and to the Churches committed to their Charge, all such
Rights and Privileges as by Law do or shall appertain unto them, or any of
them?


King and Queen. All this I Promise to do.


After this, the King and Queen laying His and Her Hand upon the Holy Gospels,
shall say, King and Queen. The things which I have here before Promised, I will
Perform and Keep. So help me God.


Then the King and Queen shall kiss the Book. The Declaration of Fidelity: And
Subscription of a Profession of the Christian Belief to be Subscribed by
Dissenters according to the Stat. Primo. Gulielmi and Mariae.
I A. B. Do sincerely Promise, and solemnly Declare before God and the World,
that I will be True and Faithful to King William and Queen Mary; And I do
Solemnly Profess and Declare, that I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and
Renounce as Impious and Heretical, that damnable Doctrine and Position, That
Princes Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of
Rome, may be Deposed or Murdered by Their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.
And I do Declare, that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate,
has, or ought to have any Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Preeminence or
Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

To Subscribe this Profession of their Christian Belief.
I A. B. Profess Faith in God the Father, And in Jesus Christ his Eternal Son,
the true God, And in the Holy Spirit, one God Blessed for evermore; And do
acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by
Divine Inspiration.

FINIS.

